

One Saturday Night in Hospital
I slept through our floor maid's call that evening.
I was still asleep when Aline came in with my postcard from Margaret.
‘Jo, it's a quarter past.
The first supper bell'll go in ten minutes.’
She shook me.
‘Can you hear me?’
I groaned.
‘Aline, be a dear sweet girl and go away and let me die in peace.
If only for another five minutes.’
‘Mind you only make it five.
Don't forget what the Night Super.
said to us last night about the next girl to come in after she's arrived to read the register.’
‘The woman's a sadist.’
I turned on my face.
‘She beats us up for kicks.’
‘She's not beating me up.
I'm going over now.’
She put my card on my dressing-table.
‘Don't go back to sleep.’
‘I won't,’ I promised, and was asleep again before the door closed after her.
The next thing I knew was Gwenellen, shaking me violently.
Aline and Gwenellen were in my set.
They were my greatest friends in Benedict's, and had rooms on either side of mine.
‘Jo, it's twenty-five to!’
‘It can't be!
Aline was only in five minutes ago!’
‘Aline's over having supper.
She said you'd woken, but when you didn't turn up I thought I'd better come back to investigate.’
She shook me again.
‘Up, love!
Don't forget Night Super.
's warning to send the next late-comer straight to Matron.’
‘Must you remind me of that traumatic experience?’
Gwenellen said placidly, ‘There's another you've got coming, love,’ and heaved up the side of my mattress.
I landed on the floor.
‘With luck, you've fifteen minutes before she gets in.’
She made my bed for me and wound Little Ben as I hurtled into uniform.
‘I'll now return to my shepherd's pie.’
‘Gwenellen,’ I said breathlessly, ‘thanks.’
She handed me Little Ben, advised me not to let Home Sister catch me leaving it so late, and took herself off.
Little Ben was an aged, ugly, and apparently indestructible pocket watch that had cost my paternal grandfather five shillings when he was a Benedict's houseman.
He had given it to his youngest daughter, Margaret, when she trained as a nurse at Benedict's just after the last World War.
When I started in the Preliminary Training School two and a half years ago my aunt had passed Little Ben on to me and had my name engraved beneath hers and grandfather's on the back.
I was very attached to Little Ben, and even more so to Margaret.
I looked at her card as I did my hair.
It read: ‘Should be off my case and home in six days.
Dickie breaks up Monday week.
Is it that Monday or the one after your holiday starts?
Either will suit us fine.
Love.
M.’
Yawning, I pushed the card into my apron bib to answer during the night.
I was night relief nurse in Hope, a women's acute medical ward, and tonight was one of the  rare nights when all three Hope night nurses were on together.
Hope was generally busy, but with the three of us I should be able to snatch the time for a letter in the small hours.
Margaret was a widow.
Dickie, her only child, was twelve.
Being another only child, and as my father's job had kept my parents in Singapore for the last two years, I now spent most of my holidays with my aunt and cousin, timing them to come in Dickie's school holidays.
My coming summer holiday started on the same day as my cousin's, and I was much looking forward to it.
I had enjoyed Hope and the work we did at night, but I detested working at night, as I had never managed to sleep well during the day.
Usually it was late afternoon before I tossed myself into the near-coma from which Gwenellen had just woken me.
I was tired of feeling tired.
I was ready inside the fifteen minutes.
The unnatural silence in the Home showed I was last out.
I should make the dining-room before the Night Superintendent, providing, as Gwenellen had advised, I escaped Home Sister.
She was a nice old soul, but she had once been Sister Hope for twenty years, as she never ceased to inform us.
If she caught me now in the front hall she would waste a good ten minutes warning me that I was risking tuberculosis and a gastric ulcer by being too late to eat a proper meal quietly, and probably throw in the chances of my poisoning a patient with the wrong drug before the night was out through carelessness induced by my own lack of blood-sugar.
‘Believe me, Nurse Dungarvan, I well remember a sad case in Hope.
Such a nice girl, but…’
I went down the back stairs, meaning to use the back door.
It was never locked before 9 P.M. It was that night.
I cursed, crept towards the front hall, then stopped dead as I heard voices.
They belonged to Home Sister and, of  all people, the Night Super.
Hell, I thought, now what?
Then I remembered the new subway.
This was being built under the main road that divided the three nurses' homes and the medical-school library from the hospital.
One of my Hope patients was married to one of the subway workmen.
She had told me the tunnels had now been connected up and the workmen used the subway constantly as a private short cut.
On the hospital side it opened into the basement under the Out Patients Department, which itself stood directly opposite our dining-room.
It would save me minutes.
I hurried back softly to the basement stairs.
Our basement had been out of bounds since the work started, as a large sign on the stairs informed me.
The stairs were roped off.
I climbed over and went on down.
The new tunnel opened on the left a few yards from the foot of the stairs.
It was lit by hurricane lamps, and it too was roped off and had another ‘No Entry’ sign.
I patted it as I went by.
The air smelt of damp and cement, but was not unpleasant, and round the bend from our tunnel where it was joined by the library tunnel the air was much fresher.
In the main subway itself, a few more yards on, there was much more light, as there were lamps hanging from hooks on the walls as well as lining the floor.
Despite my soft soles, my steps had an extraordinary echo.
It so fascinated me that I stopped in the middle of the subway.
The echo went on.
Then a man's voice behind me called, ‘One minute, please, Nurse.’
I did not recognize the voice.
I recognized the man in the long white coat directly I turned.
I took a deep breath.
‘Good evening, Mr Leland.’
‘Evening.’
He caught me up.
‘What are you doing down here?’
‘Taking a short cut to supper.’
‘Supper?’
He held up his wrist to look at his watch by the nearest lamp.
‘Night nurse?’
‘Yes, Mr Leland.’
‘Why come this way?
Surely you know this subway is out of bounds?’
His tone was mild, but, having heard of his reputation, I did not let that deceive me.
‘Yes.
I'm afraid I do.’
I looked up at his face and braced myself for the inevitable blast.
None came.
He merely looked back at me in a rather peculiar silence.
He had been our Senior Surgical Officer for about four months.
He was a Benedict's man, and, as was a Benedict's custom, had spent some years in other hospitals before returning to his present appointment.
As I had been on the medical side since he came back, this was the first time he had spoken to me, or probably seen me.
I had seen him around, frequently.
Taking note, and stock, of new senior residents was something all nurses did within twenty-four hours of that resident's arrival in a hospital.
He was a tall, thin man, but with the shoulders to carry his height.
He had a strong-featured face that was attractive without being strictly good-looking, and hair that was the colour of deep copper.
As a student he had been nicknamed Red Leland.
He was now Old Red to all Benedict's — behind his back.
When he first returned, my friends on the surgical side had made themselves fresh caps daily and spent hours on their faces before going on duty.
A couple even went on diets.
When he first returned.
Now, when the surgical girls mentioned him, it was usually between their teeth.
I wished he would get on and get it over.
And then, since weeping was something I could do fairly easily, providing I thought hard enough on a sad theme, I should see if a few womanly tears would be a good ploy.
Despite his  reputation and the general theory that doctors were impervious to tears because they saw so many shed, I had noticed that the way our men reacted to weeping females depended mainly on their ages.
Roughly, those over thirty-five, and I put him in that group, reacted with a mixture of impatience, embarrassment, and guilt.
Those under, as likely as not, burst into tears themselves.
I had been wept on by so many boyfriends that, had Home Sister known, she would have warned me of the dangers of pneumonia every time I went out on a date.
It might work on Old Red, I decided, summing him up.
He was looking correctly grave, but his mouth was sensitive and he was a lot bigger than I was, in addition to being years senior.
As any girl knew, with any normal man, that gave her the ace.
He broke the silence to ask, still mildly, if I had previously used the subway.
‘No?
Good.
Don't use it again until it's open and properly lighted.
It's far too lonely.
We've had the occasional report of undesirable characters lurking round the hospital.
One could easily get down here.
That's actually why I'm here now.
Not that I've seen anyone.
Have you?’
‘No.
I never thought of that angle.’
‘You will,’ he said, ‘next time.
What's your name, Nurse?’
I stiffened.
Was he going to report me?
‘Nurse Dungarvan’.
His quick smile was astonishingly attractive.
‘I thought so.
Obviously related to Margaret Dungarvan?’
‘Her niece.’
(God bless Margaret!)
‘You knew her?’
He said he remembered her well, hoped she was flourishing, and had I not better get off to my supper?
‘Yes, Mr Leland.’
I smiled.
‘Thank you.’
Nine struck as I reached the dining-room.
A junior Night Sister frowned, but by some miracle the Night Super.
's chair was still empty.
I had time to eat my shepherd's pie and tell my table about meeting Old Red before she appeared and apologized to us all for being late.
‘You'll forgive me if I have a cup of tea before reading the register, Nurses?’
‘Just this once, Sister,’ I murmured.
‘Well, girls?’
I asked the table.
‘And what's all this codswallop you've been feeding us about Old Red's being foul to nurses?
He's not.
He's cute.’
‘Cute!’
Aline choked and had to be banged on the back.
‘Jo, are you sure you haven't dreamed all this up?
We know what your imagination's like.
And we girls in the surgical block know our Old Red!’
Aline worked in Stanley, Gwenellen, in Marcus.
Stanley was male general surgical.
Marcus was a male major-accident ward.
I said, ‘I have not imagined this!
He honestly was cute!
He asked if I was related to Margaret.’
Aline said, ‘Maybe you reminded him of his long-lost youth.’
‘That's it!
I awoke an avuncular instinct!’
‘Well, don't count on it,’ she warned, ‘if you meet him on duty.
He'll never let you get away with anything in a ward even if he's been pining with unrequited love for your aunt for God knows how many years.’
I nodded absently, thinking of Margaret.
‘I wonder why he's never married?
He's no queer.’
Almost reluctantly the table agreed.
Since most men had acquired wives before they reached the stage of being an S.S.O. — and Benedict's, having yet to appoint its first female house-surgeon, never had any but male S.S.O.s — a bachelor S.S.O. was regarded as an unexpected bonus and fair game for the entire nursing staff.
In his four  months in residence Old Red had done a great job of dashing girlish hopes.
Gwenellen hopefully suggested he might have a secret mistress.
Aline disagreed.
‘Mistresses demand time and money.
Where's the hospital resident with either?’
I sighed.
‘Poor Old Red.
What a grim life!’
‘No-one has to be an S.S.O.,’ protested Aline.
‘The grind may be tough, but it doesn't last for ever.
Couple of years from now he'll be a pundit surgeon.
Think what pundits earn and dry your tears.’
‘But think of the way pundits have to work for years and years to earn that money.
Time they get it they're good as past it!
No, I still think Old Red has a tough life.
I must ask Margaret if she remembers him.’
‘Do that,’ urged Gwenellen, ‘and ask if she knows why he's never married.
A man his age needs a wife.’
That had already occurred to me.
The Night Superintendent clapped her hands for silence.
Before she reached my name I had chosen the wife for Old Red; when Gwenellen Jones answered I had also chosen my bridesmaid's dress, asked Matron for an extra holiday, coaxed our fare money out of my father, and was flying out to Singapore with Dickie.
Margaret had married one Simon Ellis, a junior orthopaedic registrar, in her fourth year.
I barely remembered my uncle, as he had been killed rock-climbing when Dickie was a few months old.
I had never understood why Margaret had not remarried.
My mother said that was because one married whom one met.
‘And whom does Margaret meet?
Her patients, whom she is far too much of a professional nurse to regard as anything but patients, married couples with children of Dickie's age, married G.P.s, and your little boyfriends, Jo.
If only she could meet some really suitable older man.
Trouble is, of course, they're already married.
It's only the oddities who make elderly bachelors.’
Old Red was no oddity.
Nor was he really all that elderly.
Middle-aged, perhaps, but so was Margaret.
And very suitable.
Also, the biggest point in his favour was the way he remembered her so well that he not only had not minded admitting it to me, but had been very nice in the process.
I claimed no personal credit for that, since, like most girls, I could always tell when I had lit a spark in a man at sight, and vice versa.
Nothing like that had just happened in the subway.
Though Old Red had looked at me so keenly, I would be prepared to swear on oath that he had not seen me at all.
Margaret and I were still very alike.
I had been wearing the uniform in which he must remember her.
He had looked at me and seen her.
And God bless him for that.
I hoped Margaret liked red hair.
I thought his a fascinating colour, but personally preferred dark-haired men, even though myself a brunette.
Should I ask Margaret outright?
No.
Too obvious.
I must get them together again first.
I had no idea how, yet.
I would work on it.
Right now I was too busy working on where he could take her for a honeymoon.
Spain?
Italy?
Ireland?
Aline kicked me under the table.
‘She's talking about you,’ she murmured, without using her lips.
The night's ward-changes were being announced.
I just caught ‘…from Hope Ward to Marcus Ward as special.’
‘Me —?’
I mouthed, and my table nodded.
I was furious.
I had to wait until after grace.
‘What's the old bag playing at, Gwenellen?
Aren't there three of you in Marcus tonight, and one a senior staff nurse?
Why can't you special your own patients?
I belong to Hope!’
‘Have you forgotten it's Saturday night, Jo?
Mid-July?
And that we've had no rain since Tuesday, and it started getting hotter yesterday?’
‘I had.
I never remember what day it is on nights.’
I calmed down.
‘Any notion whom I'm to special?’
‘We'd six on the D.I.L. [Dangerously Ill List]last night.
By now we could have six more.
Take your pick.’
‘How long do you think I'll be with you?’
‘Most likely, just tonight.
Our Marcus men don't linger on the brink like your Hope females.
They may come in in little pieces, but if the pieces can be stuck together the results usually show inside of their first forty-eight hours.
If not, they're usually dead.
But why so incensed?
You love  specialling .’
‘I do,’ I said, ‘in my own ward and when I can special a patient right through, as I did my classic pneumonia girl in Hope a few weeks ago.
What I detest is being a one-night special in a strange ward and then being whisked away.
One can't special anyone without getting fond of 'em.
I love fussing over patients.
When I have to leave one in mid-air I fuss to myself for days after.
That's why I object strongly to the Office's plugging me in as an Automatic Nurse for one night!’
Aline laughed.
‘Little Miss Nightingale's off!
I know what, Jo!
You'll just have to sweet-talk your new chum, Old Red, into requesting the Office to leave you in Marcus for more than one night.’
‘Oh, no!
I'd forgotten Marcus is one of his wards.
I wonder now, is this good or bad?’
Gwenellen thought neither, as if Marcus tonight was anything like Marcus last night Old Red would be far too busy to remember meeting me in the subway.
Aline disagreed.
‘He is the S.S.O., and he did catch you breaking a rule.
He won't forget that.
He doesn't forget things.
Look how he's remembered your aunt.
And  even though you do look like her, and probably even more like the way she did at our age, I can't see that being enough to inspire him with over-confidence in you as a special.
Face it, Jo, you were a nut to use that subway!
Specials aren't supposed to be nutty.
Watch it with him, Jo, and watch it with Humber.
She gave me hell when I was her junior in Cas.’
Humber was the name of the Marcus Night Staff Nurse.
When we left Aline at Stanley and went on up to Marcus on the floor above I asked Gwenellen how she got along with Humber.
‘I play her by ear, love.
She has her dodgy moods.
She's a good nurse.
The men like her.
They feel safe with her — and she can be quite human.’
She unhooked her cloak collar as we had to wait at the outer door of Marcus whilst two porters wheeled out an empty accident trolley.
‘You'll get on with Humber, once she gets used to you.’
‘Thanks, chum.’
There was an open red screen across the open door of one of the two small wards.
‘Think that's for me?’
I asked, following her into the small corridor we called the ward ‘flat’.
‘Ten to one.’
She took me into the nurses' changing-room.
Staff Nurse Humber was waiting for us.
She was about twenty-seven, tall and very slim.
She wore glasses with brown-winged frames that suited her pointed face and enhanced the impression she gave of being about to become airborne.
‘So you are here to special our Mr Francis?
H'm.
From Hope?
That's something.’
I was puzzled.
‘Is he medical, Nurse Humber?
In Marcus?’
‘Nurse Dungarvan, this may have slipped your notice, but patients are human beings and not machines to which one can fix tidy little labels.
Mr Francis is in Marcus  because he was knocked down crossing a road this morning and has a double fracture of the right tib. and fib.
He was conscious on admission, explained he had felt unwell for the last few days and had intended seeing a doctor today.
He wondered if he was getting appendicitis.
He has acute lobar pneumonia.
I take it you do know the symptoms can be similar?’
‘Yes.
Sister Hope told me she'd known a couple of pneumonias opened up by mistake.’
‘Who, with any experience, hasn't?’ demanded Staff Nurse Humber coldly.
She looked me over with an expression that matched her tone.
‘I've been told you've recently  specialled a similar medical case, but as Mr Francis is an accident case in addition to being allergic to antibiotics, personally I would have considered him a case for a trained special.
However, as the Office seem to have decided otherwise, let's get in for the report.’
Sister Marcus gave me a rather warmer welcome.
‘I am most grateful to Hope Ward for sparing you, Nurse Dungarvan.
Sit down, my dears.’
She blotted her final entry in her vast, diary-type report book.
‘Another heavy night for you, I'm afraid, Nurse Humber.
We've been admitting and transferring all day.
This weather, of course.
Now.’
She sorted some notes.
‘As the general report does not concern Nurse Dungarvan, I'll deal with her patient first.
He is in Small Ward Two.
His name is Mr William Charles Francis; age 26; occupation journalist; religion Church of England; next-of-kin father; addresses of both in the Admission Book; admitted to Casualty at 10.20 A.M. —’ and she went on to tell us all I had heard from Humber.
‘After his pneumonia had been diagnosed by the Senior Surgical Officer the diagnosis was confirmed at Mr Leland's request by the Senior Medical Officer,’ Sister added, then  broke off to explain to the night junior, a second-year, that this was routine hospital etiquette when a surgical patient produced a medical complaint, or vice versa.
The patient then came under both the S.M.O. and S.S.O.
Mr Francis's fractures had been reduced and set, and a plaster splint applied by the S.S.O. under a local anaesthetic in the ward that afternoon.
Sister Marcus said the condition of his injured leg was satisfactory.
She regretted she could not say the same about his chest and general condition, and explained why in detail.
‘The major complication,’ she continued, ‘is his total inability to tolerate antibiotics.
We have checked with his own doctor.
It would be highly unwise to attempt using them, and in consequence we have on our hands what I can only describe as an old-fashioned case of acute lobar pneumonia.
In the pre-penicillin and pre-antibiotic days, which none of you will remember, pneumonia was a very dangerous illness.’
Sister looked at me.
‘As you have recently seen for yourself.’
‘Yes, Sister.’
‘Then you will know what is required of you.’
Not that she left it there.
She went, point by point, through the medical and nursing treatment.
‘You must particularly encourage him to drink, Nurse Dungarvan.
He is too restless for a drip, and fluids are essential.
He has found that a little hard to understand.’
Nurse Humber looked up from studying Mr Francis's oxygen-intake record.
‘Forgive my asking, Sister, but why is he using a mask?
Have we run out of tents?’
‘No.
We put him in a tent but he found the sensation of being, as he put it, sealed up so distressing that the idea had to be abandoned.
He's none too happy with a mask, but happier.
As the peace of mind of all patients is important, but never so important as in pneumonia, the compromise was essential.’
Humber voiced the thought in my mind.
‘Is he difficult, Sister?’
‘I wouldn't say that, Nurse Humber.
I think he is just an ill and shocked young man with the highly strung temperament of so many artistic people.
Very reasonably, he is worried about himself.
A vivid imagination can be no help to a sufferer from serious illness, unless we can help that sufferer to use his imagination as an ally.’
Sister turned to me once more.
‘That'll be another of your jobs, Nurse Dungarvan.
Keep him calm, cheerful, and above all convinced he can recover.
Staff Nurse Humber will give you all the advice and assistance you need.
Throughout tonight you are not to leave your patient unless you are properly relieved.
If you want anything, ring.
And before you leave us I want you all to hear what the Senior Medical Officer said to me half an hour ago.
He said, ‘Sister, that boy has got to run his course to crisis, and whether he survives or not depends not on myself or on any other member of the medical staff of this hospital.
His life hangs on two things — his own will to live and good nursing.’’
Sister Marcus paused for a few seconds.
‘All right, Nurse Dungarvan.
You may leave us.’
Humber shot me a worried glance.
Suddenly she looked older than twenty-seven.
I knew how she felt.
That girl in Hope had recovered, but the night before her crisis she nearly died.
As I walked out of the ward and round the red screen I felt as old as Humber and as worried as she was about my not yet having been fully trained.
It was one thing to talk tritely about holding life in our hands; it was a very different matter to find oneself on the point of doing just that.
Momentarily, I was dead scared.
Then I adjusted the red screen behind me and went into Small Ward Two.
A Very Special Patient
Mr Francis was asleep.
His day special, a girl called Daisy Yates, was taking his pulse.
She was a fourth-year, already an S.R.N., and due to take Hospital Finals shortly.
We had worked together in a couple of other wards.
She acknowledged this with a raised thumb, but when she showed me the assortment of charts on the bed-table pushed against the wall she gave a thumbs-down over his fluid-intake.
I mouthed, ‘I've been warned,’ and we changed over without uttering a word.
He was on a fifteen-minute pulse and respiration chart.
I took his pulse again directly I was alone.
It was as she had recorded.
His skin was dry and hot, his breathing rapid and jerky.
Occasionally, on expiring, he gave a queer little grunt that I did not like.
At least he only grunted occasionally.
I had heard those grunts before with every expiratory breath.
Yet he looked much worse than my Hope girl at this same stage, probably owing to the shock of his accident.
He had been sedated and was propped in a sitting position with his plastered leg stretched out under a large bed-cradle.
The plaster was quick-drying and only slightly damp.
The sickly-sweet smell of plaster and ether  hung in the air and struck a false note.
It was like looking at one of those pictures in a children's book in which there was a glaringly obvious deliberate mistake.
Marcus Small Ward Two had turned acute medical, but it smelt like a plaster theatre.
I checked the oxygen.
His mask fitted well, the valve worked properly, the large cylinder in use was two-thirds full.
A spare full cylinder stood against the wall behind his bed.
In our medical blocks oxygen was laid on in pipelines, but as surgical patients seldom needed continuous oxygen for long periods, the surgical side still used cylinders.
I looked at his plastered leg.
His toes were warm and a good colour, and there was no sign of swelling above or below the plaster.
I stood looking him over for about a minute and then went round the room.
An extra bed-table had been brought in.
It was as lined with trays as the other table was with charts.
I examined them one by one — drinks, thermometer, stethoscope, blood-pressure machine, plaster cut-down setting, emergency transfusion setting in a sealed tin, emergency tracheotomy setting in another, emergency hypodermic setting on the final sterile-towel-covered tray.
I looked at each phial of heart stimulant in turn, the files, the needles in their sterile jar.
If any of those emergency settings were needed they would be needed in a hurry, and it was the special nurse's job to know where everything was.
If anything was missing it was the special's responsibility to ask for it, and ask fast.
On her way off, Sister Marcus came in with Humber.
Shortly after Humber returned alone and toured the room, as I had done.
Once satisfied, she took his pulse again, then watched him for a while.
She said very quietly, ‘I'm glad he's so thin,’ and took herself off.
His sleep was restless.
He kept twisting himself on to the  side of his affected lung, but did not wake when I altered his position.
His hair was dark and long enough to fall over his eyebrows when it dropped forward.
When I pushed it back, as it made him look so hot, the skin of his forehead was burning.
A spasm of coughing woke him.
His cough was short and harsh, painful for him and to hear.
He stared at me blankly as I held him forward until the spasm passed.
‘Another new face,’ he muttered when back against his pillows.
‘Hello.’
‘Hello, Mr Francis.’
I explained about my taking over from his day nurse.
‘I'm Nurse Dungarvan.’
‘Pretty name.’
He breathed carefully.
‘Irish?’
‘Half.’
I shook down the thermometer.
‘My mother's English.’
His eyes were brown and dulled by drugs, his temperature, and anxiety.
When the thermometer was out he wanted to know his temperature.
‘Up a bit.’
‘Don't be so bloody silly, Nurse!
Not being a moron’— he coughed —‘I can tell when I've got a fever.
I want to know how high I've gone.
I don't want to be treated as if I'm three years old and backward at that!
What the devil is it?’
I hesitated.
I was going to have to manage him, and whether I was able to do that successfully depended very much on how I managed this moment.
I could not possibly tell him the truth, as that would scare the daylights out of him.
I did not want to lie, as I was sure he would see through that and in future mistrust me.
Nor could I let him bully me.
The consequences to any patient-nurse relationship once a nurse allowed that could be as disastrous, if more excusable, as when bullying took place the other way round.
I took refuge in the truth, if not with the truth he wanted.
It had worked with other patients.
I just hoped it would with him.
‘Look,’ I said, ‘I do see your point, and I'm not trying to talk down to you, but if I went round telling you, or any other patient, their temperatures my bosses would kill me.
I know it's your temperature.
It's also my neck.’
‘Truly?
You're not just stalling?’
‘No.
I'm being honest.’
He blinked as he thought this over.
He had long and thick eyelashes.
‘Point taken.
Are you going to stay with me?
Like that other nurse, today?’
‘Yes.’
‘All night?
Does that mean I'm very ill?’
I hedged that one.
‘It's more because you're in this little room by yourself.
You're in here because there's no room in the main ward.
Incidentally, in there they've got a senior staff nurse to look after them, plus two other nurses.
You've just got me, and I'm only a third-year student nurse.’
‘That means I'm not too bad?’
‘Indeed you're not.
You're doing fine.’
He said slowly, ‘I rather think I am.’
His eyes suddenly smiled.
‘If all I have to do to get a girl with your looks to spend a night with me is bust a leg’— he stopped for breath —‘soon as I'm out of here I'm busting the other.’
‘A trifle drastic, Mr Francis, but a new approach.
Now, how about a little drink?’
‘Christ!
Don't you start that!
I'm not thirsty.
Just hot.’
‘A drink'll help cool you down.’
‘How?’
That was an answer I could give in medical detail, and so I did.
‘See here,’ he protested when I had finished, ‘there's nothing wrong with my kidneys.’
‘There will be, if you don't drink.’
I slid a hand beneath his head and raised the drinking-feeder to his lips.
‘Be a pal, Mr Francis.
If you won't consider your kidneys, just consider my neck.’
He looked up.
Our faces, of necessity, were close.
‘That's no hardship.
You've a beautiful neck — amongst other things.
You realize you are taking an unfair advantage?’
‘It saddens me deeply, Mr Francis.
Ready?’
I tilted the feeder.
‘Cheers.’
It took a little time, but he drank the lot and went back to sleep.
He woke from time to time and on each occasion drank a little more.
Humber kept reappearing and checking his charts.
After a couple of hours she stopped scowling over his fluid-intake.
The Senior Medical Officer came in with the Thoracic Registrar.
The Night Superintendent with Humber.
A junior night sister alone.
The General Surgical Theatre was working late.
It was after midnight before Tom Lofthouse, the G.S.
houseman and Gwenellen's fiancé, was the first of the surgeons to arrive in Marcus for his night round.
Humber brought him into the Small Ward to look at my patient's injured leg.
Tom caught my eye behind her back and winked to acknowledge my presence on alien territory.
Mr Francis was awake again.
He saw Tom's wink.
When we were alone he asked if the fair doctor in the short white coat was my boyfriend.
‘No.
He's a great friend engaged to another great friend.’
‘How cosy!’
He yawned.
‘You engaged to one of his great friends?’
I shook my head.
‘Why not?
Don't you like doctors?’
He was very drowsy, and as I had no intention of letting him wake himself up with a conversation on my private life or anything else, I said I did not believe in mixing business and pleasure, and, as I hoped, the cliché put him to sleep.
Behind the screen Marcus settled into the night.
The occasional murmur of a man's voice, the swish of a nurse's skirt, the creak of bed-springs, the chink of slung-weights shifting, the clink of a glass being replaced on a locker-top, floated in over the screen.
I was conscious of these familiar night sounds without actually listening to them.
I was too busy listening to my man's breathing.
Those expiratory grunts were slowly increasing.
Sometimes he winced in sleep.
I found myself wincing with him.
Special nursing affected most nurses I knew the way it did me.
One arrived at the bedside of a total stranger, and inside of a few hours that stranger became not merely the most important person in the world, but one's entire world.
Mr William Charles Francis was now ‘my man’ to me, and ‘Dungarvan's man’to the other Marcus nurses.
That even included Humber.
She sent Gwenellen to sit with him, because she wanted to tell me about a telephone call from General Francis.
We talked in the flat.
‘Your man's father, Dungarvan.
This is the second time he's rung tonight.
Night Super.
took the first call, but I've just been speaking to him, and you'd better have the full picture.’
She went on to explain that General Francis was a widower, and semi-invalid.
He lived in Devon.
He had made arrangements to drive up to London tomorrow.
He had suggested coming tonight, but Humber had explained that that was not necessary.
‘I offered him a bed in our relatives' hostel, but he prefers to stay at his club, and, as he has this spinal arthritis, is  bringing his own car and the man who looks after him.
I think he'll probably be more comfortable in his club.
He sounded very nice.’
‘Any others in the family to be contacted, Nurse?’
‘No.
The only other son, the younger one, is in the Army in Hong Kong.
As your man is single and hasn't given us any name apart from his father's, I take it he's unattached.
Or doesn't want his girlfriend worried — though that I doubt.’
I asked, ‘Why, Nurse Humber?’
She shrugged.
‘In my experience patients who worry plus about themselves always enjoy the drama of spreading the worry around, particularly to their beloveds.
But I could be maligning the lad.
I haven't seen all that much of him awake, and God knows he's got good cause to worry.
I don't think he looks at all well.’
That final remark was hospital jargon for ‘I think he looks close to dangerously ill.’
A dangerously ill patient, in jargon, looked ‘poorly’.
Gwenellen relieved me again for my night meal at one-thirty.
On my return she said my man had not woken and the S.S.O. had been in.
She told me this with her lips, not her voice.
Lip-reading was an accomplishment we all acquired on nights.
I mouthed back, ‘He say anything?’
‘Not to me.
He never does.
Maybe I should use the subway?’
The last few hours had so driven my off-duty life from my mind that, momentarily, I had no idea what she was getting at.
I wrote a long letter to my aunt next morning.
‘I've decided I must have schizoid tendencies.
When I switch off my lamp I switch on me, and vice versa, with no trouble  at all .
And though this may sound macabre, I did enjoy last night once it got going.
I like my sick to be sick.’
I asked if she remembered Old Red, and described meeting him in the subway, but not his current reputation, for that would have been less than tactful, as I hoped one day to marry them off, and unfair, since he had been so pleasant to me.
I was early for supper that night and on edge until I heard, ‘Nurse Dungarvan to Marcus Ward as special nurse for tonight.’
The Night Super.
lowered her list.
‘Nurse Dungarvan, when are your next nights off?’
I stood up.
‘Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday, Sister.’
‘And your holiday starts tomorrow week?’
‘Yes, Sister.’
Across the dining-room I saw Humber whisper something to one of the junior sisters and that sister nod in reply.
Humber smiled in a relieved way.
I sat down again longing to hit something hard.
Walking up with us to our wards, Aline said, ‘I guess they'll keep you in Marcus until your nights off, and then shove one of the day staff nurses on nights.’
Gwenellen looked startled.
‘That a guess?
Or have you heard something?’
‘Only that Humber's been raising Cain all day about having to carry D.I.L.s in Marcus proper and Marcus Small Ward, and how, though she's willing, she can't be in two places at once.’
She turned to me.
‘I know you  specialled that girl in Hope, Jo, and right through, but she was in the main ward, wasn't she?’
‘She was.’
‘Well, then,’ said Aline, ‘you must see Humber's angle.’
Gwenellen and I said nothing.
Gwenellen was a kind and tactful girl.
I was a girl in a flaming temper.
Daisy Yates was waiting outside the red screen when I left Marcus main ward after the report.
‘His father's still with him.
I've moved out to let them say their private good-nights.’
‘How is he?’
I asked.
Though I'd just had the official report, I wanted the inside story.
‘Not too good.’
She sounded and looked weary.
She was a large-boned girl, attractive rather than pretty, with a beautiful skin and naturally curly, short hair.
On duty she strode about looking as if she could not wait to get off duty and chuck a discus.
Yet out of uniform she looked like a fashion model.
She had the best dress sense of any girl in Benedict's and a passion for altering the colour of her hair.
She did this subtly, so as not to offend authority.
She was now a discreet auburn, which suited her, but tonight enhanced the whiteness of her face.
‘The lad's spirits have been flagging somewhat.
After supporting them all day I could use some support myself.’
‘I can imagine.
How'd he take his father's arrival?
Didn't scare him too much, I hope?’
‘I was afraid it would make him turn his face to the wall.
Then, luckily, Old Red had the bright idea of suggesting General Francis used his spinal trouble as his main reason for making this unexpected trip to Town.
Our boy was quite bucked about that.
Apparently his papa loathes hospitals and doctors, having had a bellyful before he had to leave the Army, and since then has flatly refused to discuss his back.
But he's agreed to let Old Red fix him up with an appointment to see Mr Remington-Hart, which is sensible, as nothing sounds so truthful as the truth.’
‘Remington-Hart?
A neurological surgeon for arthritis?
Why?
Surely he needs an orthopod?’
Daisy smiled.
‘Surprisingly enough, Old Red has not given me his reasons.
No doubt he has 'em.’
‘No doubt.’
I glanced round the screen.
General Francis was now standing by the bed, leaning on his two walking-sticks.
He was a tallish, spare man.
His eyes were the same amber-brown as his son's, but looked lighter, as his face was more tanned.
His dark hair was heavily streaked with grey but still very thick.
‘I hope someone can do something for him.
He's so crippled.’
I had another look.
‘Much younger than I expected.
He doesn't look anything like my idea of an old soldier.
He looks more like — what?
I know!
A weary poet.’
Daisy said dreamily, ‘I think he looks a dish.
He must have been a knock-out when he was young.
And though he's anti-hospital, his manners are out of this world.’
She looked over my head and smiled.
‘Ah, here's Corporal Wix.
Come for the General, Corporal?
He's just leaving.’
Corporal Wix was the retired soldier who now worked for General Francis.
He was about fifty-five, short, sturdy, and very neat.
His handshake made my knuckles ache.
‘How is Mr Francis tonight, miss?’ he asked Daisy.
‘A little tired.’
Apparently Corporal Wix understood hospital jargon.
‘Like as I said to the General, miss, the young gentleman'll have to be worse afore he's better.’
Bill Francis looked so much worse in twelve hours that I had to control my expression when I went back to him.
He was much more restless than last night, and, despite sleeping drugs, much more wakeful.
He wanted to talk.
As talking had helped Violet, the girl in Hope, I thought it a good idea to let him talk himself to sleep.
Humber disagreed.
At eleven she sent Gwenellen to take over  temporarily and took me into the duty-room.
‘Why isn't he asleep Dungarvan?
His leg hurting?’
‘Not since that injection he had an hour ago.’
She frowned at his prescription sheet, which she had removed from the bed-table when she called me out.
‘He can't have anything more for at least three hours.
He must sleep.
Insomnia can be a dangerous symptom in pneumonia.
It's your job to cope with his symptoms.
You are letting him talk far too much.’
I explained my reason.
She was not impressed.
She was saying so forcibly when the telephone interrupted her.
She dismissed me with a jerk of her head and took the call.
I had not been back with Bill Francis two minutes before she appeared.
‘Time I took the weight off my feet.’
She took my chair by his bed.
‘Telephone, Nurse Dungarvan.
S.S.O.’
God, I thought, and what does he want?
He told me.
‘I've had a general report on Mr Francis.
I now want to know about his fractured leg.
How is it?’
‘Comfortable, Mr Leland.’
‘Nurse, I want a report, not a placebo!’
I grimaced at the wall.
This was the Old Red I had heard about, and not the man I had met in the subway.
I gave him a detailed surgical report.
‘I gather he's not sleeping?
Why not?’
I resisted the urge to retort with his curtness, ‘Because he's not sleepy’, and gave all the medical reasons I could think of.
‘He's got to sleep.
But he wants to talk?’
‘Yes, Mr Leland.’
‘Then let him.
It'll probably unwind him better than anything else.’
He rang off.
I assumed my best dumb-brunette expression when handing this on to Humber.
I had no idea how she would  take it, but on past showing from other senior staff nurses I suspected badly.
Trained nurses, in general, object strongly to being taught their jobs either by their juniors or by doctors.
Nursing was a matter for nurses.
This was a nursing point.
Humber soared in my estimation.
‘Well, I'm damned!
I don't hold with this therapy, but if the S.S.O. is backing you up, keep on your way.
But it had better work.’
It was another hour before it worked.
In that hour I heard about life on a London newspaper, the great novel that was one day going to be written, the shock to the Francis family when the General's eldest son refused to go into the Army.
‘After four generations of soldiers on both sides the boy cried halt!
My mama took it hard, but the old man was very decent.
He's a decent old boy, is my old man.
We've never seen much of each other, but we have each other 's number.
Old Wix, of course, has never forgiven me.
Have you seen old Wix?’
‘Yes.
When he came for your father.
He looked sweet.’
‘Solid wood, you mean.’
He chuckled and started coughing.
‘I'll say this for old Wix,’ he went on when the spasm had passed, ‘though he doesn't approve of me for not toting a gun, he's bloody good to the old man.’
He was silent.
‘Think they can patch up his back?’
‘I don't know enough about it to answer that honestly.
I hope so.’
He was silent for a little longer.
He lay watching me with eyes that were at last getting drowsy.
‘You're very honest, aren't you, Nurse?’
He reached for a corner of my apron.
‘You're the first honest girl I've met.
Now I've met you’— he gave my apron a little tug —‘I'm not letting you go.’
His voice was much slower.
‘Any objections?’
I smiled in answer.
A minute later he went out like a light.
He did not wake when the usual procession of night  sisters and men in white coats came in and out.
They were careful not to disturb him.
The Senior Medical Officer murmured, ‘Listening in to his chest can wait.
Sleep's the main thing.’
He had not woken when I returned from my meal at two.
Gwenellen and I changed places soundlessly.
I took his pulse, then sat back in the chair by his bed, my hands in my lap.
The uneasy silence of the small hours fell over the hospital.
Uneasy, because during those hours so often the dying became the dead.
That night, as on every night in Benedict's, in some ward in every block at least one patient was hovering on the outer edge of life.
Sitting alone in that darkened little room, I could sense the shadow of death lying over the hospital as tangibly as I could see the shadows of night in the corners of the room and outside the window.
Bill Francis was not yet dying.
His illness had to run its course to the crisis that would come any time between the fifth and the ninth day.
The S.M.O. was of the opinion that this was the third, not second night, and that for twenty-four hours before he was knocked down the patch of consolidation had started forming in Bill Francis's lung.
The S.M.O. said it was not unusual for normally healthy people, particularly young people, to misjudge the gravity of their own symptoms and write off feeling so ill as a hangover.
‘That's partly because, being unaccustomed to serious illness, they can't believe something like that can happen to them, partly because they don't want to believe it.
Subconsciously they're frightened, so they put off seeing a doctor.’
If the S.M.O. was right, which he was bound to be, being a very experienced physician, then the crisis would come any time from the day after tomorrow — when I  would be on nights' off.
Hell, I thought, hell!
That was not only for selfish reasons.
He had now grown accustomed to me, and, as he was too ill for any kind of polite act, had left me in no doubt that he liked me.
Sister Hope always said that a sympathetic nurse-patient relationship was essential in any severe illness.
‘Picture yourselves, Nurses, feeling ill and wretched and having to put up with someone you disliked touching you, attending to you.
It would be enough to send your temperature up each time that someone came on duty.’
All patients disliked staff changes.
If he had a new night special, even if he later grew to like her, he would start by trying to play her up just as he had me, and, since she had told me herself, Daisy Yates.
That was not going to help him at all, even if it made Humber happier.
God damn Humber, I thought, and got up to write on the charts on the bed-table.
My move woke him, and he did not see me.
‘Nurse,’ he gasped, ‘where are you?’
Quickly I returned to him.
‘I'm here.
It's all right, my dear.’
He clutched me like a terrified child waking from a nightmare.
‘I won't leave you.
There, there.’
I held him against my shoulder.
‘Go back to sleep.’
‘Not yet.
I daren't.’
He began to shiver.
‘Hold me, Nurse, hold me!
I feel so queer.
I feel I'm going to float away.
Nurse — am I going to die?’
‘Of course not!
You just feel queer because you're packed full of drugs and you've got a bit of a temperature.
Who wouldn't feel queer with that lot?’
‘It's not that.’
He was calmer, with the calmness of cold fear.
‘I just have that feeling — this is the end of the line.
This is where I get off.
It's nothing to do with those drugs you gave me.
They made me feel muzzy.
I'm not muzzy now.
I feel’— his voice broke —‘I can't die!
Don't let me die!
I want to live —’ He began to cry.
‘Now you listen to me.’
I held him in my arms.
‘There's no question at all of your dying — do you understand me?
You're going to live.
You're going to do all the things you want to do.
You may feel queer for a while longer, but that's only because you're ill, and illness makes people feel queer.
But you are not dying now, and you are not going to die.’
He lifted his head to look at me.
‘How can you be so sure?’
I was not sure.
There was no time for working on the right, soothing words.
I used the first that came into my head.
‘For a start, because I'm not going to let you die — nor is anyone else in this hospital.
This is the best hospital in the country.
We know our stuff.
We're tough cookies here, and so are you.
You've got a long and full life ahead of you, chum, so you must now stop worrying and go back to sleep and catch up on the strength you'll need for living it up when you're better.’
He said, ‘I never normally trust women.
I trust you.
Do you know why?’
He reached up to touch my face as he answered himself.
‘I love you, Nurse Dungarvan.
Isn't that something?
I don't know your first name, but I love you.
Do you mind?’
I was so relieved to see the fear had left him that I would not have minded had he asked me to get into bed with him.
Nor would I have taken that any more seriously than I took his actual words.
He sounded coherent, but he was too ill and doped to have any idea what he was saying.
‘All I mind is that you should tire yourself staying awake.
Will you try and sleep now?’
‘You'll stay?’
‘You know I will.’
I helped him lie back.
‘Have one little drink and then off to sleep.’
I reached out behind me for the feeder on the locker-top.
I nearly dropped it when I felt  it being placed in my hand.
I glanced round.
Old Red stood by the locker.
His nod told me to ignore him.
I did so, outwardly.
When I next looked round he had gone.
Reunion in the Car-park
A junior night sister was waiting at the dining-room door that next evening.
‘The Assistant Matron wishes to see you straight away, Nurse Dungarvan.’
I did not know if Matron was on that evening, but I did know she invariably did her own dirty work.
That was no help to my instant gloom.
Before I knocked on the Ass.
Mat. 's door, in my own mind I had been slung out for encouraging unseemly behaviour from a male patient and was miserably working on the choice of my next career.
‘Come in!
Ah, it's Nurse Dungarvan!’ announced the Ass.
Mat. as if life was full of jolly little surprises.
‘Good.
Close the door, Nurse.’
A closed door in a hospital was an ugly sign.
My gloom grew gloomier.
‘Good evening, Sister.’
‘And such a lovely evening!
Did you sleep well?’
‘Yes, thank you, Sister,’ I lied.
‘Good.’
She smiled briskly.
‘Sleeping on night duty can be so difficult, particularly in warm weather.
Sit down, my dear.’
I sat on the edge of a chair.
Had she been Matron, her  telling me to sit down would have told me immediately that whatever her reason for wanting to see me it was not to sack me.
When Matron had to be tough she kept a girl on her feet.
But our Ass.
Mat., though not as young as Matron, was great on being all-girls-together and thrashing things out across a table.
Her opening remark now increased my gloom.
‘Matron has asked me to have a little talk to you about your temporary position as a special nurse in Marcus Ward.
I understand you have been nursing’— she glanced at a note —‘Mr William Charles Francis since Saturday night?’
‘Yes, Sister.’
‘A most interesting case.’
‘Yes, Sister.’
‘And tomorrow night you are due for nights off?’
My gloom vanished.
Suddenly I recognized her attitude for what it was.
That had taken me a little time, partly as I was still sleepy, partly as I had so convinced myself Old Red had reported me.
I saw now she was softening me up just to ask me a favour.
‘Yes, Sister.
I should be off tomorrow night —’
‘But you are not too happy at the prospect of leaving your special patient at this stage?
How well I understand that, my dear!
When I was a special nurse in the final year of my training…’
Ten minutes and five anecdotes later she returned to my nights off.
Providing I had no objection, Matron wanted me to work on until my holiday and have three extra days tacked on the end.
I had no objection at all.
It was another ten minutes before the Ass.
Mat. let me go.
When I did, being a very experienced Ass.
Mat., she had managed to give the impression authority was granting me a great favour.
‘Such an invaluable and very rare nursing experience, nowadays.
You are very fortunate!’
In the dining-room Aline grunted.
‘Huh!
Matron can't have any spare staff nurses.
Humber'll create.’
Humber was too busy to create that night.
In the evening rush-hour a lorry had skidded into a car and jammed it up against one of the pillar-boxes outside the hospital.
There had been four men in the car.
Three of them and the lorry-driver's mate were in Marcus when we came on.
The lorry-driver had escaped with slight shock.
The fourth car passenger was still too injured to be moved from the Accident Recovery Room in Casualty.
Sister Marcus said Mr Francis was rather poorly and had been moved from the Seriously Ill to the Dangerously Ill List.
The General was with him.
‘I expect he will stay a little longer,’ continued Sister.
‘His son likes having him there.’
It was a Benedict's rule that the close relatives of a D.I.L. must be allowed unrestricted access to their ill relative.
Some people took full advantage of this; quite as many others did not.
‘I mean, it's not as if there's anything I can do, is there, Nurse?
He is in the best place, and I'm sure I'd only be in your way.
You'll let me know if anything — well — happens — won't you?’
That had shocked me until I heard it too often to remain shocked.
It still left me feeling sickened by the whole human race, until some devoted parent, husband, wife, or adult child of an elderly parent put things right for me by spending days and nights at a bedside.
There was nothing General Francis could do, and because of his arthritis he could only sit with any comfort on a hard chair.
He sat still and straight-backed, where his son could see him and exchange an occasional word or smile, but well out of my way.
He did not move until Bill slid into a heavy sleep after midnight.
The S.S.O. arrived as he was leaving.
Old Red watched the older man's slow movements clinically as he held aside the red screen, then followed him out to talk.
I thought the S.S.O. seemed puzzled, but as the light was dim I could have been mistaken.
On his return he puzzled me by behaving exactly as I expected an S.S.O. to behave.
If he remembered our meeting in the subway or my relationship to my aunt, very correctly, he gave no sign.
He ignored me until forced to ask a professional query, and then asked it of my cap.
Having received identical treatment from rows of Benedict's men on duty, I could not conceive why Old Red should be the object of so much wrath from my fellow nurses.
Certainly his terse telephone technique had annoyed me last night, but not enough to make me want to spit at the sight of him.
What was there about him?
I wondered, watching him brood over the row of charts.
At face value he was quite a man.
He lacked General Francis's extreme, if ageing, good looks and enchanting manners, but take him out of his white coat and he'd be dead sexy.
That, of course, was the answer.
The girls would forgive fat little Dr Curtis, the S.M.O., with his thinning hair and glasses for ignoring them, as who wanted to be noticed by Chubby Curtis?
Also Chubby Curtis had a wife.
Old Red was another matter.
Dr Curtis came in with Humber a few minutes later.
The two senior residents frowned in unison at the rising temperature chart.
‘He's a good age and build,’ said Dr Curtis.
‘Let us thank God for youth when the antibiotics fail us.
How's the leg shaping, Red?’
‘Fine.
He'll be in a walking plaster in a few days.
I think I'm right in saying the plaster theatre's booked for him on Tuesday afternoon next week.’
He glanced briefly at Humber.
‘Will you tell Sister Marcus?’
‘Yes, Mr Leland.’
She caught my eye expressively as Dr Curtis voiced our thoughts.
‘Bit of an optimist, aren't you, Red?’
The S.S.O. was now watching the rise and fall of the little green rubber bag attached to the oxygen mask.
‘I don't think so.’
Humber returned momentarily after the men had gone.
‘Old Red stuck his neck out all right.
Hope to God he's right.’
‘Yes,’ I said, ‘yes.’
She looked hard at me, and then at Bill Francis.
He was so far under as to be very near coma.
‘Seeing 'em like that always ties my inside in knots, too.
Oh, well, this won't soothe any fevered brows.
I must get back to my poor mangled sods.
I'm very much afraid one can't last the night, and I've ugly doubts about another.
Ring if you want me.’
No-one died in Marcus that night.
In the morning Humber, Gwenellen, and the night junior looked exhausted and triumphant.
I was glad for them, but I only felt exhausted.
Bill Francis had woken at dawn.
He had been perfectly coherent and much too bright.
He had insisted I call him Bill.
‘The day nurse does, so why not you?
You'll have to get used to it when we're married.
You do know you're going to marry me?’
‘Frankly, no, as the question has not yet arisen.’
‘You mean I haven't asked you?
My dear sweet angel, Nurse Dungarvan, I'm not that much of a mug!
If I asked you now wouldn't you have to say ‘no’?
Hospital ethics and so forth?’
I did not take any of that seriously, though I would have had to be ice all through to hear it with utter in-difference.
I was slowly coming to realize that I was not at all indifferent to my patient.
That was one reason why I  was so exhausted that morning.
He was a patient.
Every Benedict's nurse was warned of the consequences to herself if she were fool enough to let herself get emotionally involved with a male patient, before she left the P.T.S. Briefly, it was the quickest way out.
Sister Marcus had looked perturbed by my night report.
That was her half-day.
She was still on duty when we went on that night.
A coach filled with holidaymakers returning from a day-trip to the sea had hit a double-decker bus on a new clearway two miles from Benedict's.
There were four emergency beds up in the centre of the ward.
One of the coach passengers died just as we arrived on duty.
Sister Marcus gave us the report with her sleeves rolled up.
I had never before seen any Benedict's sister do that.
But until last Saturday night I had never seen how a major accident ward looked directly after a major accident.
‘Mr Francis,’ began Sister Marcus, ‘is poorly.’
General Francis spent all that night on his hard chair on the other side of the bed.
Corporal Wix stayed as well.
The duty room was lined with armchairs borrowed from other wards for the relatives of the crash victims.
Humber offered the Corporal one of the armchairs.
He barely used it.
He removed his jacket, rolled up his sleeves, buttoned his tie inside his shirt, and, according to Gwenellen, took over Marcus ward kitchen.
He made countless pots of tea, set and washed up tray after tray, helped the night junior hand round tea to the stunned, grey-faced rows of waiting relatives.
I told General Francis this in one of the quiet intervals when he and I were alone with his sleeping son.
‘The night staff are so grateful.
They say he's as good as an extra night nurse.’
‘Wix is a good man.
He'll be happier if he can make himself useful.’
Another theatre-trolley returning rumbled  by on the far side of the red screen.
‘Do you have many nights like this?’
I explained my not being a Marcus regular nurse.
‘I gather this is bad for a mid-week night, but typical of any summer week-end.
Bank Holidays, of course, are hospitals' nightmares.’
‘And I presume this sort of thing goes on all over the country?’
‘I believe so.
Particularly in hospitals near motorways.
Ever since they opened our new clearway our accident intake has soared.’
‘It must place an intolerable burden on staff.
You work in shifts?’
‘We — the nurses — do.
The men do what is to all intents a twenty-four-hour shift seven days a week.
Officially they get here one half-day and one free evening a week.
Both have to end by eleven for their night rounds.
Then they have alternate week-ends from Saturday afternoon to Sunday night.
Again, they have to be back by eleven.
How they stand —’ I broke off to; get up, quickly.
‘No, Bill, no!
Don't try and pull off your mask.
I know it's hot and uncomfortable, but it is helping you — that's it.’
He had stopped fighting me as my voice got through to him.
‘That's better.’
I turned his pillows, propping him higher.
‘Another drink, Bill?’
I had to use a teaspoon.
‘Swallow, now.
Good.
Another swallow.
Another.’
Dr Curtis had been in four times.
He was still up when the theatre eventually stopped at three-forty, and returned with the S.S.O. The latter was in theatre clothes, with his green cap pushed back on his red head and his mask limp round his neck.
He looked as tired as a man could be and still stand upright.
Bill did not recognize either man.
‘What's the bastard trying to do, Nurse Dungarvan?’ he mumbled as Dr Curtis  tried to listen to his chest ‘Tell him to get the hell out of it.’
‘Take it easy, son,’ said Dr Curtis.
‘I'm a doctor.
I only want to help you.’
He waited while I soothed Bill.
‘All right, son?
Do you understand now your nurse has explained?
Good.
Good.’
When I went off that morning Bill did not recognize me.
He did not even know his father.
I left the General sitting stiffly in his hard chair, one hand on one stick handle, the other resting on his son's bed.
His set face was grey as the sky at dawn.
All the Marcus night nurses were late for breakfast.
Sister Dining-room was annoyed.
‘Really, Nurse Humber!
I do not expect to have to remind a senior staff nurse that she should have more consideration for my dining-room staff!’
The tables were nearly empty.
We broke with tradition, and all four sat together.
The Marcus night junior, though at the start of her second year, was on her first spell of nights.
(No Benedict's first-year student nurses did night duty.)
She fell asleep over her sausage and bacon.
Humber shook her.
‘Wake up and eat, Lewis.
You've one more night before your nights off, and tonight can be as bad or worse.
If you don't eat you'll be ill.’
Gwenellen's chubby and normally highly coloured cheeks were sallow with fatigue.
‘I haven't had a chance to ask anyone — how's Bill Francis?’
‘Still with us.’
Humber answered for me.
‘At the rate he's working up he's heading straight for a crisis some time today.’
Nurse Lewis had been chewing with her eyes shut.
She roused herself.
‘What happens then?’
Humber raised one hand, stiffening her fingers and  slicing the air sideways.
‘He'll shoot upwards, 105°, 106°, maybe higher.
Then at the crucial point which only his body can decide, either he'll drop’— she slapped the table —‘down to normal inside of a few hours, or his temp.
'll shoot even higher.’
She did not raise her hand again.
‘That, of course, will finish him.’
‘How high can a temp.
go?’ asked Lewis.
Humber shrugged.
‘Kids can reach fantastic heights and live.
I've never myself known of any adult getting away with going over 107.
Have you, Dungarvan?’
I was finding this academic discussion unbearable.
But as it had to be borne, I shook my head.
‘There was a woman in Hope who touched 107.8.
She died.
She wasn't young.
My pneumonia girl, Violet, hit 106.8 plus at her peak.
She was down to 99 in two hours.
She did very well.’
Nurse Lewis was keen and persistent.
‘But aren't women stronger than men?’
‘Yep,’ grunted Humber.
I said nothing.
Gwenellen said gently, ‘There's no question of his temp.
coming down by lysis?’
And before Lewis could ask what that was Gwenellen explained.
‘That's when the symptoms subside gradually over several days.’
‘Could that happen?’ demanded Lewis.
‘Not in this case.’
Humber and I spoke together, and then we were all silent.
Humber did not speak again until Lewis left us.
‘I'm sorry to have given you so little help last night, Dungarvan.
I didn't dare leave my poor sods for more than split seconds.’
‘I knew that.
I managed all right— I think.’
‘If I hadn't known you could by last night,’ she retorted, ‘I'd have got me a spare staff nurse even if it had meant taking this bloody hospital apart.
If I had still thought you as slap-happy as I originally assumed — and bluntly, my child, you gave me the impression of being incapable of  specialling a cold in the head — if the Night Super.
had let me down I'd have gone over everyone's head and rung Matron's flat.
I've done that once.
It wasn't popular.
Nor is the death of a patient through incompetent nursing, as on that occasion I pointed out.
Matron herself was sweet.’
She grinned quickly.
‘The Night Super.
's never forgiven me.
But as she needs me a hell of a lot more than I need her, we get along.’
She paused.
‘I suppose you heard I asked Sister Marcus to get you replaced?’
I nodded.
‘Know why you weren't?’
‘Matron had no spares?’
‘It didn't get to Matron then.
Sister Marcus first had to talk to the S.M.O. and S.S.O., as inevitably their views mattered.
The S.M.O. said you had been a very good night special in Hope.
The S.S.O. said he'd no complaints, and he was dead against changing specials, as that always upset the patient.
Sister told Matron, and you stayed.
I'm glad about that.
I was wrong, and I don't mind admitting it.
To be fair to myself,’ she added with a faint smile, ‘if you will insist on looking like the original swinging teenager it's small wonder that the thought of trusting you with a really ill man put the fear of God up me.’
She jumped up, yawning.
‘I must go to bed before I fall asleep here like that child Lewis.
See you both’— she corrected herself —‘I hope we see you back with us tonight, Dungarvan.
I hope your poor sod makes it.’
Gwenellen and I sat on drinking tea while the dining-room was cleared around us.
Gwenellen remarked suddenly, ‘She always calls 'em sods when she wants to weep about them.’
My body was in the dining-room.
My mind was in Small Ward Two.
I blinked.
‘What's that?’
She repeated herself, and added, ‘She cares about 'em.’
‘I know.
You said she was good.
She is.’
I stared into my empty cup.
‘Why didn't you tell me she wanted me out?’
‘Why hand on bad news?
Anyway, I thought she'd change her mind.’
‘Aline didn't.’
‘Aline's a born Cassandra, and she doesn't like Humber.’
‘I wonder why not?’
I murmured, without really wondering or caring.
Gwenellen realized that.
‘Humber told me Red Leland thinks he'll make it.’
‘He's only a surgeon.’
‘An M.Chir. and F.R.C.S.
picks up some medicine.
I back him.’
I looked up.
‘Honey, you didn't see what Bill Francis looked like this morning.’
She had no answer to that.
And since she shared Humber's and my attitude to our job, she did not give me the kind of pep-talk Aline would have come up with in these circumstances.
Aline was probably the most efficient girl in our set, and unquestionably the cleverest.
If she did not marry directly she finished training, which was highly probable, as she liked the lads as much as they liked her, before long she would be a Sister Tutor.
She had the right academic approach to nursing to make a first-class tutor, but not ward sister.
Patients, to Aline, were fascinating mental problems to be picked up each time one walked on duty and put down directly one walked out of the ward.
Up to a point we all learnt to do that.
It had to be learnt, if we were not to turn into nervous wrecks.
But every now and then some patient managed to break through the mental barrier erected by training, habit, and self-defence.
Several times I had seen Gwenellen with that barrier down, but never Aline.
Mine was down, now.
The dining-room staff were getting impatient.
Gwenellen rose slowly, patted my shoulder.
‘Come on over, love.’
I expected to lie awake for hours.
I fell asleep as soon as I got into bed, then woke to full wakefulness at three that afternoon.
The weather had changed; it was much cooler, the sky was overcast, and it was trying to rain.
I stuck it out for about an hour, and then could not stand another minute.
We were not allowed to get up early without permission, but I didn't give a damn for that.
I got up and dressed in a sweater and pants, made my bed, then sat on the end and shook physically with anxiety.
Then I faced the thought that by now he could be dead.
I neither knew nor cared whether my distress for him was based on love for a man or love for a patient.
I had loved other patients.
A few men, more women and children.
There was Violet, young Mrs King, old Mrs Evans, and all in Hope.
Georgie, Marion, Paul, Linda — the children's faces floated through my mind.
David Grant in Arthur.
He had been twenty-one when he died of leukaemia, and I had had to help with his last offices and was then sent to escort his body to the mortuary.
I had then been a night junior.
My senior had not been a Humber.
She had been furious when she saw my mask was wet.
‘A good nurse learns to control her emotions, Dungarvan!’
In the mortuary the night porters had swung open the huge white doors of the refrigerator and lifted the shrouded, stiffened body on to an empty shelf.
The refrigerator had ticked loudly.
The senior porter had said, ‘Sign here, please, Nurse,’ and been kind when he had to wait until I could see well enough to sign that No. 4 was David Alistair Grant from Arthur Ward.
I could not take any more thoughts, or my room.
I let myself into our corridor, soundlessly, and crept down the  back stairs and out of the back door without hearing or seeing any member of the Home staff.
That door opened into one of the staff car-parks that lay between the medical-school library and our Home.
I stood looking round vaguely and trying to decide what to do.
Being off duty I was forbidden near Marcus in or out of uniform.
If I rang the ward and gave a false name someone might recognize my voice.
But there must be some way — there had to be some way of getting news.
I'd go crazy if I had to wait until supper.
‘Jo, darling!
What on earth are you doing here and up?
I was just about to go round and ask Night Home Sister if there was a chance of your being called early.’
I gaped at the speaker as if she were a mirage.
She was a youngish woman of my own height, build, and colouring.
She wore a cream linen suit, a black straw boater, and black gloves.
The fact that I had never seen my aunt looking so elegant added to my impression that I was imagining this.
She never visited Benedict's.
She said she didn't hold with looking back.
‘Jo, what's up?’
In answer I did something I had not done in years.
I flung my arms round my astonished aunt's nick and burst into tears on her shoulder.
She asked no more questions.
She swept me away from the door, along a line of cars, into her aged scarlet mini, gave me a handkerchief, and let me cry it out.
Then she said, ‘You've been on nights too long.’
‘It's not that.’
I sniffed.
‘What are you doing here?’
‘I'm on my way home from Oxford, and thought this time I'd come through London and look you up.’
She handed me her powder compact, lipstick, and a comb.
‘Do your face, darling.
Then tell me.’
She listened without interrupting until I had said all I  wanted to say.
Her vivid blue eyes appraised me kindly and keenly.
‘I'll find out how he is for you.
I'll ring Richard Leland.’
She looked at her watch.
‘Is tea still served in the Doctors' House?’
I was too rapt in my own problems to remember anyone else's.
‘Yes, but you can't ring Old Red!
He's S.S.O.!’
‘So you wrote in your letter, darling.’
That did rouse me slightly from myself.
‘You do remember him?’
‘Of course!
Very well!
Richard and I trained together.
We're old friends.
I haven't seen him in years, but he won't have changed.
He's not the type.
He was a sweet boy.’
‘He's no boy now!
I can imagine what he'll think if you ring him up and say you've found me weeping over my special patient!
What excuse could you give?’
‘Jo, I told you, he's an old friend.
I don't need any excuse.
Nor will he think it odd if you are a little het-up.
Everyone gets het-up over their special patients.
Or are you rather more than just het-up?’
I did not answer.
‘Darling, you are not imagining yourself in love with this young man?’
‘Don't ask me what I'm imagining!’
‘Jo, be careful!
Remember, he's a patient.’
‘Like to bet?’
I replied savagely.
She touched my hand.
‘Let's face things one by one.
Where are the nearest outside phone-boxes?
Still in Cas.?’
She jumped out of the car.
‘You wait here.
If authority wants to know why, blame me.
Say you were too tired this morning to remember to ask for permission to get up early to meet me and then woke at the right time and didn't want to let me down.
As I'm not only an Old Benedictine, but was in the same set as Matron — God help me!— no-one'll object after that.
I'll be quick as I can.’
‘Hold on —’ Her back was to the car-park entrance.
She  did not see the S.S.O. coming quickly out of the library and crossing the entrance.
‘He's over there— he'll be across the road before you catch him.’
My aunt swung round.
She was twelve years younger than my father, and for years now I had called her Margaret, but until that moment I had always thought of her as firmly fixed in the older generation.
She was by far the quietest, as well as much the nicest, of my four aunts, and normally a rather shy woman.
Her reactions momentarily startled me out of my anxiety.
Startled and enchanted me.
She seemed to shed ten years in one second as she hollered, ‘Oy, Richard!’ at the top of her voice across the car-park.
His reactions affected me exactly as hers had done.
His head jerked round, he stared at Margaret, then bellowed back, ‘Maggie!’
He came to meet her so fast that the skirt of his white coat floated out behind him.
‘Maggie Dungarvan!
I can't believe this!’
He put his hands on her shoulders and kissed her, then held both her hands and smiled down at her as I had not seen him smile since I mentioned her name that night in the subway.
‘Maggie, you haven't changed at all!
What are you doing here?
How long are you staying?’ he demanded eagerly.
His gaiety jarred.
My anxiety had returned, and I hated him for being so happy.
I almost hated Margaret.
How could they both stand there smiling when Bill might be dead?
My aunt was explaining that she had come up to visit me.
It was only then that Old Red noticed me in the car.
He glanced at me as Margaret went on, ‘I feel very guilty at getting the poor child out of bed, as I know she's  specialling a D.I.L. and worried stiff in the process.
And how one worried as s special, I well remember.’
Her smile had vanished.
‘How's he doing, Richard?’
He went on smiling.
‘Well.
Still holding her hands, he spoke to me over her head.
‘Dr Curtis is well satisfied with your patient's chest, Nurse Dungarvan.
His temperature dropped just over six degrees this morning.
When I was in Marcus just now he was normal.
Dr Curtis expects him to stay there, so you may find yourself out of a job tonight.’
I was smiling and smiling.
‘Mr Leland, that's fabulous!’
‘Very pleasing indeed.
I'm sure you can appreciate his father's relief.’
‘He was there?’
‘Yes.
Sister Marcus has finally been able to persuade him to go back to his club for a short rest.’
He returned his attention to Margaret.
‘How long are you here for?
Do you have to hurry off, or can you stay and have dinner with me later?
As this is my free evening, I'm sure I can get away by seven.
Can you wait?’
I was too happy to hear her answer, or even recollect they were there.
Later she told me she was going to accept his invitation.
By then I was hearing wedding bells, and not only for Old Red and Margaret.
One Morning on a Bypass
I was well into my holiday before I learnt Margaret's real reason for looking so elegant that afternoon.
She had come on to Benedict's from an interview with her bank manager.
‘When father opened an account for me in that branch just across the river from the hospital in my P.T.S. days he advised me, if possible, never to move my account.
I've made an arrangement with the Downshurst branch which is now years old.
I'm now far too devoted to my Mr MacQueen to consider depriving him of my overdraft.’
‘Do you always dress to kill for him?’
I asked.
‘Isn't he married with four kids?’
‘He is.’
Margaret smiled.
‘But if you ever need to borrow money, Jo, don't forget this; look as if money is the last thing you need.
As Tom MacQueen himself once told me, banks will always lend you an umbrella, when it's not raining.
I'm not saying getting all dressed solves the problem, but as bank managers are human, it does make 'em that much more willing to help try and solve it.
With the Ellis family finances being in a perpetual state of crisis, I'm something of an expert in the subject of raising an overdraft.’
Her husband's pay as a junior registrar had died with him.
He had had no private income, pension, or — which had surprised me in the last few years — life insurance.
After his death Margaret had had only a widowed mother's pension to support Dickie and herself.
My paternal grandparents had died within a few months of each other whilst she was training, and as Grandfather had tied up all his savings in annuity for my grandmother, none of his children had inherited anything from him.
Simon Ellis had lost both parents before he married, and his only brother had been killed in the last War.
My father had helped Margaret during the early years, but directly Dickie had been old enough to board at his preparatory school Margaret had insisted on returning to nursing and becoming sole breadwinner.
A gloriously unexpected legacy from a great-aunt had allowed her to use half to start buying her cottage and bank the other half for Dickie's education.
It had not been a large legacy.
My father frequently said he did not know how she managed.
Margaret gave all the credit to her Mr MacQueen.
‘A dour Scot.
But his mother was left an impoverished widow.
He sits there looking like John Knox being unimpressed by Mary Stuart, and just as I think he'll never let me increase my overdraft he says, ‘Aye, life's not easy for a woman alone with no head for business.
I'll do my best for you, Mrs Ellis.’
And I could willingly kiss him, if I wasn't sure that would shock him to death!’
I said smiling, ‘If you always look as fabulous as you did on Thursday when you visit him I wouldn't bet on that reaction.
How did you make out then?’
She closed the living-room door before answering, even though Dickie had long gone to bed.
‘He thinks I can manage the first two years' bills at Dickie's new school, but after that I'll be cleaned out, so God alone knows  what'll happen.
Unless Dickie has passed in well enough to get a scholarship.’
Dickie had just taken the entrance examination required by his father's old public school.
The results were due next week.
Dickie's place had been booked at birth.
I said, ‘He's a bright lad.
Isn't there a good chance he may get a scholarship?’
She shrugged.
‘His present Head is hopeful, but, as he told me, no-one can predict exam.
results.
It's tough enough to get into that school.
To get in on a scholarship means passing little short of brilliantly.
Dickie realizes that.
He took the exam.
very seriously — in fact, far too seriously.
He's always set his heart on going to Simon's school.
He's trying to pretend he's not worrying about the results now, but I know he is.’
I had noticed this.
I did not say so.
She went on, ‘At least twelve is one year older than eleven.
I've seen how Dickie's pals look when taking the eleven plus, and it makes me so mad, Jo!
No child of that age should have to face something which they've the intelligence to realize can affect their whole lives, even if they are too young to appreciate, mercifully, just how much.
The poor little things look white and strained and old.
Yet don't ask me how else they can sort out the bright from the not-so-bright, as I don't know.
I don't even know it's a good idea they should be sorted out.
Personally, I'm not sure it is, though Dickie's Head insists it is, and he should know.
I've got to leave that problem to the experts.
The problem I can't leave is what do I do if Dickie just passes?
Break his heart now by saying the school's too expensive?
Or wait two years and break it then?’
I said tentatively, ‘Suppose in two years' time the situation was different?’
‘In what way?’
‘You might have more money.’
‘How?
Think they'll raise our pay?
Darling, we are nurses, not doctors.’
I was on thin ice, and I knew it.
Though she had dined with Red Leland that evening and had seemed as pleased to meet him again as he had been to see her, though I had frequently brought up his name since my holiday started, each time she had immediately changed the subject.
I had not yet been able to fathom why.
‘Well’,— I was intentionally vague —‘by then you might have won a football pool.’
‘Don't do 'em.
I don't know how.
Do you?’
‘No.
So that's out.
Well, then how about — if you marry again?’
Her expression was thoughtful as well as amused.
‘Are you suggesting I remarry to pay Dickie's school bills?
An idea.
I can't say I like it.’
‘But wouldn't you like to marry again?’
‘In theory, yes, very much.
In practice, I'm not so sure it would work out.’
‘Why not?’
She took her time.
‘Lots of reasons.’
‘Such as?’
‘To begin with, I've been on my own a long time, and the longer one is alone the more used to it and the more  choosy one becomes.
Also, the more independent.
I never aimed to be an independent, career-woman type, but on being jerked into it by Simon's death I've had to become one.
It would be folly to pretend that at least part of me doesn't love independence or that very independent women make the most adaptable of wives.
And wives, my child, to make a success of marriage, must adapt.’
‘Surely, with the right man that would work out?’
She said, ‘Sweetie, don't forget I not only need the  right man for me, but the right stepfather for Dickie.
Ready-made good fathers who are free to marry and in my age-group aren't easily come by.
Then there's another snag.
As far as I'm concerned, Dickie must come first.
Now I know the love for a man and the love for one's child are two totally different things, but it's not always simple for the father of one's child to understand that.
To expect a man to understand it about another man's son is expecting a very great deal.’
‘But lots of second marriages are happy.’
‘And lots are not, particularly for the kids.
No father's tough on a kid, but the wrong father can be far worse.
I might take a gamble for myself.
I'd never risk gambling Dickie.’
Old Red was in the right age-group and free.
As he had no children, how could anyone say what kind of a father he would make until given a chance to prove it himself?
‘Margaret I hope you don't mind my saying this, but aren't you forgetting that in a few years Dickie'll be grown up?
And what then?’
‘He'll move out and live his own life.’
‘And you'll be alone.’
‘Yes, dear.
But if you're about to suggest I marry now for companionship later, don't.
Though I may well seem aged to you, Jo, I'm not yet that old.’
She smiled self-derisively.
‘Or if I am I don't feel it.
At the same time, I'm a long way from being young enough to imagine, as you do, that marriage is the answer to all life's little problems.
On the contrary, and if this is corny I can't help it, as it's still true, it's when one marries that one's real problems start.
I think I've enough of my own without looking round for a few more.’
‘But if you did you'd have someone to help with your problems!
And, Margaret — don't you get lonely?’
‘Obviously, Jo.
Who, on their own, doesn't?
But there are worse things than loneliness, and I'm old enough to have seen 'em.
I've often come home from a job, or visiting so-called happily married friends, and thanked heaven fasting for my lot.
I'm not complaining.’
‘I know!’
I snapped crossly.
‘But it's time you did!’
‘Phooey!
You've got marriage on the brain tonight, darling.
Must be this wedding you're going to tomorrow.
What time do you want the car?’
‘Ten-thirty-ish do?’
‘Fine.’
She stood up.
‘Let's go to bed.’
I knew when I was beaten.
I went glumly upstairs.
Fond as I was of Margaret, I could willingly have shaken her.
She was behaving like an ostrich about Old Red — and a stubborn ostrich at that!
From what I had gathered of her dinner with him in town, despite her obvious pleasure in meeting him again, she had given the poor man a straight brush-off.
She had told him she was unlikely to be in Town again in the foreseeable future, and was sure he was far too busy to have time to drive down to Sussex.
I had asked, ‘Why not?’
She had laughed.
‘Where's the S.S.O. with energy for a one-hundred-and-twenty-odd-mile drive there and back?’
To comfort myself I reread Bill's letter.
He had got my address from Aline, who had been moved to Marcus to replace Gwenellen, who had flu.
I had returned to Hope from the night after Bill's crisis.
He wrote: ‘I nearly died again when you didn't appear.’
His plaster had been changed, and he had written whilst it dried.
Once dry, they were letting him up.
He hoped to join his father in Devon next week.
General Francis had seen Mr Remington-Hart on Monday.
‘He has not said anything about it to me,’ the letter continued,
but as he is making plans to leave Town this week-end, I fear the result was no dice.
I know he would like me to send you his regards.
He took quite a shine to you, did my old man.
Like father, like son.
I now want to thank you.
How the hell can I?
Even though words are my trade, I don't know the right words.
You may think you just nursed me.
That I was just another job.
Maybe.
I think you saved my life.
I think that had you not been with me on the black nights I would have died.
You may forget me, though how I hope you won't!
I'll never forget you.
I want to see you again just as soon as they let me out of this hospital.
May I, please, please, please?
I realize you can't write me here.
I'll be in touch, my love — as you must know you are.
Yours — and this is no euphemism, BILL FRANCIS
Dickie had just collected the afternoon post from the postman in the lane and given me my letter before taking in the rest to his mother.
I had not yet told Margaret it was from Bill.
It was bound to worry her, as he was still a patient and I felt she had more than enough on her plate already without my adding anything.
Or, rather, that was my excuse to myself when the letter first arrived and sent me sailing up on to Cloud Nine.
Reading it again that night, I discovered that, as usually happens, my motives were mixed.
I did not want to worry her, but neither did I want to discuss him, even with Margaret.
I did not really know why not.
I suspected it was because I had never been properly in love with anyone before, and the sensation was too strange, too pleasant, and too personal for sharing.
Margaret and I were very alike temperamentally.
Suddenly it occurred to me to wonder if this was her real  reason for refusing to discuss Red Leland.
I was very much happier by the time I went to sleep.
The wedding to which I had been invited was taking place in a village church ten miles the other side of Downshurst, a market town eleven miles from my aunt's cottage.
Dickie wolf-whistled when I appeared in my fine clothes.
‘I say, Jo, you look smashing!
I dig that hat!
Is it going to stay on?’
‘Honest to God, I hope so!
I've fixed it with two cap-pins.’
I turned round.
‘Do they show?’
Margaret examined the pale-blue Breton sailor hat with the enormous upturned brim that by sheer luck exactly toned with my dress and jacket.
‘Not a trace.
You look a dolly.
Careful with that hat when you get into the mini.’
Dickie studied my skirt.
‘Is that a proper mini-skirt, Jo?’
‘No.
It's only two inches above my knees; a proper mini should be at least six.
I thought with this hat this dress was short enough.
Anyway, it's my best.’
‘Can you sit down in it?’ asked Margaret.
‘With care and a large handbag to slap on my knees.’
I picked up my bag and gloves.
‘What's the time?
Twenty to?
Hell!
I'll be late.’
‘The bride'll be later, darling.
Take it easy on the roads.
And don't forget to wear my safety-belt, or your aged aunt will never lend you her car again.’
‘Don't worry, I won't.
Having just spent a few nights in a major-accident ward, I'd rather be late than hurry.’
They came out to the car with me.
Dickie wanted to know who was getting married.
‘No-one's told me.’
‘Yes, I did, muggins!
Yesterday, when we were doing the lawn.
I was at school with the bride.
Her name's Gillian, and she's marrying a schoolmaster.
A David  Benson.’
My cousin was groaning loudly.
‘What's up now?’
‘Who'd want to marry one of that lot?
Ugh!’
It was a lovely day and high summer.
The traffic was quite heavy on the country lanes to Downshurst.
On the Downshurst bypass there were six steady lanes of vehicles coming and going between London and the sea.
I had to travel about five miles on the bypass, and as the mini was elderly used the slow lane, to be sandwiched between a milk lorry ahead and a crowded estate-car, roughly as old as the mini, behind.
On the upward curve over the first down the lorry was forced to a crawl.
Margaret's mini was passed soaring up hills, so I changed into low gear and closed the windows so as not to be suffocated by diesel fumes.
In the driving mirror I saw the driver of the estate-car was growing restive.
Twice he attempted to overtake, but we had reached the top of the hill before a gap in the stream of cars streaking up on our right allowed him to slip in between the lorry and myself.
The lorry speeded up on the downhill run to the next roundabout and the huge road-signs giving warning of the end of the twin carriageway and the start of two-way traffic.
Directly we reached the single main road the estate-car's off-side indicator began flickering.
The driver had five passengers — three women and two men.
From the stack of suitcases strapped on the overhead rack and the fact that they were driving away from the coast I guessed they were returning from a holiday.
They were not very young, and from the back-slapping and laughter I could see through the glass rear doors in fine form.
The lorry-driver had not waved the estate-driver on.
The latter sounded his horn impatiently, and without waiting for any sign nosed his car into the middle lane, accelerating  as he did so.
Instantly, urgently, the lorry-driver's arm appeared to wave him back.
The lorry-driver's reactions were quick, but not quick enough, as the estate-car-driver's acceleration beat him to it.
He was abreast with the lorry when I saw the oncoming small black car overtaking on the other side, and overtaking fast.
It took a conscious effort to resist the urge to close my eyes, while I signalled to the traffic behind and made an emergency stop.
The safety-belt held me back as I jerked forward and at the same second heard the ghastly clash of metal hitting metal.
The estate-car reeled drunkenly, shot sideways across the road and oncoming traffic, and came to rest with its bonnet jammed in the sloping grass bank edging the road on the other side.
It only missed hitting an oncoming white sports-car by inches and by the swiftness of the young sports-car-driver's reaction.
He swerved across the road between my mini and the car behind without touching either of us, and stopped his unharmed car on our grass verge about fifty feet away.
I realized all that later.
At the actual moment I was transfixed with horror by the antics of the small black car.
The impact had caused it to buck like a frightened horse.
It turned right over backwards, spun briefly upside down like a top, then, still upside down, skidded into the back of the now stationary lorry.
The jolt dislodged the back row of heavy milk-churns.
They toppled over the chain holding them in place, spilling themselves and their contents into the road.
Within seconds the road was white with milk.
On the driver's side of the wrecked black car the whiteness was turning red.
The lorry-driver jumped down as I leapt out of the mini and ran to the black car.
At the back of my mind I was conscious of feeling very cold and of legs heavy as lead.
‘I warned the bugger!’ gasped the lorry-driver unsteadily.
‘I warned the bugger to stay back!
Didn't you see me, girl?’
He shook his fist at the driver of the estate-car, who had climbed out and was staring blankly across the road.
‘See what you done?’ he shouted.
The estate-car-driver's stare did not alter.
His passengers were filing out in a dazed little procession.
There was no movement from the little black car, and the stain on the road was spreading.
I heard my voice say, ‘I can't get this door open.’
It did not sound like my voice.
The lorry-driver was about forty and powerfully built.
He tried, failed, cursed.
‘jammed.
Let's have a go at that other, mate.’
He pushed aside another man.
‘One of them's cut bad from all this bleeding blood — my Gawd!’
The door was open, and the crumpled figure of a man had toppled from the passenger seat into the road.
‘Look at the poor bugger's face —’ His arm hit me across the waist.
‘Keep back, girl!’
‘No.’
I ducked under his arm and went on my knees.
‘Let me see if it's him that's bleeding.
I'm a nurse.’
A small crowd was round us.
A woman screamed.
‘His face!’
Somewhere close I heard someone vomiting.
I nearly did so myself.
I had to force down the wave of nausea.
It was impossible to tell the age of the man who owned that face, what he had looked like five minutes ago, or even that that was the face of a man.
But he was breathing, and he was not having an arterial haemorrhage.
‘See he's able to breathe and don't move him,’ I said, to no-one in particular pulling off my hat before half-diving, half-crawling, into the upturned car.
I concentrated now on the driver.
His legs were jammed.
He was hanging upside down, and he was so soaked in blood that it was a few more seconds before I discovered the severed artery was somewhere in his left leg.
I used  his own tie as a tourniquet.
‘Anyone got a pen?
Or pencil?’
I called.
A hand offered me a ball-point pen.
I pushed it into the tie-knot and twisted, hard.
‘Stopped it, have you, miss?’
The lorry-driver's face appeared briefly on a level with mine.
He had taken charge outside.
He had sent the young sports-car-driver to ring for the police and ambulance at a phone-box a mile or so back.
He had detailed another man to direct the traffic.
I heard him growling at the crowd.
‘You heard what the lady said.
You let that poor bugger be.
Gawd knows how he's breathing proper, but he is, so don't you go shoving him around.
Do more harm than good, see.
Like the lady said.’
A police motor-cyclist arrived first.
‘Stand back, please — back you get, sir — madam — let me get by.’
He crouched in the doorway, pulling off his leather gloves.
‘That one still alive, miss?’
‘Just.
His pulse is very poor.’
‘Reckon from the state of this car it would be.
You a doctor, miss?’
‘A nurse in training.’
I jerked my head.
‘I was in that mini.’
He nodded and crept forward carefully to examine the driver.
‘Lost a good bit, hasn't he?
Only the one leg as is bleeding?’
‘Far as I can tell.
From the feel I'd say both are broken.
Ambulance coming?’
‘On its way.
We'd best not try to shift him out until it gets here in case we start up more bleeding.
Will you be all right with him while I take a better look at the other bloke?’
He touched the unconscious driver's head.
‘Don't much fancy leaving him hanging like this.’
‘At least it's keeping what blood he's got left in his head.’
True, miss.
Too true.’
He uncurled himself and disappeared.
A police-car had arrived.
Suddenly the wrecked car was surrounded by uniformed figures.
Two ambulances came together.
One of the ambulance men crawled in to take my place whilst his colleagues consulted with the police on the best method of releasing the driver.
There was so little space in the car and I was so cramped that one of the policemen lifted me bodily out on to the road.
He set me on my feet.
‘All right then, miss?’
‘Yes, thanks,’ I lied.
I was now shaking with delayed-action shock.
I did not fool him.
‘You best sit down, miss.
I'll fetch one of the ambulance lads to take a look at you soon as we get this bloke out.’
‘You leave the little lady to me, mate.’
The lorry-driver was at my elbow.
‘I'll keep an eye on her.’
He sat with me on the grass verge and with unsteady hands rolled a cigarette.
‘Give you a fag, miss?’
‘Thanks, but I don't smoke.’
‘Me daughters don't neither.
Me lads — Gawd — like chimneys they are, the silly young baskets!’
He inhaled gratefully.
‘Not that I can't be doing with this now.’
‘I can imagine,’ I said, and we were silent.
It was around fifteen minutes before the combined efforts of four policemen and two ambulance men succeeded and the driver was lifted from the wreck.
The lorry-driver had offered his help.
A police-sergeant told him to stay where he was.
‘You look as if you've had your lot for today, mister.’
‘He can say that again,’ the lorry-driver confided to me.
‘Gets me in the guts, this does.
Always the way of it.’
‘You've seen a lot of accidents?’
‘Ten years,’ he said, ‘ten years I've had on this milk run, see, and I seen more accidents than I've had Sunday dinners.
But I not seen one yet as you might call a proper bleeding accident, if you takes my meaning?’
‘Yes.
Yes, I do.’
Across the road a large grey car suddenly pulled out of the Downshurst-bound traffic and stopped on the grass verge beyond the estate-car and the police busy with tape-measures and notebooks.
I noticed it vaguely.
The lorry-driver was more observant.
‘What's this, then?
More top brass?’ he inquired of the policeman standing over us as he wrote down our names and addresses.
The policeman glanced round.
‘Not one of ours.
7 Oak Cottages, Hurstly, did you say, Mr Jemps?’
The wedding was at Hurstly.
The name reminded me of that, but the peculiar detachment of shock prevented the reminder from disturbing me in the slightest.
I stared at the road and was not really surprised by the discovery that I recognized the man in a grey suit crossing with a police-sergeant.
I did not even wonder mildly what on earth the S.S.O. of Benedict's was doing on the Downshurst bypass on a mid-week morning.
It was my first personal experience of the extraordinary anaesthetizing powers of physical shock.
I felt as if my brain and body were stuffed with cotton-wool.
It was a rather soothing sensation.
The police-sergeant told his junior the gentleman was a doctor and a friend of the young lady's, and returned to the other side of the road.
The lorry-driver was now my mate.
He said he was real glad to meet any friend of the little lady's, and weren't it a turn-up for the book the gent.
should be a doc.?
‘Just passing was you, like?
Could've done with you earlier, mate.’
‘So I've heard.
A very unpleasant experience all round.’
Old Red was studying me clinically.
‘I've been told you're  unhurt, but I see you've picked up plenty of gore.
How do you feel?’
‘I'm all right, thanks Mr Leland.’
‘Good.’
He smiled professionally and took my pulse.
‘Rightish, if not quite right.
Why not lie down?’
I lay back, listening to Mr Jemps, the lorryman, giving the policeman a very clear and fair account of the accident.
Old Red offered cigarettes all round.
Only Mr Jemps accepted.
Red lit one for himself.
I had not seen him smoke before, and did not know he did.
The sight of him standing there smoking made me realize how little any of us in Benedict's knew what he was really like as a man, once out of the defensive armour of his white coat.
I had seen him turn human with Margaret, but that glimpse had not been enough to tell me now whether he had stopped on recognizing me for her sake or because I was a Benedict's nurse.
Either way I thought it a nice gesture, and when I next caught his eye I smiled.
He smiled back, not professionally, but rather shyly.
The policeman had finished with Mr Jemps.
He apologized for having to trouble me.
‘Best to get these things down straight away, miss.
Care to tell me what you saw?’
‘One moment, Officer.’
Red took my pulse again.
‘If you don't feel up to it you don't have to talk now, Nurse Dungarvan.
You can make a statement later.’
I sat up.
‘I'd rather get it over.
I'm much less muzzy now.’
‘Right.’
He sat beside me and lent me his shoulder as a back-rest.
My detachment was breaking up.
Momentarily I realized exactly what I was doing.
When I tell the girls, I thought, they'll not believe one word of this.
I would not blame them.
It was hard enough to believe now, myself.
At last the policeman shut his notebook.
‘Much obliged, Miss Dungarvan, Mr Jemps.
We'll not need to detain you any longer, so when you feel like moving off you do that.
We'll be in touch with the two of you later.’
He turned to Old Red.
‘I take it you'll be seeing the young lady's looked after, Doctor?
Nasty.
Very nasty.
Still, I reckon it could have been worse.
No stiffs.’
‘And you know who you got to thank for that, mate, don't you?’
Mr Jemps got on his feet belligerently.
‘This pretty little lady here.
Quick as a bleeding flash she was, the way she bunged herself head first into that little black job and stopped that poor bugger what was bleeding like a bloody stuck pig, afore any of your lot got here.
But for her he'd be a stiff this very minute, and I'm not telling you no lies!
Proper bleeding little heroine your young lady is, Doctor!’ he informed Old Red.
‘You mind you look after her real good.
Cruel shook up, she is now, like as you don't need to be no doctor to see, but she weren't shook up when she got a job to do!’
He rubbed his hand on the seat of his pants before offering it to me.
‘I'd best get what's left of my milk on the road, or I'll have the Guv'nor after me.
See you in court then, eh, miss?
I'll fetch the wife along.
Always had a hankering to be a nurse, she did.
Heal keen, she'll be, to meet you.’
‘I should like to meet her, Mr Jemps.
And thank you very much.
You were wonderful.’
Old Red waited until the Jemps-Dungarvan mutual-admiration society had broken up and Mr Jemps was climbing into his lorry.
‘Where were you off to originally?’
‘A wedding.’
Normality had returned, but without affecting the conviction that I now shared with my mate Jemps and the cops that the S.S.O. of Benedict's was my official source of strength and comfort.
‘Do you know, I'd forgotten all about it?’
‘I believe you.’
I had moved from his shoulder, so he  got up and retrieved my hat.
It was now lying higher up the bank behind us.
‘This yours?’
‘Yes.
Thanks.’
I looked it over.
‘It'll do again —’ I looked down.
‘God!
My dress won't.
What time is it?’
‘Ten to twelve.’
‘Then if I go back and change I can still make the reception.’
He considered me curiously.
‘You feel up to facing a wedding reception?
After this?’
‘Quite honestly, no.
But there's no more I can do here.
The bride is one of my greatest school friends.
We always promised to be at each other 's wedding, and if I don't turn up she'll be upset.
If I ring and invent some excuse she knows me too well not to see through it.
But how can I tell a girl this sort of truth on her wedding day?
It'll cast a hellish blight.
Talk of accidents always does.’
‘But how will you explain matters when you do eventually arrive?’
‘I'll think of something.
I'll say I forgot the time or date or way, or something.
Gillian's always been convinced I'm a complete nut, and one of the advantages of being a known nut is that one can always get people to believe one's acted in a nutty way.’
‘Is that so?’
His eyes were amused.
‘I can see that could be useful.
You don't object to being a known nut?’
‘I used not to.
I used to think it a big giggle.
Now I find it gets a bit tedious sometimes.’
I thought of Humber.
‘My own fault, of course, for always acting first and thinking later.’
‘Not always a fault, as your friend Mr Jemps would most forcibly agree.’
The faintly rigid lines of his normal expression in Benedict's had relaxed.
He looked and sounded so unlike his Benedict's self that once again I  forgot his alter ego.
He was just Margaret's old chum who had loaned me a shoulder and was still metaphorically holding my hand.
I was grateful for that invisible handclasp and for his last remark.
‘Well, thanks.
There certainly wasn't time for thought just now, and had there been I'd probably have been sick.’
I looked at the mini.
‘I'd better move if I'm going to go back and change.’
‘Staying with your aunt, aren't you?
Right.
I don't think you should drive yourself yet.
I'll run you back to Maggie's and when you've changed we can come back here and pick up your mini.
I'll have a word with the cops about leaving it here.
I doubt they'll object.’
I was relieved for myself, as I had been dreading driving again so soon.
I was delighted for Margaret.
I had to make a polite pretence at reluctance.
‘Won't it take you very much out of your way?’
‘A little, but that's not important.
I'm not due in Downshurst for another hour.
I'm lunching with Mr and Mrs Remington-Hart.
I hoped I'd have a chance to call in on your aunt some time today, and thought I'd ring from Downshurst to ask if it would be convenient.
Is she home this morning?’
‘Yes.
She'll be in all day, as I've got her car.’
I stood up eagerly.
‘Thank you very much.
I'd love a lift back.’
‘Good.’
He spoke to one of the policemen.
‘Your car can wait,’ he said on returning.
‘Let's go.’
We had to wait before crossing the road.
As we did so he explained he had taken the day off, instead of next Sunday, which would have been part of his free week-end.
He wanted to see Mr Remington-Hart about some patient and to spend next Sunday catching up on ‘cold’ cases.
These were the patients with non-acute surgical conditions on the long waiting-list for non-acute —i.e .
cold — beds.
‘We  haven't a free surgical bed today, and, by some chance, today we are quiet.
So I gave myself the day off.’
I looked at the empty estate-car when we reached the other side.
‘I wonder what happened to them?’
He knew the answer from the police-sergeant to whom he had first spoken.
‘They had a few minor cuts and bruises and slight shock.
They went in the first ambulance with the man with the facial injuries.
The second took the man you dealt with.’
‘Do you think they'll do?’
It was a stupid question, as he had not seen any of the victims.
Instead of slapping me down, as any surgeon could quite reasonably have done in those circumstances, and particularly a surgeon with his reputed bite, he said simply, ‘Not having seen them, I can't truthfully answer you, but from what I've heard the two in the black car should have a fair chance.
How old were they?’
‘I've no idea at all about the man with the face.
The other’— I hesitated —‘well — not young, definitely.
Thirty-fivish — forty.
About that.’
‘I see.’
A smile flickered over his face.
‘Though definitely not young, that's still not too old for there to be a considerable amount of resilience present.
That's the vital element, and whilst it remains the human body can survive the most amazing injuries.
As a general rule, the very old and the very young have the least in reserve, though one meets the occasional nonagenarian with the resilience of a twenty-year-old.’
He stopped, smiling apologetically.
‘I beg your pardon.
I'm riding a pet hobby-horse.’
‘I wish you'd go on.
I'm interested.
I love ‘shop’ talk.’
He looked at me hard, realized I was being honest, and did as I asked.
I guessed that was in part to help me over my shock, in part as I was Margaret's niece, but also, as I was now discovering, because, though a naturally reserved  man, having once forced himself to open up, in common with most reserved people, he was now having no difficulty in talking.
As hospital ‘shop’ fascinated him, he was very interesting, and surprisingly amusing.
I enjoyed that drive, and when it ended was more anxious than ever to shake some sense into Margaret.
I thought he would make me a delightful Uncle Richard.
The General comes to Tea
There were two cars outside the cottage that evening — Old Red's grey and a new black Rolls which I assumed belonged to Mr Remington-Hart.
Whilst I had changed into my second set of wedding clothes Margaret had explained that the Remington-Harts had bought a country house in Downshurst in the last year.
They were childless.
Mrs Remington-Hart was qualified and did public health in London.
Bernard Remington-Hart had originally started at Benedict's in the same year as Simon Ellis.
‘In here, Jo!’ called Margaret from the sitting-room.
‘General Francis and Corporal Wix have been hoping you'd be back before they had to leave for London.’
I was delighted to see the General again, and not merely as he was Bill's father.
Though he did not make me as starry-eyed as Daisy Yates, he was the best-looking man of any age I had ever seen, and I adored his old-fashioned manners.
Though crippled, he managed to give any woman in his presence the conviction that she was delicate, helpless, and ultra-decorative, and could rely on him to shelter her from life's cruel blows.
‘General, how nice to see you!
Hello, Corporal!’
Rather unfairly, as he had  been very nice that morning, it was a few minutes before I remembered there was a third guest present.
‘Hello, again, Mr Leland.’
He nodded amiably.
‘Good wedding?’
‘Splendid, thanks.
They've now gone on a fishing honeymoon.
Not my idea of romance — takes all sorts.’
Everyone smiled.
Richard admitted he liked fishing.
‘Me too,’ put in Dickie.
‘It's smashing!’
General Francis said it so happened that he owned the fishing rights on a fairly respectable stretch of water.
‘As you're a fisherman, Mr Leland, if you'd care to come down to Devon during this present season I'd be most happy to offer you unlimited fishing.’
He smiled at Dickie.
‘If your mother can spare you, boy, perhaps you'll visit us?’
He turned to Margaret.
‘I feel sure you'll understand that it will give me great satisfaction to entertain your niece's young cousin.
We can fit him out with rods and waders, and Wix'll look after him well.
We'd enjoy having a boy around the house again, eh, Wix?’
‘That's right, sir!
Be like old times!’
Margaret said warmly, ‘This is very kind, General.’
‘It would give me great pleasure.’
General Francis looked from Margaret to Red Leland.
The latter had been watching General Francis and Margaret alternately.
I amused myself watching all three and rather cruelly thanking God for the poor old General's disability.
Margaret, out of uniform, was still shy with strangers.
How she had survived a nurse's training and remained shy was beyond me, but the fact remained she had.
I had seen shyness stiffen her into a quite absurd primness.
Had General Francis not had his two sticks propped against his chair as a tangible reminder of his condition, and had he not, as had now been explained to me, been making this social call to thank me for nursing his  son after paying a second professional visit himself to Bernard Remington-Hart, his appearance and that Rolls outside would have frozen Margaret into a prissy caricature of her normal self.
Fortunately, being a nurse, she had the built-in weakness for the sick that belongs to all nurses.
I did not know if she was aware of the fact, but she was treating the General like one of her patients.
She was an excellent nurse and sweet to her patients, which was why she was in constant demand in the neighbourhood as a private nurse.
But for her insistence on being free for Dickie's holidays she could have had a ward sister's job in Benedict's by just picking up the nearest telephone.
I suspected it was Margaret, rather than the General, who was responsible for the continued mellowing of Red Leland.
He looked and sounded now so unlike Old Red, the reputed scourge of Benedict's, that I couldn't wait for my holiday to end to let me get back and tell the girls.
But before our guests left I had reluctantly decided this was one story not for telling.
It could be a very important story, and, knowing the damage our grape-vine could do with any story, the only way to stop that was to keep this one to myself.
And they call the young mixed-up!
I smiled grimly to myself, still watching the trio holding one conversation aloud and a second with their eyes.
Compared to this little middle-aged lot, we didn't get to first base!
It was so fascinating to observe that I was very sorry when the party broke up, and even more so when Margaret did not ask her old pal Richard to stay on for supper with us after the Rolls drove away.
‘Why,’ I demanded as the grey car disappeared, ‘didn't you?’
‘Darling, you know very well he's got to be back for his night round.’
‘That's not till eleven.
Three hours.’
‘He's S.S.O. S.S.O.'s aren't supposed to cut things so fine.’
She turned to go inside.
‘Has Dickie told you yet you had a phone-call?’ she asked over her shoulder.
Bill Francis had rung me from Marcus half an hour before I got back.
Dickie said, ‘When I heard them say it was St Benedict's Hospital I thought it must be for Mr Leland, so I called him.
But he said it was for you and gave me the phone back to take a message.
Your boyfriend said to say he was sorry he had missed you, and he'd be writing and was doing nicely.
He said he was a Bill Francis, so I told him we had a General Francis talking to Mum in the sitting-room, and he seemed ever so surprised!
The General,’ he added chattily, ‘was surprised too.’
‘Honest to God!’
I sat on the stairs.
‘Margaret, how did your chum Richard take my being rung up by a patient?’
‘I don't expect he liked it, darling, but you are on holiday, and though it was very naughty of that boy to risk ringing you from a ward, you can scarcely be held responsible.’
‘I hope you're right.
Luckily Old Red was in a very good mood.’
Bill's call had shaken me in more ways than one, so I dispensed with discretion.
‘Thanks to you.
He likes you a lot.’
‘We've always liked each other.’
She went into the kitchen to prepare supper.
I followed her.
‘How well did you two know each other?
Was he one of your boyfriends?
Did he date you?’
‘We went out together.
He wasn't so much a boyfriend as a boy who was one of my friends.’
She began cracking eggs into a bowl.
‘He's nearly a year younger than I am, but we always got on very well.
And that doesn't mean what it would mean if said by one of your generation!’
‘Come off it, Margaret!
You're not that old!’
‘I feel it, when you tell me of the apparently acceptable behaviour amongst your contemporaries.’
She smiled.
‘I feel I must have trained in the Dark Ages.
But when I started at Benedict's nineteen years ago, and during my training, though a few forced the pace, no-one thought one odd, or sick, if one didn't leap into bed with one's boyfriend, or indulge in violent necking sessions on every date.
You may not believe this, but though Richard and I have now known each other for eighteen years on and off, the first time he kissed me was in the car-park last Thursday.’
‘You're not serious?’
‘Perfectly.’
She laughed.
‘Shall I shock you more with another truth?
I was engaged to Simon for six months and a virgin when I married.’
‘You were?
Wasn't it a hideous strain?’
‘Possibly.
But not unenjoyable.
You kids must miss an awful lot in your eagerness to sip the heady cup of life, as your grandfather used to say.
How can you get the taste at a gulp?’
She beat the eggs.
‘Mind if I ask, have you gulped?’
I shook my head.
‘Why not?’
I said slowly, ‘It could be because I've never been dated by anyone I liked enough.’
I winced at a memory.
‘It could be Rosie.’
‘Who was Rosie?’
‘She was twenty-four.
She came into Dorothy when I was on days there at the end of my first year.’
Dorothy Ward was gynaecological.
‘She had had a criminal abortion somewhere.
She would never say where, or who did it.
She collapsed, they turned her out of the house, and literally left her to die on the pavement outside.
She was given five pints on admission.
The cops searched the house.
They found instruments, but were never able to pin it on anyone.’
‘She die?’
‘Not at once.’
I stared out of the kitchen window.
Dickie was standing on his head in the garden.
I did not see him.
‘She was doing quite nicely when she suddenly developed gas gangrene.
Dirty instruments.
She was plugged with everything we'd got.
It wasn't enough.’
I paused, looking backwards.
‘She was very pretty.
She had long brown hair.
We did it in two plaits with huge white bandage bows.
I'd never met gangrene before.
The smell was terrible.
She wanted to live.
She fought like hell.
She's the only person I've seen die really horribly.
We got rather matey.
I don't know if this was true, but she told me she had only slept with the man once.
He never came to see her.’
‘Could have been true.
Once is enough.’
I nodded.
That was something else I had learned in Dorothy Ward.
Dickie appeared at the window.
‘I say, wasn't that Rolls a smashing job!
Are all generals loaded?’
Margaret said she thought General Francis must have more than his pension to run a Rolls, own fishing rights, and pay a full-time manservant.
‘Did you realize Bill Francis had a wealthy father, Jo?’
‘No.
Neither the General nor Bill gave me any hint of lolly.’
‘I think that reflects rather well on them both.
Lay the table, children.
I'm about to cook omelettes.’
I had a postcard from Aline next day.
She said she was enjoying Marcus, but not working with Humber again.
‘Gwenellen's on sick-leave and going to O.P.D. on days when she gets back.
You are going to Cas.’
I passed the card round the breakfast table.
‘Isn't that life?
I detest departmental nursing, so whenever a department's short, there they send me!’
The following morning Margaret had two letters.
The one in Richard Leland's handwriting she kept to herself.
She handed round the ‘thank you’ letter from General Francis.
Hoping for another letter from Bill, I began watching our post as closely as Dickie.
Neither of us had had the letter we wanted when the penultimate day of my holiday arrived.
Margaret and Dickie were in the garden playing badminton when Mr Remington-Hart rang up and asked to speak to my aunt.
Dickie was taut as an overstrung violin that day.
His examination results were now overdue.
I took Margaret's place to keep him occupied.
She was away some time, and returned looking thoughtful.
‘What did he want, Mum?’ asked Dickie.
‘To discuss a patient I nursed for him years ago.
Let's have that racket, Jo.
I know you want to wash your hair for tomorrow.’
She roasted a chicken and made a fresh fruit trifle for supper as it was my last night.
Both were Dickie's favourites, and though normally he ate twice as much as his mother and myself put together, he refused second helpings.
When Margaret said, ‘How about bed, darling?’ instead of his usual protests he obeyed immediately, and even agreed to have a bath.
She was silent until we heard him upstairs.
‘Poor little thing, he's so on edge!
Going to Simon's old school is his Big Dream.
I've been thinking, Jo.
If I work through the holidays as well as the terms, and get another mortgage, perhaps I can manage those fees.
It'll mean seeing so much less of him, and God knows I seem to see little enough already, but being an only boy I've felt I must pack him off to boarding-school to get some men in his life and break the apron-strings.
I'll tell you this; every  term when I watch that school train go out I feel as if it's taking two-thirds of me with it.’
‘I've always known that.
But if you work in the holidays, what'll you do with Dickie?’
‘Holiday camps or something.
I dunno.
I'll have to think about it.
I'll get the coffee.’
She was in the kitchen and Dickie in the bath when the telephone rang.
I answered it, then put my head round the kitchen door.
‘Dickie's headmaster.’
Margaret stared at me, then shot by me into the hall.
I did not know how Dickie heard over the noise of the running taps, but at her ‘He's got it!
Oh, Mr Perkins, thank you for ringing tonight!’ he appeared swathed in a towel at the head of the stairs.
Two minutes later, in damp pyjamas, he was swinging Margaret round and round the little hall.
‘Bully for old Perky!’ he chanted.
‘Bully for old Pongy Perky!
He said I'd be a sort of ape not to get a sort of scholarship as I sort of could if I sort of used my noggin!
I say, Mum, I'm starving!
Can we have a celebration nosh?’
He ate three-quarters of a two-pound fruit cake, six thick jam sandwiches, four apples, two oranges, and finished off the chicken and the fruit trifle.
‘That's better.
May as well go to bed now.’
Margaret went up with him.
I heard yells of laughter.
On her return she flopped into an armchair, and we smiled at each other.
She said, ‘I'm so glad to have you here to share this, Jo.
I often think I miss not having someone with whom to share the joys of Dickie, far more than I miss having someone with whom to share my worries.
I'm so proud of my son tonight!
Bursting with pride, and I can say it to you!
Think of this, darling!
My son!
And he's got the highest marks of any candidate taking that entrance exam.!
In all  England!
My Dickie!
His Head is as thrilled as myself.
It's only a small prep.
school.
He said, ‘Your boy obviously has the ability to give of his best when his best is required.
A boy with that ability is a boy who should go far.’
Oh, Jo!’
Tears poured down her face.
‘I'm so happy.
I feel twenty years younger.’
She looked it.
Much later I asked, ‘Do you still miss Simon a lot?’
She hesitated.
‘Twelve years is a long time.
There are times now when I can't even remember what it was like to be a wife.
When I look back the me of those days bears no relation at all to the me now.
It's odd how much one changes without being aware of it.
I didn't realize how much I've changed, until I was back in Benedict's the other day.
And seeing Richard in a white coat.’
She paused.
‘My God, how it all came back!’ she added softly.
‘Too much?’
‘Much too much for comfort.’
‘I can imagine.
Yet, is that such a bad thing?’
‘That's roughly what Richard said when I dined with him.
He asked why I never took a case in Benedict's Private Wing.
I said I didn't hold with raising ghosts.
He said nor did he, but sometimes one had to raise 'em to lay 'em.’
She fiddled with the arm of her chair.
‘He gave me quite a stern lecture on the subject.
I don't know whether he's responsible for the offer I had from Bernard Remington-Hart this morning.
I've a notion he is.’
‘Offer?
I thought you said R.-H. rang to talk about an old patient?’
‘He did.
We discussed a man I nursed for him about seven years ago in a London nursing home.
The man had an aortic aneurysm at the base of the spine.
Bernard excised it and put in a piece of nylon.’
‘Automatic Heart job?’
‘Of course.
Bernard did a very good job.
He's done some very good spinal work.
He's got another spinal problem at the moment.
He's not yet sure if it's operable, but if it is he wants me to take the case.
It has to be in Benedict's Wing.’
She shot me an almost scared glance.
‘Can I face it, Jo?
I don't know.’
‘Margaret, you must!
After all, why not?
Yes, of course, I know your reasons — but be honest!
Is there a nicer hospital to work in?
Haven't you always said the more you've seen of other hospitals the more you've realized there's only one Benedict's?’
‘Yes.’
Again she hesitated.
‘You haven't asked who's the patient?’
‘Should I?
Anyone I know?’
‘General Francis.
That's why it has to be Benedict's.
Bernard says he flatly refuses to be done anywhere else.
He now trusts Benedict's.
And that wretched Richard,’ she added impatiently, ‘Has got me right in a corner by bringing that nice man here and letting him invite Dickie down to Devon.
I'm going to feel so ungrateful if I refuse.
As Bernard said, and I had to agree, private nurses with the right technical experience for such a case don't grow on gooseberry-bushes.’
I said very carefully, ‘Yes, I do see that if your pal Richard is behind this he has put you in a corner.
But it might not be his fault, and it would be wonderful if something could be done for that old General.
He is such a sweetie.
When do you have to make up your mind?’
‘Not for some time.
Bernard won't be doing him until after Dickie's back at school.
I promised to think it over and let him know.’
‘Margaret,’ I coaxed, ‘say yes, if only for the General's sake.
Didn't you think him a doll?’
She smiled faintly.
‘No.
Just a very nice man.’
‘Well, then!
Oh, this is fab!
Bill'll be so thrilled!’
‘Hey, Jo!
This is a strict professional confidence!
No raising of false hopes.
This is just for the trade, still all very much in the air,’ she warned, ‘and not the trade at large.
You're not to say one word of any of this to your pals when you get back to Benedict's’
‘I won't, I promise.’
Before I left for London next day Margaret had the official confirmation of Dickie's examination results.
The delay had been caused by one set of papers going temporarily astray in the post.
Each of us in turn read aloud the splendid sentence ‘The Board of Governors have pleasure in offering your son, Richard Simon Michael Ellis, the following School Scholarship.’
Dickie read the figures and calculated fast.
‘Mum!
In five years this'll come to over two thousand pounds!
Gosh!
I never thought I'd cost so much!
Did you?’
‘It crossed my mind, darling.
More toast?’
I looked at the letter again.
‘Dickie, why are you Richard Simon Michael?’
‘'Cos my Dad was Simon Richard and Grandpa was Michael.
Shove us the marmalade, Jo.’
Margaret smiled at me over the table as if she had read my mind and was too happy to be anything but amused by the fact.
I returned her smile.
‘I like the name Richard.’
‘Now there,’ said Margaret, ‘I do agree with you, Jo.’
Casualty has a Nautical Air
Sister Casualty had been two years junior to Margaret in training.
After she had finished midwifery and two years as a Benedict's junior sister she had joined the Royal Navy as a nursing sister for a few years.
She had returned to Benedict's and been appointed to Casualty after working for six months with the retiring Sister Casualty, five years ago.
She described her H.N. experience as ‘not her tot of rum’.
‘Never seemed to nurse anything but gastric matelots.
Nothing against matelots.
Damn good chaps.
Never much cared for gastrics.
But admin., that's my right berth.’
The Royal Navy had left its mark.
In Casualty we did not report for duty, we came aboard; we worked watches, not shifts; when we went off duty we went ashore; on our days off we took the liberty boat.
Sister Casualty off duty invariably wore a trouser suit, white shirt, and silk cravat in assorted colours.
As she was just under six foot tall and very slim, wore her dark hair closely cropped, and her face though free of make-up was not unattractive, the result was certainly striking.
In uniform she looked very dignified and very nice, and she ran  Casualty so efficiently that without her various little ways her professional skill would have been enough to account for her already being a hospital legend in her own lifetime.
She was very kind to the patients, and for that they would gladly have forgiven her personal idiosyncrasies, if they noticed them, which was unlikely.
She was ‘the Sister’.
To nine patients out of ten she was the first hospital sister with whom they had been confronted, and the great majority, when they walked, were pushed, or were carried for the first time through the double doors of our main entrance, were very apprehensive and trying to hide the fact.
How they hid it depended largely on their education.
The less-educated showed a nervous awe; the better, generally, open belligerence.
They knew their rights and they were going to get them.
The hospital belonged to them.
Hadn't they paid for it with their National Insurance stamps, income tax, and rates?
They had heard how hospitals messed people about with all that unnecessary waiting and medical jargon, and if anyone tried to treat them like illiterate peasants there'd be a letter in the post to some M.P.
before the day was out!
Sister Casualty handled them all magnificently, each patient differently, and yet each one as if he or she was her sole reason for taking up nursing.
She had a remarkable memory for names and faces, which helped, but above all it was her genuine kindness that not even the most irate could withstand.
‘No question,’ they told each other in educated voices, ‘that woman's doing her best for us.
One can't blame her for faults in the system.’
Which was true.
On my first morning she had taken one look at me.
‘Ah, yes, Dungarvan!
Clearly a relation to Maggie Ellis,née Dungarvan.
Your aunt, eh?
God!
That makes me feel long in the tooth, gal!’
She patted my arm.
‘Welcome aboard!
In which other departmental establishments have you previously served?’
‘Out Patients and the General Theatre, Sister,’ I replied, resisting the urge to salute by holding my hands more tightly behind my back in the correct position for any Benedict's nurse when talking to a senior.
‘Both'll help you here, if not very much.
You've been sent to join my Accident Recovery Room team as soon as possible, but I refuse to allow my gals near my.
A.R.R. until they've found their sea-legs.
I'd say that'll take you around three weeks.
It may have to be less if we are rushed.
For today, Staff Nurse Fields will be your guide, comforter, and friend.
What Staff Nurse Fields becomes tomorrow depends on you.
Tomorrow you will do alone the work you've been shown today, but under her supervision.
By the third day I expect third-years to work alone, and if you slip up, gal, I'll have your guts for garters!
Got that?’
That time I had to stifle an ‘aye, aye’.
‘Yes, Sister.’
‘Good.’
She patted me again.
‘Now, your watches.
You'll be on from 7.30 A.M. to 4 P.M. this week; next week, 1.30 P.M. to 10 P.M.; third week 3 P.M. to midnight.
Then back to square one.
Right?’
‘Yes, Sister.’
It could not have suited me better.
If Bill's leg went according to form he should be back in town for his first follow-up clinic when I started my second all-day shift with its row of free evenings.
I had hoped there would be a letter from him waiting at Benedict's when I returned last night.
I was a little disappointed it had not been there, but I was quite sure he would write again in the next few days.
Having said so much in his first letter, he was bound to follow it up.
If not, he would never have written at all.
Sister Casualty said now we had everything ship-shape, how was her old oppo Maggie Ellis.
‘Nice gal.
Good  senior.
Did her own work and didn't expect me to clear up after her.
You clear up after yourself, gal?
You'd better if you know what's good for you!
So your aunt's still nursing?
Good.
Always thought it a wicked waste of a good nurse when she chucked it to marry.
Still, Simon Ellis was a Benedict's man.’
She was voicing not only her own views, but those of authority at Benedict's.
Authority never ceased to sigh when nurses left to marry, but if Benedict's nurses married Benedict's men, then authority sighed a little less loudly.
Staff Nurse Fields was the most senior of the five permanent Casualty staff nurses and Sister's official stand-in.
She was in the same year as Humber, and had the same brisk efficiency, but was much more friendly.
She was married, which probably explained that.
Authority might prefer single nurses, but every student nurse I ever met preferred to work under a married senior.
When Sister handed me over Mrs Fields thrust a sheaf of lists of names at me.
‘Don't lose these.
You'll need 'em.
It'll be days before you remember who's who, but don't let Sister catch you checking up from your lists after your first week.
That top list has the most vital names.
Those in blue work in the Hall, those in red in the A.R.R. Unit.
The most important name in the Hall is Dr Jones, the Senior Casualty Officer.
In the A.R.R. Unit it's Mr Waring.
He's the Senior Accident Casualty Officer.’
Dr Jones was a Member of the Royal College of Physicians; Mr Waring a Fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons.
Both men were permanent members of the department with no ward responsibilities.
Mrs Fields said, ‘As by some miracle the A.R.R. Unit is empty, I'll take you there first.’
She opened a door.
‘The Cleansing Theatre.
This is where all bad accidents come  first and have their clothes removed and first transfusions.
It's really here that, if their lives can be saved, they are saved.’
She closed the door, opened another.
‘The Intensive Care Room.
Accidents come here from the C.T.
when they are not fit to stand the journey to the wards straight away.’
We moved on again.
‘This whole Unit has grown from the one room originally set aside for road accidents some years ago.
Then there were no permanent senior residents in the department as now, and all the housemen had to double-up as C.O.s [Casualty Officers]here and housemen in the wards.
They still do that in the Hall, but Mr Waring has two registrars, two house-surgeons, and one anaesthetist on his permanent Accident team.
Plus four nurses.
It may seem a large Accident Staff.
Often we could use double.’
She opened another door.
‘Burns.’
Burns were my Achilles heel.
I looked apprehensively at the five operating-type tables spaced far from each other round the wide tiled room.
Each table was fitted with transfusion stands and connected up to the piped oxygen laid on throughout Casualty.
‘Do you ever have to use all the tables at once?’
‘Often enough for five to be necessary.’
She glanced over to the two male nursing orderlies testing an oxygen tent in the far corner.
‘Isn't that so, gentlemen?’
One of the orderlies was West Indian.
His name was Nugent, and he had a beautiful voice.
‘So very right, Nurse Fields.’
He turned to his smaller, stouter colleague.
‘Isn't that the truth, man?’
His colleague, Luis, was a Spaniard.
He had large, sad brown eyes.
He raised them, expressively.
‘Aie, aie aie.
Remember, last week, no?
Those children, no more than babies, and the mama had gone shopping and left on the oil-stove, no?
Aie!
How they looked!’
He crossed himself.
I asked, ‘How did they do?’
The men looked at Mrs Fields.
She looked at the empty tables.
‘They didn't.’
We were just finishing our tour of the many dressing, examination, and clinic rooms off the Hall when Mrs Fields was summoned to Matron's Office to discuss her next holiday dates.
Sister told me to wait outside her open duty-room door and watch all that was going on.
‘No better way of learning any new job.’
She turned as two uniformed policemen came in through the main entrance.
‘Have you gentlemen come to see the lady who fell backwards off a bus and hurt her knee twenty minutes ago?
You'll find her in Room 3.
Know the way?’
‘Yes, thanks, Sister.’
Sister explained to me, ‘The poor old dear's in a fine twitter as she thought the bus was stopping, not starting —’ Sister shot off to meet an anxious young woman with a baby in her arms and a small tearful boy hanging on to her skirt.
The boy had a messy bandage round his right knee.
Sister crouched by him.
‘And what have you been doing to your knee, sonny?’
‘He will climb that old fence back of our buildings, Sister.
I've told him not to, and so has his dad,’ replied the mother, ‘but you know what boys are!’
She stroked back her baby's hair.
‘I'm sorry to bring the baby, but I had to, as I'd no-one to leave him with.’
‘That's all right, m'dear.
Very sensible of you to come up, as we'll need your consent for any treatment the doctor may decide on for your lad.’
She ruffled the boy's hair.
‘Like climbing, do you, sonny? jolly good fun, isn't it, when you don't fall off!
Let's have a peep under that bandage — no — I won't hurt.
Ah.
Well, now, when you see the doctor, if he decides to mend you with one or two stitches, you tell him I said, could he please give you a  stitch to take home in a matchbox?
You'd like that to show your mates, wouldn't you?’
The child had been about to cry again.
He stopped in mid-wail.
‘You bet!
Smashing!’
Sister sent them off with one of the Hall nurses and rejoined me.
‘I'm always glad to have mothers come up with their nippers.
You'll be surprised at how many moppets we have bring themselves up.
The very young have astonishing guts, but there's so little we're allowed to do for them without signed parental consent.
Ah — an ambulance.
This'll be another knee.
You see.’
She was right.
A few minutes later a youth with a shattered left knee-cap was wheeled on a low-slung ambulance trolley into the Cleansing Theatre.
He had come off his motor-bike.
Sister said, ‘Don't ask me why things always come in in triplicate.
Can't explain.
Fact remains, they do.
Now what?’
The oldest of the three porters running the glass-fronted lodge just inside the main entrance was putting a middle-aged woman with a blue hat into a wheel-chair.
Sister returned after escorting the woman and porter into one of the examination rooms and leaving a nurse in her place.
‘Dr Jones'll be in to look at that woman directly, Paddy,’ she told the old porter as he ambled up.
‘I've no doubt he'll ask Dr Curtis to admit her to a cardiac ward.’
‘Sure, now, and there's no doubt in my mind at all, Sister!
And hasn't she the very face of a heart?’
He went on to his lodge.
Sister smiled at his blue-jacketed back.
‘Paddy's an old salt.
Knew directly I saw him put her in a wheel-chair that we'd a cardiac on our hands.
Paddy doesn't put a patient in a chair at sight for nothing.
He's far too good a diagnostician.
Old Cas. porters get that way.
You can always trust 'em, gal.
And what's he want now?’
The old porter was returning, shaking his head gloomily.
‘Well, Paddy?’
‘A bag, Sister.
You'll be needing a paper bag.’
Sister disappeared to talk to one of her staff nurses.
Later she explained the reason for the paper bag.
‘One of these.’
She showed me a large bag made of toughened brown paper with a sealing device at the mouth.
‘These take the clothes of any vermin-infested patient.’
My expression amused her.
‘Did you think we no longer get 'em in alive?’
‘Yes, Sister.
My aunt has told me they still admitted quite a number of patients in that condition in her day, but I thought things had changed.’
‘Technique's changed, m'dear.
So has treatment.
We've new equipment, new drugs.
But not new patients, because patients are human and human nature doesn't change.
Some day, when you've time, ask one of the Sister Tutors to let you have one of the copies of the Casualty records for the last hundred years.
You won't find very much difference in the type of patient we had in then, to now.’
She looked round the crowded Hall.
‘A hundred years ago they were carried in after coming off their horses, or being knocked clown by carriages.
There was a lot more tetanus, but no more than was carried in here fifty years ago in the First War.
Twenty-five years ago they were knocked down by bombs.
Now they get knocked down on the roads.
The internal-combustion engine probably chews them up a lot more than anything that's gone before, but the Patients themselves don't alter.
The brave are still brave, the cowards cowardly, and the dirty are still alive from head to foot.
So if you ever start scratching in Casualty don't dismiss it as the odd gnat-bite.
Directly you go ashore have a bath, send everything you've been wearing to the  laundry, and wash your hair.
Mercifully, human lice still abhor cleanliness.’
Gwenellen and I were the only members of our set on days.
As Gwenellen now worked in the Out Patients Department, which closed at 6 P.M. from Mondays to Fridays and at 12.30 on Saturdays, she was enjoying one of the most envied and regular off-duty shifts in the hospital.
Having all my evenings free that week, we spent most of them together.
We agreed that without our set we felt as out of touch as two visitors from outer space.
Gwenellen was seeing next to nothing of her fiancé, Tom Lofthouse, as the surgical side was having another of its regular breathless rushes.
‘Much more,’ said Gwenellen, ‘and I'll begin to wonder what my beloved looks like.
Aline sees more of him on nights in Marcus.’
‘How's she getting on?
I've not set eyes on her since I got back.’
‘When does anyone see the night girls, love?
I've only run into her once when she was coming back from nights off.
She was in fine form.’
‘Despite Humber?’
‘They're still fighting it out.’
‘Poor Aline!’
Gwenellen rolled her eyes.
‘See here, I know you liked Humber,’ I protested, ‘and so did I, eventually, but she's got a hellish bitchy exterior.’
‘Aline knows how to take care of herself.
Talking of bitches, how are you getting on with old Sinbad in Cas.?’
I smiled.
‘I wouldn't call her a bitch.’
‘Indeed, nor would I, love,’ she replied in her most placid manner, and then we both laughed, rather unkindly.
I said it was probably a good thing Cas. was always so busy, and Gwenellen, having already worked in Cas., advised me to avoid the splint room on the rare quiet  night.
‘Have you heard Daisy Yates is joining you in Cas. when she gets back from holiday this week-end?
‘No.
Good.
I like Daisy.
Why did no-one tell me?
No-one ever tells me anything!’
‘You're a fine one to talk!’
I thought of Bill.
I had talked a great deal to her about my nights in Marcus.
I had tried to be discreet, as the subject was professional dynamite even when discussed in private with a great friend.
I had had to talk about him to someone to ease my mind.
He had still not written, and it was now beginning to worry me.
‘What's that supposed to mean?’
I asked carefully.
She asked why I had said nothing about that accident on the bypass, or seeing Old Red and General Francis on my holiday.
I was astonished and relieved.
For an ugly moment I had been convinced she had guessed the real reason for my avid professional interest in Bill Francis.
As I did not now want her to guess my real reason for keeping quiet on this other matter, I used the truth, if not all the truth.
‘What accident was so bloody awful I didn't want to talk about it.
How did you hear?’
‘From Aline.
She had it from your ex-special p., and he had it from his father.
Old Red must have told the General.
Ghastly, was it?’
‘Yep.’
‘I should have worked that out for myself.
I saw an accident at home once.’
She shuddered.
‘I can still throw up.
I haven't Aline's academic approach either.
She, of course, thinks you're just being dead crafty.’
‘Why?’
‘Because she's still fixated with her idea that Old Red's been carrying a torch for your aunt for years, and it's now burst into a fine new flame.
She thinks you don't want  to spoil things with careless talk.
I think that's a right load of old codswallop, and Tom agrees with me.
If Old Red really wants your aunt, why wait all this time?
They've both been free for years.
Admittedly, he doesn't yet earn a fraction of the money a man of his age and experience would expect to earn outside, but he is on the way to the real big-time.
And even now, as he never has time off for spending the twenty-something quid a week they'll dish him for the one-hundred-and-twenty-hour stint he puts in most weeks, he could just afford a wife and kid.
Look at Chubby Curtis.’
For once, I thought before speaking, and so was able to refrain from remarking tritely that it took two to make a marriage.
Aline's insight underlined my conviction on holiday that this was one tale not for retelling.
If by one careless word now I backed up the rumours Aline was bound to be spreading at night, by tomorrow morning Tom Lofthouse, a chatty lad, would have it all round the Doctors' House.
The men gossiped as much and as scurrilously as ourselves.
Any single senior resident had to accept as part of his job the fact that his juniors were going to speculate constantly on his lack of a visible sex-life.
If any gossip reached Red Leland I suspected he would shrug it off and forget it.
But not Margaret.
If she arrived in Benedict's to find herself established as his mistress, future wife, or both, she would promptly develop a new set of anti-Richard complexes to add to those she already had, and Heaven help his chances with her then!
I answered Gwenellen with a non-committal ‘Uh-huh,’ and, as I now knew the subject was safe, asked if she knew when Bill Francis was due in Out Patients for his first follow-up clinic.
‘I'd like to know how his leg's getting on.’
‘I've not yet seen his name on the lists.
I'll let you know when I do.’
‘Thanks.
I wish you would.’
She went on to talk O.P.D. ‘shop’.
I did not hear much she was saying, as I was thinking of Margaret and how impossible it would be to get Gwenellen, or anyone else in Benedict's with the obvious exception of Old Red, to believe the real truth, if I attempted to explain it.
They would assume, as I had until this last holiday, that Margaret was a widow from lack of opportunity, not choice, and must surely jump at the prospect of Red as a husband.
He had so much to offer her, or any woman.
Benedict's, like the world, was convinced every normal unattached woman wanted a man, and vice versa.
I thought so, too.
Yet I now had to accept, if not yet understand, that Margaret's fundamental reason for not remarrying was the plain fact that she did not want to.
She did not want another man in her life.
She just needed one.
The problem continued to bother me, and so did my lack of a letter from Bill.
One afternoon, a week later, I decided the time had come to stop dithering like a Victorian maiden and to write to Bill, when I got off at ten that night, asking if no news was good news.
Daisy Yates showed me the postcard she had had from him that morning.
‘As he's sent his love to us all, take your share, Jo.’
‘Thanks very much.’
When I got off, instead of letter-writing, I accepted a last-minute party date.
I did not enjoy it much, but it was better than lying in bed feeling hurt, a failure, and gnashing my teeth in turn.
Next morning I continued to make excuses for Bill, but as I now knew I was making them, they no longer soothed me.
Some days later Gwenellen told me he had attended his first follow-up clinic two days previously.
‘Sorry I forgot  to tell you.
His leg's fine.
He inquired after you and Daisy.’
‘How nice of him!’
The S.S.O. was crossing Casualty yard when I was going on duty that afternoon in a flaming temper.
He was frequently in Cas., and generally ignored me, as he had done in Marcus.
Occasionally he exchanged the time of day.
Being in no mood for civilities, I was about to walk by with a brief ‘Afternoon’ when he stopped.
‘I've just been talking to your aunt on the phone.
She asked me to apologize to you, should I see you, for not having answered your last letter.
Dick's off to Devon to fish on Monday.
I'm driving him down.
Any message for your aunt or cousin?’
On any day that would have pleased me.
It now had the effect of a shot in the arm.
I beamed up at my future Uncle Richard, asked him to give my love to Margaret and Dickie, my regards to the General and Co., and added my hope that he would have a good holiday.
‘I hope so, Nurse Dungarvan.
Thank you.’
He smiled and walked away.
I went on into Casualty.
A junior C.O. called Robin Armstrong and a long, lanky student with a brown beatle-cut were leaning against the wall just inside the doorway.
Robin I knew well.
He was one of Aline's old flames.
‘Hi, Robin,’ I murmured as I passed.
‘Hi, Jo.’
He sounded faintly bemused.
I guessed Sister had been beating him up again.
She got on very well with most of the men, since, whatever their personal views on her, they admired and were grateful for her professional skill.
But Robin Armstrong she did not like.
She gave him hell at the slightest opportunity.
As he was a rather slow and clumsy young man, he gave her plenty of opportunities.
He provided one now.
Leaning against a Cas. wall when Sister was on the bridge was asking for an explosion.
Sister suddenly spotted the pair and exploded.
‘Mr Armstrong!’ she bellowed across the crowded Hall.
‘If you have nothing better to do than prop up buildings, will you kindly go and find yourself a street corner and not clutter up my department!
As for you, boy’— she bore down on the student —‘are you one of my new dressers today?
Then get your mask up and get into the Accident Unit!
I am sure Mr Waring requires your invaluable assistance!’
Having dispatched them, she turned on me.
‘Back aboard, eh, Nurse Dungarvan?
Deal with these.’
She handed me a stack of forms.
‘Quick Developing Unit, first.
Take the wet plates for Christina Maria Anson straight up to Bertha Ward.
Then get to the Out Patients Laboratory with this —’ She paused as a police-sergeant appeared behind me.
‘Looking for your man, Sergeant?
That petrol explosion?
In the Burns Room of the Accident Unit, over there, third door on your right.
And you'll need one of these.’
She gave him a disposable mask from the large glass-covered jar on a shelf by the door.
‘You know what to expect?’
‘Aye, Sister.’
The man was grim.
‘It'll not be the first man I've seen after he's tried to fill up a car with a lighted cigarette in his mouth — nor the last.
I heard as he was fried to a crisp.’
Sister saw my wince as the policeman removed himself.
‘One way of putting it.’
‘Sister, such a cold-blooded way!’
‘Cold-blooded words don't necessarily betoken a callous nature, as you should be well aware by this stage in your training.
It's not what people say that gives 'em away, it's what they do.’
The Burns Room door had closed behind the police-sergeant.
‘I've had dealings with that man  before.
I've seen him crying like a child over a dead baby he carried in.
His language would have made a Chief Petty Officer blush…
But this won't get us out on the tide.’
She quickly finished all she had to tell me about my errands.
‘Cast off and don't dawdle!’
I did not dawdle, but as I had to pass our post pigeonholes, from force of habit I looked in mine in case the second post had been sorted early.
Mine was empty.
Hurrying on, I thought of Sister Cas. 's remarks, and then first of Violet in Hope.
After her crisis she had said, ‘I'll never forget what you done for me, dear.
I'll remember you all my life.’
She had repeated those words when she said goodbye.
She had gone to a convalescent home in Bournemouth.
She had not even sent me a picture postcard.
It would not be surprising if by now she had forgotten my name.
After a dangerous illness few patients willingly looked back.
The illness and those involved faded like a bad dream.
Bill had written one letter to thank me.
He had rung the cottage.
Nice gestures both, I reflected bitterly, and both typical gestures of any young man in a hospital bed who temporarily imagines himself in love with one of his nurses as a form of occupational therapy.
My bitterness was directed solely at myself.
How could I have been such a fool as to take him seriously?
When all the time I had actually been with him I had always realized he was the type to make a pass at the nearest girl with his last gasp, and I had just happened to be that girl.
Yet since leaving Marcus I had let my imagination blow it all up into a Great Romance.
Yet it was not all imagination.
At least, not as far as I was concerned.
I could accept that I had been foolish, but that acceptance was not yet a sufficient antidote for the niggling little pain in my heart.
I had just enough sense to appreciate that as a pain it rated no higher than a toothache.
But a toothache can be a singularly uncomfortable experience.
A Letter from Margaret
It was an unusually sultry afternoon, and Casualty on my return was emptier than I had yet seen it.
Sister said she had no work for me for a few minutes, so I could direct traffic for her whilst she had a few words with Dr Jones.
Mr Wrigley, the head porter, fixed open the double-glass swing doors.
‘Quietish, eh, Nurse Dungarvan?’
‘Very.
What's keeping 'em away?
The heat?’
‘Nah.
Thursday.
Payday round here.
When a day turns quiet, like, it's always on a Thursday.’
I thought of the Thursday Red had given himself off.
‘Why's that, Mr Wrigley?
What's payday got to do with it?
No-one needs money to come in here.’
‘And that's a fact, Nurse!
But there's many a missus as needs to be home when her old man comes in from work on a Thursday, if she's to get her proper share of his pay-packet.
Mind you, I'm not saying as that's what she'll get for the asking, and I'm not saying there's not many a man as'll hand over his pay-packet unopened, but there's enough of the other sort to give us a bit of a breather Thursdays.’
He surveyed the handful of patients waiting for attention outside the various Junior Casualty  Officers' rooms.
They were all elderly.
‘Proper Darby and Joan Club we run here of a Thursday.
The old 'uns know if they come in now they'll be seen nice and easy and have time for a chat-up with their old mates.’
He walked slowly back to the lodge.
I watched the empty entrance and the yard beyond that for once was clear of ambulances.
The heat was making the tar bubble up between the stone flags.
The plane-trees by the main gates were limp with thirst.
The iron railings were so dusty, they looked grey, not black.
The patients on the benches fanned themselves with newspapers.
A bit of heat, they allowed, was all right, but this was no joke, it wasn't.
‘Be a storm afore long,’ announced one old man; ‘I can feel it in me knees.’
‘Never get a fine week like we just had,’ agreed his neighbour, ‘but we pay for it.
I don't mind a good storm meself.
Clears the air lovely.
But my good lady can't abide 'em.
Think old Tom'll be in there much longer?
There's the three of you to go in before meself.
Maybe I'd best push off home and look in again tomorrow.’
The two ladies at the head of the little queue whispered together, then announced that if Mr Carter had no objection they would be happy to oblige Mr Mullings, as they did not like to think of Mrs Mullings having to face a storm unprotected.
‘Suits me, ladies.’
Mr Carter was the first speaker.
‘I'm not in no hurry, neither.’
His smile was patient, peeved, and very sad.
‘You got to be young for that.
Like them two lads out there, see?
Having a race, I reckon!
Strewth!
In this heat!’
‘And here comes another lad back of 'em!’
Mr Mullings heaved himself up by the back of the bench for a better look.
‘Student lads, you reckon?’
The two young men racing down the pavement by our  railings had reached our gates.
They tore in, up the yard, and towards the entrance.
One carried his dark jacket in an odd kind of bundle under one arm.
His companion had his on despite the heat and their speed.
On reaching Cas. they ignored the porters in the lodge, the protests of the admission clerk at her desk, and Mr Wrigley's stern, ‘Now then, you lads!
What's all this?’
They charged at me.
The one carrying his jacket produced from beneath a white paper carrier-bag.
‘Take it, Nurse!’ he gasped.
‘We found it — in that phone-box, at the end of the road.
Is it still alive?’
Sister had heard them from the S.C.O. 's office and was already beside me.
‘Let me see.’
She opened the mouth of the carrier-bag.
Lying inside, wrapped in a clean woollen shawl, was the smallest baby I had ever seen.
Its mottled little face was a mass of wrinkles.
Its eyes were closed.
It had strangely long, fine black hair.
Dr Jones had followed Sister.
As he was about to put on his stethoscope, she said briskly.
‘It's breathing, Dr Jones.
I think straight up to an incubator?’
She phrased that as a question, out of respect for etiquette.
She was actually giving an order.
She did not wait for his nod.
She whisked a blanket off the nearest trolley, wrapped it round baby and bag, and placed the bundle in my arms.
‘Up to the Maternity Unit, stat., Dungarvan.
Run.
Don't drop it, but run.
Now.’
I had never been told to run on duty.
I ran out of the department, and was only vaguely aware of the sudden uncanny silence and the way legs were moved aside and doors held open.
In the ground-floor corridor I found Dr Jones was running with me.
He grunted, ‘I'll get the fast staff lift to the Mat.
Unit,’ and shot on ahead.
The lift was roughly two hundred yards from Casualty.
It seemed more like two miles.
It was just after four o'clock.
Our ward teaching rounds ended at four.
The corridor was crowded with students, with white coats, with nurses going to and fro from tea, and the occasional pundit.
I bulldozed my way through the lot, including one outraged Office Sister.
‘Nurse Dungarvan!
What do you think you're doing?’
I paused on one foot.
‘Sorry, Sister.
Sister Casualty's Instructions —’ I ran on.
Dr Jones had the gates open.
He slammed them shut and kept one finger on the top-floor button.
With his free hand he reached inside the carrier-bag.
‘Still breathing, but growing cold and his muscle-tone's bloody poor.’
I hugged the bundle more tightly to increase the warmth.
‘Think it's a boy, Doctor?’
I gasped breathlessly.
‘Don't waste my time asking me bloody stupid questions, Nurse!’ he snapped.
‘How could I possibly tell its sex since, as you know very well, I've had no time to examine it?
I just call all babies ‘he’ until proved otherwise.’
The lift stopped.
A waiting gowned and masked midwife took the baby, and Dr Jones hitched up his mask and followed her into the incubator nursery.
I waited in the corridor for our blanket and any message for Sister Casualty, and brooded on the baby's chances of survival, how any mother could have made herself pack her own baby in a carrier-bag, and what kind of thoughts passed through a woman's mind when she walked away after abandoning her baby in a telephone-box, or anywhere else.
Or did she not think at all?
Or had someone else done it for her?
I wished I knew a few of the answers.
I didn't know any.
I felt lost and ineffectual, and Dr Jones just now had done nothing to improve my morale.
But I did not take his rebuff too personally, since, having worked with him, I was now accustomed to his habit of being unctuously civil  to his seniors and much less than civil to his juniors.
From Tom Lofthouse I had heard he was not popular in the Doctors' House, yet, conversely and amazingly to anyone who had been his junior, our Dr Jones rated as a favourite pin-up in the Staff Nurse's Home.
In Benedict's the staff nurses set the tone, since they saw more of our men on and off duty than any other nursing strata in the hospital.
Their views trickled down through the student nurses' years and were apt to be accepted as gospel, since that saved the students the bother of forming opinions for themselves, and also it was not often a student in her first couple of years, if not longer, had the opportunity to form any opinion on our men.
In Benedict's, as in most hospitals, only the higher nursing ranks dealt directly with the residents.
To deal with a pundit one had to be either a sister, senior staff nurse, or a rare fourth-year on nights.
The staff nurses called Dr Jones ‘dear Jackie’.
He was tall, very fair, reasonably attractive, and when he made with the charm at hospital parties they lapped it up.
One had to work under him to discover he never troubled with the charm unless he considered it worth his while.
The staff nurses were prepared to forgive his short temper on duty, as he was ‘such fun on a party’.
But Old Red's silences they found inexcusable because he never attended our parties, or bothered to turn on the charm to anyone.
Yet that he could talk, and well, I had discovered that day in the car.
I had also discovered recently, again via Tom, that the men now liked him.
‘A tough but decent bastard’ was their view, even if his inability to make small-talk still riled the staff nurses.
Was he just very shy?
Like Margaret?
Did he turn silent where she turned prim?
And was that such a fault?
After Bill's chattiness I did not think so.
‘Don't look so worried, Nurse.’
The midwife was back with the blanket.
‘He's breathing quite nicely and warming up now he's in the cooker.
He's small, but he should do.’
I felt hideously ashamed, having forgotten the baby.
‘I'm so glad, Sister.
Thank you.
How old is he?
And he is a boy?’
‘Yes.’
She had a nice smile.
Dr Jones had come out with her and walked straight over to the lift.
He had to wait.
He behaved as if I were invisible as he did so.
The midwife showed me a note that had been pinned to the baby's jacket under the shawl.
‘We'll keep this unless the police want it.
Dr Jones has a copy.’
The note read: ‘No money, no husband, no home.
I'm sorry.
Please call him Patrick and be kind to him.’
I grimaced.
‘The poor woman.’
Dr Jones glanced round.
‘Wouldn't you say she left her regrets a little late, Sister?’
The midwife merely shook her head sadly.
I had never been so tempted to hit any man as I was at that moment.
I went down in the lift with Dr Jones in a blazing silence.
I doubted he noticed.
We were not at a party, he did not go in for brunettes, and I was very much his junior.
On the ground floor he walked a few feet ahead, leaving me to trundle behind like a meek Arab wife.
Sister Casualty sighed over my report.
‘Oh, dear!
The poor gals will do these things.
We get so many of these dumped babies in.’
‘With notes, Sister?’
‘More often than you perhaps expect.
The umbilical cord isn't as easily severed as these unhappy mothers imagine.
The maternal instinct can't be dumped, even when you've got rid of your baby.
The only instinct stronger is self-preservation.
At this very moment that little scrap's  mother must be in hell, and part of her will stay there for the rest of her life.
Society may or may not forgive her.
Nature will never allow her to forgive herself.
I hope she can be traced.
She hopes so too, or she'd not have written that note though she may not realize it yet.
One can but hope.
Now, go and get those three lads some tea.
The police have finished questioning them.’
The three young men were waiters off for the afternoon.
Their names were Kevin, Frank, and Trevor.
Trevor had stayed behind to ring the police and explain their actions.
‘We was late off, see,’ explained Frank.
‘Gone spare, we had, as we'd missed our bus.
So we thought we'd walk to the next stop, and then we see this bag on the floor.
We thought some bird must've forgotten her shopping.
Talk about giving us a turn when we saw it move!
Doing all right, is he, then?
Patrick, eh?
Cor!’
Sister beckoned me.
‘Amon. aromat. and a wheelchair for that dresser over there.
Get him outside.’
The dresser with the brown beatle-cut was standing outside the Accident Unit.
He looked dazed and pale-green.
He slumped into the chair I pushed behind him and thankfully sipped the sal volatile.
In the yard I asked, ‘What was it?
The man with petrol burns?’
‘Yea.’
He screwed up his face as Dickie did when repulsed.
Standing, he was about a foot taller than me.
Seated, he looked not much older than Dickie.
He was quite good-looking.
He would be even more so when he was over the spotty stage.
‘Poor you.
Burns your weak spot?
They're mine.’
‘Guess they must be.
First I've seen.’
‘First — down here?
I know this is your first day, but you've been in the wards?’
‘Not yet.’
I gaped.
‘You're not a pre-clinical?’
‘Just finished that.
My lot came back from holiday yesterday.
The chap who was to have been my ward partner hasn't come back.
Don't know why not.
So this morning the fat little chap in the long white coat who was sorting us out in the Dean's Office said I'd better come along here for a few days until they got me organized with another partner.
Don't know why we have to have partners.
Do you?’
‘Yes.
It's a Benedict's rule that all students walking the wards must walk in pairs.
That way you can chaperon each other.’
‘Why do we want to do that?’
This was not the moment to lecture him on the facts of hospital life, so I said briefly, ‘Patients prefer two to one,’ and asked if he had explained his position to Sister.
‘No.
What's it got to do with her?’
I smiled.
‘Chum, you'll find out.
Never mind.
Tell anyone?’
‘That chap Dr Jones, who runs this joint.’
‘I see.
He can't have told Sister, or she'd never have pitched you straight into the A.R.R. Unit.
Did you tell Mr Waring?’
‘He a big chap with red hair?’
‘No.
That's Mr Leland, the S.S.O. You told him?’
Apparently he had talked to no-one in the A.R.R. Unit.
A nurse taking him for a more experienced dresser had given him a gown and told him to go into the Burns Room.
He said, ‘There was such a crowd round the chap on the table I couldn't see him at first.
Then someone moved.
I just came out in a sweat.’
He was doing that now from the memory.
‘I didn't know what to do, but this tall chap with red hair — what did you say his name is?’
‘Leland.’
‘Leland.
Well, he sort of noticed me and said ‘Out, boy, fast.’
I outed fast.
And you say he's — what is he?’
‘The Senior Surgical Officer.
The fat little one who sorted you out this morning was the S.M.O. Get me?
His name is Dr Curtis.
The S.M.O. and S.S.O. are our two most senior residents.
They really run this hospital, and they'll be running your life for the next few years.’
‘Where does this Waring come in?’
‘He's Senior Accident Officer.’
‘I say!’
He regarded me respectfully.
‘You do know the answers.
You a staff nurse?’
‘No.
Third-year student.
Hence my dark-blue belt and blue dress.
The second-years wear blue dresses and white belts.
The first years, mauve.
The girls in grey are staff nurses.
And any female wearing a black belt with a silver buckle ranks as a sister.
When in doubt call all women in uniform ‘Sister’ and men in white ‘sir’and everyone'll love you!’
He leered.
‘That a promise, Sister?’
I smiled.
‘You're cured.
I must go back in.
Don't hurry, but bring that chair in with you when you come.’
‘Don't go yet.
I like talking to you.’
‘Sorry about that, but Sister Cas. doesn't hold with her dressers chatting up her nurses.’
‘Stuff the old bag!’ he retorted cheerfully.
‘At least tell me who you are.
I'm Charlie Peters.’
‘Jo Dungarvan.’
I stayed momentarily, as there was something I wanted to know.
‘How old are you, Charlie?’
‘Twenty next month.
Isn't it hell?
A chap might as well be dead when he reaches twenty.
You?’
‘Twenty-one.
Dead.’
‘Don't worry, Jo,’ he said kindly, ‘you don't look it.
And, anyway, I think older women are much more interesting.’
I went back inside.
Sister's frown took the smile off my face.
‘Have you been taking a medical history, Nurse Dungarvan?’
‘In a way, Sister, yes.’
I explained myself.
Sister was even more angry than I had anticipated.
‘Nineteen?
Straight out of pre-clinical?
And exposed unprepared to view a patient whose appearance caused me to warn a hardened policeman!
Why was I not instantly informed of his true situation?
Is Dr Curtis not aware that I refuse to have schoolboys or schoolgirls in my department!
A major Casualty department is no place for children!
Where is Dr Jones?’
Dr Jones had gone to tea.
Staff Nurse Robins was on with Sister in the Hall.
‘I'm sorry, Sister,’ she apologized uncomfortably.
‘Dr Jones asked me to tell you he was off to tea.
I forgot.’
Sister tapped her foot.
‘Were you aware the Senior Medical Officer had chosen to send us Mr Peters, temporarily?’
‘No, Sister.’
Sister pressed her lips together.
At that moment Red Leland came out of the A.R.R. Unit and towards us.
‘Sister, I had to send out a dresser.
He all right?’
‘We have attended to him, Mr Leland,’ she replied icily.
‘He is now sitting in a chair on the deck and looks better.
But whether an inexperienced schoolboy can be all right after the type of traumatic experience to which he has just been subjected I would not care to say.
That is not my province.
Running this department is my province!’
He looked thoughtfully from her to the dresser.
‘I don't recognize the boy.
New in Casualty today?’
Sister told him how new.
‘I was not informed.’
‘Obviously not, Sister.
I'm sorry about this.’
‘It's not your fault, Mr Leland.’
‘Forgive my correcting you in your own department, Sister, but it is.
Since that boy's a dresser, he's on the surgical side.
When anything goes wrong on the surgical side the fault is automatically mine.’
He glanced round.
‘Is Dr Jones available?’
On hearing Dr Jones was at tea he accepted Sister's offer of a cup from our mobile canteen.
She sent me to fetch two cups, and told me then to go to my own tea.
She had disappeared with Old Red into her duty-room and closed the door before I left Casualty.
On my way to the dining-room I passed Dr Jones returning.
He assumed a pained expression and averted his eyes.
It gave me a great deal of pleasure to think how much more pained he was going to be in a few moments.
Gwenellen was at tea, and reading a letter she had had from Aline by the second post.
Aline was now off nights, on holiday, and spending her first week with her grandparents in Cornwall before flying to join her parents in Majorca for the two following weeks.
In her letter she asked Gwenellen to ask me if my aunt had at last decided to put poor Old Red out of his misery?
‘Honest to God!
Hasn't she changed discs, yet?’
‘You know our Aline, love, once she gets a bee in her bonnet.’
Unfortunately I knew Aline with her quick brain, and quicker tongue, very well.
Margaret had now officially accepted General Francis as her next case.
He was due in the Wing a few days after Dickie started in his new school, in just over three weeks' time.
Aline by then would be back and on days.
A flat denial might silence Gwenellen and Tom Lofthouse.
It would have no effect at all on Aline, who could add two and two faster and get the sum right better than any girl I knew.
I could hear her laugh.
‘Pull the other one, Jo, it's got bells on.it!
If Old Red's not gone on your aunt, why's he so decent to you?’
A possible answer hit me.
I blushed before I gave it to Gwenellen.
I did not often blush, but generally did when about to lie.
‘Dear old Aline.
It's obviously never occurred to her she could be barking up the wrong tree.’
Gwenellen put down her cup to look at me, wide-eyed.
‘Don't tell me my Tom's going to be right?’
‘Over what?’
I tried to sound casual.
I didn't succeed, which inevitably increased Gwenellen's curiosity.
‘About you and Old Red.
Tom says Robin Armstrong says Old Red's always chatting you up in Cas.
Robin says he even waylays you on your way on duty.
Didn't he this afternoon?’
I began to appreciate what I had started.
‘Yes, but that doesn't have to mean —’
‘That you are anything more than good friends?
Say no more!
I understand!’
She grinned.
‘I'll ask no leading questions, as I remember how I loathed them when I first started seeing a lot of Tom.
But don't expect people won't notice, love.
Old Red being S.S.O., and you're being only a third-year, of course they'll notice!
Particularly as normally he'd rather run that mile than chat up a nurse!
And to think you're in my set!
I shall bask smugly in your reflected glory — but don't worry!
I'll put Aline straight and try and get Tom to belt up about it when amongst the boys.
I don't want anything to spoil this.’
I was very touched and very guilty.
‘You approve?
I thought you detested Old Red?’
She was honest.
‘I didn't until he hurt my pride by being impervious to my girlish charms.
That riled me, just as it's riled the other girls.
If he wasn't so attractive himself,’ she continued, echoing some old thoughts of my own on the subject, ‘who'd give a damn?
But to be made to feel  as if one's made of wood by a man who obviously isn't made of wood is too much for any girl's stomach.
But now he's showing definite signs of not thinking you are made of wood I'm quite happy to stop taking violent umbrage and to start liking him.
I'll tell you this, I've always had to like him on the job.
I like the way he doesn't reach for his knife at the drop of a hat, and the way he doesn't give a damn about his statistics.
Remember our last S.S.O.?
When I was in Stanley last year, even though I was only in my second year, I knew as well as all the other Stanley staff that if we had in a dodgy case the S.S.O. would fix things so that someone else operated on him.
He was taking no chances on having too many deaths to muck up his statistics.
Old Red doesn't do that.
Tom says he takes all the dodgy cases himself.
Tom's getting quite attached to him in a macabre sort of way, so why shouldn't I?
After all, I've got my Tom.
I'll be delighted to dance at your wedding.’
I was scarlet.
‘Hey, Gwenellen!
Take it easy!’
She laughed not unkindly.
‘Joanna Dungarvan, don't try and kid me that with your imagination you haven't already picked your wedding dress?
Or aren't you interested?
Now, that would make this really interesting!’
I said, ‘I thought you weren't going to ask leading questions?’
‘Hint taken, love.
Hint taken.’
It was a relief to get back to Casualty, and another to recollect Old Red's coming holiday.
I refused to face the prospect of his return yet, since I seemed to have faced quite enough for one afternoon.
Worrying ahead had never been one of my habits, which was why I had mentally allowed Bill's importance to get so out of hand.
Thinking of him again made me so wretched that on my  way back into the department I did not even notice the owner of the hand that held open the door for me, until I chanced to notice Dr Jones watching from outside his office.
When our eyes met he gave me a frigid little smile.
Thinking it must have been aimed at someone else, I glanced behind me.
‘Oh.
Thanks, Mr Leland.’
Old Red acknowledged that with a nod and walked on into the corridor.
For the rest of that evening Dr Jones astonished the Casualty junior staff by being, for him, an angel of sweetness and light to us.
His new civility did not last, but, as Daisy Yates remarked one day in the following week, it had been pleasant not to have such a right little God Almighty in Cas., if only for a short time.
Though we worked in the same department, I saw little of Daisy, as we were always on different shifts.
We met mainly at meals, which I enjoyed, not only because I liked her and could still indulge myself foolishly and talk with her about our special patient in Marcus, but also as Daisy, being so near the end of her training, had several friends amongst the staff nurses.
Nurse de Wint, the staff nurse in permanent charge of the A.R.R. Unit, had been at school with Daisy and was one of her greatest friends.
Mary de Wint ranked with Mrs Fields in seniority, though, as she never worked in the Hall, when Mrs Fields was off Staff Nurse Robins, the next in line, took her place.
From Nurse de Wint, Daisy heard all the hottest bits of inside Cas. gossip.
Some of these she passed on to me.
That was how I heard Old Red had been as angry as Sister over the Charlie Peters affair, and had said as much to Dr Jones.
He had then persuaded Sister to bend her inflexible rule forbidding raw nurses or students in her department.
Daisy said, ‘He told Sister he'd like our Charlie to stay in the Hall to give him the chance to get his nerve back in easy stages.
Not that the lad now looks  as if he's got any nerves.
He's as happy as a sandboy.’
‘Until an ambulance unloads an accident.
Then he turns pale-green again.’
As Charlie was forbidden the A.R.R.U., he did not stay pale-green long.
When Old Red returned from holiday Charlie, panting helpfully round the Hall like an overgrown puppy, was part of the Cas. scene.
He got on very well with the patients, and made them laugh without taking umbrage when they laughed at him.
They all asked whether he played for the Beatles or the Stones, and were much amused to hear he had formed his own pop group with some of his fellow junior students.
It was called The Benedict's Bones.
It was a terrible group.
None of them could play or sing in tune, and Charlie, who fancied himself on skins, had no real idea of rhythm.
When he discovered I could play the piano, whenever we were off together he dragged me down to one of the older lecture rooms in the Medical School basement that happened to possess a piano, to thump out the background beat.
Those sessions nearly wrecked my hearing for life, but they made me laugh so much and took up so much of my off-duty that, as time went by, sometimes, just sometimes, I was able to laugh at my one-time passion for Bill.
Eventually I felt strong enough to write the truth to Margaret.
She replied by return.
Darling, I am sorry for you, but at the same time I am sure that one day you will be very glad things have turned out the way they have.
I know I never met Bill, but from all you said of him he reminded me much too much of a man I once knew and loved.
He was not right for me.
I never felt Bill Francis was right for you.
That letter astonished me.
I had never suspected she had ever loved any man but Simon Ellis and I knew she could not have been referring to him since she had never  spoken of him without affection and great kindness.
One of the few occasions when she had been really cross with me had been when I suggested he might have been wiser to make some sort of provision for his wife and son.
‘Who thinks of death at twenty-eight, Jo?
At that age one thinks one is going to live for ever!’
I guessed now that she had met this other man during her widowhood.
Was he the real reason for her still being a widow?
It seemed probable.
I wondered when they had known each other and why the parents had never mentioned the affair to me?
Or had they not known about it?
Recollecting the years my parents had spent abroad, it was very possible they had not.
Poor Margaret, I thought, and then I thought, Poor Old Red.
He's not only up against the ghost of Simon Ellis, he's paying this other man's bill.
Did he know that?
If so, it could explain why he had waited so long for her, and why, now they had met again, he was handling their relationship so very carefully.
Patiently, steadily, he was easing his way back into her life, seeing her regularly, but not too regularly, and taking pains to get to know Dickie and myself, which was sensible since we were both important to Margaret.
His technique was beginning to pay off.
Margaret had admitted Dickie liked him; I now thought of him as part of the family; Margaret herself had lowered her resistance enough to take his advice.
Her last paragraph ran:
I hope I'm right to come back to Benedict's.
As you know, Richard has done nothing but advise me that I must.
He says I must stop running away from the past.
He is a sensible man, so I am going to take his advice.
Very reluctantly.
I realize that is an admission of cowardice, but one of the few consolations of approaching middle age is the fact that one no longer objects to having to admit a weakness.
A Caller in Casualty
Mrs Fields went on holiday.
Robins became senior staff nurse, the other staff nurses moved up one, and the senior student nurse in the A.R.R. Unit came back into the Hall as an acting staff nurse.
The general post this caused amongst the A.R.R. Unit nurses left a vacancy.
Though I had been in Casualty longer than the three weeks Sister had talked of on my first morning, and by Cas. rules was temporarily senior to Daisy Yates, it was Daisy who was sent to join the Accident Nursing Team.
Sister said, ‘Not too sure you've got your sea-legs yet, Dungarvan.’
My reaction was mixed.
Daisy, being a nice soul, was very upset for me.
‘I do hope you don't mind, Jo?
I expect Sinbad feels that as I'm in the last few months of my final year, she'd better pack me with as much experience as possible before I get whisked away to act staff nurse in some ward.
That's already happened to half my set.’
‘Well, thanks,’ I said, ‘for the kind words, Daisy, but let us not kid ourselves.
You're a much better Cas. nurse than I am.’
‘Scrub that!
You're doing fine in the Hall.’
‘Sister obviously doesn't think so.
I'll bet she thinks  that directly she lets me into the A.R.R.U. I'll do a Charlie Peters!
She may be right.’
I grimaced.
‘Every time I see those grey faces being trundled through Cas. on accident trolleys heaped with grey blankets, and know that under the blankets are mangled, bloody, and road-filthy bodies, I start shaking.
That's why in one way I'm glad to have been passed over.
Of course, in another way I'm not.’
She said, ‘According to Tom Lofthouse, you didn't lose your nerve or your head when you ran into a real accident.’
‘That was in hot blood.
Baby, did I shake afterwards!’
‘Who wouldn't?’
She eyed me speculatively.
‘Is it true Old Red just happened to pass by that morning?’
‘Yep.’
She raised an eyebrow.
‘Quite a coincidence?’
‘They happen sometimes.’
‘So I've heard.’
She looked as if she had heard a lot more, but was too tactful to say so.
I cursed Tom Lofthouse.
Several other Cas. girls had now started casting me speculative glances, but so far no-one had made any cracks to me, which was a relief.
I was not sure whether I owed that to Gwenellen, the universal awe of Old Red, or Aline's being away.
I suspected a bit of all three.
Charlie had not yet been found a ward partner and was still working in the Hall.
When he heard about Daisy's move he was now sufficiently informed about Casualty to welcome me as a fellow-member of his L.M.F. club.
‘Like we lack moral fibre, man!
Yellow, that's us!’
Luis was helping us clean the Plaster Room after a long session of plastering.
‘You call Nurse Dungarvan a man, Charlie?
Aie, you English!
In Spain for a man to call a pretty girl a man would be great rudeness.’
‘Luis,’ I said, ‘even in England, if a man called me that, I'd take it as great rudeness.
But not from young Charlie!’
I ducked as Charlie threw a wet sponge my way.
It hit the wall.
I picked it up and chucked it back.
It caught Charlie's left ear.
‘Nurse Dungarvan!’
Sister was watching from the doorway.
‘May I remind you you are on watch?
If I ever catch you indulging in horse-play again I shall refuse to have you in my department.
Go and attend to Mrs Scutt!
Mr Peters, I want you to escort a patient to X-ray!
Luis, it's high time you were off watch!
Cast off!
Nurse Dungarvan must finish this clearing alone, later!’
Mrs Scutt was one of our regulars.
She was a large, cheerful lady with bad varicose ulcers which she was constantly banging against the furniture in her house on non-Varicose Vein Clinic days.
Her house lay just across the road from the hospital.
That day was not a V.V.C. day in Out Patients and, in any event, as it was after six o'clock, Out Patients had closed.
Mrs Scutt loved to talk.
In her loud, squeaky voice she described at length the particular occasional table that had caused her present damage; she described her husband's hernia; her mother's left kidney; her daughter's twins.
Charlie came in as she was in the middle of her obstetrical details, and, though now fairly accustomed to the patients, he was slightly taken aback.
‘Sister's at early supper, and Nurse Robins thought you might like some help, Nurse Dungarvan.
But would you rather I came back?’
Mrs Scutt, being an old hospital bird, had no difficulty in translating Robins' euphemistic message, or in placing Charlie, though she had not met him before.
‘Lord bless you, duck, you don't want to go!
Learning you to be a new young doctor, are they then?’
She waved a huge and kindly hand.
‘You park your backside in that chair along of old  Mother Scutt and watch how my little nurse finishes me leg real lovely.
Now, like I was saying, duck,’ she continued to me, ‘they didn't spot as she was carrying the two until the first come on.
Mark you, I said as she was too big, but they said as it could just be the water, as they couldn't hear no more than the one heart.
But they was lying one on top the other, duck — and the little lad was beneath and upside down.
His sister's afterbirth was in the road — and the time they had getting it away!’
Her voice rose even higher.
‘And then the little lad started to push his way out backside first.
All black and blue his poor little behind was — and as for my poor Linda's privates!’
She turned to Charlie.
‘A month back this was, duck, but she's not been right downstairs since.’
Charlie was sitting on the edge of a dressing-chair, and his eyes above his mask were as wide as Gwenellen's at their widest.
He said in a grave tone that would have done credit to the S.M.O., ‘So she is still having to stay in her bedroom?
How inconvenient!’
Mrs Scutt bellowed with laughter, slapped him hard on the back, and explained herself so plainly that Charlie went purple behind his mask.
I kept my eyes on the dressing as Mrs Scutt produced photos.
‘Lovely pair of kiddies, aren't they?
Andrew and Anne.
And isn't their old Nan real made up with them, Doctor?’
She gave Charlie another slap.
‘Take a good look!’
That slap knocked him off his chair.
He grabbed at one leg of the dressing-trolley to steady himself, forgetting his own weight and that the trolley was on wheels.
The combination sent the trolley rolling across the room behind him.
It hit the wall, and the enamel tray on the top shelf set with stainless-steel dressing dishes and bowls, slid off.
Tray and contents clattered to the floor.
The noise was shattering.
‘Oh, God!
Terribly sorry!’
Charlie dived for the dishes.
‘Will you have to start all over again?’
Mrs Scutt stopped squeaking ‘Save the pieces, duck!’ to assure him her dressing was on real lovely, and all she now needed was her elastic bandage.’
‘Perhaps you can put that on, dresser?’ suggested Old Red's voice.
He had come in and was leaning against the closed door, surveying the chaos with an expressionless face.
‘A word, please, Nurse.’
Charlie's mask had slipped down.
I kicked his ankle as he opened his mouth.
I said, ‘Yes, Mr Leland,’ and hurried out of the door he was now holding open.
Before he closed it we heard Mrs Scutt's irate, ‘He's never going to tell her off, is he?’
As it was perfectly obvious what Old Red wanted to say to me, I did not wait.
‘I'm very sorry about that crash, Mr Leland.
I'm afraid there was a little accident.’
He had moved a yard or so from the door.
He said drily, ‘That's a weight off my mind.
It sounded as if someone had suddenly gone berserk.
I came in expecting to have to make speedy contact with the Relieving Officer.’
‘With whom, Mr Leland?’
‘The gentleman to whom we turn when one of our patients, or staff, turns into an acute manic.
And if I don't have quiet now you'll probably have to get him for me.
I've just wasted ten minutes trying to listen to a man's chest.
I suspect he has a diaphragmatic hernia.
I'd like a chance to confirm my suspicions.
As I'm in the room next door to your present patient, you'll appreciate my difficulty.’
‘Some difficulty, Mr Leland?’
Sister had come back and was beside me, looking very fierce.
‘May I help?’
‘Well, thanks, Sister, I'd be grateful.’
He ignored me to smile at her.
‘As I have just been telling your nurse, I'm  having trouble listening to a chest.
Either my stethoscope has a fault or I'm going deaf.
May I borrow your stock stethoscope?’
‘My dear man, of course!
Fetch it from my desk, Nurse Dungarvan!’
When I returned to Mrs Scutt she was still indignant.
‘It's that red hair, duck!
Always the sign of a proper Tartar!’
Charlie still looked upset, but Sister removed him before I could take him aside and soothe him.
‘Get this room shipshape!
Get a mop to that mess on the deck!
Isn't that a pair of Spencer Wells under the radiator?’
She retrieved the instrument herself.
‘Good God, gal!
Are you incapable of doing even a simple dressing efficiently?
You are well into your third year!
Surely you have learnt by now that care of equipment comes second only to care of the patients!’
I had learnt that.
I had also learnt not to waste energy making excuses, and to recognize the signs and symptoms of a sister suffering from an attack of acute haema-dementia.
Sister Cas. was not often bloodyminded, and this was the first time she had been so with me.
I hoped it was just a passing phase, sparked off by her catching me fooling around in the Plaster Room, and thanked my guardian angel for the way Old Red had just covered up for me.
Had he not, by now I could be en route for Matron's Office.
Sister Cas. was not a woman to make idle threats.
God bless Old Red, I thought.
One of these fine days, when he's my uncle, I would thank him for this.
Shortly after Sister sent me to chaperon the patient in Room Two.
‘Miss Flora Mackenzie.
I trust you are capable of chaperoning, professionally!’
Chaperoning was so easy, it was the job reserved for the most junior nurses.
Miss Flora Mackenzie was very old, very thin, very  small, and very militant.
She lived alone and had fallen off a ladder in her sitting-room.
She had displaced backwards the lower end of her right radius and sustained a few other minor bumps and bruises, but was otherwise intact.
She was more angry than shocked, particularly when Old Red suggested it was not wholly wise for ladies not in their first youth to climb ladders.
‘Then I would like it fine for you to advise me how I am to repaint my ceilings, Doctor!
I cannot do a good job from a chair on a table!
I have tried, but I am too wee to reach.
I have not your inches, laddie, but I will not tolerate a dirty ceiling!’
‘Forgive me, Miss Mackenzie,’ he apologized, ‘but you are eighty-eight.’
‘And I hope I may be spared to repaint my own house when I am ninety-eight, Doctor!’
He smiled at her as he smiled at Margaret.
‘I'm not a betting man, Miss Mackenzie, but if I were I'd put my shirt on your being able to do just that.
However, I still have to say I do not approve of your climbing ladders.’
‘Aye.
You've your job to do as you see fit.’
She eyed him sternly.
‘What now?
I'd best warn you, I'm not staying in this hospital.
I've my work waiting at home.’
He knew she lived alone, and wasted no breath reminding her there was no-one there to look after her.
‘I'd like to set your wrist and put on a small plaster, which will take a little time to dry.
There's no question of anyone trying to keep you in St Benedict's against your will, but if you would consent to remain with us, say, overnight I'd be very grateful.
It would give me a chance to see your wrist plaster has dried correctly and give our students a rare opportunity to see how fit and active a lady of your age can be.’
‘I've kept my health.
The Lord has been good to me.’
Her old eyes appraised him.
‘So you want me in just for the  plaster and to give your student laddies additional geriatric experience?
And not because you've a foolish wee fancy in your mind that I require cosseting?’
He hedged.
‘I'd like you to stay.’
‘Aye.
No doubt, since you fear I'll maybe return to my painting before my plaster's dry.’
‘I don't fear that, Miss Mackenzie; I'm convinced you'll be back up that ladder before the ambulance has had time to drive away.’
‘Is that so?’
Suddenly she smiled.
‘Aye, that's what I'd do.
You're a good judge of character, laddie, and as I'm not so bad at that myself, I'll bide by what you say if you'll answer me this; what's your true reason?’
‘I think you are more shocked than you realize and, for a day or two, need us to look after you.’
She looked up at him in silence, then nodded.
‘Maybe you're right, laddie.
I'm not as young as I was.
I'll bide a wee while in your hospital, but there's to be no cosseting, you'll understand!’
He signed her admission form.
I took it to Sister.
She raised her eyebrows.
‘I never thought we'd be able to keep her.
Go up with her to Bertha Ward, gal.’
On my return Staff Nurse Robins was after my blood.
‘Dungarvan, you were supposed to have cleared the Plaster Room!
It's still in chaos!’
‘I'm sorry, Nurse Robins; I had to leave it.
I'll finish it now.’
‘Not now you can't!
There are two splinters waiting to be removed and one cut thumb soaking in the Women's Dressing Room.
There are two dressers in there, but as one of the splinters is in the thigh, you'll have to get it out.
Then do the Plaster Room.’
Charlie was one of the two dressers.
Three other women  with minor injuries came in before the room could be cleared.
Robins called away the other dresser to help the S.C.O.
Charlie and I cleared up together.
He was still upset about Mrs Scutt's trolley.
‘I wish you'd let me explain to Old Red.
Was he foul?…
Oh, Christ!’
He had now knocked over a bottle of gentian violet.
The sink he had just cleaned was stained badly.
‘I'll never get this muck off.’
‘Meth. 'll shift it, stat.’
I handed him the room's stock bottle of methylated spirit.
‘Don't work yourself into an acute anxiety state.
Just pour on and watch.
And don't worry about this afternoon either.
Old Red wasn't foul.’
I stacked a large bowl-sterilizer, then turned on the water.
‘On the contrary, he was sweet — careful!’
I lunged for the meth. bottle and caught it before it hit the floor.
‘Honest to God, Charlie, you need to do something about your reactions!’
‘Sorry, Jo.
But was he really sweet?
Old Red?
But everyone says he's an absolute swine to nurses.’
‘Everyone says — a right load of old codswallop.’
I replaced the bottle on the shelf, closed the lid of my sterilizer, and switched on the heat.
‘These things'll need twenty minutes as it's the end of the day.
What time is it now?’
I hitched out Little Ben.
‘It can't be ten?
Hell!
Robins is on until midnight with me, but Sister's off at ten, and if I don't get the Plaster Room straight before she does her final round she'll kill me.
Will you keep an eye on this sterilizer and turn it off if I forget it?’
‘Sure, but can't I help you in the Plaster Room?’
I did not want to hurt his feelings by saying I would manage far quicker alone, so I used an equally true reason for refusing his offer.
‘As the other dressers have vanished, you'd better stay up this end and make yourself very visible.
If not, in  Sister's present mood, she'll probably send out a landing party of the Royal Marines to round you boys up.
You show her there's one sterling lad on watch!’
‘Aye, aye, sir!’
The Plaster Room lay beyond the A.R.R.U. It was quiet in there.
I hung up the plastic sheet I had left soaking, rolled away those that had dried, scrubbed dried plaster from the table with the special remover, and wondered wearily how much longer it would be before the scent of wet plaster stopped reminding me of Marcus.
I could now forget Bill for hours, even days, then one sniff of wet plaster and I went straight back to Marcus Small Ward Two.
‘Excuse me, Nurse — oh, it's you!’
Old Red had come in.
‘Have you seen a watch lying around?
I've left mine somewhere; I thought in Cas.
I've just asked Sister.
It hasn't yet been handed in.
As I put on a plaster in here an hour ago, I wondered if I'd left it on that shelf above the sink.
No.’
He looked underneath.
‘Hasn't slipped down either.’
I searched with him and in vain.
‘Sorry, Mr Leland.
Have you another?’
‘In my room.
I'll have to go up.’
He turned round as the door opened again.
‘Wanting me, Peters?’
‘Er — no, sir.’
Charlie looked startled.
He turned to me.
‘It's that sterilizer you asked me to watch, Nurse Dungarvan.
It seems to need some attention.’
‘Sounds ominous.’
Old Red smiled faintly.
‘Perhaps you should see to it before it blows us all up, Nurse.’
He held open the door for me.
‘Thanks for searching.’
Charlie cantered after me as I hurried back to the Dressing Room.
The sterilizer was bubbling quietly.
‘There's nothing wrong with this thing, Charlie!’
‘I know that!
But I couldn't think of any other excuse
to get you away when I bust in and found Old Red chatting  you up!
Sorry if I put my big foot in it, but what else could I say?
This chap with the leg or something who wants to see you said something about being or having been a patient, but not being here as one now, and as he's loaded with flowers for you and I didn't know how Old Red would take it, I used the sterilizer.’
I stared.
‘Charlie, what are you talking about?
Who wants to see me?’
‘This chap with the limp.
He's got some flowers for you and was asking the porters, and I told him you worked here and I'd get you.
As Sister and Nurse Robins are swigging coffee with that drag Jones, I took him down the short cut through Eyes and shoved him into 15.
I've closed the door.
Only the porters saw him come in, and they won't talk!
His name's Francis, and he says you nursed —’ His voice stopped abruptly.
‘Come to investigate the sterilizer, sir?’ he asked of Old Red in a surprised squeak that was nearly as high as Mrs Scutt's.
‘No.
As I heard no explosion, I presumed the danger had been averted.
I just looked in to say I've found my watch, Nurse Dungarvan.’
‘Good.’
I was too shaken to ask where.
‘Shall I tell Sister, Mr Leland?’
‘Don't bother.
I'll be seeing her.’
He walked off.
Charlie and I looked at each other.
Charlie asked, ‘Think he heard about your chap with the floral tribute?’
I shrugged.
‘Jo, I'm sorry.
I always seem to be landing you in it.’
‘It's not your fault if my old boyfriends choose to drop in at the wrong moments.’
He was groaning.
‘What now?’
‘I've really done it this time, haven't I?’
‘Relax!’
I was trying to think fast and barely heard what he said.
‘I've got to get rid of this man before Sister  or Robins finds him here.
If not —’ I slid a thumbnail across my throat.
‘They surely won't do you for this?
How could you help it if some chap drops in with flowers?’
‘Charlie, grow up!
When something like this happens everyone always blames the girl!’
‘Then how about Old Red?
If he heard, won't he tell Sister?’
‘Not him!’
I was too concerned for caution.
‘Jackie Jones mightn't hesitate to run to Sister about something he only overheard by chance.
Old Red is no smooth-talking, trouble-making sod.
And anyway, he and I are sort of mates.
If he did hear I'll bet he'll have another attack of deafness and maybe a touch of amnesia as well.’
Then I realized what I was saying.
‘Charlie, this is just between you and me.
Promise?’
‘Sure.’
He grinned.
‘I say, Jo!
You're quite a bird, even if you do like 'em long in the tooth!’
That crack penetrated, but I had wasted too much time to deal with it.
‘I know!
I'll get rid of my man, and you stay up here and create a diversion if anyone appears before I'm in the clear.
Break something.
Faint.
Anything.’
‘Trust, me, Jo.’
I hoped I could, as I had to.
I knew he now realized this was serious, but I was not sure I had got through to him how serious.
For any Benedict's nurse to entertain socially on duty was, in nine cases out of ten, a sacking matter.
The tenth case got off with a very stern reprimand from Matron and a very black mark against her name for the rest of her career.
No nurse with such a mark was likely to get a reference from Matron when she left the hospital, or, which was even more important to Benedict's nurses, a Benedict's Training School badge.
These badges were handed out only on a nurse's last day in the hospital, after she had taken State and Hospital Finals and accumulated a sheaf of satisfactory ward reports.
One bad report could lose a girl her badge.
We coveted those badges, and I never realized how much until that night in Casualty.
I crossed the length of the Hall in a raging temper with Bill Francis.
Once I had longed to see him.
Not half an hour back I had been dewy-eyed with nostalgia for him.
Now I was about to meet him again, it was as if I had suddenly woken up from a syrupy dream.
He was not worth my losing my badge!
Why risk seeing him at all?
Why not go back and let Charlie get rid of him for me?
I had reached 15.
I hesitated outside the door, and for just too long.
Sister, Robins, and Dr Jones came out of the latter's office.
‘And where are you off to, Nurse Dungarvan?’ called Sister.
Charlie did his stuff before I could answer.
There was a crash of breaking glass.
‘Not that boy Peters again!’
Sister sent Staff Nurse Robins to investigate.
‘Now, Nurse Dungarvan!
Why is there a light on in 15?
Has another patient come aboard?
If so, may I ask why neither the staff nurse nor myself have been informed?
And why use 15 when you are well aware that room is only used at night when the department is crowded?’
She swept by me and into 15.
‘Oh!
Oh, it's you, Mr Leland!’
Her voice altered.
‘Nurse Dungarvan, why did you not explain at once that Mr Leland was seeing a patient in here?’
Nurse Dungarvan was in no condition to explain anything.
Fortunately, Mr Leland did it for her.
‘This gentleman is not a patient, Sister.
There has been a slight, though not serious, misunderstanding.
May I introduce to you General Francis.
General, our Sister
Casualty.’
General Francis had risen from his chair by the examination couch and was supporting himself with his sticks.
On the couch were two sheaths of flowers.
The General wore white tie and tails that accentuated his normal elegance.
He looked incredibly distinguished.
In comparison, Dr Jones seemed a scruffy, wishy-washy fair boy in a limp white coat, and even Old Red, one of the neatest men in Benedict's, looked a slightly untidy young man.
Sister Cas., in general, was impervious to masculine charm, and yet she mellowed visibly as General Francis apologized for his presence.
‘As I have just explained to Mr Leland, I returned to my hotel from a dinner engagement and discovered the flowers I had earlier ordered to be delivered here for Nurse Dungarvan and Nurse Yates had, by some misdirection, been left at my hotel.
Since that is very near I came over with them.
I was explaining this to your door porters when a most helpful youngster kindly took me in his charge and escorted me into this room.’
Sister and the two residents exchanged resigned glances.
Sister said, ‘I expect it was one of our students at present working here as a dresser.
They are a willing bunch of lads, if occasionally over-willing.’
‘Precisely,’ said the General.
‘And, to be fair to the boy, I possibly confused him, since when he very properly inquired as to whether or not I was a patient, I had to admit myself in some doubt on the point.’
He turned to Old Red.
‘As I expect you are aware, Mr Leland, my room in your Private Wing is booked from this evening, but as I wanted to attend a regimental dinner tonight, with Mr Remington-Hart's consent I'm not moving in until tomorrow.’
He then explained why he had sent Daisy and myself the flowers in the first place.
‘I never anticipated the unlooked-for pleasure of being able to deliver one bunch  in person.
With your permission, Sister, may I do that now?’
Sister not only gave smiling permission, she allowed me to escort him back to his car.
We walked the length of the Hall, instead of taking the short cut though the darkened Ophthalmic Department.
We walked very, very slowly.
The deterioration in my companion's movements in the few weeks since I had last seen him was distressing to observe.
He did not mention his health or coming operation, beyond asking if Daisy and I would visit him once it was over.
‘If that's permissible?’
‘We'll have to ask Matron.
I'm sure she'll say yes.
I know we'd love to come and call.’
‘Splendid.’
His smile would have had Daisy weak at the knees.
It did not affect mine, though I enjoyed it, vastly.
Oddly, instead of reminding me of Bill, it reminded me of Old Red.
Then I looked more closely at the General's face and realized the comparison was not odd at all.
Both men in repose looked austere and even severe.
Both, when smiling, underwent a total transformation that illuminated an unsuspected streak of gaiety in their characters as successfully as it illuminated their eyes.
I saw now exactly why, when General Francis's name came up, Daisy bemoaned the fact that she had not been born twenty years earlier.
Twenty years back he must have been the most exciting man any girl could hope to meet, in or out of the British Army.
That had nothing to do with his still almost staggering good looks.
It was just something in his eyes when he smiled and his voice when he talked to a woman.
Even though he was old enough to be my father and now walking like an old, old man, every feminine instinct I possessed was reminding me most pleasantly that he was neither my father nor an old, old man.
Ten minutes  ago I had felt angry, rather tired, and very hard done by.
I now felt fresh, gay, attractive, and very, very feminine.
In fact, I felt so wonderful that I glanced back at Old Red.
He did not notice, as he was talking to Sister outside 15.
But it struck me then how very wise he was to keep his sexy side so firmly battened down on duty.
Life in Benedict's might be more of a riot if we had an S.S.O. who lived up to his potential, but the effect on our work could be disastrous.
All good nurses were trained to keep their minds on their jobs, but even good nurses were human.
So it was just as well Old Red never allowed anyone on duty, including perhaps himself, to remember that he also was human — and still a good deal younger than General Francis.
We talked about Dickie's visit and success at winning that scholarship.
‘My aunt,’ I said, ‘makes no bones about it.
She's bursting with pride!’
‘With every reason.
Raising a child alone, and particularly a boy, is no easy job for any woman.
Mrs Ellis has done very well by that boy.
He's a good boy, and very much a boy.
I much enjoyed having him as my guest.
Unfortunately, being a serving soldier whilst my own boys were growing up, I missed nearly all their boyhood.
Your young cousin's visit made me appreciate just how much I missed.
However, if there is one occupation in life that is more pointless than others it is regretting the past.’
We were a few feet from the main entrance, but he needed to pause before moving on.
He used the pause to say how grateful he was to my aunt for deciding to take his case.
‘I hope I won't prove a too impatient patient.’
‘General, I'm sure you won't!’
I was about to add his son had been an excellent patient, and found I could not do it.
That was not because Bill was Bill, but because it would have been such an outrageous lie, as Bill's father  would realize.
Bill, I suddenly saw with that horrible clarity of hindsight, had been a selfish and demanding patient.
I took another good look at the Generals face.
There was no selfishness there and no weakness.
He would not weep on Margaret's shoulder.
My impulsive remark amused him.
‘A snap judgment, I fear but excellent for my morale.
Thank you.
Do you make many snap judgments?’
‘Too many.
I don't mean to, but keep doing it.’
‘One does, at your age.
I used to pass judgment on sight.
Paul, my younger boy, being quite surprisingly mature for his age, does take his time, but Bill takes after myself.
I suppose you know he's now touring through France?
I understand he sends regular postcards to his St Benedict's friends.’
‘Yes.’
Surprisingly, I found I was not acting.
‘Nurse Yates has had a few.
I hadn't heard he was in France.
He still on holiday?
And how's his leg?’
‘Doing very well.
The plaster'll be off in a week or so.
I presume he'll come back for that.
His paper have given him another six weeks' leave-of-absence, so he decided to see France and, I believe, Spain.’
‘How very nice for him!’
In the yard Corporal Wix was showing the finer points of the Rolls to one of our porters.
He came over to shake my hand, but had the kindness and tact not to attempt to help his employer's slow progress.
I waved them off, then went slowly back inside.
Sister, Robins, and Old Red were now standing by the lodge discussing the General's condition.
Sister said, ‘So Mr Remington-Hart won't touch him for at least fourteen days?’
‘No.’
Old Red frowned at the floor.
‘He'll never touch a back until it's been properly rested.’
That explained why Margaret was not due for another ten days.
It had begun to puzzle me.
Robins asked, ‘What's the prognosis, Mr Leland?’
‘I can't really answer that until we see what we find when we get him on the table.
If it does turn out after all to be a growth, and the chances are high, then the chances of there being secondaries will be even higher.
And an op. will almost certainly speed things up.
He's willing to risk it, and he's been told the risk.’
Sister sighed.
‘So when he signs his consent form he could be signing his own death-warrant.
Poor man!
A remarkable face,’ she added briskly.
‘Intelligent.
Sensitive.
Pity he chose the Army.
He would have done well at sea.
I hope he does well in the Wing.
I wonder who'll have him?’
Old Red looked up from the floor, and glanced at me before answering.
‘Mr Remington-Hart is bringing in two private nurses who have worked with him previously.
Both are former Benedictines, whom I think you'll remember, Sister.
Miss Kateson and Mrs Ellis.’
‘Kateson?
Kateson?
No.
Before my time.
But Mrs Ellis, of course, I remember!
If we are talking about Maggie Ellis,née Dungarvan?
That child's aunt?’
‘That's right, Sister.’
‘Really?
I am pleased!
Such a charming gal and a very good nurse.’
Sister looked at me, meaningly.
‘Strange thing, heredity.
Sometimes a trait gets passed on from generation to generation, and sometimes it can be missed out altogether.
It was rather a dirty crack to make in public.
Robins slightly endeared herself to me by going a little pink and gazing at the ceiling.
Old Red returned to frowning at the floor.
I would like to have told them both that on that occasion the crack had sailed over my head.
I had other  things to occupy my mind.
Things like General Francis's being a widower, with his only other son in Hong Kong, tonight his last night out of hospital, perhaps for ever, and Bill on holiday in France.
My mind flashed back to those nights in Marcus Small Ward.
I could see the General now, sitting so stiffly and so still on that hard chair, with one hand on the bed and the other on his stick.
I could see Sister's point.
Sometimes some trait got missed out altogether.