

ANIMATIONS New series of Wild Life images COMPUTERS Buying one for your machine GIFTS Some seasonable inspiration
Dear Readers
Animal lovers will be delighted by our new series Animations .
Each month Norma Steinberg will be showing one of the wild animals which has become an endangered species on a beautifully drawn chart and portrayed on a suitable sweater style.
The first design is of a rhino and the sweater features tucked welts to resemble the folds of the animal's hide.
Norma also tells us a little about each species.
Gwen Merricks introduces herself in Singer World and, as an expert on Singer machines, she will be writing a regular feature, accompanied by a pattern, from next month.
Welcome to these two newcomers but meanwhile, ‘old hand’ Diane Bennett tackles the decision of buying a computer for the knitting machine, so don't miss Oh Brother if you are about to do the same.
Plans for Christmas should surely find room for Wendy Phillips' bear and Jane Platt's mouse — see Picture Knitting and Kaleidoscope , but if you have no plans you'll find inspiration in Masterclass .
NEWS LINE
More from BMS
You'll find the British Mohair Spinners of Bradford at this year's knitting event which takes place at the Royal Highland Showground in Edinburgh, Scotland between 23–25 October.
Back home in Yorkshire, BMS plan bright new displays and will be stocking a wider range of textile products, in their three Mill Shops at Midland Mills,; Lower Holme Mills,; and Grove Mills .
The new range will include a wider selection of hand knitting yarns in Mohair blends, British Wool and synthetic fibres, shirts, socks and suiting lengths plus a collection of knitted garments for all the family.
Jarol's ‘Streetwise’ children's fashion yarn and co-ordinating leggings will also be part of the new look.
The photograph shows ex-shop manager Jim Charlton (right) who worked for the company for 51 years, with new Midland Mills manager Peter Seward and his three-year-old daughter Emma, who is sporting the latest Jarol gear.
Peter is also responsible for the mail order side of the business and the BMS worldwide mill stock service operation.
Revised scheme
We have details from CENTRA Examinations and Assessments Services about revisions in the 789 Machine Knitting scheme which will be introduced from September of this year.
CENTRA is the successor to NWRAC (formerly ULCI) whose course schemes and certificates in Machine Knitting have become well established over the last 30 years.
The new scheme includes the following revised features:
a)
No written examinations.
b)
Courses will be divided into units — six for Stage 1, three for Stage II — allowing credit accumulation.
c)
Presentation will be in objective format with performance criteria and evidence required for assessment clearly stated.
d)
The overall content and balance of the previous scheme will be retained to enable easy transition from old to new scheme.
e)
There will be a grading system of pass, credit and distinction for each unit.
f)
The new scheme will incorporate a flexible ‘non-series’ administrative system allowing registration and results submission at any time of the year.
The aim of the revised features is to up-date the scheme at the same time as maintaining a good balance between technical skills and design with the retention of a grading system.
Course centres will be introducing the new scheme this autumn and it is hoped that even more students will be encouraged to work towards a Machine Knitting qualification.
You can find out more details from your local course centre.
Warp and weft
A new publication from Batsford is ‘The Ashford Book of Weaving’by Anne Field.
This hardback contains 200 pages of text and illustration on the traditional craft of hand weaving and is a follow up to ‘The Ashford Book of Spinning’.
The author is one of New Zealand's well known spinners and weavers who has an extensive knowledge of the craft.
She has also taught the technique and through this book aims to provide the weaver with a comprehensive background knowledge of the subject.
Anyone who is interested in woven textiles will find this a useful source book.
It begins with a look at the various types of looms and how to set them up together with full details on how to operate each type, with hints and tips on weaving procedures.
Each section contains appropriate weaving charts to illustrate the variety of patterns and fabrics which can be produced.
The second half of the book identifies suitable materials and yarns which can be utilised with additional ideas and tips for designing and finishing woven items.
For  practice purposes the book concludes with a selection of woven projects from simple stoles to highly patterned wall hangings and rugs, plus a garment in the form of a ‘V inset’ style sweater.
Priced at £14.99, ‘The Ashford Book of Weaving’ is available from good book and craft shops .
Magic fruits
We've already told you about ‘Streetwise’, Jarol's latest chunky yarn for  kids' knits.
The colour range has been updated for the autumn to include some new shades — Raspberry Truffles (5614), Spearmint (5615), Gob Stopper (5613), Purple Hearts (5616), Lemon Bon Bons (5612), Cherry Lips (5611) and Limes (5610).
As the names suggest, these are strong bright ‘sweetie’ colours which team up well with the casual accessories and jeans which are so popular amongst the younger generation.
The price remains at just £1.49 per 100 gram ball which makes this a very economical Acrylic yarn.
‘Magic Fruits’is completely new and different shade in the Streetwise collection.
A 90% Acrylic-10% Polyester mix, this shade (5617) uses a black base with a multi colour slub, echoing the plain shades in the range, for a versatile mix 'n' match look.
This fancy quality retails at £1.99 per 100 gram ball.
Twelve new pattern designs have been produced to support the new colours and to complete the look, Jarol has also brought out a range of nylon/lycra leggings to fit from three to 14-year olds.
There is a choice of either black or multi-colour stretch fabric to team up with the Jarol yarn colours!
Full of flavour!
It looks real doesn't it?
But this is no ordinary wedding cake — it's a knitted one!
This creative work of art was produced by May Bolton, a member of the Hems Knitting Club,, to celebrate the 100th meeting of their club which was started nine years ago.
She chose Bonnie's 2/30s Acrylic as the main ingredient for the recipe and added the finishing touches with a selection of knitted trims.
We think you'll agree that this cake really does look most authentic!
Yarn Fair
Don't forget to visit the Yarn Fair for London, the South and South East at the Old Loom Mill,, to be held on 17–20 September.
Nina Miklin will be there with her complete range of coned yarns for machine knitting in all the latest fashion colours.
Nina has many high quality Italian Designer yarns in her range including a beautiful cashmere/wool blend and she will be displaying all her garment designs which have been featured in Machine Knitting Monthly and her Pattern Book Volume 1.
As well as selling her yarns and patterns, Nina will be holding special workshops at the Mill to cover ‘Buttonholes’ and ‘Finishing Techniques for Knitwear’.
The Mill itself is a large Craft and Textile Centre which is just off the A22 London to Eastbourne Road at The Old Loom Mill,.
There are plenty of courses and workshops on offer throughout the year with plenty to interest everyone.
The Mill is open to the public between 9.00 am and 5.00 pm Mondays to Saturdays and 10.00 am to 4.00 pm on Sundays.
For more information please write to the above address or telephone Glynis at The Mill Shop .
Yesterknits
Over 20,000 patterns of knitted and crocheted garments and items dating from the 1920s to the 1970s form an invaluable collection called ‘Yesterknits’.
Originally accumulated and gathered together by Chris Beacon, ‘Yesterknits’ has now been purchased by the Knitting & Crochet Guild who plan to offer a special pattern search service.
We thought this might appeal to MKM readers, who often write in with requests and anyone interested should send four first class stamps towards expenses to the Guild Librarian for more details.
In the near future the Guild is planning to open a new Museum of Knitting & Crochet in the  historic village of Saltaire near Bradford.
Here, the public will be able to view the Guild's collection of patterns, knitted and crocheted items and yarns, as well as accessories including needles and hooks.
This will be the first museum of its kind in the country and the Guild welcomes any outside support, either in the form of articles for the Museum, donations of money, sponsorship from individuals or industry and volunteers to join the Museum working party.
For more information contact .
Made to measure
For step-by-step guide to knitwear design, look out for a new publication by Rita Ruberry called ‘Made to Measure Knitwear’.
This spiral-bound booklet is written in association with Bonnie's Wools and contains 42 pages of information on making and adapting a basic block to suit your own measurements.
Rita is a machine knitter of 20 years' standing who has taught many techniques of the craft.
An advocate of the charting device with its versatility for creating personalised knitwear garments, Rita was always surprised by the number of students who never used this accessory.
She discovered that this was often because of the problem of drawing out the block shapes which, to many, was a real obstacle.
The idea behind this book is to encourage machine knitters to make their own cardboard ‘templates’ of the basic shapes which can be adapted for a wide range of designs and styles.
Clear instructions are provided for making the basic back, front and sleeve blocks, together with easy-to-follow diagrams.
Rita continues with a section on adapting the basic shape for other popular shapes, including slash neck, drop shoulder, square armhole, short sleeve, sleeveless, crossover, raglan and yoked style sweaters and tops.
She also covers a selection of different necklines, collars and inserts plus a choice of sleeve shapings.
She finishes with a chapter on pattern calculation using a calculator for the basic block shape.
Anyone who owns a charting device should find this a really useful source of information.
the books costs £5.95 and it is available from Bonnie stockists throughout the country.
Cotton and Crêpe
Despite the fact that winter will soon be drawing in, many of you will, no doubt, be taking the opportunity for a late holiday in the sun and looking for suitably cool tops to pack in your suitcases.
Did you know that knitwear designer Roz Kellett recently produced a collection of six machine knit patterns for summer tops which would be ideal for a late break in the sun?
The patterns include both short and long sleeved styles which are worked in a variety of stitch patterns for single bed standard gauge knitting.
Roz has made use of stocking stitch, Fair Isle and lace with detail in the form of pin tucks, all over patterning, borders or simple striping.
Each design has a completely different neckline and there are some unusual welts with cables or colour patterning.
Roz has chosen two-ply soft cotton and Acrylic crêpe for the designs and aptly calls her collection ‘Cotton and Crêpe’.
The collection initially created interest amongst members of knitting clubs — Roz always took the garments to illustrate her knitwear ‘talks’ and was encouraged to publish the patterns.
She has since done this and due to popular demand has now made the patterns available for £3.25 to include p&p direct from Roz Kellett,.
We know that Roz's new book on ‘tensions’, which you have all been waiting for, is about to be published and she is also working on another booklet of machine knitting trims.
We look forward to telling you all about them!
New cutting range
What never needs sharpening, is completely dishwasher safe and is covered by a 25 year guarantee?
The answer is the latest ‘Laser 5’scissor range from Richardson Sheffield Ltd., which includes eight different types of stylish, quality scissors to suit a variety of cutting applications, from embroidery and dressmaking to household and general purpose.
The design of the scissors makes them suitable for both left and right hand users, in a choice of black or white handles and the prices range from £5.50 to £9.50 per pair.
You'll find them in your high street shops.
Electronic courses
The arrival of the Brother 965 machine has increased demand for Diane Bennett's electronic courses and she will be running an extra course in November in Nailsea, near Bristol.
The course is suitable for all models — 900, 910, 940, 950/950i, 965 and 270 — and lasts for three days, from Wednesday to Friday, 11–13 November.
For PPD owners, Diane will be running a one day course on Tuesday, 10 November.
The cost of this expert tuition is just £15 per day and accommodation is available nearby with a knitter.
For more details of the course and accommodation or to make a booking, contact .
Diane is also organising an extra one day course on the garter carriage in the autumn — phone for date and details.
Knit & purl video
We are just in time to tell you that October is ‘National Hand Knitting Month’.
To encourage more people to learn to knit, the British Hand Knitting Confederation Ltd., has produced a video entitled ‘Learn To Knit’.
This is an instructional tape which illustrates the actual technique of hand knitting in a slow and clear format which is easy to follow and aimed at teaching the beginner to master the basic techniques.
The video will be available from outlets which stock BHKC member products (most of the well known hand knitting yarn companies) and should retail at around £5.99.
GOLD ST*R AWARD
Two readers, Meryl Emerson of Alresford and Mrs. D. Dibble of Farnborough, are both agreed that if ever a shopkeeper deserved our Gold Star, it is Lena Kerry of Woolwork in Grosvenor Road, Aldershot, Hampshire.
Meryl wrote to tell us of Lena's general kindness, saying she found her the most helpful and patient person she knew.
As a housewife and knitting club member, she ‘took the plunge’ and opened Woolwork nearly ten years ago and Meryl reckons the success of the shop is due to Lena's attitude of giving the same smiling service whether the customer wants a cone of yarn or the latest machine.
She relates that Lena will even take the trouble to teach customers how to use machines that they have bought elsewhere and go out of her way to make deliveries, both free of charge.
Mrs Dibble experienced Lena's generosity when the ribber attachment she had bought from a mail order company would not work on her machine.
It was returned to the company but when they needed Mrs Dibble's carriage as well, she turned to Lena for help.
This was readily given and ended in Lena lending her own ribber attachment to Mrs Dibble.
Not only did this eventually solve the problem but, as Mrs. Dibble said, ‘Please bear in mind that Lena didn't know me from Adam but she was so helpful and concerned, she took a chance on my honesty.’
We have to agree with Meryl who said, ‘I think we should all support these small shops, we could be lost without them.’
DEAR ANNE…
Don't keep your ideas, suggestions, experiences, criticism or praise to yourself.
Share your thoughts with other readers by writing to Anne at Machine Knitting Monthly .
Dear Anne ,
I read Mr. Duckworth's letter (November '91) with great interest and rushed off to my machine to try out his cast off.
I, too, find latching off tedious.
Although my vision and dexterity are not impaired (except by maturity) I appreciate that patience, nimble fingers and keen eyesight are required to manipulate the latch tool with one hand whilst pulling the work firmly downward with the other.
It becomes even more irritating when yarn splits — as it often does — and causes problems when latching off.
I have a Brother 950 (as well as another punchcard Brother) and frequently use the following method to cast off.
I hope it might help others who, like me, would do anything rather than latch off!
Knit the last row (from right or left) on a loose tension.
Push in both PART buttons.
* At the yarn end of the work, move the end stitch on to the next adjacent needle inwards and pull this needle out to holding position.
Push the empty needle to non-working position.
Pass the carriage across once (yes, I said only once).
Repeat from * until all stitches have been cast off.
It is not necessary to pass the carriage all the way across the work — just far enough to clear the needles at the ‘business’ end.
With practice it is possible to speed up the procedure by keeping one hand on the carriage and using the other to manipulate the stitches with the transfer tool.
Thank you for sharing the tip Fiona.
This is a recognised method used for casting off but many of our readers might not know about it.
You can also work it on other machines which will knit holding position needles to working position on the slip or free pass setting.
Although you have found that you cannot get on with the latch tool method of casting off, this too can become quite automatic once you have the knack.
It is impossible to describe in a few words, but one thing that many knitters do not realise is that it can be worked from either left or right and that some people find one side much easier than the other (not necessarily related to whether you are right or left handed either!).
So try knitting the last row from the opposite side to your normal way and have another try.
The main secret of the latch tool cast off technique is to keep the latch on the tool open, with the stitch (that you have just cast off) held firmly in place behind the latch under your thumb until you have retrieved the next stitch on to the hook.
THEN you let go of the latch so that the first loop slides over and is cast off.
It is then a case of a quick action to slide the tool forward slightly so that the next loop slides behind the latch ready to be caught down securely with your thumb again.
this action is impossible if you either a) do not hold the latch tool correctly (the handle of the tool should be resting in the palm of your hand with the thumb uppermost and on top of the latch area of the tool) or b) if you do not apply some downward pressure to the knitted fabric with your free hand.
With  practice , it really isn't so difficult — honestly!
Dear Anne ,
When I knit a stocking stitch tension square, instead of marking the 21st stitch on each side of centre 0 on the 30th row, I transfer these stitches at the beginning of the swatch, placing them on to needle number 22 on each side and pushing the empty 21st needles to non-working position.
As I knit the swatch, a ladder is created where the needles are out of work and I find it very easy to measure between the two ladders with my green ruler when the swatch is completed.
It is quicker too, as I can knit the 60 rows in one go and do not have to stop at row 30.
However, I have not found this method so good with pattern knitting.
When I have found my tension I write it on a adhesive label and stick this on the inside of the cone, catching the tail end of yarn to the label at the same time.
This way, if I reach the end of the cone without noticing, the cone lifts off the floor and, as it cannot possible pass through the tension assembly, I get plenty of warning without having the weights landing on my feet (ouch!) and my knitting on the floor!
I also find that this precaution usually provides enough yarn to get me to the end of the row.
If I have a shade card for that particular yarn I write the tension on that too, to save me the bother of knitting another tension swatch when I next come to use the yarn.
Another time-saving tip is my way of threading the tension arm assembly.
When I finish one colour I cut it from under the yarn guides at the back of the machine, leaving the yarn threaded through the assembly.
I tie my next colour on to the tail end of the first yarn and pull it straight through.
I have tried a similar method with my Hague Linker by using a small piece of thread to join two pieces of yarn but, unfortunately, the knots were still too big to go through the eye of the needle.
I also have small screw eyes (like the ones used for net curtains) screwed into the back edge of my knitting table.
I thread the yarns through these before they go up through the yarn guides on the mast and this prevents them from tangling together at the back of the table.
One quick question before I go — does ‘party plan’ work for selling knitwear?
I have been contemplating this for a while and would love advice from other knitters who have tried it!
STAR LETTER
Dear Anne ,
I felt I had to write to your readers as an unbiased outsider, although I am an avid reader of your magazine.
I bought the DesignaKnit 4 Professional some months back and I feel I have to give it nothing but praise.
I've had great fun and great service from the package and used it for designing several garments for both hand and machine knitting.
Although the facilities are mainly suitable for Fair Isle and intarsia, it is useful for tuck and slip designs too.
In fact, I'm working on a tuck patterned suit for myself right now.
I mainly use the package with my Brother 950i, to which I have a connecting cable, but I can't wait for Soft Byte to produce one for the Pfaff 6000 so that I can view the patterns on screen before knitting them.
This is not just a ‘Paint Program’ but a great tool for all and I am no professional; although a knitter all my life, I do not work for others.
Granted not everyone has a PC to use it on, but if someone in the family does use one, I thoroughly recommend purchasing this software.
By the way, I hope this might be considered for the ‘Star Letter’ as I find distribution to my local newsagent leaves a lot to be desired — if the distributor has not received enough copies, he doesn't get any!
Many thanks for a great magazine.
Keep up the good work.
Well, how could we resist your appeal Dorothy?
Yours is the Star Letter as it is very helpful for readers to have an independent and ‘amateur’ view of a new product but also, we can't bear to think of you missing your magazine.
However, we must point out that there are plenty of copies available and if there is a REGULAR order from you with your newsagent and from him with his distributor, there should be no problem.
We pay £5 for every letter we publish, provided it has not already been accepted or published elsewhere, plus a year's subscription to the magazine for a Star Letter.
Dear Anne ,
When knitting with more than two colours and not having a colour changer I found that no matter where I place the cones on the floor, the colour I was knitting always became entangled with the others not in use.
Even though I have a four-arm tension mast, this doesn't help when the yarn tangles up and won't go through.
If I don't spot the trouble straight away, the knitting goes tight or the yarn snaps and it causes no end of frustration when I have to stop to sort out the mess.
I came up with a very simple answer to this problem and hope it will help others.
Stand one of your large ribber weights at each end of your table and when you have finished using one colour, just hook it round the weight out of the way.
You have to remember to unhook it when changing colour again or you will end up solving one problem and causing another.
This tip obviously got you out of a tangle Meryl, but have you read about a new and useful low cost knitting accessory which is now available from Jacpacs?
It is a small plastic yarn holder caller a Jac-card which slots into the left hand side of the needle bed to make colour changing easier.
It holds up to four yarns and costs just £3.95 plus 25p for postage and packing from .
This item was introduced to encourage knitter who do not have colour changers to try out jacquard knitting but can be used to hold yarn when knitting simple stripes or any colour patterns where yarns are changed on one side of the work only.
Dear Anne ,
I solve the problem of long floats when knitting a motif, by weaving up the sides as normal and, in addition, I use several lengths of yarn (the same colour as the motif) to weave up on every fifth or sixth stitch.
On the wrong side of the knitting, this looks much neater and stops little fingers getting caught!
Dear Anne ,
After reading through my back copies of MKM I have an idea.
Instead of going through each copy to find a particular patter (one you are always going to knit later), I decided to put a sticky label on the bottom right hand corner of the front cover with details of particular patterns.
this makes quick reference easier as I can see at a glance whether the magazine has the pattern I am looking for.
Perhaps other readers will find this suggestion helpful.
Dear Anne ,
Having just read Joan Lafferty's article on Cut and Sew, I feel inspired to write to you with my tip.
The idea is to produce a smooth zig-zag stitch with the sewing machine which does not catch the knitting in the machine foot, does not pucker, stops the cut edge from fraying and gives confidence to those who are about to cut the knitted fabric for the first time.
Believe it or not, I use a fairly hot iron over the neck area to be cut out — the iron must not be so hot that the fabric melts, but just hot enough to flatten it.
I have made cardboard templates for both round and ‘V’ necklines in various sizes.
I pin one of these to the front panel of the sweater and iron inside the template area.
I also run a contrast colour tacking stitch around the outline for a sewing guide and I leave this in place until I have re-hung the sweater on the knitting machine to attach the neck band.
I find it easier to use the front (pointed) end of the iron for the front panel and the heel of the iron for the back.
I always join one shoulder seam before cutting out the front and back sections, then finish off with a sandwich neck-band that will stretch and look good.
Dear Anne ,
I don't like doing intarsia knitting but I do like ‘picture front’ jumpers and decided that it was possible to do them by using the slip stitch Fair Isle method.
At the time, I wrote to Knitmaster (as was), explaining what I wanter to do, but I was told that it couldn't be done.
S I set about answering the query for myself.
First, I draw out the outline of the motif on to a mylar sheet, with all the outlines for the different areas of colour I want to use.
You need to have an odd number of colours, including the background.
On separate mylar sheets, I then mark out each colour in turn for the relevant areas of the design.
Where possible, I have more than one colour on a card and mark the colour changes in the ‘beep’ column.
Using the bar codes to program the machine is quite easy once all the bits are drawn up.
I haven't yet found a way to automatically knit the extra stitches on the jumper after the card size has been accounted for — not unless I program every time I knit the pattern.
So, I bring all the remaining needles forward to knit the background colour.
I have found it better to sue a tension setting one dot higher for the slip stitch part.
Once the picture is drawn up and programmed, it is quite quick to knit jumpers over and over again — however, I can only fit about five patterns on one tape.
I also line the inside of the motif area to hide all the long floats or yarn.
SIMPLY SILVER
Last month I wrote about how to thread the colour changer and how it functions to change yarn.
Now I want to look at pattern knitting with the colour changer.
On the main bed, both the YC5 and YC6 colour changers can be used for knitting tuck and slip in stripes and the YC6 can be used for changing the background colour when knitting Fair Isle.
both colour changers can be used for knitting double jacquard with the ribber.
The colour changers will fit standard and find gauge machines.
The sinker plate supplied with the YC6 for single bed knitting has wheels and brushes beneath it like any sinker plate.
To use it on a fin gauge machine, the cog wheels have to be replaced with ones to fit the fine gauge.
(The cogs must fit the sinker posts which are closer together on a fine gauge than on a standard of course.)
Mrs Patricia Massey of Nottingham sent me some very attractive swatches, including some double jacquard, knitted on her fine gauge machine.
these caused an acute attack of what I once heard referred to as ‘the wants’ or, in this case, ‘I want a fine gauge knitting machine’!
Mrs Massey has a wide selection of machines and is very involved with machine knitting in Nottingham.
She says, ‘Anything to do with knitting seems to go in my head and stay, buy anything to do with cooking and cleaning goes straight through and out the other side!’
A lady after my own heart.
To knit single bed tuck and slip stripes, the yarn goes in feeder 1 of the YC6 colour changer sinker plate.
If you have the YC5 model, as we saw last month, it can be used for single bed knitting.
The ribber has to be in working position even for single bed work and the ribber connecting arm is used.
the end stitch holders are positioned at the edge of the knitting to ensure that the edge needles knit.
When tuck or slip is knitted in stripes, the effect on the knit side can be very interesting.
for magazine and book illustrations, contrasting colours have to be used to show up in photographs, but in ‘real life’ I've seen some very pleasing subtle effects obtained by using blending or similar colours.
If you are following a written design, it is essential that you change colours on the rows given with the design and that you start at row one of the card (unless otherwise stated).
Which row you change colour on will affect the  results.
On the other hand, if you are experimenting for yourself and don't like the result when you change colours in one way, try changing colours on a different set of rows.
Card 19 from the 600 or 700 pack knitted in slip changing colour every 2 rows.
Card 10 knitted in Fair Isle changing colour every 10 rows.
Card 12 knitted in Fair Isle changing colour every 12 rows.
When we take a tuck or slip stitch card and try knitting it with a changes of colour, we don't usually know what the result will be.
We're usually knitting with a card that was designed as single-colour tuck or slip.
In other words, the designer was looking at the effect of the tucking when knitting in one colour, rather than concerning her or himself with the effect when striped.
However, it is possible to work the other way round.
You can work out the final design and then work backwards to how it must be knitted, usually in slip, one colour at a time, to achieve the design.
Kathleen Kinder has written a book about this called ‘Mosaic Knitting’.
One advantage of these fabrics is that the floats are shorter than in conventional Fair Isle knitting.
Card 19 from the 600 and 700 basic pack also seems to have been designed specifically to be knitted in striped slip.
As I've said, the YC6 can be used for changing colour when knitting single bed Fair Isle.
The second yarn goes in feeder two of the sinker plate, while it is the yarn in feeder one that changes.
As with the standard sinker plate, it is the yarn in feeder two that knits the pattern and the yarn in feeder one the background.
So it is the background colour that changes, and the pattern colour that remains constant.
Actually, with some cards, for example cards 10 and 12, it's hard to tell from the result whether it's the background or pattern colour that's changing.
To my eyes it looks like the pattern, though I know with my head that it's the background.
It depends on how the card is punched of course.
However, it does mean that if you want to knit a row of motifs changing the motif colour, then to knit them with the colour changer  you need to re-punch the card in reverse.
This won't work for a single motif, but how about a single motif in black, knitted against a striped background of bright jewel colours, or white on pastel stripes?(for this, the card doesn't need to be reversed of course.)
Silver Reed tell me that to knit a single motif you must be sure the yarn mast is positioned correctly.
That is, the kink at the bottom of the mast should bend it towards the machine.
If it doesn't, the motif yarn may knit into the background.
The punchcards in the basic packs which are marked for colour changing are for manual yarn changing, where it is the pattern that is intended to change; so these won't work with the colour changer either.
When knitting Fair Isle with the colour changer, the yarn that is in feeder two must be threaded through section D of the yarn mast, while holder D remains empty.
If you thread the yarn through any other sections of the yarn mast, when knitting it will cross any yarn from a holder to the right of it.
So for example, if the yarn in feeder two is threaded through section B, when the yarn in feeder one comes from the C of D yarn holders, you'll find the two yearns are wrapped around each other , between the yarn mast and the sinker plate.
For the Fair Isle swatches with this article I was changing every 12 and 10 rows.
If you're knitting a wide piece of knitting and changing the yarn less than every two rows, it's advisable to lay down the driving lever.
Otherwise you may find that you've inadvertently changed colour when the carriage is at the left.
You can mark the punchcard to tell you when to change colour.
Many new (and not so new) knitters find this a puzzle.
Basically, the row you are about to knit is five rows down inside the card reader.
So to mark the row on which you want to change colour, find the row you want to change on, count up five rows (not including the row you're changing on) and mark the fifth row.
If you find this difficult to understand, take any of your punchcards, and count up from the first pattern row to the number 1 in the margin.
This is how you must count to mark the card.
…and ribber These two little words were cut off a sentence at the bottom of the page in Liz's October article, thereby changing its meaning.
The sentence should have read, ‘Double jacquard is two-colour patterns knitted with main bed and ribber.’
PICTURE KNITTING
BEARING GIFTS
Christmas is a time for children, toys and, of course, teddy bears.
From the many letters I receive I know how popular my teddy patterns have become and so I have done two special seasonable designs, this one depicting a teddy pulling a sledge full of gifts and for the next issue two teddies…well, perhaps you had better buy the magazine to find out for yourself!
For Teddy bearing gifts, leave five stitches between the bear's left foot and the sledge; the moon positioned roughly in the centre.
This pattern is brought to life with the addition of three brightly coloured parcels appliquéd to the knitted fabric.
Parcels can be any size you like, mine are approximately 14 stitches × 14 rows.
The red and white one, being 18 rows, is stitched on sideways.
the red bow on the top parcel gives a final finishing touch.
Teddy's scarf is made in two pieces, the first 7 stitches × 28 rows.
Using a medium tension and hanging a weight on the scarf as it is being knitted will make it curl more easily.
Begin by stitching the longer length on the left hand side, bringing it under Teddy's chin and tucking the shorter length under it as it crosses his shoulder.
For extra effect I added tassels to the ends of the scarf.
Finally I twisted together lengths of red and white yarn to make a rope for the sledge and stitched some stars around the moon to add to the frosty effect.
The second sample is a simple border produced from the holly and Teddy's head used as continuous repeats.
The top row of holly is knitted as a mirror image.
If you use the main design on a sweater front this complementary border would be ideal for use on sleeves and back.
Use these 9 stitches for repeat pattern on red and white parcel.
Use these 9 stitches from holly leaf for green parcels and scarf.
Program area inside green box (to stitch 35) for head repeat.
blue background
white background
OH brother
A COMPUTER FOR MY KNITTING MACHINE?
First it was machines which pattern with buttons, then machines with punchcards, next electronics with mylar sheets and later build-in patterns.
What next, I am often asked — well, the latest ‘Knitting revolution’ is the use of the computer for designing fabrics and garments.
I am usually one of the first to try out any new development.
Each new Brother electronic model has been with me very soon after its launch.
The garter carriage, PPD and many other items have tempted me quickly.
I have been interested in the use of computers for designing knitwear for several years.
The commercial software available for my computer was very limited and my attempts to design my own even more so!
I have seen what graphics packages on more sophisticated computers were able to produce, but I wanted to be able to use this with the knitting machine.
Nearly two years ago, I saw the type of package that really interested me BUT, of course, it was not for my computer.
However, the seeds had been sown in my mind — they just took a long time to grow!
Apart from a desire to use it with my knitting machine, I was happy with my computer and this was the main problem — I didn't want to change it.
However, no equipment will last for ever and it started to become obvious that I would need to update before too long.
My big problem was that all my files, containing the text of my books, articles, notes and so on were on discs of the wrong size to run of any other computer — without expensive conversion.
I made my decision just before I left for Australia.
When I got home, I would buy a new computer and explore first DesignaKnit and then other software packages.
It all seemed very simple then — particularly when I couldn't do anything about it for a month.
When I returned from my trip, however, it was to discover that while buying software is easy, buying a computer is certainly not!
Each magazine article I read advised me to buy the best, the fastest, the latest or whatever.
But did I really need this?
It was a difficult decision which must be much more difficult for many of our readers who have never used a computer before.
CHOOSING A COMPUTER
The first step is to select the type of computer to buy.
For most knitting software, this is limited to IBM PC compatibles, although the Bit Knitter will also run on the Amiga.
Ask anybody who is  knowledgeable about computers and they will tell you that you should always choose the software you want to run first, then buy a computer which is suitable to run this.
Do you just want to run knitting design software?
If the answer is yes, look at the various packages which are available and decide which one suits your needs.
Most computer owners, however, find that they want a computer for several different purposes.
When I bought my old computer, it was originally just for word processing — for my books and articles like this one, for example.
However, I soon discovered that it could help me in many other ways, for example to take all the hard work out of doing my accounts, producing invoices and keeping track of stock.
Fortunately, I had chosen a computer that was, at that time, widely used by small businesses, so a variety of software was available.
Think carefully before you decide — will it be just for you, or will other members of your family want to use the computer?
One word of warning, however, don't be talked into a certain type of computer by your children.
The ‘in’ computer changes with the ‘latest’game — they will be happy with whatever you get (if you are foolish enough to let them get their hands on it!).
Since all the design software runs on IBM PC compatibles, this is the obvious choice.
It is also the computer with the widest range of software available for business applications, so there is a very wide range of other software.
In the past, it has been criticised for poor graphics.
The current VGA and SVGA adaptors and screens, however, are excellent.
For most design software, a high quality graphics monitor is needed.
CHOOSING A MODEL
You have chosen a computer?
An IBM PC probably, or perhaps an Amiga.
Don't be tempted to think that your problems are over — now come the really difficult decisions.
The first step is to get a ‘shopping list’ from the producer of the software that you have chosen.
This will give the exact requirements for the system that you are going to buy.
DesignaKnit 4, for example, will run on an IBM PC, but it must have at least 512K or RAM, a hard disk or two floppy drives and an EGA or VGA screen.
I hope this list show you that there are a lot of things to consider, especially with an IBM PC.
Many computers, like my old Amstrad and the Amiga, come in standard formats.
It may be possible to buy a model with a bigger memory or add to the basics, but the choices are limited.
The IBM PC is different.
This is not simply one make of computer — there are literally hundreds of different makes, available with a wide range of choices of memory, storage and screen.
The big advantage, however, is that information is easily transferred from one machine to another.
The problem with my files would have been solved if I had been using an IBM machine — but they were way beyond my price range when I bought my first computer.
MEMORY
Computers have two different types of memory.
When the computer is running, a program like DesignaKnit needs RAM.
This is the amount of memory that is needed for the computer to undertake all the different tasks which the software requires.
The needs of knitwear design software in this respect are fairly small — most need only about half a megabyte of RAM — some other programs that I have used need two megabytes, or four times as much memory.
The other type of memory is the computer's data storage.
When designing a fabric, for example, you would probably not complete the design and transfer it to the knitting machine or print it out in just one session.
After doing a preliminary design, you would think about it, modify it and then knit it.
However, if you turn the computer off without storing the design on disk, it will be lost and you will have to start again!
Fortunately, your software will remind you of this — when I am using DesignaKnit, it always reminds me if I need to save data.
Disks are of two different types — floppy and hard.
Floppy disks are the ones that are more familiar.
This is the form in which software is normally purchased.
The small   disc is inserted into the floppy drive of the computer and the program can then be run or installed or data read from the disk.
A hard disk is usually built into the computer and is a slightly different form of storage.
The amount of information which can be stored on a hard disk is much greater — my computer, for example, has a 105 megabyte hard disk.
This will store more than 50 times as much data as the floppy disks with the biggest storage capacity!
The advantage of a hard disk is that the programs and data are available whenever the computer is switched on, without having to find and run the correct floppy disk.
The main disadvantage is that a computer with a hard disk is more expensive.
There is also more to learn!
It is possible to store such an amazing amount of information, but this has to be carefully organised on the disk to make it possible to find files easily.
Understanding the disk organisation has taken me a little time, but this has been amply repaid by the speed and ease of data storage which the hard disk gives me.
MONITORS
Several different types of monitor are available.
When buying a new computer, the same model is usually available with a range of different monitors.
A mono monitor may be suitable for work processing, but it is certainly not ideal for knitwear design.
Colours are necessary and the difference between the monitors for IBM PCs is mainly the number of colours which can be shown on the screen.
A fairly sophisticated monitor is required for design software — but if you have the wrong type, don't despair, because monitors are available separately from computers.
BUYING THE COMPUTER
Once you know what to buy, the next problem is where to go.
Your local computer supplier may be the first place to visit.
They can provide not only the computer, but also help and information should things go wrong — which may be very important.
There are also specialists, for example 21st Century Computers of Peterborough who provide specialist support for DesignaKnit and Creation 6.
Buy some computer magazines — you will find that many companies sell direct, not through dealers.
I bought my Elonex from the manufacturer, but do think carefully about the amount of help you may require.
However, this again will depend on what you want to use the computer for.
Within 15 minutes of my computer arriving, I had DesignaKnit installed and running.
If the software supplier is as helpful as Softbyte and the program as easy to use as DesignaKnit you may not need as much technical support.
Your local machine knitting dealer may also be able to help.
Some dealers who supply design software are able to supply computers, while others can advise you where to go for help.
There are a number of cheaper alternatives.
The very rapid pace of change in the computer market does mean that second-hand computers can be excellent value.
As with any second hand item, there is a risk, but the savings can be considerable.
Some dealers do supply second-hand computers which they have taken in part exchange and these may have the additional advantage of a short guarantee.
Computer auctions are another alternative — prices can be very low, but the risk is very high!
A NEW BEGINNING
After all the decisions and problems, was it really worth it?
I certainly think so — I am delighted with my new computer.
Software has improved dramatically in the six years since I bought the old computer and this one is faster and easier to use.
The design software is a real delight.
To be able to design a complete garment, fabric and shape and see how it will look before knitting the garment is wonderful.
DesignaKnit is easy to use — but at the same time a well-designed package with an excellent range of options.
Version 5, which is only just available, will, no doubt, bring even more choices and I look forward to exploring it.
I have also been exploring the Bit Knitter and the range of design options offered by Deluxe Paint, which is a very powerful graphics package.
I am delighted that it is possible to use this program to produce designs which can then be imported into DesignaKnit and used for knitting.
This option offers the best of both worlds — the simplicity of DesignaKnit with the extra facilities of Deluxe Paint.
Diane is a DesignaKnit dealer and she will be demonstrating it a various events, including the Webbington Show at the end of October.
If you live in or are visiting the Bristol area, ring her  to arrange a demonstration or for more information about the program.
She is also planning courses on DesignaKnit, the Bit Knitter and an introduction to computers for the terrified.
Please send a s.a.e. if you want further details, stating the type of course that interests you.
MASTERCLASS
DREAMING OF A WHITE CHRISTMAS?
 Reindeer in the snow, walking in winter wonderlands, the old magic works for me every time and I can't wait to begin knitting those special presents for extra-special people.
Here are some of my ideas.
I am still dreaming of the white cotton lace bedspread that I have always promised to knit for my ‘best friend’ because I know that she had always wanted one.
I would make it is squares of fairly course cotton eyelet lace with a simple crochet edging, perhaps with alternate large squares of lace and plain knitting.
Maybe this year I'll finally manage it if I begin now, though I do have other special presents to make too!
It's still early enough to finish them if I work really hard this month.
I do feel that it is extremely important to think first what your nearest and dearest would really like before you begin to knit.
I've sometimes made some rather awful mistakes when I have thought first about what I would like to give rather than what my friends would like to receive, so do try to find out before you embark on a special garment.
Most people, I find, are always extremely pleased to be given a plain beautifully-knitted sweater, carefully finished in a quality yarn and in their favourite colour.
If I don't manage the bedspread I know that my friend would really like a loose, plain, black sweater in fine wool for winter or a synthetic yarn for summer rather than one of my more dashing designer confections.
Also her son, though young and ‘with it’, would prefer an exquisitely knitted and finished find wool classic sweater in a quiet colour or a heavier, brighter, really big sweater for cold weather — but I must find out first what colour he fancies this year!
Fortunately for me, some of my friends and relations like something a bit more unusual, so I have been working out some new ideas for this year for those ‘champagne’ garments on a ‘lemonade’income.
I hope you'll like some of them for your own nearest and dearest.
For those who are young and slender, a narrow, clingy, long skirt (probably black!) or a longish pleated skirt either made on a ribber or shadow pleated (and I expect they'll want this black too!) would be very acceptable.
So would a real party frock, but do find out whether this should be a full-skirted dance dress or a skimpy lurex shift.
Leggings, whether glittery or plain, would also be a super present for the young — or the young at heart — and they don't take long.
If you know that she likes red, by all means made something red, which is not only Christmassy but also highly fashionable.
Inspiration comes from strange sources.
I am dying to make a sweater inspired by a new music centre in our house.
This is the usual cube-like structure in matt black, but when it is switched on and working, lots of tiny ruby lights twinkle and sparkle all over it and it becomes totally magical and beautiful.
A simple matt black sweater, with just a few tiny red glass beads or minute sequins scattered over it, would look lovely in movement and gorgeous to wear on Christmas Day.
As decoration is so popular you could, of course, use lavish appliqué decorations for a really glittering late day look as well .
I also want to try a sweater in grey with a black outline pattern and then fill parts of the pattern with fabric paint colours.
This could be made in either double jacquard or Fair Isle and I was inspired by a sweater in very subtle colours worn by Iris Bishop (not for once, one of her own creations!).
I think it would be fun to use fabric paints rather than hunting for and knitting lots of different colours.
This idea would  also be splendid for young and old alike, using a black pattern on a white background with really bright colours added and it would be particularly good fun for children to wear.
Just make sure that you've ‘fixed’ the colours properly and that they will be fast when washed!
Don't forget that, if you want a special present for a knitting friend, Iris Bishop has some gorgeous fabric patterns.
I would hate to pick out ‘the best’ as she has so many, but I am especially fond of her ‘Pot Pourri’collection and lover her ‘planets’and ‘Milky Way’designs — great for Christmas — and her ‘Christmas’designs would be exceedingly suitable.
As gifts for non-knitting friends, try some out yourself.
Double jacquard is so fashionable this season that most people would love to receive a sweater or jacket knitted by this technique.
It would make a beautiful fabric for my next idea, a wonderful Edwardian ‘smoking jacket’.
Not in these days, for smoking in, but just a casual yet elegant loose jacket with a tie belt made in straight pieces like a very simple dressing gown — a truly marvellous garment to relax in after a hard day's work and very good for either men or women.
The same fabric makes a beautiful dressing gown for men, women and children, either in deep, glowing, toning colours or as bright as you like.
If your machine doesn't knit double jacquard, the garment is just as nice made from two layers of Fair Isle in fine wool, bound together by strips of knitting to make it totally reversible with different colours each side if you wish.
A simple draped dress suits everyone and could be either plain or really glittery for Christmas parties.
Especially good for your ‘Empress’ size friends, these are quick to knit, I'd also very much like to knit a golden pleated skirt using several strands of gold lurex for a really glamorous lamé look.
Someone, somewhere, would be sure to love one, in fact, I would love one myself!
All these ideas are for what I would call BIG presents.
Any would be magnificent and there is time to knit several of them for ‘specials’ but I haven't said anything yet about small ‘fun’presents and decorations which are so much a part of Christmas.
I've lots of ideas for these, but as they are all quick to make I've left them for next month when you have finished your special presents and they are neatly folded and packed away in all their glory of tissue paper and gold and silver ribbons.
There is, however, one ‘fun’ idea which I intend to prepare now, to give me time to get it finished.
How about your Christmas card this year? why not knit one and them photograph it for a really professional look?
I would like to knit a snow scene with bare trees, or an elaborate angel, perhaps with added embroidery, or a photograph of Barbie or Sindy as a Christmas fairy, or how about a photograph of the family in their best knitted outfits?
Anyway, take your photograph (35mm) and order some stick-on copies.
these are quite cheap, even for bigger sizes and make a beautiful Christmas card stuck on the front of either a bought or home-made card.
A personal card is always appreciated.
Happy Christmas knitting!
TEACH-IN
USING YOUR RIBBER — PART 2
Last month I wrote about setting up the ribber and making sure it was correctly aligned with the main bed.
This month I want to take some of the mystery out of ribber work, by looking at the basics of how the carriages function.
Using the ribber, there are a lot of steps to go through when knitting.
So manuals have complicated-looking tables of or lists of instructions.
these can be rather daunting when you've just set up your ribber.
More importantly, with so many instructions to follow, it's easy to miss one or to make a mistake.
If you understand WHY you have to do certain things, you're less likely to make a mistake.
When you cast on using the ribber, on the first row BOTH carriages knit; however, on the second, third and fourth rows both carriages are set for circular knitting, so you knit one-and-a-half circles.
It is these changes to the carriage controls that knitters sometimes find hard to master, so let's look in detail at what the carriage controls do.
This is best understood by doing some exercises without any knitting on the machine.
Put the ribber to the half-pitch position and bring some needles on each bed to the working position.
Remove the connecting arm between the two carriages.
First we'll look at the main bed carriage controls.
To make the needles knit, the carriage must be set as for stocking stitch.
So set the carriage as if for stocking stitch (without the sinker plate of course) and pass the carriage across the needles.
Watch the ‘wave’ movement of the needles, noticing how far forward they come.
At the peak of the wave, the open latches are clear of the sinker posts.
If we were knitting, the stitch would be behind the latch and would be knitted off.
That's the normal knitting movement.
On Knitmaster and Silver punchcard machines, the side levers should be back on the position.
On these machines, don't have a card in the reader while you do this.
If you have, or have only just removed it, you will see a double wave as the needles respond to the punchcard.
The second pass after removing the card should show a single wave.
Silver double knit and chunky gauge modular electronics have cam lever settings and side levers identical to the punchcard machines.
They shouldn't be programmed for a pattern during these exercises, in other words they would be turned off, or they too will respond to the pattern and show a different needle movement.
The fine and standard gauge Silver electronics and the Knitmaster electronics are different to the punchcard machines.
Their side levers are controlled by the cam lever and, whether the machine is on or off, when the cam lever is on 0 the pattern will be ignored and you will see a single wave motion.
Now we're going to use the slip (Silver and Knitmaster), Part (Brother) and Empty (Toyota) control on the main carriage.
With single-bed knitting, you use this control for pattern knitting slip or skip stitch using a punchcard or electronic program, so that the carriage knits a combination of slip and knit according to the punchcard or programme.
This is elective patterning.
We're now going to see how the carriage can do non-selective slip (that is where ALL the needles slip), and in a DIRECTIONAL way — when the carriage SLIPS one way and KNITS the other.
This facility, combined with similar controls on the ribber, is the basis of circular knitting which occurs in the cast-on sequence when using the ribber.
So, on Silver and Knitmaster punchcard machines and Silver double knit and chunky electronics, put the cam lever to slip, with one side lever forward — that is, on the 0 mark.
The other side lever remains back on the .
On Silver and Knitmaster standard and fine gauge electronics the setting is slightly different.
The cam lever goes to C. The side levers position themselves — they're not under the knitter's control.
On the Brother punchcard or electronic push in ONE part button.
On the Toyota, turn the selection dial to Empty, but NOT the central empty position — choose the left or right one.
Now do two passes of the carriage.
In one direction you will see the normal wave movement of the needles knitting, but in the other direction the needles hardly move at all, that is they SLIP (and, even if you'd had yarn threaded and stitches on the needles, they wouldn't have knitted on this row).
The direction in which the carriage knits or slips is controlled by which Part button you choose on the Brother, which Empty control on the Toyota and the positions of the side levers on the Knitmaster and Silver machines.
Look at the one you chose.
On the Brother, if the Part button nearest the knitting is in, or on the Toyota you've chosen the Empty control nearest the knitting, or on the Knitmaster the side lever nearest the knitting is forward, then the NEXT row will slip.
Conversely, if the Part button nearest the knitting is out, or the Empty control is on the opposite side to the knitting, or the side lever nearest the knitting is back, the next row will knit.
Silver and Knitmaster electronics with the C setting always knit, to the left and slip to the right.
On all other machines, you can choose which way to slip and which way to knit.
Why not try the opposite setting to the one you've just used and see how the needles move (or don't) in each direction?
ENGLISH RIB knitted using a non-selective, directional, tuck setting on a chunky machine.
RACKED ENGLISH RIB
Now do the above exercise with the tuck controls instead of the slip controls.
In one direction the carriage will knit, while in the  other the needles will make the tucking movement.
That is, they will move forward far enough to collect a loop of yarn (if we were knitting), but not far enough for a stitch to go behind the latch and knit.
This is the basis of English rib and Fisherman's rib, which we'll come to in a later article.
Note that in practice Silver and Knitmaster chunky and double knit machines should NOT be set to tuck while knitting with the ribber.
It can damage the needles.
The Knitmaster and Silver standard and fine gauge electronics are different to the punchcard for the last exercise too.
To do this exercise, put the carriage to E, where you'll find it tucks to the right and knits to the left.
Now we're going to do a similar exercise for the ribber.
As on the main bed you can slip or tuck one way and knit the other.
On all ribbers I have (that is, ribbers to go with punchcard or electronic machines) the controls are similar.
The Chunkies and double-knits are a little different to the standard gauge, but they resemble each other.
First let's look at the ribber controls that we don't use during most ribber knitting, which are set to their basic position and only changed on special occasions.
All ribber carriages have holding levers, one each side, usually on the edge of the carriage and near the top.
On all machines, the two positions (knitting and holding) are labelled in the same way as the holding levers on the main carriage.
As long as you're not holding needles, it doesn't matter which position these levers are in, though I try to make a habit of having them in the knit position.
The Brother 850 ribber has change knobs, one each side, labelled , they should be on , except when used for double jacquard.
The Silver and Knitmaster SRP60 ribber has an auto-set lever at the base of the carriage next to the pick knob.
It has two positions.
1 and 0 and should be on 1, except for pick rib and some two-colour rib fabrics.
The Toyota has a pair of Simulknit levers labelled 0 and S. These should be on S for Simulknit and O for everything else.
Having put these levers in their basic positions, you are free to concentrate on the three ribber controls that you'll be using all the time.
On the body of the ribber carriage there is a control on either side called the Set Levers (Silver and Knitmaster), the cam levers (Brother), or the ET levers (Toyota).
With both controls in the lower position (labelled 1 on the Silver and Knitmaster, N on the Brother and Plain on the Toyota) the carriage will knit both ways.
On the Silver and Knitmaster Chunky and double knit ribbers, these controls are on the right and left edge of the carriage towards the bottom.
Each carriage has a third control.
On the Brother and Toyota standard gauge machines it's in the centre of the carriage.
On Brother it's labelled P and R and on the Toyota Tuck and Empty.
On the Silver and Knitmaster standard gauge machines the control is at the base of the carriage and is labelled n (the tuck symbol) and — and is called the pick knob.
On the Chunky and double knit ribbers, this third control is a lever at the top of the tension dial.
Again it has two positions, labelled 0 and n on the Silver and Knitmaster and R and P on the Brother.
When the set levers (cam levers, or ET levers) are set to knit, the third control has no effect.
Now move one of the set (cam or ET) levers to the upper position.
Position the third control to the slip position — that's — on Silver and Knitmaster standard and fine gauge machines, R on Brother machines.
Empty on Toyota and 0 on Silver and Knitmaster Chunky and double knit machines,.
Pass the carriage across and back.
You'll find the needles make the knitting movement going one way, but hardly move at all in the other.
So, if you'd been knitting, you would have knitted one way and slipped the other.
Now put the third control to the alternative position (tuck for Toyota, P for Brother and n for Silver and Knitmaster) and pass the carriage across and back.
You'll see the knit movement going one way and the tuck movement the other.
NOW RETURN THIS CONTROL TO THE SLIP POSITION .
The direction control comes from the set (cam or ET) levers.
The one nearest the knitting, at the beginning of the row, controls what happens on that row.
To summarise, the set (cam or ET) levers have two positions.
In the lower position the carriage knits, in the upper position it tucks or slips.
The choice between tuck and slip is made by the third control.
So, how does this help us with the circular rows we do during the cast on sequence?
Well, if the main carriage slips while the ribber knits going one way, and then the ribber slips while the main bed knits going the other way, you are knitting in a circle.
I hope you can now set the carriages to do this for yourself, but if you're stuck the carriage settings are shown in Figure 1.
Set the carriages for circular knitting and pass them together (but without the connecting arm) across the back, watching how the needles move.
Trace the path the yarn will take, which needles will knit on each row.
Try it for both the clockwise and anti-clockwise circle.
On Silver and Knitmaster punchcard machines, you will sometimes want to knit circular rows with the punchcard in. (if the garment is knitted using a punchcard, you don't want to have to remove the card every time you cast on).
You can't knit circular rows using the settings given in Figure 1 when using a punchcard.
The problem is that when a punchcard is in, with the side lever back on , the carriage will interact with the card.
So when the carriage is set to slip, with the side lever (nearest the knitting) on  and you want the carriage to knit, the carriage will instead slip and knit according to the card, just as if you were knitting a slip stitch pattern.
The slip row of the cycle is alright as, when the side lever is on 0, the carriage in effect ignores the card and all the needles still slip.
So the problem when knitting the circular rows arises on the row of the cycle during which the main carriage has to knit.
For that row, the main carriage has to be set as for stocking stitch, that is with cam lever on 0.
I know some knitters find it hard to remember which row that is.
So I teach them to set up the carriages as if there were not a card in.
Then before each row of the circular rows, they must look at the side lever of the main carriage that is nearest the knitting.
If it's back on , you should put the cam lever to 0, if it's forward on 0, put the cam lever to slip.
I've also written this out as a table in Figure 2.
I've written two articles now in a series that's supposed to be practical and is intended to get you knitting on your ribber and we've not yet knitted a single row.
However, next month we will actually start knitting.
This exercise explaining the carriage controls is included in Ann's Open Learning Video Course for the Ribber — Course No.7C.
See advertisement on Page 75.
TALKING POINT
MADE TO MEASURE
As I sit here with my cardigan sleeves rolled up, I reflect on the two alternatives — having them unrolled and falling over the typewriter keys or ignoring the instructions and making the sleeves a more suitable length in the first place.
THE CAPTIVE KNITTER
When you first come to machine knitting the most important thing, naturally, is to learn how it operates and then to make a few garments.
Most of us religiously plough through the manual, certainly a good way to start, finally making our first effort, say a fully fashioned stocking stitch sweater.
No one can take away the exhilaration of completing that first garment and, because everybody in the family needs sweaters, if it doesn't fit one person it will fit another.
It's only as their wardrobes become full that the problem arises; garments that turn out the wrong size are going to fill one person's space more than another's.
A greater problem arises at the stage where you have made the article to order and it's not quite right.
Before you come up against this situation you will have realised that the manual and ‘first garments’ books are intended for the Ms/Mrs/Mr Average Figure.
Whoever wrote it or designed those basic garments knew that you would be struggling to learn all you could in the shortest possible time and that to give you concise diagrams and stitch and row numbers would cut down any need for extra calculations by you.
This is where we should consider what shape and size this average person might be.
After all, we may be learning as we go along but it isn't long before we discover that not everybody has a sylph-like waist or arms that with a little stretch will trail along the floor!
We don't want to go on forever making lovely things that don't suit us (notice this is a useful expression for ‘too small’) simply because some knitting pattern has told us how many rows and stitches to work.
Making things which look just that bit better is so easy, it's worth a little extra trouble and will surely take you out of the learner stage.
BREAKING FREE
It seems a bit trivial to ask whether you have measured those parts of yourself that always give trouble?
Take, for example, sleeve lengths.
Why won't I admit that I must have the shortest arms in the world?
I, who cannot reach anything on the top shelf at the supermarket?
I, whose family offer to bring the stepladder if I plan to point the skirting board?
For years I used to knit exactly the number of rows quoted in the instructions, especially when I was trying to get friendly with the machine.
that was not too bad until the advent of the blissfully easy ‘dropped shoulder’ line.
As a designer I was aware that with the underarm shaping removed the seam would be at least two inches longer but I must admit the sleeves tended to look out of proportion if that was allowed for.
This variation becomes even more compounded when you think about the extremely over-sized sweaters that are common today — a sweater a sweater that is about 24 inches across looks really strange with 16 inch sleeves, rather like flaps — so the designer adds the usual sleeve length.
There you have it; myself, the captive knitter with short arms, wearing a garment with sleeves that are probably too long even for Ms Average.
I noted last week, while I hung like the average orang-outang from a strap in a train on the London underground, gazing about at travellers' knitteds, that many of them had cuffs rolled up.
It isn't only sleeves; look at those enormous sweaters.
They're great aren't they, covering a multitude of peculiarities, but even they can sometimes do with a little adjustment, sizewise.
Not only do the size diagrams in the magazine indicate the measurements of the pieces, they can also tell you the proportions of the finished garment.
Do you really want a sweater that is as wide as it's long?
That depends upon your own measurements, doesn't it?
We know about the lovely girls who model, they look wonderful in everything, but how about someone like Ma Larkin?
Would she want to wear a sweater as wide as it's long?
Come to think of it, maybe she would.
The point is, you do not have to work the garment exactly to the proportions given if you have concluded that you would prefer some minor adjustment…
MATHS OR PRE-SHAPERS?
Some people, upon seeing a title like that, would automatically opt for the pre-shaping method since maths is quite often a dirty word.
Yes, you can rely on the various methods by which you draw a shape on a chart and it tells you automatically how many stitches and rows you need but for those machines that are not so sophisticated you are left with simple maths.
If, for example, all you wanted to do was to reduce the sleeve length, you could (provided an alternative length was given) use a shorter length given for a smaller size.
By looking at the diagram though, you will probably see that the smaller sleeve length is also narrower at the top than the measurements in your size.
To make sure that you get a shorter sleeve without a narrower top you simply need to reduce the number of rows worked.
It doesn't take a BSc to work it out, especially for a chunky machine where the number of rows given is often very few.
You will know how many rows there should be to the inch (centimetre), all you need to do is to work a number of rows less than given in the instructions before finishing the sleeve.
How many?
Well, if, for example, the tension has 20 rows to four inches (ten centimetres) and you want the sleeve say, two inches (five centimetres) shorter, just work ten rows less.
While the maths is so simple what is not so simple is deciding where and when to adapt a pattern.
This often comes about by trial and error.
For yourself you will soon tell if your garments are constantly too small or large, too long or short.
Take a good long look at yourself in a mirror, with and without the wrongly-sized items.
Tell yourself honestly whether it's the garment that's wrong or your estimation of your own proportions.
If you know that a slightly longer sweater will make you look slimmer and you want to look that way, it is up to you to examine the diagram before you knit and work accordingly.
you are on to a good thing, you'll end up with knitteds that suit you because they fit.
QUESTION TIME
Pat shares some of the problems she has solved and tips she has been given before answering the questions raised at this month's meeting.
It is amazing how resilient some yarns can be.
We were discussing the yarn ‘Hobby’ at the club and some members were saying it could be re-used, even though it had been thoroughly steam pressed, worn and washed for years.
It just has to be unpicked, wound into balls, reknitted and resteamed.
One of the members went one better by telling us she had made a shadow pleated skirt which, by mistake, was put into the ‘whites’ wash and finished up a quarter of its original size, ruined beyond restoration — so everyone though.
However, our intrepid knitter resteamed it (In-Tec method) and, lo and behold, it stretched to its original length and looked as good as new.
Recently I had a frustrated 'phone call from a club member.
‘Why, oh why, do I get mispatterning on the second side of my jumper?
I use a Knitmaster 700.’
She didn't believe me when I said I was sure it was because she wasn't taking the carriage far enough over to the right, clearing the pattern selector.
She was QUITE sure she did.
However, at out next meeting she agreed that this had been the problem.
Watching herself very carefully as the shaping increased at the neck, she realised how easy it was to stop just short by an inch or so and not clear the selector.
At the next meeting one member brought in her ‘mistake’(how grateful we always are to knitters who share ‘mistakes’.
How frustrating it is when other people's knitting always goes right and outs has ‘hiccups’!)
She was knitting to cars as one single motif on her Silver Reed but had put the point cams on incorrectly and had one car in the middle and two half cars either side.
This is easily done if the point cams are not placed exactly in the 24 stitch placings.
Next we moved on to the ‘enlarger’ on the E6000.
One knitter wanted just an ordinary pattern in stitch Pattern A, starting on R1.
She didn't want to ‘enlarge’ or ‘alter’it, but no matter how she tried, the machine would not knit the pattern.
I asked what she had been knitting in Pattern A before and she recalled that she had been using a pattern where she had used the ‘enlarge’ and had asked it to start on R8.
Now for this new pattern she had said ‘No’ to ERASE and, therefore, the instruction was still in the consul to start on R8.
She either had to say ‘YES’ to ERASE and wipe the slate clean, or alter the instruction in the ‘enlarge’to start on R0.
I must admit that, like this lady, I do tend to say ‘NO’ to ERASE.
I have accidently wiped out too many things.
I only say ‘YES’ when I stop and think very carefully about what is programmed in.
We had a punchcard in class the other day which would not catch on to the ‘cogs’ and allow itself to rotate.
On examination, the car had been cut badly and now instead of a neat hole which the teeth of the cog could grab, the hole was broken and nothing would make the machine accept this card.
So, when you cut a punchcard at the bottom, cut into the card and not through the holes.
(See figure 1.)
Also, do remember to trim the edges of the card at the sides where the cards are clipped together.
Failure to do this will stop the card rotating properly.
(See figure 2.)
When I knit the waistband of a skirt (using separate method), I return the skirt in two halves, but, as Val reminded me the other day, it is quicker to do it all at once and here is the method:— Join back seam (sideways knitted skirt) or all seams.
Work out how many stitches are required for the WHOLE waistband.
Cast on over this number, in waste yarn and knit about 10 rows.
Knit 1 row nylon cord (optional).
Main yarn, MT+1, knit 1 row.
MT-1, knit half depth of waistband (about 12–16 rows).
MT+3, knit 1 row.
MT-1, knit 2 rows (or number chosen).
Pick up first row in main colour.
Remove waste yarn.
Knit 1 row.
Put one half of these waistband stitches in HP.
With wrong side of skirt facing you, pick up ‘stitches’ from half the top of skirt, putting them on to the needles that are in WP.
Set carriage for hold and knit 1 row over these stitches in work and cast them off.
(Knit another row at tension 10 if you want to latch off.)
Take remaining waistband stitches from HP to WP.
Pick up the ‘stitches’ from second half of top of skirt, placing them on these remaining needles.
Knit 1 row and cast off in same manner.
This method is also ideal if you have to reknit a neckband or have  sewn up the second shoulder in error.
Thanks Val.
Q I can knit in double jacquard and have made a couple of garments, but would very much like to knit a single motif.
I can knit plain jacquard happily with the ‘Striper’ card.
I have a Knitmaster machine.
A Knit in plain jacquard until you are ready to do the motif.
Stop with the carriage at the left.
Change to the single motif card and lock.
Knit one row (the last row of previous pattern).
Put Magic cams on to the carriage and place the point cams where you wish the motif to go.
Release the card (you don't need to set to ‘slip’, you are already there) and knit one row.
Col 2.
Knit 2 rows.
Col 1.
Bring all needles outside of motif area to HP.
Knit 1 row.
Repeat.
Notice that each time to knit in colour 1, you must bring needles outside motif to HP.
If you have a Brother machine, the method is the same up to Col 2.
Then put all selected needles outside of motif area back to WP.
Knit 1 row and repeat.
Col 1.
Bring out all needles outside motif area to HP.
Knit 1 row and repeat.
Brother models that have the single motif cams, can use this but you still have to bring the needles forward to HP when using Col 1.
Q I have the Brother KR850 which has the lili buttons.
How do I use them and what do they do?
A To use them you take three actions.
1
Put the Swing Lever to the central position.
2
Put both PR levers UP.
3
Turn the two knobs either side of the ribber carriage to lili.
Note, on the protection strip, you have red marks ————.
Bring up some needles on the ribber bed only and have the first needle on a red mark and the last needle in a space (not on a mark).
With the ribber carriage separated from the main carriage (without yarn) take it slowly across these needles and you will note that ALTERNATE needles come higher than the others.
These higher ones only will KNIT.
Going back the other way, those needles which just knitted will rest and only the other ones will knit; for example, going from right to left the first and alternate needles KNIT, going back from left to right, the second and alternate needles knit.
If you forget this needle set up and have the needles starting and finishing on a red mark (or on a blank at both ends), the same set of needles will work both ways, the others won't have a turn and after three rows, you are all jammed up!
It makes a firmer fabric than an every needle rib, makes a double jacquard pattern shorter and truer to the actual pattern and, also, you can use it for the plain rows instead of the ‘striper’ card if you like the texture.
Warning — you cannot cast on in this method.
Cast on normally, then you can go immediately into it.
If you are really interested, make a tension swatch, say 50 stitches and 50 rows, using the normal method of jacquard, then another swatch using the lili button method and you will see that the latter makes a much shorter fabric.
Q Whilst still on double jacquard, can you only use the finer yarns?
A When using an ‘every needle rib’ set up (same number of needles on main bed as on ribber) then really, to be kind to your machine, a three-ply is about as thick as you should go.
However, if, after casting on, you rearrange the needles on the ribber bed to a 1×1, then you can use four-ply with the benefit of ‘no floats’ and a fabric that looks more like single bed Fair Isle.
Q I have some very thick hand knitting yarn and want to know if there is any way I can utilise it for my standard gauge machine?
A Have you tried WEAVING with it?
If it is too thick to weave on every row, you could try card 1 and weave for two rows, knit two rows and so on.
If that still comes out too thick, weave for one row, knit two rows and so on.
Another possibility is to ‘e’ wrap the weaving yarn around selected needles.
Bring out about every third needle to HP and ‘e’ wrap around each needle, knit two plain rows, ‘e’wrap, knit two rows and so on.
Do not make any attempt to try and ‘knit’ with this yarn, will you?
You could, of course, buy one of the super Chunky machines — but that's another story!
Q I have an ugly coloured, fairly fine yarn.
I have loads of it but hate the colour.
Any suggestions?
A If you put it in with another colour, all you get are ‘streaks’ which won't be much good as you are trying to change the colour.
You could invest in, or borrow a yarn twister.
This will enable you to make a thicker yarn by twisting several yarns together which will give a tweed effect when knitted up.
You can get some very interesting results this way.
Alternatively, does your machine do PLATING?
This is the best way to ‘alter’ a colour.
I had some peach poodle yarn which was far  too ‘peachy’ for my liking.
I put it with a fine one-ply in cream and the difference is amazing.
To plate, look for the instructions in your manual, it is quite easy, once you are threaded up.
A tip for threading up Silver Reed or Knitmaster machines.
Take the carriage right outside the end of the bed, still on the bed.
Thread up the second yarn with a long needle or bodkin and thread this second yarn into the correct slot.
Again study your manual.
Sometimes this yarn does not catch in on R1, but starts its work.
What happens when you ‘plate’ is that you get the main yarn appearing on one side of the fabric and the plating yarn on the other side.
Swap these over to try the other way before you decide which is best.
This changes, subtly, the colours and tones down the most garish of shades.
You can also create a lovely effect by using tuck stitch with plating.
Remember, you are knitting the two thicknesses of the yarn on each stitch, so allowance must be made for the stitch size.
You can also use your yarn for weaving, which by combining it with another fine yarn, will lighten, darken or brighten it up considerably and leave you with a beautiful fine fabric.
Enough for this issue — happy knitting everyone and remember, a mistake is never a mistake, it's a feature!
TALKING TOYOTA
WEAVING PATTERNS
Part 2 Have fabric — how to use it?
Until now you may well have been making samples only 60 stitches wide.
While these are very useful for your sample file you will probably be anxious for ideas on how to use these new fabrics.
If you have made cloth with quite a coarsely textured yarn then the resulting quality is possibly rather stiff.
Compare your fabric with similar bought ones.
Ask yourself what you would have bought this cloth for.
It will no doubt suit a good top coat, or perhaps cushion covers or possibly a bed cover.
However, if you are already a keen needlewoman the answer to using this type of fabric is what we call ‘cut and sew’.
In other words, buy a good dressmaking pattern of a suitable garment, look at the pattern layout and make a length of cloth to suit the widest section the patter.
Then use your length of cloth to suit the widest section of the pattern.
then use your length of cloth as though you had purchased it from a bolt of fabric in a shop.
Before you actually cut the cloth, test it for strength, washing (should you consider this a possibility) and test it also for pressing.
Your first sample piece will be ideal for all these tests.
If the material will take pressing then press the whole length and block it out to its finished dimensions well before you attempt any cutting.
If possible you should press and block at least 24 hours before you want to start.
This will set the stitches and make handling easier.
Some of these cloths will be interlines and it might be a good notion to try adding some of the iron-on lining to the wrong side while you are pressing.
This will make cutting very much easier, it will set the cut edges completely and all the cut sections will retain their shape.
The lining will be hidden since a garment receiving this type of treatment deserves to be lined as well as interlined.
After this preparation the dressmaking technique can proceed, using the appropriate seaming that your own sewing machine offers, zig-zag stitch and/or overlocking stitch (possible the most suitable to keep the fabric supple at the seams).
If you do not have much dressmaking ability but still want to make this type of use of the woven material produced by your knitting machine, you could well turn to the diagrams that most machine knitting patterns supply.
You will frequently see a garment in a shape that suits pattern stitches and fabrics other than those suggested in the accompanying instructions.
All you need to do is to draw up the pattern shapes to full size on to brown paper and use this as a pattern for your cloth.
It is better to do this before you even begin to make the fabric so that you can test the pattern size against you (only a rough guide since the paper is flat) and you can measure the widest pattern section to work out how wide you need to make your cloth.
The diagrams for patterns will have a narrow seam allowance incorporated but add a few stitches if you think your seams will be well within the drawn edges.
Many of the knitting pattern diagrams are very simple shapes and make drawing up to full size and shaping, as far as armhole and neck, quite basic.
With the cut and sew method any rather geometric shaping that doesn't suit either your fabric or the finished look can always be adjusted in the sewing, by sewing in a curved line round a squared cutting line.
further alterations can take place at will, when you are finishing off, by adding piping or braiding to neaten neck edges and so on.
You do not need to be a dressmaker to use the cut and sew method, although using sewing machine speeds things up.
If you are making a jacket, hand sewing will serve just as well since you would not hesitate to hand sew a knitted jacket.
Tacking and fitting a garment of this kind is always useful and then you can simply backstitch or mattress seam the edges.
Many straight edges can be joined by picking up the edges, right sides together, on to the needlebed.
Then, using matching yarn at a standard tension and needles at E position, knit one row at tension 10 and cast off.
you will have a neat and flexible edge with no hand sewing.
A quick tip for this method is that if you work an extra row before casting off you can simply remove the stitches from the needlebed and, using the latch tool or a crochet hook, cast off the stitches away from the machine whenever it suits you.
For those familiar with the linking method of sewing seams that method can be used to join the pieces and no doubt the machine provides suitable instructions.
Using woven fabrics for household articles seems appropriate because many of the samples when they are finished have the right feel and substance for using in the home.
Cushion covers are a delight, rapidly worked and easy to make up.
The edges of woven machine knit cloth are neat and firm and can be joined with the narrowest of seams and a single row of double crochet along the opening edge will be sufficient before inserting a zip fastener.
Do not forget to test the sample piece for washing and pressing ability.
After that there is no limit, you can mix and match colours as you will, altering the look of a room in a matter of minutes.
Throw-over bedspreads are another great use for the thicker woven lengths.
Make them to whatever width you care to but it is advisable to divide the desired throw-over width into suitable panels, rather than to find it too narrow and have to add little strips to either side.
Once you have decided on the width of each  section, work the lengths and join the pieces.
the seams, however, neat, will be improved by a deliberate decoration, for example, some matching bought braid, a long plait which could end in a tassel at the floor end, or a further narrow piece of matching Fair Isle or even a different woven pattern, stitched on to conceal the join.
Matching fringes give a rich finish or perhaps you could add a very heavy tassel to each of the corners to weight them.
LIGHTWEIGHT WEAVING
As we have pointed out, there is no need to restrict your weaving to the solid fabrics, lovely as they are.
Once you have the technique mastered, you will want to try out interesting yarns and looser tensions.
By combining these different ideas you will find fabrics that resemble woven linen, hopsack-look cloth and even lacy-look materials.
These can be used as cut and sew but because they are softer they will also lend themselves to shaping into familiar garments, say blouson sweaters, jackets and so on.
You can work to diagrams of patterns that you already know and like or try out new ones that may suit the fabric rather better.
Woven fabric is especially good with shirt looks and a classic finish, particularly since the seams may need firm sewing.
If you think that the result of your soft weaving effort will not have enough body on its own you can always use it as a supplement to another knitted pattern stitch.
A body section could be made in a standard four-ply small pattern stitch, possibly a tiny tuck pattern, cast off straight at the underarms, with a woven pattern used for the yoke and sleeves.
If the work is very loose it will make splendid soft sleeves for a patterned sweater and the cuffs will serve to draw the sleeves in.
This allows your sleeves to be knitted, weaving as you go, without your having to consider any shaping at the sides.
A softly woven dress would also look attractive with collar, cuffs or edging in blending simple plain machine knitting with the added bonus that these plain edgings are serving to lock the soft edges in place.
Do not forget that if you have worked the shoulders in a soft fabric, it is better to stitch a piece of tape into the shoulder seam to ‘hold’ it in place.
you can also eliminate the need for buttonholes in a woven fabric, since it takes kindly to crochet edges which can also include loop fastenings.
Heavy weaving will easily take bought fancy fastenings and then, neat machine knitted button and buttonhole bands can always be worked in the background yarn.
Finally, you can buy easily applied press stud fasteners and by sewing on ribbon behind the edges you will produce strong, simple fastenings.
Having tried out these various methods you might consider them too time-consuming to use for large areas but they are so attractive that they can be put to good use as trimmings.
While it was suggested in the previous paragraph that woven fabrics can be edged with matching plain knitted sections, plain knitting can be equally well edged with woven patterns.
By working your experimental pieces into a narrow strip you will be able to see the effect of, say, a woven pattern braid, or matching plain and coloured collar pieces.
You can compensate for using more time working a really special border and so on by speeding up on the main sections.
For example, a plain jacket built on the Scandinavian shape, basically a tube split up centre front, with a slit at each upper side edge for straight cast off edge sleeves, could have woven strip front fastenings.
Cuffs and stand-up collar.
If you cast on and work widthways the work will grow in no time and you merely need to work until the strip is slightly longer than you need so that you can cut it to fit after sewing it on.
You can either work it to be doubled over to the wrong side or make a matching strip of plain knitting as a facing.
Add to this some striking metal loop fasteners and you have a million-dollar look jacket.
REMEMBER
1.
You must be prepared to give some time to experimenting with various yarns and tensions until the quality of woven fabric feels just right.
2.
You will need to adjust the tension dial to accommodate the rather thicker yarn you are using.
3.
If the yarn is at the front of the machine, on your lap or on the floor, let the weaving yarn run through your fingers and keep it in gentle control.
If you are holding it too tightly it will draw up the knitting which will become very tight and solid.
4.
Always bring the first needle to D position and make sure that the weaving yarn is caught in the guide so that it can be directed correctly into the path of the main carriage.
5.
Do not restrict yourself to the punchcards supplied with the machine.
Once you have the technique in hand you can use 24 stitch repeats by punching them into 12 stitch repeat cards, provided that they are a repeat of either four stitches, six stitches or 12 stitches.
Added to this, you can use the push button mechanism to select needles for your very own weaving patterns and use novelty yarns that you would not normally be able to use on this machine.
ANIMATIONS
A new series in which Norma brings to your knitting machine some of the wonderful animals whose life in the wild is at risk of extinction and without which the world would be poorer.
If one looks at the lists of endangered specials it is apparent that many are large animals.
It is possible to consider that the evolutionary process is much to blame.
For instance one can readily see how insects adapt themselves to many environments but the larger the animal the less likely it is to survive if the environment drastically changes.
Many of these animals not only have to contend with a changing landscape due to human development (!) but also human greed.
We tend to isolate ourselves from the rest of the natural world and yet we are very much a part of it.
As an animal becomes extinct we lost an integral part of nature and ourselves.
It is out duty to protect and support what we have so nearly destroyed.
Hopefully we have not left it to late.
In this series I hope to not only provide you with a list of the endangered animals, but also some fascinating information about each animal and the way it lives.
I would also like to show that it is not all doom and gloom and that, finally, steps are being taken to remedy the dire situation.
RHINOCEROS
Twelve million years ago the rhinoceros' ancestors roamed the earth wandering freely over much of Africa and Europe.
Today, however, it is a very different story with only five species remaining and each one endangered.
In Africa there remains the white rhinoceros and the black rhinoceros.
They are respectively the second and third largest land animals, the elephant being the largest.
The white rhinoceros can reach a massive 17 feet long and weigh over three tons.
The Indian rhinoceros, Javan rhinoceros and the Sumatran rhinoceros all inhabit South East Asian rain forests.
Although rhinos have been depicted as rather vicious stampeding animals they are in fact sedentary and often solitary.
 They like nothing more than wallowing in a cool mud bath in the mornings when the sun is not too high and then resting in the shade of an acacia tree during the scorching heat which follows.
It is during the night that they find most of their food which is dew smothered vegetation.
The main cause of their depletion is poaching.
Rhinos are mainly hunted for their horns which are then used in the Middle East for ceremonial dagger handles and also ground up for so called healing properties.
Rhinos were also considered a great trophy from a day's hunting.
Rhino numbers are so reduced that a ban has been placed on hunting them.
In some places a poacher my be shot on sight, but for many the risk is worth it as a rhino horn can fetch up to $4,500 (UD) on the black market.
In Kenya 20,000 black rhinos were reduced to 500 in under ten years.
Dehorning programmes are being carried out in parts of Africa to reduce the poaching.
It remains to be seen how a rhino, which takes many years to evolve and which has evolved with a horn, will learn to survive without one.
Rhinos are also now being relocated to sanctuaries which are surrounded by high voltage fencing.
Her captive breeding programmes are being attempted.
SUGGESTED YARN COLOURS AND DESIGN IDEAS
Rhinos are grey in colour, even the white rhino.
The design is of a black rhino.
The design is of a black rhino.
Either natural colours such as savannah yellow with the rhino in brown, or a more striking emerald green with the rhino in black, would look good.
I have used striped bands ruched to resemble the rhino's hide.
The design can be knitted as a single motif of 80 stitches by 80 rows, could be doubled in size by using the double length and double width buttons for a very large rhino, or could be knitted as a savannah scene with a second single motif of a acacia thorn tree.
If you would like a mylar sheet template of this design, please send £1.75 and a large SAE to .
Other designs by Norma Steinberg and Angela Gordon are African Animals and African Prints , two booklets of mylar sheet templates.
Each booklet costs £2.50 and please send a large SAE as above.
The patterns from both booklets are also available on disk (with variations, 53 patterns in total) in format for Brother disk drives and for DesignaKnit 4.
The price is £5.95 and please state the format required when ordering.
CREATIVE INTARSIA
COLLARS
This month, I have created an intarsia design on a collar, to coincide with the launch of my latest book ‘Terry's Techniques’— Book 2 — Collars.
The book contains six different types of collar, all of which can be work separately, on top of a basic round neck jumper.
For the latter, use either you own favourite pattern, or else the one which is given in the book.
Types of collar include square, triangular, lace, hooded and so on.
Readers who have been to one of my knit-club talks, will remember the prototype shown there which I referred to as the ‘Knit-club Jumper’, because of the ease of making the basic jumper look different at each club meeting, just by changing the collar!
For this intarsia collar, follow the written instructions at the same time as following the intarsia chart.
I have used shades of orange and yellow for my stylised flowers but you, of course, can choose your own favourite colours.
Deep reds or shades of mauve would also make wonderful colour combinations.
The following pattern is only given as a guide to what to do, so that you can adapt it to suit your own yarn and jumper pattern, if necessary.
It is written for the standard gauge machine, using four-ply yarns, giving approximately eight stitches and ten rows to one inch.
For abbreviations, please see last page.
SILVER SCENE
Over the last few months I have been working my way through the variation switches.
This month it is the turn of number six, the double jacquard switch.
This switch automatically programs any single-bed Fair Isle pattern for double jacquard which has only two colours in a row.
There can be more than two colours in the pattern, but only two of them will appear on any particular row.
For double jacquard with MORE than two colours in a row, use the Design controller and the multi-coloured jacquard program (in earlier manuals this is knit as ‘several colours in one row’.
the jacquard switch is not used with this program.
I wrote about multi-coloured jacquard and the Design Controller in the November 1991 issue.
Older machines can also knit jacquard with more than two colours in a row, but for this knitters have to separate the colours and mark the mylar sheet in the necessary way for themselves.
The jacquard switch isn't then used.
Double jacquard is Fair Isle knitted with the ribber.
This means there are not floats.
Knitters often ask me about knitting double jacquard, saying that they don't like the floats on single-bed Fair Isle fabrics.
I always get the impression that they believe that double jacquard is just like single-bed Fair Isle but without the floats.
That is, they think it's knitted in the same yarns and feels just the same as single -bed Fair Isle.
However, it is important to realise that double jacquard is quite a different fabric to single-bed Fair Isle and usually requires different yarns.
When knitted in the conventional way, all the needles (in the required area) are working; that is, you use a full-needle-rib arrangement.
This means that you need to use a fine yarn, two- or three-ply for standard gauge machines.
Four-ply is too thick and will cause the carriage to jam.
As well as a ribber you need a double-bed colour changer (YC5 or YC6).
Once colour is knitted at a time and you change colour every two rows.
The YC5 or YC6 fits both the fine and standard gauge machines.
There isn't a colour changer for the double knit or Chunky gauges.
Silver Reed tell me the double knit ribber does have a yarn holder and this holds the yarns you are not using at the end of the needle bed, making changing by hand easier.
At least when you're knitting on the bigger gauges you have fewer rows to knit than on a fine or standard gauge.
So changing manually is a possibility.
For a Chunky machine and a full needle rib setting use double knit yarn.
On a double knit machine, use four-ply.
As I've said, you change yarn every two rows, which most knitters seem to know, even if they've never tried double jacquard.
But it isn't quite that simple.
The no. 1 right hand light must be on (as well as the jacquard light when you start knitting) and you have to start by knitting a single row in the background colour from right to left , then change to the second colour.
After the first row, you do change colours every two rows.
If you don't start in the correct way with a single row in the background colour, you will find you've knitted a ‘nonsense’.
If you understand what it happening, then you are likely to get the above sequence correct.
When knitting double jacquard, the cam lever is set to the jacquard or slip position.
On the first row, the main carriage knits the background stitches and slips the pattern stitched for row one of the pattern.
When you change colour, the no. 1 light changes to the left hand light, so that you knit the pattern stitches and slip the background stitches, still for row one of the pattern.
At the end of the second row, the Design Controller moves on to the next row of the pattern, ready for you to knit the pattern stitches of the second row of the pattern on your third knitting row.
If you're knitting with the mylar sheet, it moves on at the start of the second row and is scanned at the end of the second row.
At the end of your third row of knitting, you change colour, the no. 1 light changes again and you knit the background stitches of the second row of the pattern.
So you are knitting background-pattern-pattern-background.
Each row of the pattern as marked on the mylar sheet takes two rows to knit.
You may knit the background or the pattern stitches of each row first, depending on whether you're on the first two, or the last two, rows of the four-row cycle.
All this is happening on the main bed, of course.
The ribbers on the SRP50, the double knit and Chunky gauge are set to knit in both directions (set levers on 1, pick knob on —).
So the reverse of the fabric has stripes of two rows of each of the colours being used.
The SRP60N ribber can be set like this, but you can also use the autoset lever to produce a fabric that has only a single colour on the reverse.
When the autoset cam driver is placed in its holder at the left end of the ribber bed, the autoset lever will be reversed every time the carriages go into the colour changer.
The set levers are positioned on 1 (with the pick knob on -).
When the autoset lever is on 1 the ribber will knit, when it is on 0 the ribber will slip.
Every two rows, the autoset lever changes from 1 to 0 and vice versa, so only one of your two colours knits on the ribber.
If you want the background colour to knit on the ribber, start with the autoset lever on 1, if you want the pattern colour to knit, start with the autoset lever on 0.
The fabric will be different to the ‘striped’ jacquard.
SAMPLE 1 Basic jacquard, ribber knits every needle every row
SAMPLE 3 Jacquard knitted with SRP60N ribber using autoset lever.
Pattern colour  knitted on the ribber
The fabric may also vary according to which colour you choose to knit on the ribber.
Pattern 6–39 from the EC1 pack has large areas knitted in the background colour only.
If you knit the background colour on the  ribber, floats of the pattern colour lie between the beds and are trapped between the rows of main colour stitches on the ribber and main bed.
If you knit the pattern colour on the ribber, in the areas where the main colour is knitting on its own the knitting isn't joined between front and back.
There is a sort of closed pocket in those areas.
As a further variation, on the SRP60N and SRP50 ribbers you can use the RJ1 ribber carriage.
This carriage knits bird's-eye double jacquard.
The controls are set to knit alternate stitches on every row.
Again the fabric is different to either of the previous jacquards.
One point to watch with this carriage is that you must have an even number of needles on the ribber bed.
On every row the ribber will knit the second fourth, sixth (and so on) needles.
If you have an odd number of needles, you end up knitting the same needles on every row, so that after a few rows the carriage jams.
There is a fourth double jacquard fabric that can be knitted.
For this one, every needle on the main bed knits, but only every third or fourth on the ribber.
This means that you can use thicker yarns, the ones you use for ordinary single-bed Fair Isle.
This fabric will have vertical lines on the right side where the ribber needles are, but this can add to its attraction.
You can't use the RJ1 carriage with this needle arrangement.
Try knitting each variation in the same design.
You can then see the way the fabrics differ.
The jacquard switch can be used in combination with switches 2 to 5 on the 580 and the modular electronics.
On the earlier electronics, you can't use the double-length switch on the 580 and modular electronics, the knitting sequence is the same as when it is not in use.
Double jacquard can extend the range of patterns that you can use for ‘Fair Isle’ or two-colour work.
You no longer have to worry about the length of floats.
I also find it useful for patterns which have a lot of single stitches in them.
These can either disappear or more often look larger and uneven in single-bed Fair Isle.
Knitted in double jacquard, the single stitches will be the same size as all the others and the fabric stays even.
My son, then aged 10, asked me to knit him a sweater with a large single motif on it.
the motif has many single stitches and I felt it wouldn't work at all in single-bed Fair Isle.
So I knitted it in double jacquard.
The fabric turned out very even, including around the edge of the motif.
I also found it was a very practical fabric for a small boy.
Whereas he normally came in from playing with threads hanging from his sweaters, this one proved very hard to catch and pull.
This caused me to regrade double jacquard.
As well as having it in the luxury class, I now also include it in the practical, hard-wearing, well worth-the-effort class!
SAMPLE 2 Jacquard knitted with SRP60N ribber using autoset lever.
Main colour only knitted on the ribber
SAMPLE 4 jacquard knitted with RJ1 ribber carriage.
Ribber knits every other needle on every row
DUOMATIC UPDATE
Recently a reader asked ‘What is the Passap method of joining a neckband to a garment?’
This question made me realise that there must be lots of new knitters out there with electronic of Duomatic 80 machines who do not know this technique.
So it is ‘Beginners please’ this month and I do hope that the old hands will bear with me.
Learning to knit on a Duomatic is really quite easy but there are lots of techniques, which can help with making garments, which are not mentioned in the instruction books.
In this article I will try to give you a few tips to make life a little easier.
This month's pattern is knitted in Bramwell's Rania which is a lovely soft yarn, easy to knit and warm and comfortable to wear.
It is, however, not easy to backstitch the neckband through the open loops because of the loops which are part of the construction of the yarn.
So this is an ideal garment for what is commonly known as the Passap method of joining the band to the garment on the machine.
Before you try it on your garment, knit a test piece of band so that you can perfect the technique.
Use a smooth four-ply yarn and you can attach it to an old test piece for a trial run.
NECKBAND
Handle up, orange strippers.
Push up 49 needles on each bed and arranged for 1×1 rib.
Put a pusher into WP under each back bed needle in WP.
Handle down.
Push up all in-between back bed needles.
Set lock to N/N, stitch size 3/3, knit one row.
RC at 000.
Handle up.
Set lock to BX/N, stitch size 4/4, knit to RC27.
Handle down.
Push up all in-between needles on the front bed.
Set lock to CX/CX, stitch size 2 ½/2; ½, knit 2 rows.
Set lock to N/N, stitch size 3 ¼/3; ¼, knit one row.
Set lock to CX/CX, stitch size 4 ½/4; ¼, knit 2 rows.
Set lock to GX/N, stitch size 5 ½/5; ½.
Change to black strippers and knit 3 rows.
Pull yarn down between beds and hold it down.
Set lock to N/GX, stitch size 5½. knit 3 rows.
TO JOIN NECKBAND TO GARMENT
1.
Lay garment (test piece in this case) on the back bed with the right side of the garment facing the ceiling and the neck edge towards you.
2.
Pull hooks of needles on the back bed just through the neck edge.
3.
Transfer front bed stitches on to beck bed needles (at this point you will have a ‘sandwich’ of one back bed stitch, neck edge and one front bed stitch on each back bed needle).
4.
Using yarn from bobbin, knit back by hand through each back bed needle.
Make sure that each loop is fairly large — try pulling the needle back to within approximately one centimetre of non-work position.
Break off yarn at the end.
5.
Drop front bed and turn garment over so that it hangs, wrong side facing you, over the front bed.
6.
using the latch tool and starting from the side where the lock is, latch off each stitch across the work.
Pull the end of the yarn through the last stitch.
Sample l shows the neckband  with the row which was knitted by hand in a contrast colour so that you can see it more clearly.
This method of joining a neckband to a garment is ideal for use with a cut and sew neck.
Cut and sew is very much easier than shaping on the machine so do try it if you have not already done so.
Knit two backs, marking the stitches for the neck width.
Steam or press as directed in the making up instructions of the pattern.
Mark the neckline with a line of tacking stitches.
With a sewing machine and polyester thread to match the garment, set two rows of straight stitches by the tacking stitches.
If your machine has a stretch or ‘living’ stitch facility, use this instead of straight stitch.
With a pair of sharp scissors cut round just above the machine stitches.
Finally, work a row of zig-zag stitching round the cut edge to neaten it.
Join one shoulder of the garment and then proceed with the neckband as above.
Some beginners find that casting off presents a problem, so here is the method which I use:
1.
Carriage on the right.
Transfer all stitches to the front bed, leave back bed needles in working position.
2.
Knit one row N?
N. If you are knitting full needle rib then you can probably leave the stitch size a t the size you have been using, or increase it by half a number.
If you are using Fisherman's rib or tuck stitch, the fabric will stretch widthways when removed from the machine, so you will need to increase the stitch by one and a half or two numbers to prevent a tight cast off.
3.
Drop the front bed and push the ‘knots’ between the beds up towards the back bed with a transfer tool so that the true stitches on the front bed can be seen clearly.
4.
using the yellow latch tool, pick up the left half of the first stitch on the right into the hook.
Push tool down into the second stitch — the first stitch will slip behind the latch and you can ‘crochet’ the second stitch through the first.
Continue in this way across the bed, leaving stitches on the needles as you crochet.
Break the yarn and pull it through last stitch.
5.
Push up front bed.
Push up back bed needles back to non-working position so that the back bed stitches are released from the machine.
Release the front bed stitches in the same way.
Again, this is easier than it seems and far easier to do than to put into words.
Once you have mastered it, it gets easier and easier.
Another little problem which sometimes occurs is that, when going to a full needle setting from rib, you get a row of little holes between the two.
A textured yarn will often hide these but if you want to avoid them then proceed as follows: Finish the rib with the lock on the left of the bed.
Push up all in-between needles on both beds and put the handle down.
Set the lock to CX/CX and, using a small stitch size (try 2 ½/2; ½), knit two rows.
Set the lock to N.N and increase the stitch size.
Knit one row then continue to knit in pattern as desired.
You probably know that, when increasing while knitting with pushers, a pusher must be brought from the blocking rail for each stitch increased.
Also, when decreasing, a pusher must be put back into the blocking rail for every stitch decreased.
When this is being done the blocking rail must be fully closed before you begin to knit again.
It is quite easy, especially on the back bed, to leave the rail held open by a pusher not quite in its proper place.
When this occurs you can and probably will, lost the pattern and that means unravelling which we all want to avoid if possible.
When knitting with pushers and arrow keys, it is essential to take the lock past the stitches being knitted so that the arrow keys can work properly.
This is quite easy with the E6000 as the width of the knitting is programmed into the console, but on the Duomatic 80, when knitting with the Deco and one colour, watch that the lock passes far enough past the right edge of the work to allow the Deco and arrow keys to do their job properly.
Just one more plea.
Do follow the instructions for making up garments.
There will usually be an instruction which tells you to either steam, press, or cover with a damp cloth after blocking pieces so size.
It really is essential that you do this if you want a garment of the correct size and shape.
It takes very little time to do and makes an enormous difference to the finished garment.
I hope that all this is of some help to the new knitters and will encourage them to learn to lover their Duomatics as much as I love mine.
If you have any awful problems, write and ask for help, as we are always please to hear from you here a Machine Knitting Monthly .
Happy knitting.
LATCH ON
SPINNING A YARN
Hands up any knitter who does not have a lot of cones tucked away for use ‘sometime’.
You are either very new to the game, or are terribly strong willed.
If the latter — congratulations!
A lot of us go to Exhibitions and come home with real bargains (or so we tell our husbands!).
But are they bargains?
Sometimes we do very well, but sometimes it is a mistake.
Of course the cones with brand names, sold by the firms we know (and love) are well worth having; often these are sold at a reduction, especially for the Show.
It is the unbranded cones that can cause trouble.
I say ‘can’ because most of us have bought something that proved to be marvellous.
Let us look at the various yarns that are spun on cones.
First of all there is Shetland wool.
This is always spun in oil, but seldom has any indication on the cone.
Have you ever watched seasoned knitted diving into cartons of yarn, coming up with a cone and giving it a good sniff?
The characteristic ‘oily’ smell immediately tells us that this is a cone of Shetland pure wool.
these cones can be a real bargain, since they are usually ‘ends of line’ from the commercial manufacturers and are sold at a very good price.
Unfortunately they are not usually repeatable, so having made a superb jumper for your mother, you will probably be unable to make one for yourself.
For any knitter new to Shetland wool, the work appears very harsh when knitted, but don't be put off, once washed to remove the oil it comes up beautifully soft and fluffy.
However, to achieve a satisfactory result you need to knit at a very loose tension, at least eight, and more probably nine or ten.
Again don't be put off by the appearance of the test piece, washing is the answer.
Some ‘authorities’ suggest using washing-up liquid to get rid of the oil.
I find this a lengthy process, even Nanette Newman's bubbles don't do the job first time.
So I use the ordinary detergents that I keep in the cupboard for hand-washing and this works very well for me.
But like everything else, it is a matter for the individual concerned.
In her book ‘The Ribbing Attachment (Part 1)’, Mary Weaver gives a lot of information about yarns, wool included.
It seems that yarn can be spun in two ways, one with ‘S’ twist and the other ‘Z’twist.
The latter is meant for weaving and, if knitted, will make the garment twist so that one knits a parallelogram instead of a square.
Many of us got caught this way years ago, but I don't think yarns for weaving are sold at Knitting Shows anymore — at least I haven't heard the complaints that I used to do.
It was not only wool that behaved in this manner, some synthetics could do the same thing.
I remember knitting my daughter a summer top in a colour that was fashionable at the time.
There was no brand name on the yarn and the work twisted so badly that she could not wear it.
I was told to press it, but you can guess what happened then — not only was the garment shape twisted, but the fabric itself was distorted.
This went in the rubbish bin and I vowed ‘never again’.
As knitters we still talk about the ‘ply’ of the yarn.
To a spinner this means the number of strands twisted (or plied) together.
So two-ply is two strands and three-ply is three strands and so on.
As far as I can ascertain this notation still applies to some brands of wool, but when we come to synthetics, things are a bit different.
Older knitters (and for that matter ‘wearers’ of knitted garments) tend to view synthetics with suspicion.
I have been told that synthetics are not warm enough on the one hand, or by others that they are too hot!
It is no good trying to convince some folks, if they want pure wool they are going to have it!
All this suspicion arose from the first nylon yarn that appeared on the market.
This was tough, ‘pilled’ in wear and stretched in all directions.
Possibly the latter was due to our handling of it — we were accustomed to pressing woollen garments to within an inch of their lives and we did much the same to our synthetic garments.
I well remember a little cardigan from a High Street store that was given to me for my (then) six-month-old baby.
This garment grew with the child, so she was still wearing it to play in the garden when she was four years old!
Very economical.
There was also an awful type of unbranded ‘floss’ yarn that was even more unpopular than the nylon sold by the well known names in the hand knitting world.
I saw some of this (in hanks) only a few months ago on a stand at a street market.
I wonder if they sold any?
Mind you, I have an idea that this would be good to use as a weaving yarn, but I restrained myself from buying any — I have enough cones in the cupboard, thank you very much.
The old hands at machine knitting glibly talk about ‘two-thirties’ to the bewilderment of the newcomers at the knitting club.
‘Two-thirty’ is an industrial term for fine synthetics.
The ‘two’ refers to the number of strands wound together and the thirty is something to do with the length — I can never remember the exact definition of this bit.
But it doesn't particularly matter to the knitter.
I do know that this is a very fine yarn (hand knitters are pleased to call it ‘one-ply’).
As a rough guide two strands wound together make something approximately like three-ply in thickness and three together are usually reckoned to be about a four-ply. these fine industrial yarns used to be in the ‘odds and ends’ bins, but the manufacturers have caught on to the fact that they are popular with machine knitters, so now they can be bought under a brand name.
These yarns certainly make good, cheap garments, but two or three strands together can create static electricity, so that one strand will make a loop; this is not usually discovered until the work is off the machine.
These loops have a mind of their own, seldom, if ever, appearing on the side seam under the arm, but rather placing themselves right in the middle of the front of a garment!
However, with a little diligence and help of the single end of a transfer tool, they can sometimes by unravelled in the work and since the end is fine it can be darned in at the back.
Sometimes we find cones with a ‘count’ beginning with a three.
These indicate that three strands have been plied together; they are obviously thicker and knit up more or less as a double knitting type yarn.
For this reason they are not so popular with knitters who have standard gauge machines and they don't seem to have caught on for chunky machines, possibly because they are too thick for the former and not thick enough for the latter.
When it comes to cotton on cone this is yet another matter.
Nowadays the manufacturers are producing cottons called two, three and four-ply which I'm told knit up very well on the standard machine.
I'm afraid I haven't experimented with these overmuch, mainly because I have some cottons on cone that are not branded, lurking in the cupboard.
In fact they are some of those I have got from the ‘bargain’ cartons.
Many years ago I knitted myself a sleeveless jumper in mercerised cotton; this stretched in the wash until it was more like a mini-dress.
I never wore it again.
As my knitting acquaintances will tell you, I am neither the shape nor the age for a mini dress!
Why did I buy a number of odd cones of cotton?
Because I also do a fair bit of crochet and these cones (white) are excellent for the crochet collars that have been fashionable for a couple of years.
I also make swans and angels for the Christmas bazaars, but this is a knitting magazine, not one on crochet!
My point is, for little items like this, either knitted or crochet, these odd cones are definitely worth having.
Finally, we must talk about the knitter's friend —‘four-ply’ acrylic.
This is certainly acrylic, but not really ‘four-ply’ since most of these excellent yarns are two strands, ‘plied’together and usually advertised as ‘knits as four-ply’.
Most standard gauge machines like these acrylics, knitting art about tension six or seven, according to the make of machine.
They wear well, too (so the young mothers tell me) since the children's garments are for ever in the washing machine.
In the same bracket we must put the four-ply all-wool that is spun specially for domestic knitting machines and is advertised as ‘machine washable’.
I'm sure it is, but I have never put it to the test, being old fashioned.
I remember a few years ago a lady bought a jumper to the knitting club, displaying it proudly and saying: ‘it's just some out of the washing machine’.
I would like to have said, ‘Yes and it looks like it’.
But I didn't and I daresay both wool and washing machines have improved over the years!
I have just taken a cone of machine washable wool from my shelf, it is sold as ‘four-ply’.
With great difficulty I have ‘unplied’ the end (if there is such a word) and sure enough, there are four strands wound together.
So sometimes four-ply is indeed what it says!
SINGER SPECIAL
SYSTEM 9000 — SCREEN TO FABRIC RELATIONSHIP — Part 1
The Singer System 9000 knitting machines are very versatile indeed in their design creation ability.
The types and varieties of design that are possible on the screen are almost unlimited.
they range from single-colour slip to tuck to multi-coloured jacquard.
Just because of this versatility, it is possible to become confused as to the relationship of what appears on the screen to what will actually happen in the fabric when your design is used for knitting.
so this time I thought we would look at some of the knit options that are available to us from within the 9000 program.
After selecting DESIGN & CREATION from the basic menu screen, we are give the option of several different stitch types available from within the design menu.
The TYPE OF KNITTING menu is displayed on your TV monitor screen.
See Figure 1.
As you can see, there are seven available options as to how your new design will be created on the screen or how a pattern that is already stored will be displayed.
Fancy Patterns: This really does cover many stitch types and is intended for those patterns that are most often used for single colour work, where the design relies on texture rather than contrasting colours to form the pattern.
these include single and double bed tuck, slip, pin-tucks, garter stitch and so on.
Lace patterns: This is self descriptive and is used for lace patterns of all types, whether involving the transfer of garter/lace carriage, or lace created by releasing stitches from the back bed after every two rows.
Fair Isle: Probably the option that is used most frequently to draw designs for fabric where the pattern is made with two or more colours.
Jacquard: The option that is used for designing patterns that are to be used for double-bed, two-colour work and very similar to the Fair Isle option.
Norwegian Jacquard: This stitch design option will allow you to knit many different colours in a design style that is best described as based on the traditional Scandinavian type of pattern, where small designs are laid on to a multi-coloured striped background.
Three-Colour Jacquard: Coloured designs containing three colours in every row.
Four-Colour Jacquard: Coloured designs containing four colours in every row.
So why are we offered all these different ways of creating a design?
The simple answer is that each one uses a different method of sending the final design to the knitting machine itself and this affects the way in which the fabric is actually created.
There is no need to get worried about this as you will see.
Any design to the knitting machine itself and this affects the way in which the fabric is actually created.
there is no need to get worried about this as you will see.
Any design can be created in any of these seven formats and it will not matter on bit that you have used the Fair Isle option to draw a four colour jacquard design.
However, when you come to knit the design, or load it from memory ready to knit, then it does matter, as we shall see later.
So basically for drawing all designs that are to be in a single colour, relying on texture for their effect, I use the Fancy Patterns option.
For drawing all patterns containing more than one colour in the design.
I use the Fair Isle option.
This makes life simpler and there is very little to remember when working this way.
Let's look at what is happening when we use these two options in a little exercise.
From your TYPE OF KNITTING menu, select the Fair Isle option.
The screen changes to the basic design screen.
See Figure 2.
the design screen itself offers the same basic layout whatever design option you choose from the TYPE OF KNITTING menu.
But there are minor differences in the way some of the parts are displayed, depending on the option chosen.
We shall see this when we use the Fancy Patterns in a moment.
At the bottom left corner, I have drawn a simple two-colour pattern as shown in Figure 3.
The design is in just two colours and is displayed as such.
But how will the machine and controller knit this?
The answer is, exactly as you see it on screen.
With the back carriage at the jacquard setting, as shown in your instruction manual for Fair Isle, the electronics will select the needles for the background stitches which will be knitted with colour one from the main yarn feed.
The needles for the stitches which will be knitted with colour one from the main yarn feed.
The needles for the stitches in contrast colour will be selected to the upper position as the carriage crosses the needlebed and picks up colour two from the second yarn feed (the ‘butterfly’.
So this means that when using the Fair Isle option from the design screen, both colours are knitted at the same time within the same row.
Therefore, the Fair Isle option is not only used for creating the design, it also controls the way in which the machine knits the fabric from the design.
This option can be used to draw any design, but should not necessarily be used for the knitting.
So how do we change from drawing in one option to knitting in another?
George answers this question in Part 2, coming next month in the December issue.
SINGER WORLD
I would like to introduce myself to you in my first article for Machine Knitting Monthly.
I have worked with Singer machines for the past seven years, during which time I have come to trust them and admire the work that they produce, which I think cannot be equalled on any other machine.
Previously I ran my own school of machine knitting and also taught machine knitting for the local Education Authority at a nearby college.
I taught on all makes of machine and have also worked in stores and at exhibitions, selling knitting and sewing machines.
I studied for the UCLI in Home Machine Knitting and, on passing both parts of the exam, went on to teach it for three years.
I therefore feel qualified to write to you about the French electronic machines.l
My monthly articles will include techniques which should help you to use and get the best from your machine, but first I will tell you about the back-up services available to Singer knitters.
Singer are now operating Training Centres in various parts of the country.
The tutors are all trained by the company and are competent on all models of the french electronic machines.
Every owner of a new Singer knitting machine is entitled to a training course at one of the official Training Centres.
the purchase of a System 9000 entitles the owner to a two-day course with a one-day follow up six to eight weeks later.
system 624 and 2331 owners are offered a one-day course.
Training Centres are located at the following Singer shops:
In addition to the complimentary courses, others will be available from time to time.
Details and prices can be obtained from .
the Singer magazine, ‘Big Nine Plus’ includes patterns and articles for chunky and standard gauge Singer/Superba machines.
The magazine's Editor, Melinda Lodge, is always on the lookout for interesting features and new designers and from this Autumn, the magazine will also include articles and patterns for sewing, courtesy of Betty Foster who is well known to many of you.
The magazine is quarterly and can be purchased from your local Singer knitting machine stockist, most large newsagents or by subscription from .
The official Singer correspondence course has now been operating for about nine months and has proved to be very popular.
This first course consists of ten lessons covering a wide range of techniques.
Samples have to be knitted for each lesson and submitted for marking.
The samples are then returned to the student with the next lesson.
The price of the ten-lesson course is £50 and details are available from Singer at the address above.
Further courses are planned and will be available shortly.
A range of videos designed to help Singer knitters get the best from their machines is now available from Woolley Software.
Currently there are four videos available, with plans for a further 16, covering various knitting techniques.
A brand new idea, ‘Pick and Mix videos’, has just been launched.
Knitters can choose from a whole range of techniques and their selection will be put on to a video, exclusive to them.
Details of these are available from Woolley Software .
Every new Singer knitting machine now sold is accompanied by the basic ‘step by step’ video.
I will be keeping you up-to-date on Singer events and also ‘manning’ an information desk at all the main knitting exhibitions, where I will be able to help and advise you.
Parts, accessories, patterns and magazines will be for sale.
I hope to see you at one of the shows soon but do join me here next month for hints on lace knitting.
INSPIRATIONS
NOVEMBER
COUNTRYSIDE CELEBRATION
During the month of November, resident waterfowl can be seen searching the increasingly barren landscape for food.
That most attractive bird, the heron can be observed more easily now in the reed beds and overhead some geese search for new feeding grounds.
Both the heron and the geese can be used as separate border patterns.
YARNS AND COLOURS
A good strong contrast in colour is best to show up all the details in this design.
Obviously any dark colour with white, cream or a pastel shade would be suitable, but I personally think simple black and white looks very effective and is a good colour combination for this time of year.
Smooth yarns are advisable as, with fancy textured yarns, you lose a lot of the close-up detail.
LANDSCAPE
Knit welts and so on in black or another dark colour.
Starting at row 1 of the design, knit in Fair Isle (120 rows) with white in feeder 1 and black in feeder 2.
Continue in plain knitting with black.
BORDER DESIGNS
The ‘heron’ and ‘geese’can be used as border designs as follows:
HERON
Knit some plain rows in black.
In Fair Isle, with white in feeder 1 and black in feeder 2, knit rows 1–80 inclusive of the design.
Continue in plain knitting with black.
GEESE
Knit some plain rows in black.
In Fair Isle, with white in feeder 1 and black in feeder 2, knit rows 81–120 only of the design (rows 21–60 of punchcard B).
Continue in plain knitting with black.
To repeat the border, as illustrated, knit four plain rows of black between repeats of the design and change the direction of the motif (by turning the punchcard over to the reverse side) on each repeat.
YARN THICKNESS GUIDE ABBREVIATIONS & NOTES
MOCK RIB
Used for welts, cuffs, neckbands and other edges on single bed machines without a ribber.
Push the number of main bed needles given in pattern to working position.
Push every alternate needle back to non working position of a 1×1 rib or every third needle back to non working position for a 2×1 rib.
It may be necessary to reduce this number by one needle at one or both edges to keep rib even.
(Increase the stitches after the mock rib has been worked to give the same number as the pattern.)
Using main tension and waste yarn, cast on and knit a few rows ending with carriage at left.
Set row counter at 000. using at least two full sizes tighter than main tension, knit the number of rows given in pattern for rib.
Using three full sizes looser than this tension, knit one row.
(This loose row gives a neat fold line.)
Return to two full sizes tighter than main tension and knit the same number of rows as before.
Push empty needles from non working to working position and make a hem by placing loops of first row worked in main yarn evenly along the row.
Make sure that each empty needle holds a loop to prevent a row of holes across the work.
Unravel waste yarn after work has been removed from machine.
After garment has been blocked to size, insert a metal welt bar or thin, clean piece of wood through the hem and pull firmly downwards to draw stitches of mock rib closer together.
Set the stitches by steaming lightly on wrong side, if pressing instructions permit.