

An overhead broadcaster on the bridge of the frigate Ariadne crackled into life, a bell rang twice and then O'Rourke's voice came through, calm, modulated, precise and unmistakably Irish.
O'Rourke was commonly referred to as the weatherman, which he wasn't at all.
‘Just picked up an odd-looking customer.
Forty miles out, bearing 222.’
Talbot pressed the reply button.
‘The skies above us, Chief, are hotching with odd-looking customers.
At least six airlines criss-cross this patch of the Aegean.
NATO planes, as you know better than all of us, are all around us.
And those pesky fighter-bombers and fighters from the pesky Sixth Fleet bloweth where the wind listeth.
Me, I think they're lost half the time.’
‘Ah!
But this is a very odd odd-looking lad.’
O'Rourke's voice was unruffled as ever, unmoved by the less than flattering reference to the Sixth Fleet, from which he was on temporary loan.
‘No trans-Aegean airline uses the flight path this plane is on.
There are no NATO planes in this particular sector on my display screen.
And the Americans would have let us know.
A very courteous lot, Captain.
The Sixth Fleet, I mean.’
‘True, true.’
The Sixth Fleet, Talbot was aware, would have informed him of the presence of any of their aircraft in his vicinity, not from courtesy but because regulations demanded it, a fact of which O'Rourke was as well aware as he was.
O'Rourke was a doughty defender of his home fleet.
‘That all you have on this lad?’
‘No.
Two things.
This plane is on a due south-west to north-east course.
I have no record, no information of any plane that could be following this course.
Secondly, I'm pretty sure it's a big plane.
We should see in about four minutes — his course is on a direct intersection with ours.’
‘The size is important, Chief?
Lots of big planes around.’
‘Not at 43,000 feet, sir, which is what this one is.
Only a Concorde does that and we know there are no Concordes about.
Military job, I would guess.’
‘Of unknown origin.
A bandit?
Could be.
Keep an eye on him.’
Talbot looked around and caught the eye of his second-in-command, Lieutenant-Commander Van Gelder.
Van Gelder was short, very broad, deeply tanned, flaxen-haired and seemed to find life a source of constant amusement.
He was smiling now as he approached the captain.
‘Consider it done, sir.
The spy-glass and a photo for your family album?’
‘That's it.
Thank you.’
The Ariadne carried an immense and, to the uninitiated, quite bewildering variety of looking and listening instruments that may well have been unmatched by any naval ship afloat.
Among those instruments were what Van Gelder had referred to as the spy-glass.
This was a combined telescope and camera, invented and built by the French, of the type used by spy satellites in orbit and which was capable, under ideal atmospheric circumstances, of locating and photographing a white plate from an altitude of 250 miles.
The focal length of the telescope was almost infinitely adjustable: in this case Van Gelder would probably use a one in a hundred resolution, which would have the optical effect of bringing the intruder — if intruder it was — to an apparent altitude of four hundred feet.
In the cloudless July skies of the Cyclades this presented no problem at all.
Van Gelder had just left the bridge when another loudspeaker  came to life, the repeated double buzzer identifying it as the radio-room.
The helmsman, Leading Seaman Harrison, leaned forward and made the appropriate switch.
‘I have an SOS.
I think — repeat think — vessel's position is just south of Thera.
All I have.
Very garbled, certainly not a trained operator.
Just keeps repeating ‘Mayday, Mayday, Mayday’.
Myers, the radio operator on duty, sounded annoyed: every radio operator, the tone of his voice said, should be as expert and efficient as he was.
‘Wait a minute, though.’
There was a pause, then Myers came on again.
‘Sinking, he says.
Four times he said he was sinking.’
Talbot said: ‘That all?’
‘That's all, sir.
He's gone off the air.’
‘Well, just keep listening on the distress frequency, Harrison, 090 or near enough.
Can't be more than ten, twelve miles away.’
He reached for the engine control and turned it up to full power.
The Ariadne , in the modern fashion, had dual engine-room and bridge controls.
The engine-room had customarily only one rating, a leading stoker, on watch, and this only because custom dictated it, not because necessity demanded it.
The lone watchman might, just possibly, be wandering around with an oil-can in hand but more probably was immersed in one of the lurid magazines with which what was called the engine-room library was so liberally stocked.
The Ariadne 's chief engineer, Lieutenant McCafferty, rarely ventured near his own domain.
A first-class engineer, McCafferty claimed he was allergic to diesel fumes and treated with a knowing disdain the frequently repeated observation that, because of the engine-room's highly efficient extractor fans, it was virtually impossible for anyone to detect the smell of diesel.
He was to be found that afternoon, as he was most afternoons, seated in a deckchair aft and immersed in his favourite form of relaxation, the reading of detective novels heavily laced with romance of the more dubious kind.
The distant sound of the diesels deepened — the Ariadne was capable of a very respectable 35 knots — and the bridge began to vibrate quite noticeably.
Talbot reached for a phone and got through to Van Gelder.
‘We've picked up a distress signal.
Ten, twelve miles away.
Let me know when you locate this bandit and I'll cut the engines.’
The spy-glass, though splendidly gimballed to deal with the worst vagaries of pitching and rolling, was quite incapable of coping with even the mildest vibration which, more often than not, produced a very fuzzy photograph indeed.
Talbot moved out on to the port wing to join the lieutenant who stood there, a tall, thin young man with fair hair, thick pebbled glasses and a permanently lugubrious expression.
‘Well, Jimmy, how do you fancy this?
A maybe bandit and a sinking vessel at the same time.
Should relieve the tedium of a long hot summer's afternoon, don't you think?’
The lieutenant looked at him without enthusiasm.
Lieutenant the Lord James Denholm — Talbot called him ‘Jimmy’ for brevity's sake — seldom waxed enthusiastic about anything.
‘I don't fancy it at all, Captain.’
Denholm waved a languid hand.
‘Disturbs the even tenor of my ways.’
Talbot smiled.
Denholm was surrounded by an almost palpable aura of aristocratic exhaustion that had disturbed and irritated Talbot in the early stage of their acquaintanceship, a feeling that had lasted for no more than half an hour.
Denholm was totally unfitted to be a naval officer of any kind and his highly defective eyesight should have led to his automatic disbarment from any navy in the world.
But Denholm was aboard the Ariadne not because of his many connections with the highest echelons of society — heir to an earldom, his blood was indisputably the bluest of the blue — but because, without question, he was the right man in the right place.
The holder of three scientific degrees — from Oxford, UCLA and MIT, all summa cum laude — in electrical  engineering and electronics, Denholm was as close to being an electronics wizard as any man could ever hope to be.
Not that Denholm would have claimed to be anything of what he would have said to be the ridiculous kind.
Despite his lineage and academic qualifications, Denholm was modest and retiring to a fault.
This reticence extended even to the making of protests which was why, despite his feeble objections — he had been under no compulsion to go — he had been dragooned into the Navy in the first place.
He said to Talbot: ‘This bandit, Captain — if it is a bandit — what do you intend to do about it?’
‘I don't intend to do anything about it.’
‘But if he is a bandit — well, then, he's spying, isn't he?’
‘Of course.’
‘Well, then —’
‘What do you expect me to do, Jimmy?
Bring him down?
Or are you itching to try out this experimental laser gun you have with you?’
‘Heaven forfend.’
Denholm was genuinely horrified.
‘I've never fired a gun in anger in my life.
Correction.
I've never even fired a gun.’
‘If I wanted to bring him down a teeny-weeny heat-seeking missile would do the job very effectively.
But we don't do things like that.
We're civilized.
Besides, we don't provoke international incidents.
An unwritten law.’
‘Sounds a very funny law to me.’
‘Not at all.
When the United States or NATO play war games, as we are doing now, the Soviets track us very closely indeed, whether on land, sea or air.
We don't complain.
We can't.
When they're playing their game we do exactly the same to them.
Can, admittedly, have its awkward moments.
Not so long ago, when the US Navy were carrying out exercises in the Sea of Japan an American destroyer banged into, and quite severely damaged, a Russian submarine which was monitoring things a little too closely.’
‘And that didn't cause what you've just called an international incident?’
‘Certainly not.
Nobody's fault.
Mutual apologies between the two captains and the Russian was towed to a safe port by another Russian warship.
Vladivostok, I believe it was.’
Talbot turned his head.
‘Excuse me.
That's the radio-room call-up.’
‘Myers again,’ the speaker said.
‘Delos .
Name of the sinking vessel.
Very brief message — explosion, on fire, sinking fast.’
‘Keep listening,’ Talbot said.
He looked at the helmsman who already had a pair of binoculars to his eyes.
‘You have it, Harrison?’
‘Yes, sir.’
Harrison handed over the binoculars and twitched the wheel to port.
‘Fire off the port bow.’
Talbot picked it up immediately, a thin black column of smoke rising vertically, unwaveringly, into the blue and windless sky.
He was just lowering his glasses when the bell rang twice again.
It was O'Rourke, the weatherman, or, more officially, the senior long-range radar operator.
‘Lost him, I'm afraid.
The bandit, I mean.
I was looking at the vectors on either side of him to see if he had any friends and when I came back he was gone.’
‘Any ideas, Chief?’
‘Well…
’ O'Rourke sounded doubtful.
‘He could have exploded but I doubt it.’
‘So do I. We've had the spy-glass trained on his approach bearing and they'd have picked up an explosion for sure.’
‘Then he must have gone into a steep dive.
A very steep dive.
God knows why.
I'll find him.’
The speaker clicked off.
Almost at once a telephone rang again.
It was Van Gelder.
‘222, sir.
Smoke.
Plane.
Could be the bandit.’
‘Almost certainly is.
The weatherman's just lost it off the long-range radar screen.
Probably a waste of time but try to get that photograph anyway.’
He moved out on to the starboard wing and trained his  glasses over the starboard quarter.
He picked it up immediately, a heavy dark plume of smoke with, he thought, a glow of red at its centre.
It was still quite high, at an altitude of four or five thousand feet.
He didn't pause to check how deeply the plane was diving or whether or not it actually was on fire.
He moved quickly back into the bridge and picked up a phone.
‘Sub-Lieutenant Cousteau.
Quickly.’
A brief pause.
‘Henri?
Captain.
Emergency.
Have the launch and the lifeboat slung outboard.
Crews to stand by to lower.
Then report to the bridge.’
He rang down to the engine-room for Slow Ahead then said to Harrison: ‘Hard a-port.
Steer north.’
Denholm, who had moved out on to the starboard wing, returned, lowering his binoculars.
‘Well, even I can see that plane.
Not a plane, rather a huge streamer of smoke.
Could that have been the bandit, sir — if it was a bandit?’
‘Must have been.’
Denholm said, tentatively: ‘I don't care much for his line of approach, sir.’
‘I don't care much for it myself, Lieutenant, especially if it's a military plane and even more especially if it's carrying bombs of any sort.
If you look, you'll see that we're getting out of its way.’
‘Ah.
Evasive action.’
Denholm hesitated, then said doubtfully: ‘Well, as long as he doesn't alter course.’
‘Dead men don't alter courses.’
‘That they don't.’
Van Gelder had just returned to the bridge.
‘And the man or the men behind the controls of that plane are surely dead.
No point in my staying there, sir — Gibson's better with the spy-glass camera than I am and he's very busy with it.
We'll have plenty of photographs to show you but I doubt whether we'll be able to learn very much from them.’
‘As bad as that?
You weren't able to establish anything?’
‘Very little, I'm afraid.
I did see the outer engine on the port wing.
So it's a four-engined jet.
Civil or military, I've no idea.’
‘A moment, please.’
Talbot moved out on the port wing, looked aft, saw that the blazing plane — there was no mistaking the flames now — was due astern, at less than half the height and distance than when he had first seen it, returned to the bridge, told Harrison to steer due north, then turned again to Van Gelder.
‘That was all you could establish?’
‘About.
Except that the fire is definitely located in the nose cone, which would rule out any engine explosion.
It couldn't have been hit by a missile because we know there are no missile-carrying planes around — even if there were, a heat-seeking missile, the only type that could nail it at that altitude, would have gone for the engines, not the nose cone.
It could only have been an up-front internal explosion.’
Talbot nodded, reached for a phone, asked the exchange for the sick bay and was through immediately.
‘Doctor?
Would you detail an SBA — with first-aid kit — to stand by the lifeboat.’
He paused for a moment.
‘Sorry, no time to explain.
Come on up to the bridge.’
He looked aft through the starboard wing doorway, turned and took the wheel from the helmsman.
‘Take a look, Harrison.
A good look.’
Harrison moved out on the starboard wing, had his good look — it took him only a few seconds — returned and took the wheel again.
‘Awful.’
He shook his head.
‘They're finished, sir, aren't they?’
‘So I would have thought.’
‘They're going to miss us by at least a quarter mile.
Maybe a half.’
Harrison took another quick look through the doorway.
‘This angle of descent — they should land — rather, hit the sea — a mile, mile and a half ahead.
Unless by some fluke they  carry on and hit the island.
That would be curtains, sir.’
‘It would indeed.’
Talbot looked ahead through the for'ard screens.
Thera Island was some four miles distant with Cape Akrotiri lying directly to the north and Mount Elias, the highest point of the island — it was close on 2000 feet — to the north-east.
Between them, but about five miles further distant, a tenuous column of bluish smoke, hardly visible against a cloudless sky, hung lazily in the air.
This marked the site of Thira Village, the only settlement of any size on the island.
‘But the damage would be limited to the plane.
The south-west of the island is barren.
I don't think anyone lives there.’
‘What are we going to do, sir?
Stop over the point where it goes down?’
‘Something like that.
You can handle it yourself.
Or maybe another quarter or half mile further on along the line he was taking.
Have to wait and see.
Fact is, Harrison, I know no more about it than you do.
It may disintegrate on impact or, if it survives that, it may carry on some distance under water.
Not for far, I should think — not if its nose has gone.
Number One —’ this to Van Gelder ‘— what depths do we have here?’
‘I know the five fathom mark is about half a mile offshore along the south of the island.
Beyond that, it shelves pretty steeply.
I'll have to check in the chart-room.
At the moment I'd guess we're in two to three hundred fathoms.
A sonar check, sir?’
‘Please.’
Van Gelder left, brushing by Sub-Lieutenant Cousteau as he did.
Cousteau, barely in his twenties, was a happy-go-lucky youngster, always eager and willing and a more than competent seaman.
Talbot beckoned him out on to the starboard wing.
‘Have you seen it, Henri?’
‘Yes, sir.’
Cousteau's normal cheerfulness was in marked abeyance.
He gazed in unwilling fascination at the blazing, smoking plane, now directly abeam and at an altitude of  under a thousand feet.
‘What a damnable, awful thing.’
‘Aye, it's not nice.’
They had been joined by Surgeon Lieutenant-Commander Andrew Grierson.
Grierson was dressed in white shorts and a flowing multi-coloured Hawaiian shirt which he doubtless regarded as the correct dress of the day for the summer Aegean.
‘So this is why you wanted Moss and his first-aid box.’
Moss was the Leading Sick Bay Attendant.
‘I'm thinking maybe I should be going myself.’
Grierson was a West Highland Scot, as was immediately evident from his accent, an accent which he never attempted to conceal for the excellent reason that he saw no earthly reason why he ever should.
‘If there are any survivors, which I consider bloody unlikely, I know something about decompression problems which Moss doesn't.’
Talbot was conscious of the increased vibration beneath his feet.
Harrison had increased speed and was edging a little to the east.
Talbot didn't even give it a second thought: his faith in his senior quartermaster was complete.
‘Sorry, Doctor, but I have more important things for you to do.’
He pointed to the east.
‘Look under the trail of smoke to the plane's left.’
‘I see it.
I should have seen it before.
Somebody sinking, for a fiver.’
‘Indeed.
Something called the Delos , a private yacht, I should imagine, and, as you say, sinking.
Explosion and on fire.
Pretty heavily on fire, too, I would think.
Burns, injuries.’
‘We live in troubled times,’ Grierson said.
Grierson, in fact, lived a singularly carefree and untroubled existence but Talbot thought it was hardly the time to point this out to him.
‘The plane's silent, sir,’ Cousteau said.
‘The engines have been shut off.’
‘Survivors, you think?
I'm afraid not.
The explosion may have destroyed the controls in which case, I imagine, the engines shut off automatically.’
‘Disintegrate or dive?’
Grierson said.
‘Daft question.
We'll know all too soon.’
Van Gelder joined them.
‘I make it eighty fathoms here, sir.
Sonar says seventy.
They're probably right.
Doesn't matter, it's shallowing anyway.’
Talbot nodded and said nothing.
Nobody said anything, nobody felt like saying anything.
The plane, or the source of the dense column of smoke, was now less than a hundred feet above the water.
Suddenly, the source of the smoke and flame dipped and then was abruptly extinguished.
Even then they failed to catch a glimpse of the plane, it had been immediately engulfed in a fifty-foot-high curtain of water and spray.
There was no sound of impact and certainly no disintegration for when the water and the spray cleared away there was only the empty sea and curiously small waves, little more than ripples, radiating outwards from the point of impact.
Talbot touched Cousteau on the arm.
‘Your cue, Henri.
How's the whaler's radio?’
‘Tested yesterday, sir.
Okay.’
‘If you find anything, anybody, let us know.
I have a feeling you won't need that radio.
When we stop, lower away then keep circling around.
We should be back in half an hour or so.’
Cousteau left and Talbot turned to Van Gelder.
‘When we stop, tell sonar I want the exact depth.’
Five minutes later the whaler was in the water and moving away from the side of the Ariadne .
Talbot rang for full power and headed east.
Van Gelder hung up a phone.
‘Thirty fathoms, sonar says.
Give or take a fathom.’
‘Thanks.
Doctor?’
‘Hundred and eighty feet,’ Grierson said.
‘I don't even have to rub my chin over that one.
The answer is no.
Even if anyone could escape from the fuselage — which I think would be impossible in the first place — they'd die soon after surfacing.
Diver's bends.
Burst lungs.
They wouldn't know that they'd have to breathe out all the way up.
A trained, fit submariner, possibly with breathing apparatus, might do it.
There would be no fit, trained submariners aboard that plane.
Question's academic, anyway.
I agree with you, Captain.
The only men aboard that plane are dead men.’
Talbot nodded and reached for a phone.
‘Myers?
Signal to General Carson.
Unidentified four-engined plane crashed in sea two miles south of Cape Akrotiri, Thera Island.
1415 hours.
Impossible to determine whether military or civilian.
First located altitude 43,000 feet.
Apparent cause internal explosion.
No further details available at present.
No NATO planes reported in vicinity.
Have you any information?
Sylvester.
Send Code B.’
‘Wilco, sir.
Where do I send it?’
‘Rome.
Wherever he is he'll have it two minutes later.’
Grierson said: ‘Well, yes, if anyone knows he should.’
Carson was the C-in-C Southern European NATO.
He lifted his binoculars and looked at the vertical column of smoke, now no more than four miles to the east.
‘A yacht, as you say, and making quite a bonfire.
If there's anyone still aboard, they're going to be very warm indeed.
Are you going alongside, Captain?’
‘Alongside.’
Talbot looked at Denholm.
‘What's your estimate of the value of the electronic gear we have aboard?’
‘Twenty million.
Maybe twenty-five.
A lot, anyway.’
'There's your answer, Doctor.
That thing's gone bang once already.
It can go bang once again.
I am not going alongside.
You are.
In the launch.
That's expendable.
The Ariadne's not.’
‘Well, thank you very much.
And what intrepid soul —‘
‘I'm sure Number One here will be delighted to ferry you across.’
‘Ah.
Number One, have your men wear overalls, gloves and flash-masks.
Injuries from burning diesel can be very  unpleasant indeed.
And you.
I go to prepare myself for self-immolation.’
‘And don't forget your lifebelts.’
Grierson didn't deign to answer.
They had halved the remaining distance to the burning yacht when Talbot got through to the radio-room again.
‘Message dispatched?’
‘Dispatched and acknowledged.’
‘Anything more from the Delos ?’
‘Nothing.’
‘Delos,’ Denholm said.
‘That's about eighty miles north of here.
Alas, the Cyclades will never be the same for me again.’
Denholm sighed.
Electronics specialist or not, he regarded himself primarily as a classicist and– indeed, he was totally fluent in reading and writing both Latin and Greek.
He was deeply immersed in their ancient cultures as the considerable library in his cabin bore testimony.
He was also much given to quotations and he quoted now.
'The isles of Greece, the isles of Greece!
Where burning Sappho loved and sung,
Where grew the arts of war and peace,
Where Delos rose, and Phoebus sprung,
Eternal summer —’
‘Your point is taken, Lieutenant,’ Talbot said.
‘We'll cry tomorrow.
In the meantime, let us address ourselves to the problem of those poor souls on the fo'c's'le.
I count five of them.’
‘So do I.’ Denholm lowered his glasses.
‘What's all the frantic waving for?
Surely to God they can't imagine we haven't seen them?’
‘They've seen us all right.
Relief, Lieutenant.
Expectation of rescue.
But there's more to it than that.
A certain urgency in their waving.
A primitive form of semaphoring.
What  they're saying is ‘get us the hell out of here and be quick about it’.’
‘Maybe they're expecting another explosion?’
‘Could be that.
Harrison, I want to come to a stop on their starboard beam.
At, you understand, a prudent distance.’
‘A hundred yards, sir?’
‘Fine.’
The Delos was — or had been — a rather splendid yacht.
A streamlined eighty-footer, it was obvious that it had been, until very, very recently, a dazzling white.
Now, because of a combination of smoke and diesel oil, it was mainly black.
A rather elaborate superstructure consisted of a bridge, saloon, a dining-room and what may or may not have been a galley.
The still dense smoke and flames rising six feet above the poop deck indicated the source of the fire — almost certainly the engine-room.
Just aft of the fire a small motorboat was still secured to its davits: it wasn't difficult to guess that either the explosion or the fire had rendered it inoperable.
Talbot said: ‘Rather odd, don't you think, Lieutenant?’
‘Odd?’
Denholm said carefully.
‘Yes.
You can see that the flames are dying away.
One would have thought that would reduce the danger of further explosion.’
Talbot moved out on the port wing.
‘And you will have observed that the water level is almost up to the deck.’
‘I can see she's sinking.’
‘Indeed.
If you were aboard a vessel that was either going to go up or drag you down when it sank, what would your natural reaction be?’
‘To be elsewhere, sir.
But I can see that their motorboat has been damaged.’
‘Agreed.
But a craft that size would carry alternative life-saving equipment.
If not a Carley float, then certainly an inflatable rubber dinghy.
And any prudent owner would carry a sufficiency of lifebelts and life-jackets for the passengers  and crew.
I can even see two lifebelts in front of the bridge.
But they haven't done the obvious thing and abandoned ship.
I wonder why.’
‘I've no idea, sir.
But it is damned odd.’
‘When we've rescued those distressed mariners and brought them aboard, you, Jimmy, will have forgotten how to speak Greek.’
‘But I will not have forgotten how to listen in Greek?’
‘Precisely.’
‘Commander Talbot, you have a devious and suspicious mind.’
‘It goes with the job, Jimmy.
It goes with the job.’
Harrison brought the Ariadne to a stop off the starboard beam of the Delos at the agreed hundred yards distance.
Van Gelder was away at once and was very quickly alongside the fo'c's'le of the Delos .
Two boat-hooks around the guard-rail stanchions held them in position.
As the launch and the bows of the sinking yacht were now almost level it took only a few seconds to transfer the six survivors — another had joined the group of five that Talbot had seen — aboard the launch.
They were, indeed, a sorry and sadly bedraggled lot, so covered in diesel and smoke that it was quite impossible to discriminate among them on the basis of age, sex or nationality.
Van Gelder said: ‘Any of you here speak English?’
‘We all do.’
The speaker was short and stocky and that was all that could be said of him in the way of description.
‘Some of us just a little.
But enough.’
The voice was heavily accented but readily understood.
Van Gelder looked at Grierson.
‘Any of you injured, any of you burnt?’
Grierson said.
All shook their heads or mumbled a negative.
‘Nothing here for me, Number One.
Hot showers, detergents, soap.
Not to mention a change of clothing.’
‘Who's in charge here?’
Van Gelder asked.
‘I am.’
It was the same man.
‘Anybody left aboard?’
‘Three men, I'm afraid.
They won't be coming with us.’
‘You mean they're dead?’
The man nodded.
‘I'll check.’
‘No, no!’
His oil-soaked hand gripped Van Gelder's arm.
‘It is too dangerous, far too dangerous.
I forbid it.’
‘You forbid me nothing.’
When Van Gelder wasn't smiling, which wasn't often, he could assume a very discouraging expression indeed.
The man withdrew his hand.
‘Where are those men?’
‘In the passageway between the engine-room and the stateroom aft.
We got them out after the explosion but before the fire began.’
‘Riley.’
This to a Leading Seaman.
‘Come aboard with me.
If you think the yacht's going, give me a call.’
He picked up a torch and was about to board the Delos when a hand holding a pair of goggles reached out and stopped him.
Van Gelder smiled.
‘Thank you, Doctor.
I hadn't thought of that.’
Once aboard he made his way aft and descended the after companionway.
There was smoke down there but not too much and with the aid of his torch he had no difficulty in locating the three missing men, all huddled shapelessly in a corner.
To his right was the engine-room door, slightly buckled from the force of the explosion.
Not without some difficulty, he forced the door open and at once began coughing as the foul-smelling smoke caught his throat and eyes.
He pulled on the goggles but still there was nothing to see except for the red embers of a dying fire emanating from some unknown source.
He pulled the door to behind him — he was reasonably certain there was nothing for him to see in the engine-room anyway — and stooped to examine the three dead men.
They were far from being a pretty sight but he forced himself to carry out as thorough an investigation as he could.
He spent some quite considerable time bent over  long time — and when he straightened he looked both puzzled and thoughtful.
The door to the after stateroom opened easily.
There was some smoke there but not so much that he required to use his goggles.
The cabin was luxuriously furnished and immaculately tidy, a condition which Van Gelder very rapidly altered.
He pulled a sheet from one of the beds, spread it on the floor, opened up wardrobes and drawers, scooped up armfuls of clothes — there was no time to make any kind of selection and even if there had been he would have been unable to pick and choose, they were all women's clothing — dumped them on the sheet, tied up the four corners, lugged the bundle up the companionway and handed it over to Riley.
‘Put this in the launch.
I'm going to have a quick look at the for'ard cabins.
I think the steps will be at the for'ard end of the saloon under the bridge.’
‘I think you should hurry, sir.’
Van Gelder didn't answer.
He didn't have to be told why he should hurry — the sea was already beginning to trickle over on to the upper deck.
He passed into the saloon, found the companionway at once and descended to a central passage.
He switched on his torch — there was, of course, no electrical power left.
There were doors on both sides and one at the end.
The first door to port opened up into a food store, the corresponding door to starboard was locked.
Van Gelder didn't bother with it: the Delos didn't look like the kind of craft that would lack a commodious liquor store.
Behind the other doors lay four cabins and two bathrooms.
All were empty.
As he had done before, Van Gelder spread out a sheet — in the passageway, this time — threw some more armfuls of clothes on to it, secured the corners and hurried up on deck.
The launch was no more than thirty yards away when the Delos , still on even keel, slid gently under the surface of the sea.
There was nothing dramatic to mark its going — just a  stream of air bubbles that became gradually smaller and ceased altogether after about twenty seconds.
Talbot was on deck when the launch brought back the six survivors.
He looked in concern at the woebegone and bedraggled figures before him.
‘My goodness, what a state you people are in. l his the lot, Number One?’
‘Those that survived, sir.
Three died.
Impossible to get their bodies out in time.’
He indicated the figure nearest him.
‘This is the owner.’
‘Andropulos,’ the man said.
‘Spyros Andropulos.
You are the officer in charge?’
‘Commander Talbot.
My commiserations, Mr Andropulos.’
‘And my thanks, Commander.
We are very deeply grateful —‘
‘With respect, sir, that can wait.
First things first, and the very first thing is to get yourselves cleaned up immediately.
Ah.
And changed.
A problem.
Clothes.
We'll find some.’
‘Clothing we have,’ Van Gelder said.
He pointed at the two sheet-wrapped packages.
‘Ladies.
Gentlemen.’
‘A mention in dispatches for that, Number One.
You said ‘ladies’?’
‘Two, Commander,’ Andropulos said.
He looked at the two people standing by him.
‘My niece and her friend.’
‘Ah.
Well, should apologize, I suppose, but difficult to tell in the circumstances.’
‘My name is Charial.’
The voice was unmistakably feminine.
‘Irene Charial.
This is my friend Eugenia.’
‘We could have met under happier circumstances.
Lieutenant Denholm here will take you to my cabin.
The bathroom is small but adequate.
By the time you bring them back, Lieutenant, I trust they are recognizable for what they are.’
He turned to a burly, dark-haired figure who, like most of the crew, wore no insignia of rank.
‘Chief Petty Officer  McKenzie.’
McKenzie was the senior NCO on the Ariadne .
‘The four gentlemen here, Chief.
You know what to do.’
‘Right away, sir.
If you will come with me, gentlemen.’
Grierson also left and Van Gelder and Talbot were left alone.
‘We can find this place again?’
Van Gelder asked.
‘No trouble.’
Talbot looked at him speculatively and pointed towards the north-west.
‘I've taken a bearing on the monastery and radar station on Mount Elias there.
Sonar says that we're in eighteen fathoms.
Just to make sure, we'll drop a marker buoy.’
General Carson laid down the slip of paper he had been studying and looked at the colonel seated across the table from him.
‘What do you make of this, Charles?’
‘Could be nothing.
Could be important.
Sorry, that doesn't help.
I have a feeling I don't like it.
It would help a bit if we had a sailor around.’
Carson smiled and pressed a button.
‘Do you know if Vice-Admiral Hawkins is in the building?’
‘He is, sir.’
A girl's voice.
‘Do you wish to speak to him or see him?’
‘See him, Jean.
Ask him if he would be kind enough to stop by.’
Vice-Admiral Hawkins was very young for one of his rank.
He was short, a little overweight, more than a little rubicund as to his features and exuded an aura of cheerful bonhomie.
He didn't look very bright, which he was.
He was widely regarded as having one of the most brilliant minds in the Royal Navy.
He took the seat to which Carson had gestured him and glanced at the message slip.
‘I see, I see.’
He laid the message down.
‘But you didn't ask me here to comment on a perfectly straightforward signal.
The Sylvester is one of the code names for the frigate HMS  Ariadne .
One of the vessels under your command, sir.’
‘Don't rub it in, David.
I know it, of course— more accurately I know of it.
Don't forget I'm just a simple landlubber.
Odd name, isn't it?
Royal Naval ship with a Greek name.’
‘Courtesy gesture to the Greeks, sir.
We're carrying out a joint hydrographic survey with them.’
‘Is that so?’
General Carson ran a hand through his grizzled hair.
‘I was not aware that I was in the hydrographic business, David.’
‘You're not, sir, although I have no doubt it could carry out such a survey if it were called for.
The Ariadne has a radio system that can transmit to, and receive transmissions from, any quarter of the globe.
It has telescopes and optical instruments that can pick out the salient features of, say, any passing satellite, even those in geosynchronous orbit — and that's 22,000 miles up.
It carries long-range and surface radar that is as advanced as any in the world.
And it has a sonar location and detection system that can pick up a sunken object at the bottom of the ocean just as easily as it can pinpoint a lurking submarine.
The Ariadne , sir, is the eyes and the ears and the voice of your fleet.’
‘That's nice to know, I must say.
Very reassuring.
The ability of the commanding officer of the Ariadne is — ah — commensurate with this extraordinary array of devices he controls?’
‘Indeed, sir.
For an exceptionally complex task an exceptionally qualified man.
Commander Talbot is an outstanding officer.
Hand-picked for the job.’
'Who picked him?’
‘I did.’
‘I see.
That terminates this line of conversation very abruptly.’
Carson pondered briefly.
‘I think, Colonel, that we should ask General Simpson about this one.’
Simpson, the over-all commander of NATO, was the only man who outranked Carson in Europe.
‘Don't see what else we can do, sir.’
‘You would agree, David?’
‘No, General.
I think you'd be wasting your time.
If you don't know anything about this, then I'm damned sure General Simpson doesn't know anything either.
This is not an educated guess, call it a completely uneducated guess, but I have an odd feeling that this is one of your planes, sir — an American plane.
A bomber, almost certainly, perhaps not yet off the secret lists — it was, after all, flying at an uncommon height.’
‘The Ariadne could have been in error.’
‘The Ariadne does not make mistakes.
My job and my life on it.’
The flat, unemotional voice carried complete conviction.
‘Commander Talbot is not the only uniquely qualified man aboard.
There are at least thirty others in the same category.
We have, for example, an electronics officer so unbelievably advanced in his speciality that none of your much-vaunted high-technology whizzkids in Silicon Valley would even begin to know what he's talking about.’
Carson raised a hand.
‘Point taken, David, point taken.
So an American bomber.
A very special bomber because it must be carrying a very special cargo.
What would you guess that to be?’
Hawkins smiled faintly.
‘I am not yet in the ESP business, sir.
People or goods.
Very secret, very important goods or very secret and very important people.
There's only one source that can give you the answer and it might be pointed our that their refusal to divulge this information might put the whole future of NATO at risk and that the individual ultimately responsible for the negative decision would be answerable directly to the president of the United States.
One does not imagine that the individual concerned would remain in a position of responsibility for very much longer.’
Carson sighed.
‘If I may speak in a spirit of complaint, David, I might point out that it's easy for you to talk and  even easier to talk tough.
You're a British officer.
I'm an American.’
‘I appreciate that, sir.’
Carson looked at the colonel, who remained silent for a couple of moments, then nodded, slowly, twice.
Carson reached for the button on his desk.
‘Jean?’
‘Sir?’
‘Get me the Pentagon.
Immediately.’
‘You are unhappy, Vincent?’
Vincent was Van Gelder's first name.
There were three of them seated in the wardroom, Talbot, Van Gelder and Grierson.
‘Puzzled, you might say, sir.
I don't understand why Andropulos and the others didn't abandon ship earlier.
I saw two inflatable dinghies aboard.
Rolled up, admittedly, but those things can be opened and inflated from their gas cylinders in seconds.
There were also lifebelts and life-jackets.
There was no need for this the-boy-stood-on-the-burning-deck act.
They could have left at any time.
I'm not saying they'd have been sucked down with the yacht but they might have had a rather uncomfortable time.’
‘Same thought had occurred to me.
Mentioned it to Andrew here.
Odd.
Maybe Andropulos had a reason.
Anything else?’
‘The owner tried to stop me from boarding the yacht.
Maybe he was concerned with my health.
I have the feeling he wasn't.
Then I would much like to know what caused that explosion in the engine-room.
A luxurious yacht like that must have carried an engineer — we can find that out easily enough — and it's a fair guess that the engines would have been maintained in an immaculate condition.
I don't see how they could have caused an explosion.
We'll have to ask McCafferty about that one.’
‘That, of course, is why you were so anxious that we pinpoint the spot where the Delos went down.
You think an expert on the effects of explosives could identify and locate  the cause of the explosion?
I'm sure he could, especially if he were an expert at determining the causes of aircraft lost through explosions — those people are much better at that sort of thing than the Navy is.
Explosives experts we have aboard but no experts on the effects of explosives.
Even if we did, we have no divers aboard — well, you and myself apart —trained to work at levels below a hundred feet.
We could borrow one easily enough from a lifting vessel or salvage tug but the chances are high that he'd know nothing about explosives.
But there's really no problem.
It would be a simple matter for any lifting vessel to raise an aircraft fuselage to the surface.’
Talbot regarded Van Gelder thoughtfully.
‘But there's something else worrying you, isn't there?’
‘Yes, sir.
The three dead men aboard the Delos — well, to be specific, just one of them.
That's why I asked the doctor here to come along.
The three of them were so smoke begrimed and blackened that it was difficult to tell what they were wearing but two of them appeared to be dressed in white while the third was in a navy blue overall.
An engineer wouldn't wear whites.
Well, I admit our engineer Lieutenant McCafferty is a dazzling exception; but he's a one-off case, he never goes near his engines anyway.
In any event I assumed the man in the overalls was the engineer and he was the one who caught my attention.
He had a vicious gash on the back of his head as if he had been blown backwards against a very hard, very sharp object.’
Grierson said: ‘Or been struck by a very hard, sharp object?’
‘Either way, I suppose.
I wouldn't know.
I'm afraid I'm a bit weak on the forensic side.’
‘Had his occiput been crushed?’
‘Back of his head?
No.
At least I'm reasonably certain it hadn't been.
I mean, it would have given, wouldn't it, or been squashy.
It wasn't like that.’
‘A blow like that should have caused massive bruising.
Did you see any?’
‘Difficult to say.
He had fairly thick hair.
But it was fair.
No, I don't think there was any.’
‘Had it bled a lot?’
‘He hadn't bled at all.
I'm quite sure of that.’
‘You didn't notice any holes in his clothing?’
‘Not that I could see.
He hadn't been shot, if that is what you're asking and that is what I think you are asking.
Who would want to shoot a dead man?
His neck was broken.’
‘Indeed?’
Grierson seemed unsurprised.
‘Poor man was through the wars, wasn't he?’
Talbot said: ‘What do you think, Andrew?’
‘I don't know what to think.
The inflicting of the wound on the head and the snapping of the vertebra could well have been simultaneous.
If the two weren't simultaneous, then it could equally well have been — as Vincent clearly seems to think — a case of murder.’
‘Would an examination of the corpse help at all?’
‘It might.
I very much doubt it.
But an examination of engine-room bulkheads would.’
‘To see if there were any sharp edges or protrusions that could have caused such a head wound?’
Grierson nodded.
‘Well, when — and if — we ever raise that hull, we should be able to kill two birds with one stone: to determine the causes of both the explosions and this man's death.’
‘Maybe three birds,’ Van Gelder said.
‘It would be interesting to know the number and layout of the fuel tanks in the engine-room.
There are, I believe, two common layouts — in one case there is just one main fuel tank, athwartships and attached to the for'ard bulkhead, with a generator or generators on one side of the engine and batteries on the other, plus a water-tank to port and another to starboard: or there could be a fuel tank on either side with the water-tank up front.
In that case the two fuel tanks are interconnected to keep the fuel levels equal and maintain equilibrium.’
‘A suspicious mind, Number One,’ Talbot said.
‘Very suspicious.
What you would like to find, of course, is just one fuel tank because you think Andropulos is going to claim that he didn't abandon ship because he thought another fuel tank was about to go and he didn't want his precious passengers splashing about in a sea of blazing fuel oil which would, of course , also have destroyed the rubber dinghies.’
‘I'm grieved, sir.
I thought I'd thought of that first.’
‘You did, in fact.
When the passengers are cleaned up see if you can get this young lady, Irene Charial, alone and find out if she knows anything about the layout of the engine-room.
The casual approach, Vincent, the innocent and cherubic expression, although I doubt the last is beyond you.
Anyway it's possible she's never been there and may possibly know nothing about it.’
‘It's equally possible, sir, that she knows all about it and may well choose to tell me something.
Miss Charial is Andropulos's niece.’
‘The thought had occurred.
However, if Andropulos is not all he might be, then the chances are high that there is some other member of his ship's company in his confidence and I would have thought that would be a man.
I don't say that that's because you know what the Greeks are like because I don't know what the Greeks are like.
And we mustn't forget that Andropulos may be as innocent as the driven snow and that there is a perfectly rational explanation for all that has happened.
Anyway, it would do no harm to try and you never can tell, Vincent — she might turn out to be a classic Greek beauty.’
From the fact that the whaler was lying stopped in the water and that Cousteau, his hand resting idly on the tiller, appeared to be expressing no great degree of interest in anything, it was obvious that his wait had been a vain one, a fact he confirmed on his arrival on the bridge.
Talbot called the sonar room.
‘You have pinpointed the location of the plane?’
‘Yes, sir.
We're sitting exactly above it.
Depth registered is eighteen fathoms.
That's the echo from the top of the fuselage.
Probably lying in about twenty fathoms.
It's lying in the same direction as it was flying when it came down — north-east to south-west.
Picking up some rather odd noises down here, sir.
Would you care to come down?’
‘Yes, I will.’
For reasons best known to himself Halzman, the senior sonar operator, preferred not to discuss it over an open line.
‘A minute or two.’
He turned to Van Gelder.
‘Have McKenzie put down a marker buoy, about midships.
Tell him to lower the weight gently.
I don't want to bump too hard against the plane's fuselage in case we do actually come into contact with it.
When that's been done, I want to anchor.
Two anchors.
A stern anchor to the north-west, about a hundred yards distant from the buoy, then a bow anchor a similar distance to the south-east.’
‘Yes, sir.
May I suggest the other way around?’
‘Of course, you're right.
I'd forgotten about our old friend.
Taking a holiday today, isn't it?
The other way around, of course.’
The ‘old friend’ to which he referred and which Van Gelder clearly had in mind, was the Meltemi wind, referred to as the ‘Etesian’in the British sailing directions.
In the Cyclades, in the summer months — and indeed in most of the Aegean — it blew steadily, but usually only in the afternoon and early evening, from the north-west.
If it did start up, the Ariadne would ride more comfortably if it were bows on to it.
Talbot went to the sonar room which was only one deck down and slightly aft.
The sonar room was heavily insulated against all outside noise and dimly lit by subdued yellow lighting.
There were three display screens, two sets of control panels and, over and above all, a considerable number of heavily padded earphones.
Halzman caught sight of him in  an overhead mirror — there were a number of such mirrors around, speaking as well as any other kind of sound was kept to a minimum in the sonar room — removed his earphones and gestured to the seat beside him.
‘Those earphones, sir.
I thought you might be interested in listening for a minute.’
Talbot sat and clamped the earphones on.
After about fifteen seconds he removed-them and turned to Halzman, who had also removed his.
‘I can't hear a damned thing.’
‘With respect, sir, when I said a minute, I meant just that.
A minute.
First of all you have to listen until you hear the silence, then you'll hear it.’
‘Whatever that means, I'll try it.’
Talbot listened again, and just before the allotted minute was up, he leaned forward and creased his brow.
After another thirty seconds he removed the head-set.
‘A ticking sound.
Strange, Halzman, you were right.
First you hear the silence and then you hear it.
Tick…tick…tick, once every two to three seconds.
Very regular.
Very faint.
You're certain that comes from the plane?’
‘I have no doubt, sir.’
‘Have you ever heard anything like it before?’
‘No, sir.
I've spent hundreds of hours, more likely thousands, listening to sonar, asdics, hydrophones, but this is something quite new on me.’
‘I've got pretty good hearing but I had to wait almost a moment before I could imagine I could hear anything.
It's very, very faint, isn't it?’
‘It is.
I had to turn the hearing capacity up to maximum before I stumbled on it — not a practice I would normally follow or recommend — in the wrong circumstances you can get your eardrums blasted off.
Why is it so faint?
Well, the source of the sound may be very faint to begin with.
I've been thinking about this, sir — well, I've had nothing else to think  about.
It's either a mechanical or electrical device.
In either case it has to be inside a sealed or waterproof casing.
A mechanical device could, of course, operate in water even if it was totally submerged, but operating in water would dampen out the sound almost completely.
An electrical device would have to be totally sealed against sea-water.
The plane's own electrical system, of course, has ceased to function, so it would have to have its own supply system, almost certainly battery-powered.
In either event, mechanical or electrical, the sound impulses would have to pass through the waterproof casing, after which they must pass through the fuselage of the plane.’
‘Have you any idea as to what it might be?’
‘None whatsoever.
It's a two and a half second sequence — I've timed it.
I know of no watch or clock movement that follows that sequence.
Do you, sir?’
‘No, I don't.
You think it could be some sort of timing device?’
‘I thought about that too, sir, but I put it out of my mind.’
Halzman smiled.
‘Maybe I'm prejudiced against that idea because of all those cheap and awful video film cassettes we have aboard, with all their special effects and pseudo science.
All I know for sure, sir, is that we have a mysterious plane lying on the sea-bed there.
Lord only knows what mysterious kind of cargo it was carrying.’
‘Agreed.
I think we'd better leave it at that for the moment.
Have one of your boys monitor it, once, say, in every fifteen minutes.’
When Talbot returned to the bridge he could see the marker buoy just astern, bobbing gently in the very small wake Van Gelder was creating as he edged the Ariadne gently to the north-west.
Very soon he stopped, juggled the engines to and fro until he reckoned the bows were a hundred yards distant  from the buoy, had the anchor dropped, then moved just as slowly astern, the anchor chain being paid out as he went.
Soon the stern anchor had been paid out and the Ariadne was back to where she had started, the buoy nudging the midships port side.
‘Neatly done,’ Talbot said.
‘Tell me, Number One, how are you on puzzles?’
‘Useless.
Even the simplest crossword baffles me.’
‘No matter.
We're picking up a strange noise on the sonar.
Maybe you'd like to take a turn along there, perhaps even identify it.
Baffles me.’
‘Consider it done.
Back in two or three minutes.’
Twenty minutes elapsed before he returned to the bridge where Talbot was now alone: as the ship was no longer under way, Harrison had retired to his Mess.
‘That was a long couple of minutes, Vincent, and what are you looking so pleased about?’
‘I really don't know how you do it, sir.
Incredible.
I don't suppose you have any Scottish blood?’
‘Not a drop, as far as I'm aware.
Am I supposed to be following you, Number One?’
‘I thought maybe the second sight.
You were right.
A classic Greek beauty.
Irene.
Miss Charial, that is.
Odd, mind you, blonde as they come.
I thought all those warm-blooded young Latin ladies had hair as black as a raven's wing.’
‘It's the sheltered life you lead, Vincent.
You should go to Andalucia some day.
Seville.
On one street corner a dusky Moorish maiden, the next a Nordic blonde.
We'll discuss pigmentation some other time.
What did you learn?’
‘Enough, I hope.
It's an art, sir, this casual and inconsequential approach.
The questioning, I mean.
She seems honest and open enough, not ingenuous, if you know what I mean, but quite straightforward.
Certainly didn't give the impression of having anything to hide.
Says she doesn't know the engine-room well but has been there a couple of times.
We came to  the question of fuel oil — I was just wondering out loud, natural curiosity, I hope she thought — as to what could have caused the explosion.
Seems I was wrong when I said there were just two common ways of arranging fuel and water tanks.
Seems there's a third.
Two big tanks on either side of the engine, one fuel, one water.
How big, I don't know, she was a bit vague about that — no reason why she should know — but at least thousands of litres, she says.
If there was a spare fuel tank she didn't know about it.
I look forward, sir, to hearing Mr Andropulos justifying his decision not to abandon ship.’
‘So do I. Should be interesting.
Anyway, congratulations.
A good job.’
‘No hardship, sir.’
Van Gelder scanned the sea around.
‘Odd, don't you think, sir?
I mean, are we the only ones who heard the SOS?
I would have thought the horizon would have been black with converging vessels by this time.’
‘Not so strange, really.
Nearly all the vessels around at this time of year are private yachts and fishermen.
Lots of them don't carry any radio at all and even those who do almost certainly wouldn't be permanently tuned to the distress frequency.’
‘But we are.’
‘This time I'm ahead of you.
The Delos — or at least Andropulos — knew that we would be permanently tuned to the distress frequency, that we are automatically alerted by bell or buzzer whenever the distress frequency is energized.
This presupposes two things.
He knew we were a naval vessel and he also knew that we were in the vicinity.’
‘You realize what you are saying, sir?
Sorry, I didn't mean it to sound that way.
But the implications, sir.
I must say I really don't like those at all.’
‘Neither do I. Opens up all sorts of avenues of interesting speculation, doesn't it?’
He turned as McKenzie came on to the bridge: ‘And how are our oil-stained survivors, Chief?’
‘Clean, sir.
And in dry clothes.
I don't think any of them will make the list of the ten best-dressed men.’
He looked at Van Gelder.
‘I gather you didn't have too much time, sir, for the selection and careful matching up of clothes.
They're a bit of an odd sight, I must say, but respectable enough.
I knew you would want to see them, Captain — Mr Andropulos seems very anxious to see you — and I know you don't like unauthorized people on the bridge so I took the liberty of putting the four gentlemen and the two young ladies in the wardroom.
I hope that's all right, sir.’
‘Fine.
You might ask the Surgeon Commander and Lieutenant Denholm to join us there.
And send a couple of your boys up here to keep a lookout.
Who knows, our radar might have a day off.’
The six survivors from the Delos were standing around rather awkwardly, not talking, when Talbot and Van Gelder reached the wardroom.
The four men, as McKenzie had suggested, did present rather an odd spectacle.
They looked rather as if they had just raided an old clothes shop, few of the items of their clothing being a match, and for the most part, fitting only where they touched.
In striking contrast, both girls were immaculately clad: dressed in white blouses and white skirts, they could have stepped straight from the pages of Vogue .
‘Please,’ Talbot said.
‘All of you be seated.
Before we talk, I suggest we get our priorities right.
First things first.
You've had a harrowing experience and a lucky escape.
I suggest you will not take amiss the suggestion of a suitable restorative.’
He pressed a bell and a steward entered.
‘Jenkins.
Refreshments.
Find out what they would like.’
Jenkins did so and left.
‘I'm the captain,’ Talbot said.
‘Talbot.
This is Lieutenant-Commander  Van Gelder.
Ah!’
The door had opened.
‘And this is Surgeon-Commander Grierson, whom you have met  and whose services you fortunately didn't require, and Lieutenant Denholm.’
He looked at the short stocky man seated before him.
‘I take it that you, sir, are Mr Andropulos, the owner.’
‘I am, Commander, I am.’
Andropulos had black hair, black eyes, white teeth and a deeply tanned complexion.
He looked as if he hadn't shaved that morning but then, he would always look as if he hadn't shaved that morning.
He leapt to his feet, took Talbot's hand, and shook it vigorously.
He positively radiated a combined aura of benevolence and bonhomie.
‘Words cannot express our gratitude.
A close-run thing, Commander, a very close-run thing.
We owe you our lives.’
‘I wouldn't go as far as to say that but I'll admit you were in a rather nasty pickle.’
‘Pickle?
Pickle?’
‘Dangerous circumstances.
I deeply regret both your loss of the members of your crew and your yacht.’
‘The yacht is nothing.
I can always buy another.
Well, Lloyd's of London can buy it for me.
Still sadder to lose an old friend like the Delos but sadder still, much sadder, to lose the three members of my crew.
Been with me for many years.
I treasured them all.’
‘Who were they, sir?’
‘My engineer, chef and steward.
With me for many years.’
Andropulos shook his head.
‘They will be sadly missed.’
‘Wasn't it odd for a chef and steward to be in the engine-room?’
Andropulos smiled sadly.
‘Not aboard the Delos , Commander.
It was not exactly run along the lines of a ship of the Royal Navy.
They were in the habit of having an after-lunch drink there with the engineer.
They had my permission, of course, but they preferred to be discreet about it — and what more discreet place than the engine-room?
Alas, their discretion cost them their lives.’
‘That is ironic.
May I be introduced to the others?’
‘Of course, of course .
This is my very dear friend Alexander.’
Alexander was a tall man with a thin, unsmiling face and black, cold eyes who didn't look as if he could possibly be anybody's very dear friend.
‘This is Aristotle, my captain.’
Andropulos didn't say whether Aristotle was the first or last name: he had watchful eyes and a serious expression but looked as if he might, unlike Alexander, be capable of smiling occasionally.
‘And this is Achmed.’
He didn't say what occupation Achmed held.
He was young, pleasant-faced and smiled readily.
Talbot couldn't even begin to guess at his nationality except that he wasn't Greek.
‘But I forget myself.
Deplorable, deplorable.
I forget myself.
Such manners.
Should have been ladies first, of course.
This is my niece, Irene.’
Van Gelder hadn't made any mistakes about her, Talbot thought, except that he'd missed out on the wide green eyes and a rather bewitching smile.
‘And this is Eugenia.’
This one, Talbot reflected, was much closer to Van Gelder's concept of a warm-blooded young Latin lady.
She had a slightly dusky skin, black hair and warm brown eyes.
And she also, no doubt, was quite beautiful.
It seemed to Talbot that Van Gelder was going to find himself in something of a quandary.
‘I congratulate you, Mr Andropulos,’ Talbot said gallantly, ‘and ourselves.
Certainly the loveliest passengers we've ever had aboard the Ariadne .
Ah.
The steward.’
Andropulos took his glass — a scotch and not a small one, and disposed of half the contents in one gulp.
‘My goodness, I needed that.
Thank you, Commander, thank you.
Not as young as I was nor as tough, either.
Age cometh to us all.’
He quaffed the rest of his drink and sighed.
Talbot said: ‘Jenkins, another for Mr Andropulos.
A slightly larger measure this time.’
Jenkins looked at him expressionlessly, closed his eyes momentarily and left.
‘The Ariadne ,’ Andropulos said.
‘Rather odd, is it not.
Greek name, British vessel.’
‘Courtesy gesture to your Government, sir.
We are carrying out a hydrographic charting exercise with your people.’
Talbot saw no point in mentioning that the Ariadne had never carried out a hydrographic exercise in its life and that the ship had been called Ariadne to remind the Greeks that it was a multi-national vessel and to persuade a wavering Greek government that perhaps NATO wasn't such a bad thing after all.
‘Hydrographic, you say.
Is that why we're moored fore and aft — a fixed platform for taking bearings.’
‘A fixed platform, yes, but in this instance the purpose is not hydrographic.
We've had quite a busy afternoon, Mr Andropulos, and at the moment we're anchored over a plane that crashed into the sea just about the time we were receiving your SOS.’
‘A plane?
Crashed?
Good God!
What — what kind of plane?’
‘We have no idea.
It was so wreathed in smoke that it was impossible to distinguish any important features.’
‘But surely — well, don't you think it was a big plane?’
‘It may have been.’
‘But it could have been a big jet.
Maybe hundreds of passengers.’
If Andropulos knew it wasn't a jet carrying hundreds of passengers, his face wasn't saying so.
‘It's always possible.’
Talbot saw no point in telling Andropulos that it was almost certainly a bomber and equally certainly not carrying hundreds of passengers.
‘You — you mean to tell me that you left the area to come to our aid?’
‘A reasonable enough decision, I think.
We were pretty certain that there were people alive aboard the Delos and we were also pretty certain that there was no one alive aboard that plane.’
‘There could have been survivors aboard that plane.
I mean, you weren't there to see.’
‘Mr Andropulos.’
Talbot allowed a certain coldness to creep into his voice.
‘We are, I hope, neither callous nor stupid.
Before leaving, we lowered one of our motorboats to circle the area.
There were no survivors.’
‘Oh dear,’ Irene Charial said.
‘Isn't it awful?
All those people dead and there we were, busy doing nothing except feeling sorry for ourselves.
I'm not being inquisitive, Captain, and I know it's none of my business, but why do you remain anchored here?
I mean, there can't possibly be any hope now that some survivors may surface.’
‘There is no hope, Miss Charial.
We're remaining here as a marker until the diving ship arrives.’
He didn't like lying to her but thought it inadvisable to tell her that there was no rescue ship hurrying to the scene and that, as far as he knew, the only other people who knew of the disaster were the NATO HQ in Italy.
More especially, he didn't want any person or persons in her company to know.
‘But — but it will be too late to save anyone.’
‘It's already too late, young lady.
But they'll send divers down to investigate, to find out whether it's a passenger-carrying jet or not and to try to ascertain the cause of the accident.’
He was looking, without seeming to look, at Andropulos as he said the last words and felt almost certain that he saw a flicker of expression cross his face.
Andropulos's captain, Aristotle, spoke for the first time.
‘How deep is this plane, Commander?’
‘Seventeen, eighteen fathoms.
Just over thirty metres or so.’
‘Thirty metres,’ Andropulos said.
‘Even if they do get inside — and there's no guarantee that they will be able to do so — won't it be difficult to move around and see anything?’
‘I can guarantee they'll get inside.
There are such things as oxyacetylene torches, you know.
And they'll have powerful underwater torches.
But they won't bother with either of  those things.
The divers will carry down a couple of slings with them.
A diving ship will have no difficulty at all in bringing the fuselage to the surface.
Then they'll be able to examine the plane at their leisure.’
This time there was no trace of expression in Andropulos's face: Talbot wondered if he, Andropulos, had become aware that such changes in expression were being sought for.
Jenkins entered and handed Talbot a sealed envelope.
‘From the radio-room, sir.
Myers said it was urgent.’
Talbot nodded, opened the envelope, extracted and read the slip of paper it had held.
He slipped it in his pocket and stood.
‘My apologies, ladies and gentlemen.
I have to go to the bridge.
Come along with me, Number One.
I'll join you at seven o'clock for dinner.’
Once outside, Van Gelder said: ‘You really are a fearful liar, sir.
A fearfully good liar, I mean.’
‘Andropulos isn't half bad, either.’
‘He's had practice.
Between the two of you — well, in his own phrase, it's a close-run thing.
Ah, thank you.’
He unfolded the slip of paper Talbot had handed him.
‘’ Vitally urgent you remain in closest contact with downed plane Stop will join you earliest in the morning Stop Hawkins’.
Isn't that the Vice-Admiral, sir?’
‘None other.
Vitally urgent and flying down to see us.
What do you make of that?’
‘I make it that he knows something that we don't.’
‘Indeed.
Incidentally, you've kind of forgotten to tell me about your visit to sonar.’
‘Sorry about that, sir.
I had something else on my mind.’
‘Somebody, not something.
Having seen her I can understand.
Well?’
‘The noise from the plane?
Tick…tick…tick.
Could be anything.
Halzman half suggested it might be some sort of timing device.
Could be that he's right.
I don't want to  sound alarmist, sir, but I don't think I like it very much.’
‘I don't particularly care for it myself.
Well, then, the radio-room.’
‘I thought you said you were going to the bridge?’
‘That was for Andropulos's benefit.
The less that character knows about anything the better.
I think he's cunning, astute and alert for the slightest nuances.’
‘Is that why you didn't make any reference to the engine-room explosion?’
‘Yes.
I may, of course, be doing him a massive injustice.
For all I know he may be as fresh and innocent as the dawn's early dew.’
‘You don't really believe that, sir.’
‘No.’
Myers was alone in the radio-room.
‘Another message to Rome,’ Talbot said.
‘Again Code B. To Vice-Admiral Hawkins.
Message received.
Strongly advise that you come soonest.
Tonight.
Report repeated two and a half second ticking sounds from plane.
Could be timing device.
Please phone immediately.’
‘A ticking sound, possibly a timing device, Talbot says.’
Vice-Admiral Hawkins was standing by Carson's chair as the general read and re-read the slip of paper Hawkins had just handed him.
‘A timing device.
We don't have to discuss the implications of this.’
From his high-rise office Carson looked out over the roofs of Rome, then at the colonel across the desk, then finally up at Hawkins.
He pressed a button on his desk.
‘Get me the Pentagon.’
The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff was also standing as the man behind the desk read the slip of paper he had just  been handed.
He read it three times, laid it down carefully on the desk, smoothed it out and looked across at the Chairman.
His face looked drawn and tired and old.
‘We know what this means, or what it could mean.
If anything goes wrong the international repercussions will be enormous, General.’
‘I'm afraid I'm fully aware of that, sir.
Apart from the universal condemnation, we will become the pariah dog, the outcasts of the world.’
‘And no hint of any Soviet involvement.’
‘None whatsoever.
No proof, direct or indirect.
As far as the world is concerned, they are blameless.
My first reaction is that they are indeed blameless.
My second thoughts are exactly the same.
I can see no way they are linked with this.
We bear the burden, sir.’
‘We bear the burden.
And will stand condemned before the court of mankind.’
The General made no reply.
‘The Chiefs have no suggestions?’
‘None that I regard as very useful.
In short, bluntly, none.
We have to rely on our people out there.
Carte blanche , sir?’
‘We have no option.
How good are your men in the Mediterranean?’
‘The very best.
No rhetoric, sir.
I mean it.’
‘And this British vessel on the spot?’
‘The frigate Ariadne ?
A very special vessel indeed, I am given to understand.
Whether or not it can cope with this, no one can say.
There are too many imponderables.’
‘Do we pull it out?’
‘That's not for my decision, sir.’
‘I know it's not.’
He was silent for a long moment then said: ‘It may be our only hope.
It stays.’
‘Yes, Mr President.’
Talbot was alone with Van Gelder on the bridge when the radio-room called.
‘I have voice contact with Rome, sir.
Where will you take it?’
‘Here.’
He gestured to Van Gelder to take up a listening phone.
‘Talbot here.’
‘Hawkins.
I'm leaving shortly with two civilians for Athens.
You'll have a phone call from there letting you know our estimated time of arrival.
We'll be landing on Thera Island.
Have a launch standing by to meet us.’
‘Yes, sir.
Take a taxi down to Athinio — there's a new quay about two miles south of the Thira Village anchorage.’
‘My map shows that the Thira anchorage is nearer.’
‘What your map may not show is that the only way down to Thira anchorage is by mule-track down a precipitous cliff.
A seven-hundred-foot cliff, to be precise.’
‘Thank you, Talbot.
A life saved.
You have not forgotten my twin bêtes noires , my fatal flaws.
Till this evening, then.’
‘What bêtes noires ?’
Van Gelder said.
‘What flaws?’
‘He hates horses.
I would imagine the detestation extends to mules.
And he suffers from acrophobia.’
‘That sounds a very nasty thing to suffer from.
And what might that be?’
‘Vertigo.
A fear of heights.
Almost got him disbarred from entry to the Navy.
He had a powerful aversion to climbing up rigging.’
‘You know him well, then?’
‘Pretty well.
Now, this evening.
I'd normally send young Henri to pick anybody up but Vice-Admiral Hawkins and the two no doubt equally distinguished civilians who are with him are not anybody.
So we do it in style.
A Lieutenant-Commander, I thought.’
‘My pleasure, sir.’
‘And tell them all you know about the plane, the Delos and  the survivors.
Also our suspicions about the survivors.
Saves the time when they get here.’
‘I'll do that.
Speaking about the survivors, when I go ashore do you want me to take them along and dump them?’
‘You are unwell, Number One?’
‘I'm fine.
Didn't for a moment think you'd want them out of your sight.
And we couldn't very well abandon the two young ladies on that barren rock there.’
‘It's as well the islanders can't hear you.
There's fourteen hundred people in the Thira township and there's a fair amount of tourist accommodation.
And speaking again of the survivors, not to mention our three other visitors, we'll have to find sleeping accommodation for them.
The Admiral can have the admiral's cabin — it'll be the first time an admiral has slept there.
There are three empty cabins.
You can have mine, I'll sleep here or in the chart-room.
The rest, well, you fix it.’
‘Five minutes, said he confidently.’
He was back in forty-five.
‘Took me a little longer than I thought.
Ticklish problems.’
‘Who's got my cabin?’
‘Irene.
Eugenia has mine.’
‘It took you three-quarters of an hour to arrange that?’
‘Decisions, decisions.
Calls for a little delicacy and a modicum of finesse.’
‘My word, you do do yourselves well, Commander,’ Andropulos said.
He sipped some claret.
‘Or is this a special treat for us?’
‘Standard fare, I assure you.’
Andropulos, whom Grierson had reported as having a remarkable affinity for scotch, seemed relaxed to the point of garrulity.
Talbot would have taken long odds that he was cold sober.
He talked freely about quite a number of subjects, but had not once broached  the question of being sent ashore.
It was clear that he and Talbot had at least one thing in common— the wish that he remain aboard the Ariadne .
Jenkins came in and spoke softly to Van Gelder, who looked at Talbot.
‘Call from the radio-room.
Shall I take it?’
Talbot nodded.
Van Gelder left and returned within half a minute.
‘Call was delayed, sir.
Difficulty in contacting us.
They will be there in less than half an hour.
I'd better go now.’
‘I'm expecting visitors later this evening,’ Talbot said.
‘I shall have to ask you not to come to the wardroom for some time after they come.
Not for too long.
Twenty minutes at the most.’
‘Visitors?’
Andropulos said.
‘At this time of the evening.
Who on earth are they?’
‘I'm sorry, Mr Andropulos.
This is a naval vessel.
There are certain things I can't discuss with civilians.’
Vice-Admiral Hawkins was the first up the gangway.
He shook Talbot's hand warmly.
The Admiral didn't go in much for saluting.
‘Delighted to see you again, John.
Or I would be if it weren't for the circumstances.
And how are you, my boy?’
‘Fine, sir.
Again, considering the circumstances.’
‘And the children?
Little Fiona and Jimmy?’
‘In the best, thank you, sir.
You've come a long way in a short time.’
‘Needs must when the devil drives.
And he's sitting on my tail right now.’
He turned to the two men who had followed him up the gangway.
‘Professor Benson.
Dr Wickram.
Gentlemen, Commander Talbot, the captain of the Ariadne.’
‘If you will come with me, gentlemen.
I'll have your gear taken to your quarters.’
Talbot led them to the wardroom and gestured them to their seats.
‘You want me to get my priorities right?’
‘Certainly.’
Talbot pressed a bell and Jenkins came in.
‘A large gin and tonic for those two gentlemen,’ Hawkins said.
‘Lots of ice.
They're Americans.
Large scotch and water for me.
Quarters, you said.
What quarters?’
‘You haven't been aboard since before commissioning but you won't have forgotten.
For an admiral, an admiral's quarters.
Never been used.’
‘How perfectly splendid.
Honoured, I'm sure.
And for my two friends here?’
‘A cabin apiece.
Also never been used.
I think they'll find them quite comfortable.
I'd like to bring along some of my officers, sir.’
‘But of course.
Whom did you have in mind?’
‘Surgeon-Commander Grierson.’
‘Know him,’ Hawkins said.
‘Very wise bird.’
‘Lieutenant Denholm.
Our electronic Wunderkind .
I know you've met him, sir.’
‘That I have.’
He looked at his two friends, smiling broadly.
‘You'll have to mind your p's and q's here.
Lieutenant Denholm is the heir to an earldom.
The genuine article.
Fearfully languid and aristocratic.
Don't be deceived for an instant.
Mind like a knife.
As I told General Carson, he's so incredibly advanced in his electronic speciality that your high-tech whizzkids in Silicon Valley wouldn't even begin to understand what he's talking about.’
‘Then there's Lieutenant McCafferty, our senior engineer, and, of course, Lieutenant-Commander Van Gelder whom you've already met.’
‘For the first time.
Favourably impressed.
Very.
Struck me as an able lad indeed.’
‘He's all that.
More.
If I were laid low tomorrow you wouldn't have to worry.
He could take over the Ariadne at any moment and you wouldn't notice the difference.’
‘From you, that's worth any half-dozen testimonials.
I'll bear it in mind.’
Introductions completed, Hawkins looked at Talbot and his four officers and said: ‘The first question in your minds, of course, gentlemen, is why I have brought two civilians with me.
First I will tell you who they are and then, when I have explained the purpose of our coming, you will understand why they are here.
In passing, I might say how extraordinarily lucky I am to have them here with me.
They seldom leave  their home state of California: it just so happened that both were attending an international conference in Rome.
‘Professor Alec Benson here.’
Benson was a large, calm man in his early sixties, grey of hair, cherubic and cheerful of countenance, and wearing a sports jacket, flannels and polo jersey, all of varying shades of grey and all so lived in, comfortable and crumpled that he could well have inherited them from his grandfather.
‘The Professor is the director of the seismological department of the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena.
He's also a geologist and vulcanologist.
Anything that makes the earth bang or shake or move is his field.
Regarded by everybody in that line as the world's leading expert — he chaired, or was chairing until I so rudely interrupted him, an international conference in seismology in Rome.
You all know, of course, what seismology is.’
‘A rough idea,’ Talbot said.
‘A kind of science — I think ‘study’ would be a better word for it — of the causes and effects of earthquakes.’
‘A kind of science?’
Hawkins said.
‘I am distressed.
It is a science.’
‘No offence meant, I'm sure, and none taken,’ Benson said equably.
‘The Commander is perfectly correct.
Far from being a science, we're still only dabbling on the periphery of the subject.’
‘Ah, well.
Dr Wickram is a physicist, as well known in his own field as Professor Benson is in his.
He specializes in nuclear physics.’
Talbot looked at Dr Wickram who, in startling contrast to Benson, was thin, dark and immaculately dressed in a blue suit, white button-down collar and a black tie, the funereal hue of which went rather well with the habitual severity of his expression, and said: ‘Does your interest in nuclear physics extend to nuclear weaponry, Dr Wickram?’
‘Well, yes, it does rather.’
‘You and the Professor are to be congratulated.
There  should be some kind of civilian medal for this.
Vice-Admiral Hawkins, of course, is acting in the line of duty.
I would have thought you two gentlemen should have stayed in Rome.
I mean, isn't it safer there?’
Hawkins cleared his throat.
‘You wouldn't dream of stealing a superior officer's thunder, would you?’
‘I wouldn't dream of it, sir.’
‘Well, to the point.
Your two signals duly received.
The first gave rise to some concern, the second was profoundly disturbing.’
‘The ‘tick…tick…tick’ bit, sir?’
‘The ‘tick…tick…tick’ bit.
Both signals were sent to the Pentagon, the second one also going to the White House.
I should imagine that the word consternation would suitably describe their reaction.
Guessing, of course, but I think the speed of the reply to the second message showed how badly shaken they were.
Normally, it can take forever — well, even months at times — to extract just a nugget of information from the Pentagon, but this time minutes only.
When I read their reply, I could understand all too well.’
Hawkins paused, possibly for suitable dramatic effect.
‘So can I,’ Talbot said.
‘What do you mean?’
‘If I were the Pentagon or the White House I'd be upset too if a US Air Force bomber or cargo plane, carrying a load of bombs, suddenly disappeared into the sea.
Especially if the bombs — or missiles — that plane was carrying were of the nuclear variety.
Even more especially if they were hydrogen bombs.’
‘Well, damn your eyes, Talbot, you do deprive ageing vice-admirals of the simpler pleasures of life.
There goes my thunder.’
‘It wasn't all that difficult, sir.
We had already guessed it was a bomber.
Civilian planes, with the exception of Concorde, don't fly at the height at which we picked it up.
We'd  have had to be pretty stupid not to assume what we did.
Bombers usually carry bombs.
American reaction made it inevitable that it was an American plane.
And you wouldn't have come down here in such a tearing hurry, and be accompanied by an expert in nuclear weaponry, unless the bombs were of a rather nasty variety.
I can't imagine anything nastier than hydrogen bombs.’
‘Nor can anyone.
When you put it the way you put it, I suppose I should have guessed that you had guessed.
Even the Pentagon don't know or won't divulge what type of plane it was.
They suggest an advanced design of the C.141 Starlifter cargo plane.
It was refuelled in the Azores and heading for Greece.
From your first message we gathered you saw the plane crash into the sea but couldn't identify it.
Why not?’
‘Number One, show the Admiral why not.’
Van Gelder produced a sheaf of photographs and handed them to Hawkins who flipped through them quickly, and then, more slowly, a second time.
He sighed and looked up.
‘Intriguing, I suppose, if you're a connoisseur of the pattern effects of smoke and flame.
I'm not.
All I can make out is what I take to be the outer port engine and that's no help at all.
And it gives no indication as to the source or cause of the fire.’
‘I think Van Gelder would disagree with you, sir,’ Talbot said.
‘He's of the opinion that the fire originated in the nose cone and was caused by an internal explosion.
I agree with him.
It certainly wasn't brought down by ship-based anti-aircraft fire.
We would have known.
The only alternative is a heat-seeking missile.
Two objections to that.
Such a missile would have targeted on the engines, not the fuselage and, more importantly, there are no vessels in the area.
Our radar would have picked them up.
As a corollary to that, the missile didn't come from an aircraft, either.
The Admiral will not need reminding that the radar aboard the Ariadne is as advanced as any in the world.’
‘That may no longer be true, sir.’
Denholm's tone was deferential but not hesitant.
‘And if it is true, then we can't discount missiles just like that.
This is not a dissenting opinion, I'm just exploring another possibility.’
‘Explore away, Lieutenant,’ Hawkins said.
‘Any light that can illumine the darkness of our ignorance, etcetera, etcetera.’
‘I'm not sure I'm all that good as a beacon, sir.
I do know that I don't go along with the belief that the Soviets always trail the West in technological advancement.
Whether this belief is carefully and officially nurtured I do not know.
I admit that the Soviets spend a certain amount of time and trouble in extracting military secrets from the West.
I say ‘certain’ because they don't have to try all that hard: there appears to be a steady supply of scientists, both American and British, who, along with associates not necessarily involved in direct research at all, are perfectly willing to sell the Soviets anything they want — provided, that is , the price is right.
I believe this to be true in the case of computers where they do lag behind the West: I do not believe it in the case of radar.
‘In this field, Plessey, of Britain, probably leads the West.
They have developed a revolutionary new radar system, the Type 966, which is fitted, or about to be fitted, to Invincible-class aircraft-carriers, the Type 42 Sheffield-class destroyers and the new Type 23 Norfolk-class frigates.
This new radar is designed not only to detect and track aircraft and sea-skimming missiles, but it also —’
Hawkins cleared his throat.
‘Sorry to interrupt, Denholm.
You may know this but surely it comes under the heading of classified information?’
‘If it did, I wouldn't talk about it even in this company, sir.
It's in the public domain.
As I was about to say, it's also able to control Sea Dart and Seawolf missiles in flight and home them in on their targets with great accuracy.
I also understand they're virtually immune to jamming and radar decoys.
If  Plessey have done this, the Soviets may well have also.
They're not much given to advertising such things.
But I believe they have the know-how.’
Hawkins said: ‘And you also believe, in this case, that a missile was the culprit?’
‘Not at all, sir.
I'm only suggesting a possibility.
The Captain and Lieutenant-Commander Van Gelder may well be right.
Trouble is, I know nothing about explosives.
Maybe there are missiles with such a limited charge that they cause only limited damage.
I would have thought that a standard missile would have ensured that a plane it brought down would not have struck the sea with its fuselage relatively intact but in a thousand pieces.
Again, I simply don't know.
I just wonder what the security was like at the base from which that plane took off in the States.’
‘Security?
In the case of a super-sensitive plane such as this?
Total.’
‘Does the Admiral really believe there is such a thing as total security?’
The Admiral didn't say what he believed, he just sipped his scotch in silence.
‘There were four major air disasters last year, all four planes involved having taken off from airports which were regarded as having maximum security.
In all four cases terrorists found the most stringent airport checks childishly easy to circumvent.’
‘Those were civilian airports.
This would be a top-secret US Air Force base, manned exclusively by US Air Force personnel, specially chosen for their position, rigidly screened, backgrounds exhaustively researched, and all subjected to lie-detector tests.’
‘With respect to the Vice-Admiral, and our American friends, lie-detector tests — more accurately, polygraph tests — are rubbish.
Any moderately intelligent person can be trained to beat the polygraph test, which, after all, depends on crudely primitive measurements of pulse rate, blood pressure and perspiration.
You can be trained to give right answers, wrong answers or merely confusing ones and the scrutineer can't tell the difference.’
‘Doesn't measure up to your idea of electronics, eh?’
‘Nothing to do with electronics, sir.
Polygraphs belong to the horse-and-buggy era.
You've just used the word super-sensitive, sir.
The Ariadne , if I may put it that way, is a hotbed of super-sensitivity.
How many members of this crew have ever been subjected to a polygraph test?
None.’
Hawkins considered his glass for a few moments, then looked up at Talbot.
‘Should the need arise, Captain, how long would it take you to contact the Pentagon?’
‘Immediately.
Well, half a minute.
Now?’
‘No.
Wait.
Have to think about it.
Trouble is, even the Pentagon is having difficulty in extracting information from this Air Force base which is, I believe, somewhere in Georgia.
The Pentagon's own fault, really, although you can't expect them to admit this.
They've so inculcated this passion for absolute secrecy into the senior officers of all four services that no one is prepared to reveal anything without the permission of the commanding officer of the Air Force base or ship or whatever.
In this particular case, the commanding officer who, to the Pentagon's distress, would appear to have a human side to his nature, has elected to take twenty-four hours off.
No one appears to know where he is.’
Van Gelder said: ‘Makes it a bit awkward, sir, doesn't it, if war breaks out in the next half-hour?’
‘No.
Base remains in full operational readiness.
But there's still no relaxation of the iron-bound rules concerning the release of classified information.’
Talbot said: ‘You wouldn't be sitting here unless they'd released some information.’
‘Naturally not.
The news they've released is vague and incomplete but all very, very bad.
One report says there were twelve nuclear weapons aboard, another fifteen.
Whether they were missiles or bombs was not disclosed: what was  disclosed was that they were hydrogen devices, each one in the monster megaton range, twelve to fifteen megatons.
The plane was also understood to be carrying two of the more conventional atom bombs.’
‘I think I'll break a self-imposed regulation and have a scotch myself,’ Talbot said.
A half-minute passed in silence, then he said quietly: ‘This is worse than I ever dreamed.’
‘Dream?’
Grierson said.
‘Nightmare.’
‘Dream or nightmare, it won't matter to us,’ Lieutenant Denholm said.
‘Not when we're drifting through the stratosphere in vaporized orbit.’
‘A hydrogen bomb, Dr Wickram,’ Talbot said.
‘Let's call it that.
Is there any way it can spontaneously detonate?’
‘In itself, impossible.
The President of the United States has to press one button, the man on the spot another: the radio frequencies are so wildly different that the chances of anyone happening on the right combination are billions to one.’
‘Is there a chance — say a billion to one — that the Soviets might have this combination?’
‘None.’
‘You say it's impossible to detonate in itself.
Is there any other way, some external means, whereby it could be detonated?’
‘I don't know.’
‘Does that mean you're not saying or that you're not sure?
I don't think, Dr Wickram, that this is the time to dwell on such verbal niceties.’
‘I'm not sure.
If there were a sufficiently powerful explosion close by it might go up by sympathetic detonation.
We simply don't know.’
‘The possibility has never been explored?
I mean, no experiments?’
‘I should hope not,’ Lieutenant Denholm said.
‘If such an experiment were successful, I wouldn't care to be within thirty or forty miles at the time.’
‘That is one point.’
For the first time, Dr Wickram essayed a smile, but it was a pretty wintry one.
‘In the second place, quite frankly, we have never envisaged a situation where such a possibility might arise.
We could, I suppose, have carried out such an experiment without the drastic consequences the Lieutenant has suggested.
We could detonate a very small atom bomb in the vicinity of another.
Even a charge of conventional explosive in the vicinity of a small atom bomb would suffice.
If the small atom bomb went up, so then would the hydrogen bomb.
Everybody knows that it's the fissioning of an atom bomb that triggers off the fusion of a hydrogen bomb.’
Talbot said: ‘Is there any timing device, specifically a delayed one, fitted in a hydrogen bomb?’
‘None.’
The flat finality in the voice left no room for argument.
‘According to Vice-Admiral Hawkins, there may be a couple of conventional atom bombs aboard the sunken plane.
Could they be fitted with timing devices?’
‘Again, I don't know.
Not my field.
But I see no reason why they couldn't be.’
‘For what purpose?’
‘Search me.
Realms of speculation, Captain, where your guess is as good as mine.
The only thing that occurs to me is a mine, a marine mine.
Neatly dispose of any passing aircraft carrier, I should think.’
‘That's thinking small,’ Van Gelder said.
‘A hydrogen mine would neatly dispose of any passing battle fleet.’
‘Whose passing fleet?
One of ours?
In wartime as in peace-time, the seas are open to all.’
‘Not the Black Sea.
Not in wartime.
But a bit far-fetched.
How would this mine be activated?’
‘My continued ignorance must be a great disappointment.
I know nothing about mines.’
‘Well, time was when mines were either magnetic or acoustic.
Degaussing has made magnetic mines passé .
So, acoustic.
Triggered by a passing ship's engines.
Interesting, isn't it?
I mean, we've passed over it several times since we first heard the ticking and we've triggered nothing.
So far.
So maybe that ticking doesn't mean that the mine is set to go off any time.
Maybe it's not activated — by which I mean ready to go off when a vessel passes over it — until the ticking stops.
Or maybe it's just set to go up whenever the ticking stops.
Trouble is, we've no idea what started the ticking in the first place.
I can't see any way it could have been deliberate.
Must have been caused by the explosion that brought down the plane or by the impact of striking the water.’
‘You're a source of great comfort, Van Gelder,’ Hawkins said heavily.
‘I admit, sir, that the alternatives aren't all that attractive.
My own conclusions, which in this case are probably completely worthless, are that this ticking represents a period of grace — I mean that it cannot explode — as long as the ticking lasts and that it's not designed to explode when the ticking stops but is then activated and ready to explode when triggered by passing engines.
A guess, sir, but not necessarily a wild one.
I'm going on the assumption that this mine could well be dropped by a surface vessel as well as a plane.
In that case, the ship would want to be a large number of miles away before the mine was activated.
So it would start the timing mechanism running at the moment it dropped it over the side.
I am sure, sir, that the Pentagon could provide some illumination on this subject.’
‘I'm sure it could,’ Hawkins said.
‘And your conclusions are far from worthless, they make a good deal of sense to me.
Well, Captain, what do you propose to do about all this?’
‘I rather thought, sir, that your purpose in coming down here was to tell me what to do.’
‘Not at all.
I just came to make myself au fait with the  situation and to garner some information in return for some I give you.’
‘Does this mean, Admiral — I say this carefully, you understand — that I have a hand in making the decisions?’
‘You don't have a hand.
You damn well make them.
I'll endorse them.’
‘Thank you.
Then my first decision — or, if you like, a suggestion respectfully made — is that you and your two friends depart for Rome immediately.
It's not going to help anyone, and will be a considerable loss to both the scientific and naval communities, if you three gentlemen elect for self-immolation.
Besides, by asking me to make the decisions, you have implied that there's nothing you can do here that my crew and I can't.
Lieutenant-Commander Van Gelder is at your immediate service.’
‘The Lieutenant-Commander will have to wait.
For me, at least.
Your logic is sound but I'm not feeling very logical at the moment.
But I do agree as far as my two friends are concerned.
They could be back at their international conference in Rome tomorrow, without anyone having noticed their absence.
We have no right to put the lives of civilians, not to mention two such eminent civilians, at risk.’
‘You've just put your finger on it, Admiral.’
Benson puffed comfortably on a sadly blackened pip–.
‘Eminent or not, we are civilians.
Civilians don't take orders from the military.
I prefer the Aegean to Rome.’
‘Agreed,’ Wickram said.
‘Ludicrous.
Preposterous.’
‘You don't seem to have any more clout with your two friends than I have with the three of you.’
Talbot produced two slips of paper from his inner pocket.
‘I suggest you sign those, sir.’
Hawkins took them, looked thoughtfully at Talbot, scanned the two sheets, then read from one of them.
‘'Request urgent immediate dispatch of nearest salvage or diving vessel to 36.21N, 25.22E due south Cape Akrotiri, Thera Island, to recover one sunken plane, one sunken yacht.
Further request immediate dispatch by plane to Thera Island two deep-sea divers with diving equipment for four, repeat four.
Priority one double A. Signed Vice-Admiral Hawkins.’'
Hawkins looked at Benson and Wickram.
‘This message is directed to Rear-Admiral Blyth, HMS Apollo .
Rear-Admiral Blyth is the operational commander of European section of NATO sea forces in the Eastern Mediterranean.
Priority one double A means drop everything else, this has absolute priority.
Admiral Hawkins is, I take it, my good self.
Why, Captain, the request for four diving suits?’
‘Van Gelder and I are trained divers, sir.
Ex-submariners.’
‘I see.
Second signal directed to Defence Minister, Athens.
‘Urgent contact Air Control Athens airport for information re aircraft, thought American, that crashed 1415 today south of Thera Island.
Did it ask permission for flight path to, and landing in, Athens or other Greek airfield?
Further request you enlist immediate aid of police and Intelligence re anything known about one Syros Andropulos, owner of yacht Delos .’
This message is also, I'm flattered to observe, signed by me.
Well, well, well, Captain, I nearly did you a great injustice a minute or two ago, I thought you had not perhaps addressed yourself to the problem on hand.
But you have, and in some style and quite some time before I arrived.
Two questions.’
‘The aircraft and Andropulos?’
Hawkins nodded.
‘At 43,000 feet, the pilot didn't have to bother to notify anyone about his presence.
He knew he was alone in the sky.
But once he started descending, it was a different matter entirely.
He wouldn't be too keen on bumping into anyone, especially not with the cargo he had on board.
And, of course, he would require permission to land.’
‘But why Greece?’
‘Because the flight path he was following when we first located him would have taken him to Ankara in Turkey, or some place pretty close by.
Now, even although Turkey is — nominally, at least— a member of NATO, I'm sure the Americans have no air bases at, or near, Ankara.
I don't even know if they have any air bases at all in Turkey.
I'm certain they have no missile launching bases.
In Greece, the Americans have both.
So, Greece.
As for Andropulos, several of my officers and I think he's a leery customer and a suspicious one.
Not one thing that could be proved in a court of law, of course.
We suspect that he may know something about the downing of this plane that we don't know he knows, if you follow me.
He says the Delos was sunk as the result of an explosion.
But it's the old question of did he fall or was he pushed?
In other words, was the explosion accidental or deliberate?
If we could hoist the Delos to the surface we might well find out.’
‘We might well indeed.
Still, first things first.’
Hawkins looked briefly at the signals again.
‘Seem to fit the task admirably.
I'll gladly sign.’
Hawkins produced a pen, signed and handed the papers to Talbot.
‘As you had all this figured out quite some time, I suspect, before I left Rome, why didn't you send those signals yourself?’
‘Lowly commanders don't give the instructions to Rear-Admiral Blyth.
I haven't the authority.
You have.
That's why I asked you to join us as soon as was possible.
Thanks for the signing, sir.
That was the easy part.
Now comes the difficult part.’
‘Difficult part?’
Hawkins said warily.
‘What difficult part?’
‘Have we the moral right to ask the crew of the salvage vessel or lifting vessel, not to mention the divers, to join us, in Lieutenant Denholm's elegant phrase, in drifting through the stratosphere in vaporized orbit?’
‘Ah.
Yes.
A point, of course.
What do you think?’
‘Again, not a decision for lowly commanders.
Admirals only.’
‘Dear, oh dear.
Then, if things go wrong, you'll have  nothing on your conscience and everything in the world to reproach me with.’
‘If anything goes wrong, sir, I don't think we'll be having too much to say to each other when we're in vaporized orbit.’
‘True.
Mine was an unworthy remark.
No one likes to bear the responsibility for such decisions.
Send the signals.’
‘Very good, sir.
Lieutenant Denholm, ask Myers to come here.’
Hawkins said: ‘I understand — I'm not making comparisons — that the President of the United States was faced with a problem similar to the one you've just confronted me with.
He asked the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff if he should pull out the Ariadne which they knew, of course, was sitting over the crashed plane.
The Chairman said, quite rightly, that that wasn't his responsibility, the old and honoured American tradition of passing the buck.
The President decided that the Ariadne should stay.’
‘Well, I could come all over bitter and say that's very noble and gallant of the President, especially as there's no chance of his being blown out of his seat in the Oval Office when this little lot goes up, but I won't.
It's not a decision I would care to have to make.
I assume he gave a reason for his decision?’
‘Yes.
The greatest good of the greatest number.’
Myers came in.
Talbot handed him the two messages.
‘Get these off at once.
Code B in both cases.
To both messages add ‘Immediate, repeat Immediate, confirmation is requested.’'
Myers left and Talbot said: ‘It is my understanding, Admiral, that in your capacity as officer commanding the naval forces in the Eastern Mediterranean you have the power to overrule the President's instructions.’
‘Yes.’
‘Have you done so?’
‘No.
You will ask why.
Same reason as the President.
The  greatest good of the greatest number.
Why the questioning, Captain?
You wouldn't leave here even if I gave a direct order.’
‘I'm just a bit puzzled about the reason given — the greatest good of the greatest number.
Bringing a rescue vessel, which admittedly is my idea, will only increase the greatest danger to a greater number.’
‘I don't think you quite appreciate just how great the greatest number is in this case.
I think Professor Benson here can enlighten you.
Enlighten all of us, for I'm rather vague about it.
That's why Professor Benson is here.’
‘The good Professor is not at his best,’ Benson said.
‘He's hungry.’
‘Most remiss of us,’ Talbot said.
‘Of course you haven't eaten.
Dinner, say, in twenty minutes?’
‘I'd settle for a sandwich.’
Talbot looked at Hawkins and Wickram, both of whom nodded.
He pressed a bell.
‘I'm a bit vague about it myself,’ Benson said.
‘Certain facts are beyond dispute.
What we're sitting on top of at this moment is one of them.
According to which estimate of the Pentagon's you choose to believe, there's something like a total of between 144 and 225 megatons of high explosive lying down there.
Not that the difference between the lowest and highest estimate is of any significance.
The explosion of a pound of high explosive in this wardroom would kill us all.
What we are talking about is the explosive power of, let me see, yes, four and a half billion pounds.
The human mind cannot comprehend, differences in estimates become irrelevant.
All we can say with certainty is that it would be the biggest man-made explosion in history, which doesn't sound so bad when you say it quickly as I'm saying it now.
‘The results of such an explosion are quite unknown but stupefyingly horrendous however optimistic your guess might be, if optimistic is the word I'm looking for, which it isn't.
It might fracture the earth's crust, with cataclysmic results.
It  might destroy part of the ozone layer, which would permit the sun's ultra-violet radiation either to tan us or fry us, depending upon how large a hole had been blasted in the stratosphere: it might equally well cause the onset of a nuclear winter, which is so popular a topic among both scientists and laymen these days.
And lastly, but by no means least, are the tsunami effects, vast tidal waves usually generated by undersea earthquakes: those tsunami have been responsible for the deaths of tens of thousands of people at a time when they struck low-lying coastal areas.’
Benson reached out a grateful hand for a glass that Jenkins had brought.
Talbot said: ‘If you're trying to be encouraging, Professor, you're not doing too well at it.’
‘Ah, better, much better.’
Benson lowered his glass and sighed.
‘I needed that.
There are times when I'm quite capable of terrifying even myself.
Encouraging?
That's only the half of it.
Santorini's the other half.
In fact, Santorini is the major part of it.
Gifted though mankind is in creating sheer wanton destruction, nature has him whacked every time.’
‘Santorini?’
Wickram said.
‘Who or what is Santorini?’
‘Ignorance, George, ignorance.
You and your fellow physicists should look out from your ivory towers from time to time.
Santorini is less than a couple of miles from where you're sitting.
Had that name for many centuries.
Today it's officially known, as it was five thousand years ago at the height of its civilization, as Thera Island.
‘The island, by whatever name, has had a very turbulent seismic and volcanic history.
Don't worry, George, I'm not about to sally forth on my old hobby-horse, not for long anyway, just long enough to try to explain what the greatest number means in the term the greatest good of the greatest number.
‘It is commonly enough imagined that earthquakes and volcanic eruptions are two faces of the same coin.
This is not necessarily so.
The venerable Oxford English Dictionary  states that an earthquake is specifically a convulsion of the earth's surface caused by volcanic forces.
The dictionary is specifically wrong: it should have used the word ‘rarely’ instead.
Earthquakes, especially the big ones, are caused when two tectonic plates — segments of the earth's crust that float freely on the molten magma beneath — come into contact with one another and one plate bangs into another or rubs alongside it or dives under it.
The only two recorded and monitored giant earthquakes in history were of this type — in Ecuador in 1906 and Japan in 1933.
Similarly, but on a lesser scale — although still very big — the Californian earthquakes of San Francisco and Owens Valley were due to crustal movement and not to volcanoes.
‘It is true that practically all the world's 500–600 active volcanoes — someone may have bothered to count them, I haven't — are located along convergent plate boundaries.
It is equally true that they are rarely associated with earthquakes.
There have been three large volcanic eruptions along such boundaries in very recent years: Mt St Helens in the state of Washington, El Chichón in Mexico and one just north-west of Bogotá in Columbia.
The last one — it happened only last year — was particularly nasty.
A 17,000-foot volcano called Nevada del Ruiz, which seems to have been slumbering off and on for the past four hundred years, erupted and melted the snow and ice which covered most of its upper reaches, giving rise to an estimated seventy-five million cubic yards’ mudslide.
The town of Armero stood in its way.
25,000 people died there.
The point is that none of those was accompanied by an earthquake.
Even volcanoes in areas where there are no established tectonic frontiers are guiltless in this respect: Vesuvius, despite the fact that it buried Pompeii and Herculaneum, Stromboli, Mt Etna and the twin volcanoes of the island of Hawaii have not produced, and do not produce, earthquakes.
‘But the really bad apples in the seismic barrel, and a very  sinister lot those are, too, are the so-called thermal hotspots, plumes or upswellings of molten lava that reach up to or through the earth's crust, giving rise to volcanoes or earthquakes or both.
We talk a lot about those thermal plumes but we really don't know much about them.
We don't know whether they're localized or whether they spread out and lubricate the movements of the tectonic plates.
What we do know is that they can have extremely unpleasant effects.
One of those was responsible for the biggest earthquake of this century.’
‘You have me confused, Professor,’ Hawkins said.
‘You've just mentioned the really big ones, the ones in Japan and Ecuador.
Ah!
But those were monitored and recorded.
This one wasn't?’
‘Certainly it was.
But countries like Russia and China are rather coy about releasing such details.
They have the weird notion that natural disasters reflect upon their political systems.’
‘Is it in order to ask how you know?’
‘Of course.
Governments may elect not to talk to governments but we scientists are an incurably gabby lot.
This quake happened in Tangshan province in north-east China and is the only one ever known to have occurred in a really densely populated area, in this case involving the major cities of Peking and Tientsin.
The primary cause was undoubtedly a thermal plume.
There are no known tectonic plate boundaries in the area but a very ancient boundary may be lurking in the area.
The date was July 27, 1976.’
‘Yesterday,’ Hawkins said.
‘Just yesterday.
Casualties?’
‘Two-thirds of a million dead, three-quarters of a million injured.
Give or take a hundred thousand in each case.
If that sounds flippant or heartless, it's not meant to be.
After a certain arbitrary figure — a hundred thousand, ten thousand, even a thousand, it all depends upon how much your heart and mind can take — any increase in numbers becomes meaningless.
And there's also the factor, of course, that we're referring to faceless unknowns in a far-off land.’
‘I suppose,’ Hawkins said, ‘that that would be what one might call the grand-daddy of them all?’
‘In terms of lives lost, it probably is.
We can't be sure.
What we can be sure of is that Tangshan rates as no more than third in the cataclysmic league.
Just over a century ago the island of Krakatoa in Indonesia blew itself out of existence.
That was quite a bang, literally — the sound of the explosion was heard thousands of miles away.
So much volcanic material was blasted into the stratosphere that the world was still being treated to a series of spectacular sunsets more than three years afterwards.
No one knows the height of the tsunami caused by this eruption.
What we do know is that much of the three great islands bordering the Java Sea — Sumatra, Java and Borneo — and nearly all of the smaller islands inside the sea itself lie below an altitude of 200 feet.
No tally of the dead has ever been made.
It is better, perhaps, that we don't know.’
‘And perhaps it's also better that we don't know what you're going to say next,’ Talbot said.
‘I don't much care for the road you're leading us along.’
‘I don't much care for it myself.’
Benson sighed and sipped some more gin.
‘Anyone ever heard of the word ‘kalliste ’?’
‘Certainly,’ Denholm said.
‘Means most beautiful.
Very ancient.
Goes back to Homeric times.’
‘My goodness.’
Benson peered at him through his pipe smoke.
‘I thought you were the electronics officer?’
‘Lieutenant Denholm is primarily a classicist,’ Talbot said.
‘Electronics is one of his hobbies.’
‘Ah!’
Benson gestured with his thumb.
‘Kalliste was the name given to this little lady before it became either Thera or Santorini, and a more singularly inapt name I cannot imagine.
It was this beautiful lady that blew her top in 1450 BC with four times the explosively destructive power of  Krakatoa.
What had been the cone of a volcano became a circular depression — we call it a caldera — some thirty square miles in area into which the sea poured.
Stirring times, gentlemen, stirring times.
‘Unfortunately those stirring times are still with us.
Santorini has had, and continues to have, a very turbulent seismic history.
Incidentally, mythology has it that there was an even bigger eruption about 2500 BC.
However it hasn't done too badly since 1450 BC.
In 236 BC another eruption separated Therasia from north-west Thera.
Forty years later the islet of old Jaimeni appeared.
There have been bangs and explosions, the appearances and disappearances of islands and volcanoes ever since.
In the late sixteenth century the south coast of Thera, together with the port of Eleusis, vanished under the sea and stayed there.
Even as late as 1956 a considerable earthquake destroyed half the buildings on the west coast of the island.
Santorini, one fears, rests on very shaky foundations.’
Talbot said: ‘What happened in 1450 BC?’
‘Regrettably, our ancestors of some thirty-five centuries back don't seem to have given too much thought to posterity, by which I mean they left no records to satisfy their descendants’ intellectual curiosity.
One can hardly blame them, they had too many urgent and pressing matters on hand at the time to worry about such things.
According to one account, the explosion caused a tidal wave I 65 feet high.
I don't know who worked this out.
I don't believe it.
It is true that water levels on the Alaskan coast, caused by tsunami , earthquake-related tidal waves, have risen over three hundred feet but this only happens when the sea-bed shallows close inshore: in the deep sea, although the tsunami can travel tremendously fast, two, perhaps three, hundred miles an hour, it's rarely more than a ripple on the surface of the water.
‘The experts — an expert may be loosely defined as any person who claims he knows what he's talking about — are  deeply divided as to what happened.
Loggerheads would be too mild a term.
It's an archaeological minefield.
The explosion may have destroyed the Cyclades.
It may have wiped out the Minoan civilization in Crete.
It may have swamped the Aegean isles and the coastal lowlands of Greece and Turkey.
It may have inundated lower Egypt, flooded the Nile and swept back the Red Sea waters to permit the escape of the Israelites fleeing from the Pharaoh.
That's one view.
In 1950 a scientist by the name of Immanuel Velikovsky caused a considerable furore in the historical, religious and astronomical worlds by stating unequivocally that the flooding was caused by Venus which had been wrenched free from Jupiter and made an uncomfortably close encounter with earth.
A very scholarly and erudite work, widely acclaimed at the time but since much maligned.
Professional jealousy?
Upsetting the scientific apple-cart?
A charlatan?
Unlikely — man was a friend and colleague of Albert Einstein.
Then, of course, there was Edmund Halley, he of comet fame — he was equally certain that the flooding had been caused by a passing comet.
‘There's no doubt there was a huge natural disaster all those millennia ago.
As to its cause, take your pick — your guess is as good as mine.
Reverting to the situation we find ourselves in at this moment, there are four facts that can be regarded as certainties or near-certainties.
Santorini is about as stable as the proverbial blancmange.
It's sitting on top of a thermal plume.
Thirdly, the chances are high that it is sitting atop an ancient tectonic boundary that runs east-west under the Mediterranean — this is where the African and Eurasian plates are in contention.
Lastly, and indisputably, we are sitting atop the equivalent of roughly 200 million tons of TNT.
If that goes up I would say it is highly probable — in fact think I should use the word inevitable — that both the thermal plume and the temporarily quiescent earthquake zone along the tectonic fault would be reactivated.
I leave the rest  to your imagination.’
Benson drained his glass and looked around hopefully.
Talbot pressed a bell.
Hawkins said: ‘I don't have that kind of imagination.’
‘None of us has.
Fortunately.
We're talking about the combined and simultaneous effect of a massive thermonuclear detonation, a volcanic eruption and an earthquake.
This lies out with the experience of mankind so we can't visualize those things except to guess, and it's a safe guess, that the reality will be worse than any nightmare.
The only consolation, of course, is that we wouldn't be around to experience anything, nightmare or reality.
‘The extent of potential annihilation beggars belief.
By ‘annihilation’ I mean the total extinction of life, except possibly some subterranean or aquatic forms.
What lava, volcanic cinders, dust and ashes don't get, the blast, air percussion waves, fire and tsunami will.
If there are any survivors — and this could be in an area of thousands of square miles — the massive radio-active fall-out will attend to them.
It hardly seems necessary to talk about such things as nuclear winters and being fried by ultra-violet radiation.
‘So you can see, Commander Talbot, what we mean when we talk about the greatest good of the greatest number.
What does it matter if we have two ships or ten out here, two hundred men or two thousand?
Every extra man, every extra ship may, just may, be of a tiny percentage more help in neutralizing this damn thing on the sea-floor.
What's even two thousand compared to the unimaginable numbers who might perish if that device does detonate sooner or later — almost certainly sooner — if we don't do something about it?’
‘You put things very nicely, Professor, and you make things very clear.
Not that the Ariadne had any intention of going anywhere but it's nice to have a solid reason to stay put.’
Talbot thought briefly.
‘Solves one little problem, anyway.
I have six survivors from the yacht Delos aboard and had  thought to put three of the innocent parties among them ashore but that seems a little pointless now.’
‘Alas, yes.
Whether they are aboard here or on Santorini it will be all one to them when they join us in what Lieutenant Denholm is pleased to call vaporized orbit.’
Talbot lifted a phone, asked for a number, listened briefly and hung up.
‘The sonar room.
Still tick…tick…tick.’
‘Ah,’ Benson said.
‘Tick…tick…tick.’
‘You had an enjoyable tête-à-tête with Mr Andropulos, sir?’
Vice-Admiral Hawkins, together with his two scientist friends, had just come to the bridge in response to Talbot's invitation that they join him.
‘Enjoyable?
Ha!
Thank you, incidentally, for rescuing us.
Enjoyable?
Depends what you mean, John.’
‘I mean were you suitably impressed.’
‘I was suitably unimpressed.
Interested, mind you, but deeply unimpressed.
Man's character, I mean, not his quite extraordinary affinity for strong spirits.
He comes across as whiter than the driven snow.
A man of such transparent honesty has to have something to hide.’
‘And he got his slurring wrong, too,’ Benson said.
‘Slurring, sir?’
‘Just that, Commander.
Thickened his voice in the wrong places to try and convince us that he was under the influence.
Maybe he could have got away with it in his native Greek but not in English.
Cold sober, I believe.
And clever.
Anyway he's clever enough to hoodwink those two charming young ladies he has with him.
I think they're being hoodwinked.’
‘And his bosom friend, Alexander,’ Hawkins said.
‘He's not so clever.
He comes over as what he might well be — a paid-up member, if not a capo, in the Mafia.
He was quite unmoved when I sympathized with them about the loss of the three members of their crew.
Andropulos said he was desolated by the deaths of his treasured friends.
Van Gelder  had already told us that.
Maybe he was overcome by grief, maybe not.
In view of the fact that, like you, I regard him as a fluent liar and consummate actor, I think not.
Maybe he is conscience-stricken at having arranged their deaths.
Again, I think not.
By that I don't mean he couldn't have been responsible for their deaths, I just mean that I don't think he's on speaking terms with his conscience.
Only information I gathered from him is that he abandoned his yacht because he thought his spare fuel tank was going to blow up.
A man of mystery, your new-found friend.’
‘He's all that.
Very mysterious.
He's a multi-millionaire.
Maybe a multi-multi-millionaire.
Not in the usual Greek line of tankers — bottom's fallen out of that market anyway.
He's an international businessman with contacts in many countries.’
Hawkins said: ‘Van Gelder told me nothing of this.’
' 'Of course he didn't.
He didn't know.
Your name attached to a message, Admiral, is a guarantee of remarkably quick service.
Reply received to our query to the Greek Defence Ministry received twenty-five minutes ago.’
‘A businessman.
What kind of business?’
‘They didn't say.
I knew that would be your question so I immediately radioed a request for that information.’
‘Signed by me, of course.’
‘Naturally, sir.
Had it been a different matter I would of course have asked your permission.
But this was the same matter.
The reply came in a few minutes ago listing ten different countries with which he does business.’
‘Again, what kind of business?’
‘Again, they didn't say.’
‘Extraordinarily odd.
What do you make of it?’
‘The Foreign Minister must have authorized this reply.
Maybe censored it a little.
He is, of course, a member of the government.
I would assume that the mysterious Mr Andropulos has friends in the government.’
‘The mysterious Mr Andropulos gets more mysterious by the moment.’
‘Maybe, sir.
Maybe not — not when you consider the list of ten foreign trading partners he has.
Four of them are in cities of what you might regard as being of particular interest — Tripoli, Beirut, Damascus and Baghdad.’
‘Indeed.’
Hawkins thought briefly.
‘Gun-running?’
‘But of course, sir.
Nothing illegal about being gun-runners — Britain and America are hotching with them.
But all governments are holier-than-thou in this respect and never publicly associate themselves with them.
Never do to be classified as a merchant of death.
Could well explain why the Greek government is being so cagey.’
‘Indeed it could.’
‘One thing strikes me as odd: why is Tehran missing from the list?’
‘True, true.
The Iranians — with the possible exception of the Afghans, are more desperate for arms than any other place around.
But gun-runners don't specialize in blowing up planes in flight.’
‘I don't know what we're talking about, sir.
The Hampton Court maze has nothing on this lot.
I have the feeling that it's going to take us quite some time to figure this out.
Fortunately we have more immediate problems to occupy our minds.’
‘Fortunately?’
Hawkins lifted his eyes heavenwards.
‘Did you say fortunately?’
‘Yes, sir.
Vincent?’
This to Van Gelder.
‘I should think Jenkins knows the requirements of the Vice-Admiral and his two friends by this time.’
‘You are not joining us?’
Benson said.
‘Better not.
We expect to be quite busy later on tonight.’
He turned to Van Gelder again.
‘And give orders for our six shipwrecked mariners to return to their cabins.
They are to remain there until further orders.
Post guards to see that those instructions are obeyed.’
‘I think I'd better go and do this myself, sir.’
‘Fine.
I'm all out of tact at the moment.’
Hawkins said: ‘Do you think they'll take kindly to this — ah — incarceration?’
‘Incarceration?
Let's call it protective custody.
Fact is, I don't want them to see what's going on in the next few hours.
I'll explain why in a moment.
‘The Ministry of Defence had another item of information for us.
About the bomber.
It had been in touch with air control in Athens and had been instructed to alter course over the island of Amorgós — that's about forty miles north-east of here — and proceed on a roughly north-north-west course.
Two fighter planes — US Air Force F15s — went up to meet it and escort it in.’
‘Did you see any such planes in the vicinity?’
‘No, sir.
Wouldn't have expected to.
Rendezvous point was to be over the island of Euboea.
The destination was not Athens but Thessalonika.
I assume the Americans have a missile base in that area.
I wouldn't know.
‘Admiral Blyth on the Apollo has also come through.
We've had luck here — two pieces of luck.
A recovery ship en route to Piraeus has been diverted to Santorini.
Diving crews, recovery gear, the lot.
You'll know it, sir.
The Kilcharran .’
‘I know it.
Auxiliary Fleet vessel.
Nominally under my command.
I say ‘nominally’ because I also have the misfortune to know its captain.
Lad called Montgomery.
A very crusty Irishman with a low opinion of Royal Navy regulations.
Not that that matters.
He's brilliant at his job.
Couldn't ask to have a better man around.
Your other item of good news?’
‘There's a plane en route to Santorini at this moment with a couple of divers and diving equipment for four aboard.
Very experienced men, I'm told, a Chief Petty Officer and a Petty Officer.
I've sent Sub-Lieutenant Cousteau ashore to pick them up.
They should be here in half an hour or so.’
‘Excellent, excellent.
And when do you expect the Kilcharran ?’
‘About five in the morning, sir.’
‘By Jove, things are looking up.
You have something in mind?’
‘I have.
With your permission, sir.’
‘Oh, do shut up.’
‘Yes, sir.
It will also answer your two questions — why Van Gelder and I are on the wagon and why the six survivors have been — well, locked up out of harm's way.
When Cousteau comes back with the divers and equipment, Van Gelder and I are going down with them to have a look at this plane.
I'm pretty sure we won't be able to accomplish much.
But we'll be able to assess the extent of the damage to the plane, with luck locate this ticking monster and with even greater luck try to free it.
I know in advance that we're not going to have that kind of luck but it's worth a try.
You'd be the first to agree, sir, that in the circumstances,anything is worth a try.’
‘Yes, yes, but, well, you'll excuse me if I frown a bit but you and Van Gelder are the two most important people on this ship.’
‘No, we're not.
If anything should happen to us personally, and I don't see what can happen, you are, in your spare time, so to speak, accustomed to commanding a battle fleet.
I can hardly see that a mere frigate is going to inconvenience you to all that extent.
And if anything should happen on a catastrophic scale, nobody's going to be worrying too much about anything.’
Wickram said: ‘You are a cold-blooded so-and-so, Commander.’
Hawkins sighed.
‘Not cold blood, Dr Wickram.
Cold logic, I'm afraid.
And when and if you come back up, what then?’
‘Then we're off to have a look at the Delos .
Should be very interesting.
Andropulos may have made a mistake, Admiral, in telling you that he was scared that his spare fuel tank might blow up.
But then, he could have had no idea that we were going to have a look at the Delos .
That's why he's locked up.
I don't want him to know we've got divers aboard and I especially don't want him to see me taking off with divers in the general direction of the Delos .
If we find that there was no spare tank, we shall have to keep an even closer eye on him.
And, for good measure, on his dear friend Alexander and his captain, Aristotle.
I can't believe that that young seaman, Achmed or whatever his name is, or either of the two girls can have anything to do with this.
I think they're along for the purpose of camouflage, respectability, if you will.
In any event we should be back long before the Kilcharran arrives.’
He turned to look at Denholm who had just arrived on the bridge.
‘Well, Jimmy, what drags you away from the fleshpots?’
‘If I may say so with some dignity, sir, I'm trying to set them an example.
I've just had a thought, sir.
If you will excuse me, Admiral?’
‘I think that any thought you might have could be well worth listening to, young man.
Not Greek literature this time, I'll be bound.
This — ah — hobby of yours.
Electronics, is it not?’
‘Well, yes, it is, sir.’
Denholm seemed faintly surprised.
He looked at Talbot.
‘That atom bomb down there, the one that goes tick…tick…tick.
The intention is, or the hope, anyway, to detach it from the other explosives?’
‘If it can be done.’
‘And then, sir?’
‘One thing at a time, Jimmy.
That's as far as my thinking has got so far.’
‘Would we try to de-activate it?’
Denholm looked at Wickram.
‘Do you think it could be de-activated, sir?’
‘I honestly don't know, Lieutenant.
I have powerful suspicions, but I just don't know.
I should have imagined that  this lay more in your field than mine.
Electronics, I mean.
I know how to build those damned weapons but I know nothing about those fancy triggering devices.’
‘Neither do I. Not without knowing how they work.
For that I'd have to see the blueprint, a  diagrammatic layout.
You said you had powerful suspicions.
What suspicions, sir?’
‘I suspect that it can't be de-activated.
In fact, I'm certain the process is irreversible.
The second suspicion is also a certainty.
I'm damn sure that I'm not going to be the one to try.’
‘That makes two of us.
So what other options are open to us?’
Benson said: ‘May a total ignoramus venture an opinion?
Why don't we take it to some safe place a hundred miles away and dump it at the bottom of the deep blue sea?’
‘A tempting thought, Professor,’ Denholm said, ‘but not a very practicable one.
It is, of course, a hundred per cent certain that this triggering device is battery-powered.
The latest generation of Nife cells can lie dormant for months, even years, and still spring smartly to attention when called on to do their duty.
You can't declare a whole area of the Mediterranean off-limits to all shipping for years to come.’
‘I prefaced my suggestion by saying that I was an ignoramus.
Well, in for a penny, in for a pound.
Another doubtlessly ludicrous suggestion.
We take it to the self-same spot and detonate it.’
Denholm shook his head.
‘I'm afraid that still leaves us with a couple of problems.
The first is, how are we going to get it there?’
‘We take it there.’
‘Yes.
We take it there.
Or we set out to take it there.
Then somewhere en route the ticking stops.
Then the triggering device cocks its ear and says, ‘Aha!
What's this I hear?
Ship's engines,’ and detonates.
There wouldn't even be a second's warning.
‘Hadn't thought of that.
We could — I say this hopefully — tow it there.’
‘Our little friend is still listening and we don't know and have no means of knowing how sensitive its hearing is.
Engines, of course, would set it off.
So would a generator.
A derrick winch, even a coffee-grinder in the galley might provide all the impulse it requires.’
Talbot said: ‘You came all the way up to the bridge, Jimmy, just to spread sweetness and light, your own special brand of Job's comfort?’
‘Not quite, sir.
It's just that a couple of ideas occurred to me, one of which will have occurred to you and one which you probably don't know about.
Getting the bomb to its destination would be easy enough.
We use a sailing craft.
Lots of them hereabouts.
Aegean luggers.’
Talbot looked at Hawkins.
‘One can't think of everything.
I forgot to mention, sir, that in addition to being a student of ancient Greek language and literature Lieutenant Denholm is also a connoisseur of the small craft of the Aegean.
Used to spend all his summers here — well, until we nabbed him, that is.’
I wouldn't begin to know how to sail those luggers or caiques, in fact I couldn't even sail a dinghy if you paid me.
But I've studied them, yes.
Most of them come from the island of Samos or Bodrum in Turkey.
Before the war — the First World War, that is — they were all sailing craft.
Nowadays, they're nearly all engined, most of them with steadying sails.
But there's quite a few both with engines and a full set of sails.
Those are the Trehandiri and Perama types and I know there are some in the Cyclades.
One of those would be ideal for our purposes.
Because they have shallow keels, a minimum draught and no ballast they are almost useless performers to windward but that wouldn't matter in this case.
The prevailing wind here is north-west and the open sea lies to the south-east.’
‘Useful information to have,’ Talbot said.
‘Very useful indeed.
Um — you wouldn't happen to know anyone with such a craft?’
‘As a matter of fact I do.’
‘Good God!
You're as useful as your information.’
Talbot broke off as Van Gelder entered the bridge.
‘Duty done, Number One?’
‘Yes, sir.
Andropulos was a bit reluctant to go.
So were Alexander and Aristotle.
In fact, they point-blank refused to go.
Infringement of their liberties as Greek civilians or some tosh to that effect.
Demanded to know on whose orders.
I said yours.
Demanded to see you.
I said in the morning.
More outrage.
I didn't argue with them, just called up McKenzie and some of his merry men, who removed them forcibly.
I told McKenzie not to post any guards, just lock the doors and pocket the keys.
You're going to hear from the Greek government about this, sir.’
‘Excellent.
Wish I'd been there.
And the girls?’
‘Sweet reason.
No problem.’
‘Fine.
Now, Jimmy, you said a couple of ideas had occurred to you.
What was the second one?’
‘It's about the second problem that the Professor raised.
The detonation.
We could, of course, try sympathetic detonation by dropping a depth charge on it but as we would be in the immediate vicinity at the time I don't think that would be a very good idea.’
‘Neither do I. So?’
‘The Pentagon could have the answer.
Despite feeble denials to the contrary, everyone knows that the Pentagon controls NASA — the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
NASA, in turn, is supposed to administer the Kennedy Space Center.
‘Supposed’ is the operative word.
They don't.
The centre is operated by EG & G, a major defence contractor.
EG & G — Dr Wickram will know much more about this than I do — oversees such things as nuclear-weapons tests  and the so-called Star Wars.
More importantly, they are developing, or have developed, what they call the krytron, a remote-controlled electronic impulse trigger that can detonate nuclear weapons.
A word from the Admiral in the ear of the Pentagon might work wonders.’
Hawkins cleared his throat.
‘This little titbit of information, Lieutenant.
It will, of course, like your other titbits, be in the public domain?’
‘It is, sir.’
‘You astonish me.
Most interesting, most.
Could be a big part of the answer to our problem, don't you agree, Commander?’
Talbot nodded.
‘I think we should act immediately on this one.
Ah!
The very man himself.’
Myers had just entered, carrying a piece of paper which he handed to Talbot.
‘Reply to your latest query to the Pentagon, sir.’
‘Thank you.
No, don't go.
We'll have another message to send them in a minute.’
Talbot handed the paper to Hawkins.
‘'Security at bomber base’,’ Hawkins read, ‘’believed to be 99.9% effective.
But cards on the table.
However unlikely, there may be one chance in ten thousand that security has been penetrated.
This could have been that one chance’.
Well, isn't that nice.
Absolutely useless piece of information, of course.
‘'Plane carried fifteen H-bombs of fifteen megatons each and three atom bombs, all three equipped with timing devices’.
Well, that's just fine.
So now we have three of those ticking monsters to contend with.’
‘With any luck, just one,’ Talbot said.
‘Sonar picks up only one.
Extremely unlikely that all three would be ticking in perfect unison.
Point's academic, anyway.
One or a hundred, the big boys would still go up.’
‘Identified by size, they say,’ Hawkins went on.
‘Sixty inches by six.
Pretty small for an atom bomb, I would have thought.
4000 kilotons.
That's a lot, Dr Wickram?’
‘By today's standards, peanuts.
Less than half the size of the Hiroshima bomb.
If the bomb is the dimensions they say, then it's very large for such a small explosive value.’
‘It goes on to say that they're designated for marine use.
I suppose that's a fancy way of saying that they are mines.
So your guess was right, Dr Wickram.’
‘Also explains the size of the bomb.
Quite a bit of space will be taken up by the timing mechanism and, of course, it will have to be weighted to give it negative buoyancy.’
‘The real sting comes in the tail,’ Hawkins said.
‘’ When the ticking stops the timing clock has run out and the firing mechanism is activated and ready to be triggered by mechanical stimulation’, by which I take it they mean ship's engines.
So it looks as if you were right about that one, Van Gelder.
Then, by way of cheerful farewell, they say that enquiries so far confirm that the timing mechanism, once in operation, cannot be neutralized and appears to be irreversible.’
The last words were met with silence.
No one had any comment to make for the excellent reason that everyone had already been convinced of the fact.
‘A message to the Pentagon, Myers.
‘Urgently require to know state of development of the EG & G krytron’— that's k-r-y-t-r-o-n, isn't it, Lieutenant?—‘nuclear detonation device.’'
Talbot paused.
‘Add: ‘If operating model exists essential dispatch immediately with instructions.’
That do, Admiral?’
Hawkins nodded.
‘Sign it Admiral Hawkins.’
‘We must be giving them quite some headaches in the Pentagon,’ Hawkins said in some satisfaction.
‘This should call for still more aspirin.’
‘Aspirins are not enough,’ Van Gelder said.
‘Sleepless nights are what are called for.’
‘You have something in mind, Van Gelder?’
‘Yes, sir.
They can have no idea of the really horrendous potential of the situation here in Santorini — the combination  of all those megatons of hydrogen bombs, thermal plumes and volcanoes and earthquakes along the tectonic plate boundaries and the possibly cataclysmic results.
If Professor Benson here were to make a very brief precis of the lecture he gave us in the wardroom this evening it might give them something more to think about.’
‘You have an evil mind, Van Gelder.
What a perfectly splendid suggestion.
Uneasy will lie the heads along the Potomac this night.
What do you think, Professor?’
‘It will be a pleasure.’
When Sub-Lieutenant Cousteau, together with the two divers and their equipment, returned from Santorini, they found the Ariadne in virtual darkness.
With the thought of the malevolent listening bug on the sea-floor dominating every other in his mind, Talbot had sought Lieutenant Denholm's advice on the question of noise suppression: Denholm had not been half-hearted in his recommendations, with the result that the use of all mechanical devices on the ship, from generators to electric shavers, had been banned.
Only essential lighting, radar, sonar and radio were functioning normally: all these could function equally well, as they had been designed to do, on battery power.
The sonar watch on the ticking device in the crashed bomber was now continuous.
The two divers, Chief Petty Officer Carrington and Petty Officer Grant, were curiously alike, both aged about thirty, of medium height and compact build: both were much given to smiling, a cheerfulness that in no way detracted from their almost daunting aura of competence.
They were with Talbot and Van Gelder in the wardroom.
‘That's all I know about the situation down there,’ Talbot said, ‘and heaven knows it's little enough.
I just want to know those three things — the extent of the damage, the location of this ticking noise and to see if it's possible to remove this  atom bomb or whatever, which I'm convinced in advance is impossible.
You are aware of the dangers and you are aware that I cannot order you to do this.
How does the prospect appeal, Chief?’
‘It doesn't appeal at all, sir.’
Carrington was imperturbable.
‘Neither Bill Grant nor I is cast in the heroic mould.
We'll walk very softly down there.
You shouldn't be worrying — about us, you should be worrying about what your crew is thinking.
If we slip up they'll all join us in the wide blue yonder or whatever.
I know you want to come down, sir, but is it really necessary?
We're pretty experienced in moving around inside wrecks without banging into things and we're both Torpedo Gunner Mates and explosives, you might say, are our business.
Not, I admit, the kind of explosives you have down there but we know enough not to trigger a bomb by accident.’
‘And we might?’
Talbot smiled.
‘You're very tactful, Chief.
What you mean is that we might bang into things or kick a detonator on the nose or something of the kind.
When you say ‘necessary’, do you mean ‘wise’?
I refer to our diving experience or lack of it.’
‘We know about your diving experience, sir.
You will understand that when we knew what we were coming into we made some discreet enquiries.
We know that you have commanded a submarine and the Lieutenant-Commander was your first lieutenant.
We know you've both been through the HMS Dolphin Submarine Escape Tower and that you've done more than a fair bit of free diving.
No, we don't think you'll be getting in our way or banging things around.’
Carrington turned up palms in acceptance.
‘What's your battery capacity, sir?’
‘For essential and non-mechanical purposes, ample.
Several days.’
‘We'll put down three weighted floodlights and suspend them about twenty feet above the bottom.
That should illuminate the plane nicely.
We'll have a powerful hand-flash each.
We have a small bag of tools for cutting, sawing and snipping.
We also have an oxyacetylene torch, which is rather more difficult to use under water than most people imagine, but as this is just a reconnaissance trip we won't be taking it along.
The closed-circuit breathing is of the type we prefer, fifty-fifty oxygen and nitrogen with a carbon dioxide scrubber.
At the depth of a hundred feet, which is what we will be at, we could easily remain underwater for an hour without any risk of either oxygen poisoning or decompression illness.
That's academic, of course.
Provided there's access to the plane and the fuselage is not crushed a few minutes should tell us all we want to know.
‘Two points about the helmet.
There's a rotary chin switch which you depress to activate an amplifier that lets us talk, visor to visor.
A second press cuts it off.
It also has a couple of sockets over the ears where you can plug in what is to all effects a stethoscope.’
‘That's all?’
‘All.’
‘We can go now?’
‘A last check, sir?’
Carrington didn't have to specify what check.
Talbot lifted a phone, spoke briefly and replaced it.
‘Our friend is still at work.’
The water was warm and still and so very clear that they could see the lights of the suspended arc-lamps even before they dipped below the surface of the darkened Aegean.
With Carrington in the lead and using the marker buoy anchor rope as a guide they slid down fifty feet and stopped.
The three arc-lamps had come to rest athwart the sunken bomber, sharply illuminating the fuselage and the two wings.
The left wing, though still attached to the fuselage, had been almost completely sheared off between the inner engine and  the fuselage and was angled back about thirty degrees from normal.
The tail unit had been almost completely destroyed.
The fuselage, or that part of it that could be seen from above, appeared to be relatively intact.
The nose cone of the plane was shrouded in shadow.
They continued their descent until their feet touched the top of the fuselage, half-walked, half-swam until they reached the front of the plane, switched on their flash-lights and looked through the completely shattered windows of the cockpit.
The pilot and the co-pilot were still trapped in their seats.
They were no longer men, just the vestigial remains of what had once been human beings.
Death must have been instantaneous.
Carrington looked at Talbot and shook his head, then dropped down to the sea-bed in front of the nose cone.
The hole that had been blasted there was roughly circular with buckled and jagged edges projecting outwards, conclusive proof that the blast had been internal: the diameter of the whole was approximately five feet.
Moving slowly and cautiously so as not to rip any of the rubber components of their diving suits, they passed in file into a compartment not more than four feet in height but almost twenty feet in length, extending from the nose cone, under the flight deck and then several feet beyond.
Both sides of the compartment were lined with machinery and metal boxes so crushed and mangled that their original function was incomprehensible.
Two-thirds of the way along the compartment a hatch had been blasted upwards.
The opening led to a space directly behind the seats of the two pilots.
Aft of this was what was left of a small radio-room with a man who appeared to be peacefully sleeping leaning forward on folded arms, the fingers of one hand still on a transmitting key.
Beyond this, four short steps led down to an oval door let into a solid steel bulkhead.
The door was secured by eight clamps, some of which had been jammed into position by the impact of the  blast.
A hammer carried by Carrington in his canvas bag of tools soon tapped them into a loosened position.
Beyond the door lay the cargo compartment, bare, bleak, functional and obviously designed for one purpose only, the transport of missiles.
These were secured by heavy steel clamps which were in turn bolted to longitudinal reinforced steel beams let into the floor and sides of the fuselage.
There was oil mixed with the water in the compartment but even in the weird, swirling, yellowish light they looked neither particularly menacing nor sinister.
Slender, graceful, with either end encased in a rectangular metal box they looked perfectly innocuous.
Each contained fifteen megatons of high explosive.
There were six of those in the first section of the compartment.
As a formality, and not because of any expectations, Talbot and Carrington applied their stethoscopes to each cylinder in turn.
The results were negative as they had known they would be: Dr Wickram had been positive that they contained no timing devices.
There were also six missiles in the central compartment.
Three of these were of the same size as those in the front compartment: the other three were no more than five feet in length.
Those had to be the atom bombs.
It was when he was testing the third of those with his stethoscope that Carrington beckoned to Talbot, who came and listened in turn.
He didn't have to listen long.
The two and a half second ticking sequence sounded exactly as it had done in the sonar room.
In the aft compartment they went through the routine exercise of listening to the remaining six missiles and found what they had expected, nothing.
Carrington put his visor close to Talbot's.
‘Enough?’
‘Enough.’
‘That didn't take you long,’ Hawkins said.
‘Long enough to find out what we needed.
Missiles are there, all present and correct as listed by the Pentagon.
Only one bomb has been activated.
Three dead men.
That's all, except for the most important fact of all.
The bomber crashed because of an internal explosion.
Some kindly soul had concealed a bomb under the flight deck.
The Pentagon must be glad that they added the faint possibility that there was one chance in ten thousand that security might be breached.
The faint possibility came true.
Raises some fascinating questions, doesn't it, sir?
Who?
What?
Why?
When?
We don't have to ask ‘where’ because we already know that.’
‘I don't want to sound grim or vindictive,’ Hawkins said, ‘because I'm not.
Well, maybe a little.
Should cut the gentlemen on Foggy Bottom, or wherever, down to size and make them a mite more civil and cooperative in future.
Not only is it an American plane that is responsible for the dreadful situation in which we find ourselves, but it was someone in America who was ultimately responsible.
if they ever do discover who was responsible, and it's not without the bounds of possibility, it's going to cause an awful lot of red faces and I'm not just referring to the villain himself.
I'd lay odds that the person responsible is an insider, a pretty high-up insider with free access to secret information, such as closely guarded secrets as to the composition of the cargo, the destination and the time of take-off and arrival.
Wouldn't you agree, Commander?’
‘I don't see how it can be otherwise.
Not a problem I'd care to have on my hands.
However, that's their problem.
We have an even bigger problem on our hands.’
‘True, true.’
Hawkins sighed.
‘What's the next step, then?
In recovering this damn bomb, I mean?’
‘I think you should ask Chief Petty Officer Carrington, sir, not me.
He and Petty Officer Grant are the experts.’
‘It's a tricky one, sir,’ Carrington said.
‘Cutting away a  fuselage section large enough to lift the bomb through is straightforward enough.
But before we could lift the bomb out we would have to free it from its clamps and this is where the great difficulty lies.
Those clamps are made of high-tensile steel fitted with a locking device.
For that we need a key and we don't know where the key is.’
‘It could be,’ Hawkins said, ‘that the key is held at the missile base where the bombs were due to be delivered.’
‘With respect, sir, I think that unlikely.
Those clamps had to be locked at the Air Force base where they were loaded So they would have to have a key there.
I think it would be much easier and more logical if they just took the key with them.
Trouble is, a key is a very small thing and that's a very big bomber indeed.
‘If there's no key there are two ways we can remove that clamp.
One is chemical, using either a metal softener or corrosive.
The metal softener is used by stage magicians who go in for spoon-bending and such-like.’
‘Magicians?’
Hawkins said.
‘Charlatans, you mean.’
‘Whatever.
The principle is the same.
They use a colourless paste which has no effect on the skin but has the peculiar property of altering the molecular structure of a metal and making it malleable.
A corrosive is simply a powerful acid that eats through steel.
Lots of them on the market.
But in this case, both softeners and corrosives have one impossible drawback: you can't use them underwater.’
Hawkins said: ‘You mentioned two ways of removing the clamp.
What's the other?’
‘Oxyacetylene torch, sir.
Make short work of any clamp.
It would also, I imagine, make even shorter work of the operator.
Those torches generate tremendous heat and I should also imagine that anyone who even contemplates using an oxyacetylene torch on an atom bomb is an obvious candidate for the loony-bin.’
Hawkins looked at Wickram.
‘Comment?’
‘No comment.
Not on the unthinkable.’
‘I speak in no spirit of complaint, Carrington,’ Hawkins said, ‘but you're not very encouraging.
What you are about to suggest, of course, is that we wait for the Kilcharran to come along and hoist the damn thing to the surface.’
‘Yes, sir.’
Carrington hesitated.
‘But there's a snag even to that.’
‘A snag?’
Talbot said.
‘You are referring, of course, to the distinct and unpleasant possibility that the ticking might stop while the Kilcharran's winch engine is working overtime at hauling the bomber to the surface?’
‘I mean just that, sir.’
‘A trifle.
There are no trifles that the combined brain-power aboard the Ariadne can't solve.’
He turned to Denholm.
‘You can fix that, Lieutenant?’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘How, sir?’
There was a pardonable note of doubt if not outright disbelief in Carrington's voice: Lieutenant Denholm didn't look like the type of person who could fix anything.
Talbot smiled.
‘If I may say this gently, Chief, one does not question Lieutenant Denholm on those matters.
He knows more about electrics and electronics than any man in the Mediterranean.’
‘It's quite simple, Chief,’ Denholm said.
‘We just couple up the combined battery powers of the Ariadne and the Kilcharran .
The Kilcharran's winches arc probably diesel-powered.
We may or may not be able to convert them to electrical use.
If we can't, it doesn't matter.
We have excellent electric anchor windlasses on the Ariadne .’
‘Yes, but — well, with one of your two anchors out of commission you'd start drifting, wouldn't you?’
‘We wouldn't drift.
A diving ship normally carries four splayed anchors to moor it precisely over any given spot on the ocean floor.
We just tie up to the Kilcharran , that's all.’
‘I'm not doing too well, am I ?
One last objection, sir.
Probably a feeble one.
An anchor is only an anchor.
This bomber and its cargo probably weighs over a hundred tons.
I mean, it's quite a lift.’
‘Diving ships also carry flotation bags.
We strap them to the plane's fuselage and pump them full of compressed air until we achieve neutral buoyancy.’
‘I give up,’ Carrington said.
‘From now on, I stick to diving.’
‘So we twiddle our thumbs until the Kilcharran arrives,’ Hawkins said.
‘But not you, I take it, Commander?’
‘I think we'll have a look at the Delos , sir.’
They had rowed about a mile when Talbot called up the Ariadne .
He spoke briefly, listened briefly, then turned to McKenzie who was at the tiller.
‘Ship oars.
The timing device is still at it so I think we'll start the engine.
Gently, at first.
At this distance I hardly think we'd trigger anything even if the bomb was activated, but no chances.
Course 095.
There were nine of them in the whaler — Talbot, Van Gelder, the two divers, McKenzie and the four seamen who had rowed them so far.
Those last would not be required again until they reached the last mile of the return trip.
After about forty minutes Van Gelder moved up into the bows with a portable six-inch searchlight which, on such a clear night, had an effective range of over a mile.
The search-light was probably superfluous for there was a three-quarter moon and Talbot, with his night-glasses, had a clear bearing on the monastery and the radar station on Mount Elias.
Van Gelder returned within minutes and handed the searchlight to McKenzie.
‘Fine off the port bow, Chief.’
‘I have it,’ McKenzie said.
The yellow buoy, in the light of both the moon and the searchlight, was clearly visible.
‘Do I anchor?’
‘Not necessary,’ Talbot said.
‘No current that's worth speaking of, no wind, a heavy anchor weight and a stout anchor rope.
Just make fast to the buoy.’
In course of time McKenzie did just that and the four divers slipped over the side, touching down on the deck of the Delos just over an hour after leaving the Ariadne .
Carrington and Grant disappeared down the for'ard companionway while Talbot and Van Gelder took the after one.
Talbot didn't bother entering the after stateroom.
The two girls had stayed there and he knew it would hold nothing of interest for him.
He looked at the dead engineer, or the man whom Van Gelder had taken to be the engineer because of his blue overalls, and examined the back of his head carefully.
The occiput had not been crushed and there were no signs of either bruising or blood in the vicinity of the deep gash in the skin of the skull.
He rejoined Van Gelder who had already moved into the engine-room.
There was, of course, no smoke there now and very little traces of oil.
In the light of their two powerful flashlights visibility was all that could be wished for and it took them only two minutes to carry out their examination: unless one is looking for some obscure mechanical fault there is very little to look for in an engine-room.
On their way out they opened up a tool-box and took out a long slender chisel apiece.
They found the bridge, when they arrived there, to be all that they would have expected a bridge on such a yacht to be, with a plethora of expensive and largely unnecessary navigational aids, but in all respects perfectly innocuous.
Only one thing took Talbot's attention, a wooden cupboard on the after bulkhead.
It was locked, but on the understandable assumption that Andropulos wouldn't be having any further use for it Talbot wrenched it open with a chisel.
It contained the ship's papers and ship's log, nothing more.
A door on the port side of the same bulkhead led to a combined radio-room and chart-room.
The chart-room section held nothing that a chart-room should not have had, including a locked cupboard which Talbot opened in the same cavalier fashion he had used on the bridge: it held only pilot books and sailing directions.
Andropulos, it seemed, just liked locking cupboards.
The radio was a standard RCA.
They left.
They found Carrington and Grant waiting for them in the saloon.
Carrington was carrying what appeared to be a portable radio: Grant had a black metallic box slightly larger than a sheet of foolscap paper and less than three inches thick.
Carrington put his visor dose to Talbot's.
‘All we could find.
Of interest, I mean.’
‘We have enough.’
‘Dispatch would appear to be the keynote of your investigations, Commander,’ Hawkins said.
Glass in hand, he was seated across the wardroom table from Talbot.
‘I mean, you seem to spend singularly little time on your — um — aquatic investigation.’
‘You can find out interesting things in a very short space of time, sir.
Too much, for some people.’
‘You refer to our shipwrecked friends?’
‘Who else?
Five things, sir.
Van Gelder was right, there were no signs of bruising or blood where the engineer had been gashed on the head.
An examination of the engine-room turned up no signs of protrusions, angle-beams or sharp metallic corners that could have caused the injury.
Circumstantial evidence, I know, but evidence that strongly suggests that the engineer was clobbered by a heavy metallic instrument.
No shortage of those in an engine-room.
We have, of course, no clue as to the identity of the assailant.
‘Secondly, I'm afraid the owner of the Delos has been guilty of telling you fibs, Admiral.
He said he abandoned the Delos because he was afraid that the reserve fuel tank might blow up.
There is no such tank.’
‘Isn't that interesting.
Does make things look a little black for Andropulos.’
‘It does a bit.
He could always claim of course that he knew nothing of the layout of the engine-room and had always assumed that there had to be a reserve tank or that in a panic-stricken concern for the welfare of his beloved niece he had quite forgotten that there was no such tank.
He's undoubtedly intelligent, we know he's a thespian of some note and could put up a spirited and convincing defence in court.
But he'd have no defence against a further charge that the explosion was not due to natural causes, unless you regard the detonation of a bomb, almost certainly a plastic explosive, under the main fuel tank as being a natural cause.’
‘Well, well, well.
One wonders how he'll talk his way out of this one.
You're quite certain, of course?’
‘We are wounded, sir,’ Van Gelder said.
‘The Captain and I are developing quite some expertise on the effects of explosives on metal.
In the bomber, the metal of the fuselage was blown outwards: in this case the metal of the fuel tank was blown inwards.’
‘We are not explosives experts, sir,’ Talbot said.
‘But it would seem that Andropulos wasn't either.’
He nodded towards Carrington and Grant.
‘But those two gentlemen are experts.
We were talking about it on the way back.
They reckon that Andropulos — if it was Andropulos, it could have been Alexander or Aristotle — made an amateurish blunder.
They say the villain, whoever he was, should have used what they call an inverted beehive plastic explosive attached to the underside of the tank by a magnetic damp, in which case more than ninety per cent of the explosive charge would have been directed upwards.
It would seem that they didn't use such a device.’
Hawkins looked at Carrington.
‘You can be sure of this, Chief?’
‘As sure as can be, sir.
We do know that he couldn't have  used a beehive.
The explosive charge would have been either flat, circular or cylindrical and in any of those cases the disruptive explosive power would have been uniformly distributed in all directions.
Grant and I think he didn't deliberately sink the yacht but that he just, through ignorance, kind of accidentally blew a hole through the bottom.’
‘If it weren't for the three dead men, this could be almost amusing.
As it is, one has to admit that life is full of its little ironies.
What's that you've got in front of you there, Carrington?’
‘Some sort of radio, sir.
Took it from the captain's cabin.’
‘Why did you take it?’
‘Struck me as odd, sir, unusual, out of place, you might say.
Every cabin is fitted with its own bulkhead radio — all probably fed from the central radio in the saloon.
So why should he require this additional radio, especially when he had access to — and was probably the only user of — the much superior radio in his radio-room?’
Talbot looked at Denholm.
‘Just a standard radio, is it?’
‘Not quite.’
Denholm took the radio and examined it briefly.
‘A transceiver, which means it can transmit as well as receive.
Hundreds of them around, thousands, most commonly as ship-to-shore radios in private yachts.
Also used in geological and seismological work and construction building.
Remote control detonation.’
He paused and looked around myopically.
‘I don't want to sound sinister, but it could equally well be used to trigger off the detonator in an explosive device being carried by an American Air Force bomber.’
There was a brief silence, then Hawkins said: ‘I don't want to complain, Denholm, but you do rather tend to complicate matters.’
‘I used the word ‘could’, sir, not ‘did’.
On the whole, given the mysterious and inexplicable circumstances, I rather think I prefer the word ‘did’.
If that is the case it leads, of course, to even more mysteries.
How did Andropulos or  whoever know when, and from where, that bomber was leaving?
How did he know its cargo?
How did he know an explosive device was being smuggled aboard?
How did he know the radio wavelength to set it off?
And, of course, there's the why, why, why.’
The silence was considerably longer this time.
Finally, Hawkins said: ‘Maybe we're doing Andropulos an injustice.
Maybe Alexander is the mastermind.’
‘Not a chance, sir.’
Van Gelder was definite.
‘Andropulos lied about the spare tank.
He has connections with main centres of known gun-running activities.
The fact that Alexander, who unquestionably plays the role of assistant villain, had the radio in his cabin is of no significance.
I should imagine that Irene Charial might be in the habit of dropping in on her uncle occasionally and he wouldn't want her saying, ‘Whatever are you doing with a spare radio in your cabin, Uncle?’
I can hardly imagine her dropping in on Alexander at any time, far less occasionally.
So, Alexander kept the radio.’
‘You mentioned the possibility of an insider at this Air Force base in America, sir,’ Talbot said.
‘I think we should be thinking in terms of a whole platoon of insiders.
You will be composing messages for the Pentagon, Air Force Intelligence and the CIA?
Suitably etched in acid.
I think by this time they must be dreading the thought of another signal from the Ariadne .
I don't see much point in your going to Washington and entering a popularity stakes contest.’
‘The slings and arrows — well, we're accustomed to injustices.
What do you have in that box?’
‘Petty Officer Grant picked this up in Andropulos's cabin.
Haven't opened it yet.’
Not without difficulty he undid two spring clips and lifted the lid.
‘Waterproof, by Jove.’
He looked at the contents.
‘Means nothing to me.’
Hawkins took the box from him, lifted out some sheets of paper and a paperback book, examined them briefly and  shook his head.
‘Means nothing to me, either.
Denholm?’
Denholm shuffled through the papers.
‘In Greek, naturally.
Looks like a list of names, addresses and telephone numbers to me.
But I can't make sense of it.’
‘I thought you understood Greek?’
‘I do.
But I don't understand Grecian code.
And this is what it's written in — a code.’
‘Code!
Damn it to hell.’
Hawkins spoke with considerable feeling.
‘This could be urgent.
Vital.’
‘It's more than likely, sir.’
Denholm looked at the paperback.
‘Homer's Odyssey .
I don't suppose it's here just by coincidence.
If we knew the connection between the poem and what's written on those sheets, then cracking the code would be child's play.
But we don't have the key.
That's locked away inside Andropulos's mind.
Anagrams and word puzzles are not in my line of country, sir.
I'm no cryptologist.’
Hawkins looked moodily at Talbot.
‘You don't have a code-cracker among this motley crew you have aboard?’
‘To the best of my knowledge, no.
And certainly not a Greek code-cracker.
Shouldn't be too difficult to find one, I should imagine.
The Greek Defence Ministry and their Secret Service are bound to have some cryptologists on their staffs.
Just a radio call and a half-hour's flight away, sir.’
Hawkins glanced at his watch.
‘Two a.m.
All God-fearing cryptologists are tucked up in their beds by this time.’
‘So are all God-fearing admirals,’ Denholm said.
‘Besides, my friend Wotherspoon didn't mind being rousted out of bed an hour ago.
Positively cheerful about it, in fact.’
Talbot said: ‘Who, may I ask warily, is Wotherspoon?’
‘Professor Wotherspoon.
My friend with the Aegean lugger.
You asked me to contact him, remember?
Lives in Naxos, seven or eight hours’ sail from here.
He's on his way with the Angelina .’
‘Very civil of him, I must say.
Angelina ?
Odd name.’
‘Better not let him hear you say that, sir.
Name of his  lugger.
Ancient and honoured Grecian name, some sort of classical goddess, I believe.
Also the name of his wife.
Charming lady.’
‘Is he — what shall we say?— slightly eccentric?’
‘All depends upon what you mean by eccentric.
He regards the rest of the world as being slightly eccentric.’
‘A professor?
What does he profess?’
‘Archaeology.
Used to.
He's retired now.’
‘Retired?
Oh dear.
I mean, have we any right to bring an elderly archaeologist into this?’
‘Don't let him hear you say that either, sir.
He's not elderly.
Old man left him a fortune.’
‘You warned him of the perils, of course?’
‘As directly as I could.
Seemed amused.
Said his ancestors fought at Agincourt and Crecy.
Something to that effect.’
‘What's good enough for a retired archaeologist should be good enough for a Greek cryptologist,’ Hawkins said.
‘Not that I follow the logic of that.
If you would be so good, Commander.’
‘We'll radio Athens right away.
Two things, sir.
I suggest we release Andropulos and his friends for breakfast and leave them free.
Sure, we've got plenty on them, but as yet no conclusive proof and the three A's — Andropulos, Aristotle and Alexander — are a close-mouthed and secretive lot and we can be certain they won't talk to us or give anything away.
But they might, just might, talk among themselves.
Lieutenant Denholm will lurk unobtrusively.
They don't, and won't, know that he talks Greek as well as they do.
Number One, would you tell McKenzie to warn the four seamen who were with us tonight that they are on no account to mention the fact that we were on the Delos .
Keel-hauling, walking the plank, that sort of thing.
One other thing.
The presence of the cryptographer, when he arrives, will not go unnoticed.’
‘He's not a cryptographer,’ Van Gelder said.
‘Peace be to Lieutenant Denholm but he's a civilian electronics specialist  who's come out to fix some abstruse electronic fault that only he can fix.
Also gives a splendid reason for him to use Denholm's cabin while he gets on with his decoding.’
‘Well, thank you very much.’
Denholm smiled and turned to Talbot.
‘With the Captain's permission, I'd like to retire there right now and get some sleep before this impostor arrives.’
‘An excellent idea.
Vice-Admiral Hawkins, Professor Benson, Dr Wickram, I suggest you follow his example.
I promise you we'll give you a shake if anything untoward occurs.’
‘Another excellent idea,’ Hawkins said.
‘After our nightcap.
And after you've sent your signal to Athens and I've composed a suitably stirring message to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in Washington.’
‘Stirring?’
‘Certainly.
Why should I be the only one suffering from insomnia?
I shall tell him that we have every reason to believe that the bomber was carrying a smuggled explosive device aboard, that its detonation was triggered by a radio wave and that we have the miscreant responsible in our hands.
Reason to believe, not proof.
I shall name Andropulos.
I shall want to know how he knew when and from where that bomber was taking off.
How did he know what it was carrying?
How could this explosive device possibly have been smuggled aboard?
How did he know the radio wavelength to set it off?
I shall suggest that our concern should be made immediately known to the White House, Air Force Intelligence, the CIA and the FBI.
I will suggest that Andropulos has been provided with top-level, ultra-secret information from a very senior official.
I will suggest that this should considerably narrow their field of search.
I will further suggest that it seems very likely that the traitor is in his own fiefdom, the Pentagon.’
‘Stirring indeed.
Laying it on the line as you might say.’
Talbot paused.
‘It has occurred to you, Admiral Hawkins, that you might also be laying your own career on the line?’
‘Only if I'm wrong.’
‘Only if we're wrong.’
‘In the circumstances, a bagatelle.
You would do exactly the same thing.’
‘Five o'clock, sir.’
Talbot woke in his sea-cabin abaft the bridge to find Van Gelder bending over him.
‘The Kilcharran is three miles out.’
‘What's the latest word from sonar?’
‘Still ticking away, sir.
Captain Montgomery says he's going to shut down his engines in another half-mile.
Sees us clearly and reckons he'll come to a stop more or less alongside.
He says that if he's going to overshoot he'll use a sea anchor or drop a stern anchor and if he stops short of us he'll send a crew with a rope.
From the way he talks he seems to regard either possibility as a remote contingency.
Doesn't seem the shy or bashful type.’
‘I gathered as much from the admiral.
Has our cryptologist arrived?’
‘Yes.
Calls himself Theodore.
Speaks perfect English but I suppose he's Greek.
Installed in Denholm's cabin.
Denholm himself is up in the wardroom trying to resume his slumbers.’
Van Gelder broke off to accept a sheet of paper from a seaman who had appeared in the doorway, glanced briefly at the message and handed it without a word to Talbot, who read it in turn, muttered something inaudible and swung his legs to the deck.
‘He'll have to try to resume his slumbers later on.
Tell him to join us in the admiral's cabin at once.’
A pyjama-clad Vice-Admiral Hawkins, propped up on the pillows of his bunk, glowered at the message in his hand  and passed it across to Denholm.
‘Pentagon.
Unsigned.
This krytron device you suggested.’
‘If I were the spluttering type, which I'm not, this would be a sure fire-starter.’
Denholm re-read the message.
‘'Understand krytron experimental device in hand.
Endeavour expedite soonest clearance.’
Gobbledygook, sir.
Writer is ignorant or stupid or thinks he's clever.
Very likely all three at once.
What does he mean —‘endeavour’?
He can either do it or not.
What does he mean —‘understand’?
He either knows or not.
Expedite?
Means to try to hurry things along.
The Pentagon doesn't expedite — they demand immediate compliance.
Same goes for that meaningless word ‘soonest’.
Again, should be immediate.
Clearance by whom?
The Pentagon can clear anything they want.
What do they mean —‘experimental’?
Either it works or it doesn't.
And doesn't the phrase ‘in hand’ have a splendid meaningless vagueness about it.
Gobbledygook, sir.’
‘Jimmy's right, sir,’ Talbot said.
‘It's insulting.
Stalling for time.
What they're saying in effect is that they're not going to entrust their latest toy to their closest ally because we'd flog it to the first Russian we came across.’
‘It's rich,’ Denholm said.
‘It's really wonderful.
The Americans positively force their Stinger surface-to-air missiles on the rebels who are fighting the Marxist regime in Angola and the Contras in Nicaragua.
It's no secret that those guerrilla bands contain a fair proportion of characters who are just as undesirable as the dictatorial governments they're supposed to be fighting and who would have no hesitation in disposing of those $60,000 missiles, at a fraction of their cost, to any passing terrorists who, in turn, would have no hesitation in loosing off one of those missiles at a passing Boeing 747, preferably one packed with five hundred American citizens.
But that's perfectly OK for the American administration's ad hoc knee-jerk set of reactions that passes for their foreign policy.
But it's unthinkable that they should allow the  krytron into the hands of their oldest ally.
It makes me sick.’
‘It makes me mad,’ Hawkins said.
‘Let us give them a lesson on clear and unequivocal English.
‘Unsigned message received.
Meaningless mumbo-jumbo designed to stall and delay.
Demand immediate repeat immediate repeat immediate dispatch of krytron or immediate repeat immediate repeat immediate explanation of why not available.
Sender of message and person responsible for delay in clearance will be held directly responsible for possible deaths of thousands.
Can you not imagine the world-wide reaction when it is learnt that not only is America responsible for this potential disaster but that it was almost certainly caused by treason in the highest American military echelons?
A copy of this message is being sent directly to the President of the United States.’
That do, you think?’
‘You could have pitched it a bit more strongly, sir,’ Talbot said, ‘but I'd have to spend the rest of the night thinking how.
You spoke earlier of sleepless heads along the Potomac.
I think we should now talk of heads rolling along the Potomac.
If I were you, sir, I'd keep clear of Washington for some little time, by which I mean the rest of your life.’
He rose.
‘The Kilcharran will be alongside in a few minutes.
I assume you are in no hurry to meet Captain Montgomery?’
‘You assume right.
There is no charity in me.’
He looked at his watch.
‘Five-thirteen.
My respects to the captain and ask him to join me for breakfast at, say, eight-thirty.
In my cabin here.’
Captain Montgomery, whether by luck or design — design, Talbot was certain — brought the Kilcharran alongside the Ariadne with faultless precision.
Talbot stepped across the two gunwales — they were almost exactly of a height — and made his way up to the bridge.
Captain Montgomery was a tall, burly character with a jutting black beard, white teeth, a slightly hooked nose and humorous eyes and, in spite of the immaculately cut uniform and four golden rings on either cuff, could easily have passed for a well-to-do and genial eighteenth-century Caribbean pirate.
He extended a hand.
‘You'll be Commander Talbot, of course.’
The voice was deep, the Irish brogue unmistakable.
‘You are welcome aboard.
Has there been any further deterioration in the situation?’
‘No.
The only deterioration possible, Captain, is one I don't care to imagine.’
‘Indeed.
I shall be sadly missed in the Mountains of Mourne.
We're great ones for the lamentations, the weepings and the wailings in the Mountains of Mourne.
Is this atom bomb, or whatever, still ticking away?’
‘It is.
I suppose you might call it a deterioration when the ticking stops.
You shouldn't have come here, Captain.
You should have nipped into the Gulf of Corinth — you might have stood a chance there.’
‘Not to be thought of for a moment.
Nothing to do with heroics — heroics are for those epics they make in Hollywood — or the fact that I couldn't live with myself.
I just couldn't stand the thought of what that man would say.’
‘You'll be referring to Vice-Admiral Hawkins?’
‘The very same.
Maligning and blackening my character as usual, I dare say?’
‘Hardly.’
Talbot smiled.
‘He did, mind you, make some casual remark about you being allergic to certain naval regulations.
He also said you're the best in the business.’
‘Aye.
A fair man and a bloody good admiral — but don't tell him I said so.
I suggest coffee in my cabin, Commander, and perhaps you'll be kind enough to tell me all you know.’
‘That shouldn't take long.’
‘Eleven p.m.,’ the President said.
‘What's the time over there?’
‘Six a.m.
There's a seven-hour time difference.’
‘A very forthright character, this Admiral Hawkins.’
The President gazed thoughtfully at the two dispatches lying on his desk.
‘You know him, of course?’
‘Pretty well, sir.’
‘An able man, General?’
‘Exceptionally so.’
‘He also appears to be an exceptionally tough s.o.b.’
‘That's undoubtedly true, sir.
But then you have to be to command the NATO Mediterranean sea forces.’
‘Do you know him, John?’
This was to John Heiman, the Defence Secretary, the only other person present.
‘Yes.
Not as well as the General, but well enough to agree with the General's assessment.’
‘Pity I never met him.
Who selected him for the job, General?’
‘Usual NATO committee.’
‘You were on it, of course?’
‘Yes.
I was the chairman.’
‘Ah.
The man with the casting vote?’
‘No casting vote.
The decision was unanimous.’
‘I see.
He — well, he seems to have rather a low opinion of the Pentagon.’
‘He doesn't exactly say that.
But he does appear to have a low opinion, deep suspicions if you like, of a person or persons in the Pentagon.’
‘Puts you in a rather unhappy position.
I mean, there must be some stirrings in the Pentagon dovecote.’
‘As you say, Mr President, a few ruffled feathers.
Some are hopping mad.
Others are giving the matter serious consideration.
Generally, you could speak of an air of quiet consternation.’
‘Are you, personally, prepared to lend any credence to this outrageous suggestion?
Or what appears to be outrageous?’
‘Think the unthinkable?
I don't have any option, do I ?
Every instinct says no, this cannot be, those are all my friends and colleagues of many years standing, all honourable men.
But instinct is a fallible guide, Mr President.
Common sense and what little knowledge of history I have tells me that every man has his price.
I have to investigate.
The enquiry is already under way.
I thought it prudent not to involve the intelligence arms of the four services.
So, the FBI.
The Pentagon does not care to be investigated by the FBI.
It's an extremely difficult and delicate situation, sir.’
‘Yes.
One can hardly go up to an admiral of the fleet and ask him what he was doing on the night of Friday the thirteenth.
I wish you luck.’
The President looked at one of the papers before him.
‘Your message re the krytron that provoked Hawkins's ire must have been badly handled.’
‘It was.
Very badly.
The matter has been attended to.’
‘This krytron device.
Is it operational?’ 'Yes.’
‘Been sent?’
The General shook his head, the President pressed a button and a young man entered.
‘Take this message for the General here.
‘Krytron device en route.
Would greatly appreciate up-to-date assessment of existing problems and measures being taken.
Fully appreciate extreme gravity, dangers and complexities of the situation.
I personally guarantee total and immediate repeat immediate repeat immediate support and cooperation in all measures undertaken.’
That should do it.
Sign my name.’
‘I hope he appreciates the three ‘immediates’,’ the General said.
‘Eight-forty, sir,’ McKenzie said.
‘Admiral's apologies, but he'd like to see you.
He's in his cabin with Captain Montgomery.’
Talbot thanked him, rose, washed the sleep from his face and eyes and made his way to the admiral's quarters.
A  shirtsleeved Hawkins beckoned him to join himself and Montgomery at the breakfast table.
‘Coffee?
Sorry to disturb you but these are times that are sent to try men's souls.’
For a troubled soul Hawkins looked remarkably fresh, rested and relaxed and was attacking his breakfast with some gusto.
‘Captain Montgomery has been reporting the state of progress and I thought you might like to hear it.
Incidentally, our friend the timing device is still ticking merrily away.’
‘We are making progress,’ Montgomery said.
‘Slow but steady — slow, because the presence of what the Admiral calls your friend the timing device does have a rather inhibitory effect and we're probably taking some quite needless precautions as far as acoustic levels are concerned.
But we're dealing with a devil we don't know and we're paying the devil more than his due.
Our own sonar is now locked on to this device and the sonar room has suddenly become the focal centre of interest in the Kilcharran .
‘We have achieved two things.
First, by coupling up the battery resources of our two vessels we have ample electric power to lift this wreck.
Your young Lieutenant Denholm looks and talks like a character out of P. G. Wodehouse, but he unquestionably knows his stuff.
Your engineer officer, McCafferty, is no slouch either and neither is mine.
Anyway, no problem.
Secondly, we've cut away the port wing of the bomber.’
‘You've what?’
Talbot said.
‘Well, you know how it is.’
Montgomery sounded almost apologetic.
‘It was three parts torn away in any case and I figured that neither you nor the US Air Force would have any further use for it.
So I had it burnt off.’
Despite his faint air of apology, it was quite clear that Montgomery had no regrets about what had been a wholly unilateral decision: as the only expert on the spot, he had no intention of consulting anybody.
‘A difficult decision and a tricky operation.
No one, as far as  I know, has ever before cut away the wing of a submerged big jet.
That's where the fuel tanks are located and though it seemed likely that the partial tearing away of the wing had also ruptured the fuel lines and spilled the fuel, there was no way of being sure and no one, again as far as I know, has ever come up against the problem of what happens when an oxyacetylene jet meets a fuel tank under water.
But my men were very careful, there was no fuel and so no trouble.
And now, at the present moment, my men are securing flotation bags and lifting slings to the plane.
‘Removing this wing gives us two advantages, one minor, one major.
The minor one is that with the wing and two very heavy jet engines gone we have all that less to lift although I'm certain we could have lifted the whole lot without trouble.
The major one is that the wing, had it been left there, would have snagged on the underside of the Kilcharran as it surfaced and tilted the fuselage, maybe to so acute an angle as to make access to this damned bomb difficult or impossible.’
‘Very well done, Captain,’ Hawkins said.
‘But surely there's still one problem.
When the bomber surfaces, isn't the weight of the remaining wing and its two engines going to tilt it just as far in the other direction?’
Montgomery smiled in a kindly and tolerant fashion which any average person would have found more than wildly infuriating.
Hawkins, fortunately, was not an average person.
‘No problem,’ Montgomery said.
‘We're also securing flotation bags under that wing.
When the fuselage surfaces, the wings will still be under water — you know how low wings are set on a modern jet.
In the first stage of surfacing, only the top of the fuselage will be above water-level — when we cut away a rectangular section over where the bomb is located I want as much water as possible below that section to dissipate the heat of the oxyacetylene torches.
After we've made that hole in the top we'll lift the fuselage high enough to drain most of the water from it.’
‘How long will it take to inflate the bags and haul the plane to the surface?’
‘An hour or two.
I don't know.’
‘An hour or two?’
Hawkins made no attempt to conceal his surprise.
‘I should have thought a few minutes.
You don't know, you say.
I would have thought those things could have been pretty closely calculated.’
‘Normally, yes.’
Montgomery's air of massive restraint was on a par for provocation with his kindly tolerance.
‘But normally we'd use powerful diesel compressors.
Out of deference to the little lady lying on the sea floor, no diesel.
Electricity again but using only a fraction of the power.
So, an indeterminate period.
Do you think I could have some more coffee?’
Montgomery clearly regarded the conversation as over.
Van Gelder knocked on the opened door and entered, a message slip in his hand.
He handed it to Hawkins.
‘For you, Admiral.
Came in a couple of hours or so ago.
Not urgent, so I didn't think it worth waking you for it.’
‘A wise decision, my boy.’
Hawkins read it, smiled broadly and handed it to Talbot, who glanced at it, smiled in turn and read it out aloud.
‘Well, well,’ Talbot said.
‘Hobnobbing with presidents.
Perhaps, after all, sir, you could walk down Pennsylvania Avenue without being clapped in irons or whatever they do to you over in those parts.
More importantly, you have the krytron and this splendid pledge of cooperation.
Your indignation — the less charitable would call it calculated gamble — has paid off.
I like the ‘repeat immediate’ bit.
The President would appear to have a sense of humour.’
‘He would indeed.
One has to be grateful to him for intervening personally.
Very, very satisfactory.
I note that he requires information.
Would you, please.’
‘Naturally.
Emphasis, of course, on the gravity and the dangers?’
‘Of course.’
‘Another item of news, sir,’ Van Gelder said to Talbot.
‘I've just had a rather intriguing chat with Irene Charial.’
‘I can well imagine that.
Andropulos and company, of course, are now at liberty.
How are they this fine morning?’'
Glowering a bit, sir.
At least Andropulos and Alexander were.
But the cook was in fine form and they seemed to be thawing a bit when I left them chattering away in Greek with Denholm sitting among them and not understanding a word they were saying.
Irene wasn't there.’
‘Oh?
So, naturally, overcome by concern, you hurried up to my cabin to enquire after her health.’
‘Naturally.
I knew that was what you would want me to do, sir.
She didn't look as if she had slept too well and admitted as much.
Seemed worried, apprehensive even.
At first she was rather reluctant to talk about what was bothering her.
Misplaced loyalty, I should say.’
‘I would say so too,’ Talbot said.
‘If, that is, I knew what you were talking about.’
‘Sorry.
Turned out she wanted to know if Uncle Adam had been sending any radio messages.
It seems —’
‘Uncle Adam?’
‘Adamantios Andropulos.
His parents have a lot to answer for.
Seems that she and her pal Eugenia — both sets of parents live in Piraeus, the two girls are at the University in Athens — were in the habit of phoning home every night.
She wanted their parents to know that they had had an accident, were safely aboard a Royal Navy ship and would be home soon.’
‘I hope she's right,’ Hawkins said.
‘Me too, sir.
I told her no messages had been sent and suggested that if Uncle was a businessman — I thought it better not to mention that we already knew he was a multi-millionaire businessman — he might naturally tend to be secretive and that he might also be reluctant to broadcast the fact that he had lost his yacht through what might have been  his own fault.
She said that was no excuse for not informing the next of kin of the three crew members of the Delos who had died.
I asked her if she had raised the question with him and she said no.
She was a bit evasive on this point.
I gather she either doesn't know very much about Uncle Adam or doesn't care very much about what she does know.’
Van Gelder produced a paper from his pocket.
‘I told her to write a message and I would see it was sent.’
Talbot looked at the paper.
‘It's in Greek.
Perhaps this Uncle Adam —’
‘We share the same nasty, suspicious mind, sir.
I called Jimmy from the breakfast table.
Quite innocent, he says.’
‘I have a better idea.
Take the two young ladies to the radio-room.
It's a simple matter to lock into the telephone land lines through the Piraeus radio station.
They can talk direct to their folks.’
‘With Jimmy just happening to be there?’
‘We share, as you say, the same nasty, suspicious minds.
Before you do that, however, I think we'll go and see how our latest recruit is getting on.’
‘Ah!
Our resident cryptologist.
Theodore.’
‘Theodore.
After we've seen him and the young ladies have finished their calls I want you to take Irene Charial aside.’
‘And engage her in casual conversation?’
‘What else?
It would seem that she and her uncle are less than soul-mates and, of course, she will be feeling suitably grateful to you for having permitted her to speak to her folks.
Find out what you can about Andropulos.
Find out what she thinks of him.
See what you can discover about his business or businesses.
Find out who his business contacts and friends are and what she thinks of them, assuming, of course, that she's ever met any of them.
And it would be very interesting to know where his travels take him — I'm not talking about his yacht cruises when she is with him — and why they take him there.’
‘You are asking me, sir, in effect, to ply Irene with cunning and devious questions, to entrap her, if you will, to engage in duplicity and extract unwitting information from a sweet and innocent girl?’
‘Yes.’
‘A pleasure, sir.’
Theodore was a cheerful, plump man in his late forties, with a pale face and thick pebble glasses, those last a very probable consequence of having spent a lifetime poring over abstruse codes.
‘You have come to check on progress, gentlemen.
I am making some, I'm happy to report.
Took me quite some time to find the key, the connection between the code and the Odyssey .
Since then, it's straightforward.
These sheets are in three sections and I'm now about two-thirds of the way through the first one.’
‘Found anything of interest?’
Talbot said.
‘Interesting?
Fascinating, Captain, fascinating.
Statements of his accounts, bank holdings, if you like.
He has his money stashed away —‘stashed’ is the word?— all over the world, it seems.
As a matter of interest, I'm totting up the sum of his holdings as I go along.
He's made it very easy for me, everything is in US dollars.
So far, let me see, it's two-eighty.
Yes, two-eighty.
Dollars.’
‘A man could retire on that,’ Van Gelder said.
‘Indeed.
Two-eighty.
Followed by six zeros.’
Talbot and Van Gelder looked at each other in silence, then bent forward over Theodore's shoulders to look at the figures he had added up.
After some seconds they straightened, looked at each other again, then bent forward once more.
‘Two hundred and eighty million dollars,’ Talbot said.
‘On that you could retire, Vincent.’
‘If I scraped and pinched a bit, I might manage.
Do you know where those bank accounts are kept, Theodore?
Cities, countries, I mean?’
‘Some I do, because he's given names and addresses, some I don't.
For the second lot, he may have another code which I don't have or he just knows them by heart.
By heart, I would guess.
I have no means of knowing where at least half the accounts are.
Just the amounts, that's all.’
‘Could you show us some of those?’
Talbot said.
‘Of course.’
Theodore pointed to some entries, flipped over several pages and indicated several more.
‘Just amounts, as I said.
As you see, there's a differing capital letter after each entry.
They mean nothing to me.
Maybe they do to Andropulos.’
Talbot leafed through the pages again.
‘Five letters, just five, recur regularly — Z, W, V, B and G. Well, now.
If you were a thrifty citizen and wanted a safe piggy-bank secure from the prying eyes of nasty parties such.
as police and income tax authorities, which country would you choose?’
‘Switzerland.’
‘I think the same far from original thought had occurred to Andropulos — for at least half his assets.
Z for Zurich.
W?
Winterthur, perhaps.
V?
Off-hand, I don't know about that one.’
‘Vevey?’
Van Gelder said.
‘On Lake Geneva?’
‘I don't think so.
Hardly what you might call an international banking centre.
Ah!
I have it.
Not in Switzerland, but it might as well be.
Vaduz.
Liechtenstein.
I don't know much about those things but I understand that once cash disappears into the vaults of Vaduz it never surfaces again.
B could be Berne or Basle — Andropulos would know, of course.
G has to be Geneva.
How am I doing, Number One?’
‘Splendidly.
I'm sure you're right.
I hardly like to point out, sir, that we still don't have the names and addresses of those banks.’
‘True.
Crest-fallen, but only slightly.
We still have names and addresses of other banks.
You have a list of those cities where those banks are located?’
‘I don't have to,’ Theodore said.
‘I have it in my head.
They're all over the place, west, east and in between.
Places as different as Miami, Tijuana, Mexico City, Bogotá in Colombia, Bangkok, Islamabad in Pakistan, Kabul in Afghanistan.
Why anyone should want to hide away money in Kabul is quite beyond me.
Country is torn by war and the Russians occupy and control the capital.’
‘Andropulos would appear to have friends everywhere,’ Talbot said.
‘Why should the poor Russians be left out in the cold?
That about the lot?’
‘Quite a few other places,’ Theodore said.
‘Mostly smaller accounts.
One exception, though.
The biggest deposit of the lot.’
‘Where?’
‘Washington, DC.’
‘Well, now.’
Talbot was silent for a few minutes.
‘What do you make of that, Number One?’
‘I think I've just about stopped making anything out of anything.
My mind has kind of taken a leave of absence.
But my eyes are still working, in a fashion, you might say.
I think I see a faint light at the end of the tunnel.’
‘I think if we think a bit more it might turn into a search-light.
How much money?’
‘Eighteen million dollars.’
‘Eighteen million dollars,’ Van Gelder said.
‘My, my.
Even in Washington, DC, a man could buy a lot with eighteen million dollars.’
The Angelina , to put it at its most kindly, was a rather striking-looking craft.
An eighty-tonner built of pinewood from the forests of the island of Samos, she had a dazzling white hull which contrasted strongly — some would have said violently — with her vermilion gunwale.
Wide of beam and low in the water amidships, she had a pronounced flare aft and for'ard, a curved stem that projected high above the gunwale.
As a sailing boat, she was well equipped with a standing-lug main and balance-lug foresail, together with two jibs.
Had it been left at that, as she had originally been built, the Angelina , a typical example of the Tehandiri class, would not only have been striking but downright handsome.
Unfortunately, it had not been left at that.
The owner, Professor Wotherspoon, although a self-avowed traditionalist, was also strongly attached to his creature comforts.
Not content with converting the craft's very considerable hold — it was, after all, originally constructed as a cargo vessel — into cabins and bathrooms, he had constructed on the deck a bridge, saloon and galley which, while admittedly functional, detracted notably from the overall aesthetic effect.
Shortly before ten o'clock in the morning, the Angelina , almost slack-sailed and ghosting along under a Meltemi that hardly rated as a zephyr, tied up along the starboard side of the Ariadne .
Talbot, accompanied by Denholm, climbed down a rope ladder to greet the owner.
The first impression that Talbot had of Wotherspoon was that he didn't look a bit like a professor or an archaeologist but then, he had to admit, he had no idea what a professor or archaeologist was supposed to look like.
He was tall, lean, shock-haired and deeply tanned: humorous of mien and colloquial of speech, he was the last person one would expect to find wandering through the groves of Academe.
He was certainly not more than forty years old.
His wife, with auburn hair and laughing hazel eyes, was at least ten years younger and was also, it seemed, an archaeologist.
Introductions effected by Denholm, Talbot said: ‘I appreciate this very much, Professor.
Very kind of you to come.
Not to say very gallant.
You appreciate that there is a fair chance that you might find yourself prematurely in another world?
Lieutenant Denholm did explain the dangers to you?’
‘In a cautious and roundabout fashion.
He's become very tight-lipped since he joined the Senior Service.’
‘I didn't join.
I was dragooned.’
‘He did mention something about vaporization.
Well, one gets a bit tired of studying ancient history.
Much more interesting to be a part of the making of it.’
‘It might be a very short-lived interest indeed.
Does Mrs Wotherspoon share your short-lived interests?’
‘'Angelina’, please.
We had to entertain a very prim and proper Swiss lady the other day and she insisted on addressing me as Madame Professor Wotherspoon.
Ghastly.
No, I can't say I share all of my husband's more extravagant enthusiasms.
But, alas, he does have one professorial failing.
He's horribly absent-minded.
Someone has to look after him.’
Talbot smiled.
‘A fearful thing for so young and attractive a lady to be trapped for life.
Again, thank you both very, very much.
I should like it if you would join us for lunch.
Meantime, I'll leave Lieutenant Denholm to explain the full  horrors of the situation to you — especially the ones you'll encounter across the lunch table.’
‘Gloom and despondency,’ Van Gelder said.
‘It ill becomes one so young and beautiful to be gloomy and despondent.
What is the matter, Irene?’
In so far as one so young and beautiful could look morose, Irene Charial gazed out morosely over the taffrail of the Ariadne .
‘I am not, Lieutenant-Commander Van Gelder, in the mood for flattery.’
‘Vincent.
Flattery is an insincere compliment.
How can the truth be flattery?
But you're right about the word ‘mood’.
You are in a mood.
You're worried, upset.
What's troubling you?’
‘Nothing.’
‘Being beautiful doesn't mean you're above telling fibs.
You could hardly call that flattery, could you?’
‘No.’
A fleeting smile touched the green eyes.
‘Not really.’
‘I know this is a very unpleasant situation you find yourself in.
But we're all trying to make the best of it.
Or did something your parents say upset you?’
‘You know perfectly well that that's not true.’
Van Gelder also knew it, Denholm had reassured him on that point.
‘Yes, that's so.
You were hardly in a cheerful frame of mind when I first met you this morning.
Something worries you.
Is it so dreadful a secret that you can't tell me?’
‘You've come here to pry, haven't you?’
‘Yes.
To pry and probe.
Crafty, cunning, devious questions to extra information from you that you don't know you're giving away.’
It was Van Gelder's turn to look morose.
‘I don't think I'm very good at it.’
‘I don't think you are, either.
That man sent you, didn't he?’
‘What man?’
‘Now you're being dishonest.
Commander Talbot.
Your captain.
A cold man.
Distant.
Humourless.’
‘He's neither cold nor distant.
And he's got a very considerable sense of humour.’
‘Humour.
I don't see any signs of it.’
‘I'm beginning not to be surprised.’
Van Gelder had stopped smiling.
‘Maybe he thought it would be wasted on you.’
‘Maybe he's right.’
She appeared not to have taken offence.
‘Or maybe I just don't see too much to laugh about at the moment.
But I'm right about the other thing.
He's remote, distant.
I've met people like him before.’
‘I doubt it very much.
In the same way that I doubt your power of judgement.
You don't seem to be very well equipped in that line.’
‘Oh.’
She made a moue .
‘Flattery and charm have flown out the window, is that it?’
‘I don't flatter.
I've never claimed to have charm.’
‘I meant no harm.
Please.
I see nothing wrong with being a career officer.
But he lives for only two things — the Royal Navy and the Ariadne .’
‘You poor deluded creature.’
Van Gelder spoke without heat.
‘But how were you to know?
John Talbot lives for only two things — his daughter and his son.
Fiona, aged six, and Jimmy, aged three.
He dotes on them.
So do 1.
I'm their Uncle Vincent.’
‘Oh.’
She was silent for some moments.
‘And his wife?’
‘Dead.’
‘I am sorry.’
She caught his arm.
‘To say I didn't know is no excuse.
Go ahead.
Call me a clown.’
‘I don't flatter, I don't charm — and I don't tell lies.’
‘But you do turn a pretty compliment.’
She took her hand away, leaned on the rail and looked out over the sea.
After some time, she said, without looking around: ‘It's my Uncle Adam, isn't it?’
‘Yes.
We don't know him, we don't trust him and we think he's a highly suspicious character.
You will forgive me talking about your nearest and dearest in this fashion.’
‘He is not my nearest and dearest.’
She had turned to face him.
There was neither vehemence in her voice nor marked expression in her face: at most, a slight degree of bewilderment in both.
‘I don't know him,I don't trust him and I think he's a highly suspicious character.’
‘If you don't know him, what on earth are — were — you doing aboard his yacht?’
‘I suppose that, too, seems suspicious.
Not really.
Three reasons, I would think.
He's a very persuasive man.
He seems to be genuinely fond of our family — my younger brother and sister and myself — for he is forever giving us presents, very expensive presents, too, and it seemed churlish to refuse his invitation.
Then there was the element of fascination — I know practically nothing about him, nor what his business activities are or why he spends so much time in foreign countries.
And, of course, perhaps both Eugenia and I are snobs at heart and were flattered by the invitation to go cruising on a very expensive yacht.’
‘Well, good enough reasons.
But still not good enough to explain why you went with him if you dislike him.’
‘I didn't say I disliked him.
I said I distrusted him.
Not the same thing.
And I didn't begin distrusting him until this trip.’
‘Why start now?’
‘Alexander is why.’
She gave a mock shudder.
‘Would you trust Alexander?’
‘Candidly, no.’
‘And Aristotle is almost as bad.
The three of them spent hours talking together, usually in the radio-room.
Whenever Eugenia or I went near them, they stopped talking.
Why?’
‘Obvious, isn't it?
They didn't want you to hear what they were talking about.
Ever been with him abroad on his business 
‘Good heavens, no.’
She was genuinely startled at the idea.
‘Not even on the Delos ?’
‘I've only been on the Delos once before.
With my brother and sister.
A short trip to Istanbul.’
He was going to have less than a sensational report to make to his captain, Van Gelder reflected.
She didn't know her uncle.
She didn't know what his businesses were.
She never travelled with him.
And her only reason for distrusting him was that she distrusted Alexander, a feeling almost certainly shared by the majority of people who had ever met him.
Van Gelder made one last try.
‘Your mother's brother, of course?’
She nodded.
‘What does she think of him?’
‘She never speaks ill of him.
But she never speaks ill of anyone.
She's a wonderful lady, a wonderful mother, not simple or anything like that, just a very trusting person who could never bring herself to speak ill of anyone.’
‘She's obviously never met Alexander.
Your father?’ 'He never speaks of Uncle Adam either, but he doesn't speak in a very different way, if you follow me.
My father is a very straight, very honest man, very clever, head of a big construction company, highly respected by everyone.
But he doesn't speak of my uncle.
I'm not as trusting as my mother.
I believe my father strongly disapproves of Uncle Adam or whatever businesses he runs.
Or both.
I don't believe they've talked in years.’
She shrugged and gave a faint smile.
‘Sorry I can't be of more help.
You haven't learnt anything, have you?’
‘Yes, I have.
I've learnt I can trust you.’
This time the smile was warm and genuine and friendly.
‘You don't flatter, you don't charm and you don't tell lies.
But you are gallant.’
‘Yes,’ Van Gelder said.
‘I believe I am.’
‘Sir John,’ the President said, ‘you have put me in a most damnably awkward position.
I speak, you understand, more in sorrow than in anger.’
‘Yes, Mr President.
I am aware of that and I'm sorry for it.
It is, of course, no consolation for you to know that I am in an equally awkward situation.’
If Sir John Travers, the British Ambassador to the United States, did indeed find himself in such a situation, he showed no signs of it.
But then Sir John was renowned throughout the diplomatic world for his savoir-faire , his monolithic calm and his ability to remain wholly unruffled in the most trying and difficult situations.
‘I'm only the messenger boy.
Grade one, of course.’
‘Who the hell is this fellow Hawkins, anyway?’
Richard Hollison, deputy head of the FBI, couldn't quite match Sir John's tranquil serenity but he had his obvious anger under tight control.
‘I don't think I care very much for having a foreigner telling the White House, the Pentagon and the FBI how to run their business.’
‘Hawkins is a Vice-Admiral in the British Navy.’
The General was the fourth and only other person in the office.
‘An exceptionally able man.
I cannot think of any United States naval officer whom I would sooner have in his place in those near-impossible circumstances.
And I don't think I need point out that I am in the most awkward situation of all.
I don't want to sound overly possessive but, bloody hell, the Pentagon is my concern.’
‘Richard Hollison,’ Sir John said.
‘I've known you for some years now.
I know your reputation for toughness is matched only by your reputation for fairness.
Be fair in this case.
Admiral Hawkins, as the General has just said, is in a position of having to cope with almost impossible circumstances which, as you are in a position to know better than most, involves making almost impossible decisions.
He's not telling anyone how to run their business.
In order to get a message  to the President, without anyone in the Government or the Pentagon seeing the message before the President, he elected to bypass the Pentagon and all the standard avenues of communication.
Certainly the Pentagon knows it's already under investigation, but Hawkins didn't want anyone to know that he was pointing fingers in certain directions.
If it is your intention to set a cat among the pigeons or let loose an eagle in the dovecote, you don't send a postcard in advance announcing your intentions.’
‘Yes, I accept that,’ Hollison said.
‘With weary resignation, I accept it.
But don't ask me to like it.’
‘Like it or lump it,’ the President said, ‘I accept it, too.’
He looked unenthusiastically at the paper before him on his desk.
‘It would appear that this Adamantios Andropulos, who is Hawkins's temporary guest-I could well imagine that Admiral Hawkins would use the term ‘guest’ even if this unfortunate were clapped in irons in some shipboard dungeon — has an account with a Washington bank, name and address supplied, of some eighteen million dollars, and would we kindly make enquiries to see if he has been disbursing any of this of late and, if so, in what direction.
I know this lies well within your capabilities, Richard.
Point is, how long will it take?’
‘All depends upon how many false names, how many dud companies, how much of the usual laundering paraphernalia is involved.
The villain, if there is a villain, might well have a numbered account in outer Mongolia.
Unlikely, I admit, but you take my point.
One hour, maybe three.
We will not stand upon the order of our going.
Excuse me, Mr President.
Excuse me, gentlemen.’
Hollison left.
‘The Army and the Marines will be pleased to learn — when they do learn of it — that Admiral Hawkins does not consider them worthy of his regard,’ the President went on.
‘Only the Air Force and the Navy.
The Air Force I can, in the circumstances, understand.
But it would be interesting to  know why he has deemed the Navy to be deserving of his interests.
He gives no indications on that score.’
The President sighed.
‘Maybe he doesn't even trust me.
Or maybe he knows something that we don't know.’
Sir John said placidly: ‘If that is the case — that he knows something we don't — I have little doubt that he'll tell us in the fullness of time.’
The man under discussion in the White House was, at that moment, dwelling on precisely the same subject.
‘Time's winged chariot, John.
I forget the rest of the quotation but it's definitely on the wing.’
Leaning back in a comfortable armchair, a glass of frosted lime juice in his hand, Hawkins succeeded only in giving the impression of a man with all the time in the world.
‘So much to do, so little time to do it in.
How stands the Ariadne in respect of the rest of this uncaring world?’
‘I think you might say, sir, that the patient is coming along as well as could be expected.
Our carpenter is aboard the Angelina , building a cradle for the bomb according to the specifications the Pentagon gave us.
There will be two hinged clamps to secure it in even the worst weather which, as you can see for yourself, is the last thing we expect today.’
‘Indeed.’
The Admiral looked through the window of his cabin.
‘The weather is all wrong, John.
Considering the possibly apocalyptic and doom-laden task we have on hand, the least we could reasonably expect is high winds, torrential rain, thunder, lightning, tempests, tornadoes and all those other adverse weather conditions that King Lear encountered on his walkabout around the blasted heath.
But what do we have?
A blistering July sun, a cloudless blue sky and the wine-dark seas without even a ripple to show for themselves.
Downright disappointing.
Also disappointing, not to say extremely  disturbing, is the likelihood that if those zero-wind conditions persist, it'll take the Angelina a week to get even half way towards the horizon.’
‘I don't think we have to worry about that, sir.
Weather conditions in the Cyclades between early July and mid-September are remarkably predictable.
It's already eleven forty-five.
Any minute now the Meltemi, the Etesian wind, will start up from the north-west.
During the afternoon it reaches Forces 5 or 6, sometimes even seven.
Usually dies away in the evening but it has been known to last all night.
The Meltemi will be ideally suited for the Angelina .
Those luggers, as Denholm said, are hopeless windward sailors but in this case it will be directly astern of them and carry them down towards the Kásos Strait to the east of the easternmost tip of Crete.’
‘Sounds fine, but, well, even if Montgomery manages to raise this bomber, if he manages to cut a hole in the fuselage without blowing us all to kingdom come, if he manages to extract the atom bomb and if he manages to secure it to the Angelina's cradle, what happens if the thing detonates before he reaches the Kásos Strait?’
‘Then that's it for Wotherspoon and his crew.
For us, the risk is low.
I've been talking to Dr Wickram about this.
He seems convinced of the inherent stability of the hydrogen bomb — after all, he does build the damn things.
While he says it would be a hundred per cent certain to go up if an atom bomb exploded alongside it, we mustn't over-estimate the effects of a more remote explosive shock, even at a distance of a few miles.
After all, those bombs did survive the effect of the explosion in the nose of the bomber and the impact of the plane hitting the water at high speed.
Besides, the intervening miles of water — we hope there will be those intervening miles — should have a powerfully dampening effect.’
‘There'll be no such effect for those aboard the Angelina .
Curtains.
What motivates a man like that, John?
Obviously, he's incredibly brave — but, well, is he all right?’
‘If you mean is he off his rocker, then we're all off our rockers.
He's as sane as you or I. He's a romantic at heart, a born adventurer; a couple of hundred years ago and he'd have been somewhere on the other side of the world building up the odd empire.’
‘That's as may be.
But it's still a terrible thought that a man like that should die for us.’
‘He won't be dying for all of us.
I'm going on the Angelina .
So is Vincent Van Gelder.’
Hawkins put down his glass and stared at him.
‘Do you know what you're saying?
I know what you're saying and I think you've taken leave of your senses.
Are you mad?
You and Van Gelder?
Quite mad?’
‘Van Gelder insists on coming along.
I insist on going.
That's all there is to it.’
‘I absolutely forbid it.’
‘With the deepest respect, Admiral, you'll forbid me nothing.
Did you honestly expect me to leave a job half done?
Did you honestly expect me to let him go out there and die alone?
I would remind you that I am the captain of this ship and that at sea not even an admiral can take over from me or give orders which I consider to be to the detriment of this vessel.’
‘Mutiny!’
Hawkins waved a dismissive hand at his lime juice.
‘Have we nothing stronger than this?’
‘Naturally.’
Talbot went to the Admiral's wine cupboard and prepared a drink while Hawkins gazed at a spot on the deck which was about a thousand miles away.
‘A large scotch and water.
No ice.’
‘Thank you.’
Hawkins drained almost half the contents.
‘Mutiny, forsooth!’
‘Yes, sir.
Can't hang me from the yard-arm, though.
It's my yard-arm.
You haven't yet met Angelina — Professor  Wotherspoon's wife, I mean, not the lugger.
But you will.
I've invited them aboard for lunch.
Young, rather lovely, nice sense of humour and dotty about her husband.
She has to be — dotty, I mean — to do something she dearly doesn't want to do, that is to go along from here with her husband and the bomb on the lugger.’
‘I'm sure I shall be delighted to make her acquaintance.’
Hawkins took another sip of his drink.
‘What's she got to do with the matter in hand?’
‘She's not going with the bomb and the lugger.
Neither is Wotherspoon, for that matter, or his two crew members.
They remain aboard the Ariadne .
Wotherspoon, of course, will have to be forcibly restrained, but that's no problem at all .
Van Gelder and I will take the Angelina down through the Kásos Strait.
Two small medals will suffice.’
Hawkins was silent for quite some time, then said: ‘How are you going to pin on a couple of posthumous VCs or whatever when you're circling the earth in a vaporized orbit?’
‘One problem at a time.
We can't let the girl go.’
‘Good God, no.
I'll never forgive myself.
I never even started to think.
I wonder —’
‘Wonder me no wonders, sir.
We don't have room for three heroes aboard the Angelina .
Someone has to take the Ariadne home again, remember?
Well, that's the Angelina .
Now, the Kilcharran .
I've just been talking to Captain Montgomery.
He's just given a couple of experimental tugs on the lifting slings and he reckons the bomber, with the help of the flotation bags, of course, is nearing a state of neutral buoyancy.
Twenty minutes, half an hour at the most, and he's going to start to haul away.
You won't want to miss that, sir.’
‘No, indeed.
What did Walter de la Mare say — look your last on all things lovely every hour?
This may be the last thing I'll ever see?’
‘I rather hope it doesn't come to that, sir.
Apart from the  lugger and the recovery of the bomber, we have to wait for three other things.
The reaction to the message we sent to the President via our embassy in Washington, which might take quite some time, for even the most cooperative of banks, and banks almost by definition are secretive and detest the very thought of cooperation, are going to be very reluctant to disclose any information about their important clients, because important clients don't like that sort of thing.
Admittedly, Air Force Generals and Admirals are unlikely to be very important financially, but they are from the point of view of prestige and power and would, I should think, carry a disproportionate amount of clout.
I do hope we haven't upset too many people over there.
Then, and this I should expect very soon, there should be a reply from Greek Intelligence to our query asking for the complete list of places where Andropulos has conducted business, any kind of business, over the past few years.
Then, of course, we await the arrival of this krytron device from America.’
‘Which may arrive any old time.
I mean, we have no idea, have we?
Do the Americans have supersonic planes?’
‘Sure they have.
But fighters only.
And their nearest refuelling point would be the Azores and I'm quite certain no fighter could fly the close on two thousand miles they'd have to travel to get there.
Question of fuel capacity.
Besides, it's not absolutely essential that we get this device before leaving with the bomb — always assuming, of course, that we do leave.
We could always dump the bomb, drop a marker, warn all shipping to keep clear, wait for the krytron to arrive, return there and detonate the bomb.’
‘Much more satisfactory if it could all be done in one fell swoop.’
Hawkins thought for a moment, then smiled.
‘What's the time in Washington?’
‘Four a.m., I think.’
‘Excellent, excellent.
A short message.
Ask them how it's being transported and what's the expected time of arrival.
Give 'em something to do.’
Talbot lifted a phone and dictated the message.
‘Haven't seen your second-in-command lately,’ Hawkins said.
‘I understood he was prising secrets loose from Andropulos's niece?’
‘Vincent normally carries out his duties with efficiency and dispatch.
When the duties involve Irene Charial, it seems to take a little longer.’
‘Not so many years ago it would have taken me a little longer myself.
Ah!’
Van Gelder had appeared in the doorway.
‘Just discussing you, young man.
A difficult and protracted interview, I take it?’
‘One treads delicately, sir.
But she told me everything she knew.’
He looked reproachfully at Talbot.
‘I detect a trace of scepticism in your expression, sir.
Unwarranted, I assure you.
I believe her, I trust her and I was not bewitched by her green eyes, owing to the fact that I was on duty at the time.’
‘Less than admirable though they may be, Vincent, deviousness and low cunning have their place in the scheme of things.’
‘It wasn't like that at all.
I told her that you had sent me to try to trap her into making unwary and unguarded statements and unwittingly to betray herself.
After that, we got along famously.’
Talbot smiled.
‘Just another way of being devious.
What does she know?’
‘Nothing.
I guarantee you'd come to the same conclusion, sir.
She doesn't know her uncle, except superficially.
She doesn't trust him.
She thinks he's a highly suspicious character.
She thinks Alexander is a highly suspicious character, although that wouldn't require any great acumen on anyone's part.
She knows nothing about his businesses.
She's never travelled with him.
Her father, whom she obviously dotes on and has the highest respect for, thinks he's a highly suspicious character — he and Andropulos haven't spoken for years.
She's convinced that her father knows a great deal about her  uncle and his businesses, but Dad refuses to discuss any aspect of the matter.’
‘Sounds as if we could do with Dad aboard right now,’ Hawkins said.
‘I have the feeling we could learn some very interesting things from him.’
‘I'm sure we could, sir.
One odd thing — she's convinced that her uncle is genuinely fond of her.’
Hawkins smiled.
‘I think it would be rather difficult not to be fond of the young lady.
However, I would point out in the passing, and apropos of nothing, that mass murderers have been known to dote on tiny tots.’
‘I hardly think he's a mass murderer, sir.’
‘And she's certainly not a tiny tot.’
He looked speculatively at Talbot.
‘A passing thought, John?’
‘Yes.’
Talbot looked out through the window for an unseeing moment, then back at Hawkins.
‘How do we know he's not a mass murderer?’
The speculation was still in Hawkins's eyes.
‘You don't normally make remarks like that.
Not without good reason.
You have something in mind?’
‘I think I have.
But it's so far back in my mind that I can't reach it.
It'll come.’
He turned as Denholm entered the cabin.
‘I seem to recall having asked you this question before.
What drags you away from the fleshpots?’
‘Duty, sir.’
‘You will have noticed, Admiral,’ Talbot said, ‘how devoted the Ariadne 's officers are to their duty.
I thought, Jimmy, that you were supposed to be lurking and eavesdropping?’
‘I have lurked, sir.
And eavesdropped.
I have also been plying Mr Andropulos and his friends with strong drink.’
‘At this time of the morning?’
Hawkins said.
‘Captain's orders, sir.
I hope, Captain, that the Admiralty are going to take care of my bar bill.’
‘Prodigious?’
‘Not as prodigious as their thirsts.
They have relaxed a bit.
They have apparently agreed that I'm simple-minded.
They are quite certain I don't know a word of Greek but even so they're still very cautious.
Much given to allusions and cryptic references, all made, for good measure, in a Macedonian dialect.’
‘Which you learnt at your mother's knee?’
‘A bit later than that.
But I'm at home in it.
I don't know whether you will consider this good news or bad, sir, but Andropulos knows there are hydrogen bombs aboard that bomber.
He even knows there are fifteen of them.’
There was a fairly lengthy silence while the other three men in the cabin considered the implications of Denholm's words, then Hawkins said: ‘Good news and bad news.
Good news for us, bad news for Andropulos.
Well done, my boy.
Very well done.’
‘I echo that, sir,’ Talbot said.
‘Lieutenant Denholm is miscast as either a classicist or electronics officer.
MI5 should have him.
There is no way that Andropulos could have learnt aboard the Ariadne of the existence of those bombs.
So he knew before.
Proof, if that were needed, of our near-certain conviction that Andropulos has penetrated the Pentagon.’
‘I would point out, sir,’ Denholm said, ‘that the words hydrogen bombs weren't actually used.
Also, it's only my word against theirs.’
‘That's irrelevant and this is no court of law.
There will be no confrontation.
All that matters is that we know and they don't know that we do.’
‘My usefulness is over?
Or do I continue to lurk?’
‘Lurk, of course.
The three A's must be making some contingency plans.
We know now why they wanted aboard the Ariadne .
What we don't know is what they intend to do now that they are here.
Resume your wassailing.’
‘Wassailing?’
Denholm sounded bitter.
‘I have an arrangement with Jenkins whereby I consume copious quantities of tonic water, lemon and ice.
Ghastly.’
He turned to go but  Talbot stopped him as a seaman entered and handed over a sheet of paper.
‘You might as well hear what's in this.’
He studied the paper briefly.
‘This is in reply to a request we made of Greek Intelligence for as exhaustive a list as they could supply of all places where Andropulos is known either to do business or have contacts.
No names, no addresses, just towns.
Forty or fifty of them.
My, my.
This list wasn't compiled on the spur of the moment.
Greek Intelligence must have been taking a more than passing interest in the activities of our friend Andropulos over a long period, years I would think.
I wonder why.
About half of those places are marked by asterisks.
Again I wonder why.
Was that for their own information or is it intended to suggest something to us?’
He handed the paper to Hawkins, who studied it for a moment, then said: ‘I know those places marked with an asterisk.
I don't see their relevance in our circumstances.
I can't even remotely associate them with our problem.
I'd swear that none of those places had any connection with hydrogen bombs.’
‘So would I,’ Talbot said.
‘Maybe they handle something else.
In spite of the situation we find ourselves in, maybe hydrogen bombs aren't the biggest cause for concern.
If you can imagine anything worse than our present situation, that is.
Could I have that back, sir?’
He sat at the desk, made some marks on the paper before him, then looked up.
‘Bangkok, Islamabad, Kabul, Bogotá, Miami, Mexico City, Tijuana, San Diego, Bahamas, Ocho Rios, Ankara, Sofia — Andropulos playing both sides of the fence with those last two, the ethnic Turks are having a very bad time in Bulgaria just now, but Andropulos wouldn't let that interfere with his business interests — and Amsterdam.
What does that list suggest?’
‘Drugs,’ Van Gelder said.
‘Drugs.
Heroin, cocaine, marijuana, you name.
it.
Now some more towns.
Tehran, Baghdad — Andropulos again playing both sides of the fence, Iran and Iraq had been at war for six years now — Tripoli, Damascus, Beirut, Athens, Rome, East Berlin, New York and London.
That suggest something?’
‘Yes.’
It was Van Gelder again.
‘Terrorism.
I'm not quite sure why New York and London qualify.’
‘I seem to remember there have been two attempts, one at John F. Kennedy, the other at Heathrow to smuggle bombs aboard planes.
Both bungled, both failed.
I think it's fairly safe to assume — in fact, it would be criminally negligent not to assume — that the terrorists who planned those crimes are still in residence in London and New York, waiting.
Jimmy, would you please go to your cabin and bring Theodore here with whatever further results his cryptology has turned up.’
Hawkins said: ‘I most sincerely hope that you are not thinking what I think you are, if you follow me.’
‘It may be, sir, that I am thinking what you are, if you follow me .’
‘What you are suggesting is that this Andropulos is some kind of mastermind — possible world co-ordinator — of drug-smuggling?
Is that what you meant by your remark that we didn't know he wasn't a mass murderer?’
‘Yes, sir.
What else can that list of contacts he has in drug areas mean?
Where else has he accumulated his vast wealth — and we haven't added it all up yet, not by any means.’
‘There's no actual proof.’
‘All depends on what you call proof.
It's very powerful suggestive evidence.
How far are you prepared to stretch the long arm of coincidence?
To infinity?’
‘And you're further suggesting he's engaged in terrorism.
That he's using his vast profits from drug-smuggling to finance his terrorist activities?’
‘It's possible, but I don't think so.l think the two activities are being run in tandem.’
‘A drug-peddler is one thing.
A terrorist quite another.
Incompatibles.
Poles apart.
Never the twain shall meet.’
‘One hesitates to contradict a senior officer.
But I'm afraid you're wrong, sir.
Vincent, would you enlighten the Admiral?
You know what I'm talking about.’
‘All too well, sir.
October 1984, Admiral, our last submarine patrol.
North Atlantic, about two hundred miles west of the Irish coast.
I can remember it as if it were yesterday.
We were asked to move into position to observe, but not to intercept, a small American ship en route from the States to Ireland and given its course and estimated time when it would pass a certain point.
Neither the crew of this vessel nor its captain, a certain Captain Robert Anderson who, I believe, is still at large, knew that they had been monitored from the moment they had left port by an American spy-in-the sky satellite.
We upped periscope, identified it, then downed periscope.
They never saw us.
It was a New England trawler, the Valhalla , based on Gloucester, Massachusetts, from which it had sailed a few days earlier.
It transferred its cargo to an Irish tug, the Marita Ann , which was duly seized by the Irish Navy.
‘The cargo consisted entirely of military hardware — rifles, machine-guns, shotguns, pistols, hand grenades, rockets and, as I recall, about 70,000 rounds of ammunition, all destined for the IRA.
It was to have been the IRA's biggest gun-running plot ever, but it was foiled because of what was called ‘Operation Leprechaun’, where the CIA, our MI5 and Irish Intelligence took a healthy — or unhealthy, it all depends on your point of view — interest in the activities of Noraid, an Irish-American group that specialized — for all I know it may still be specializing — in buying American arms and shipping them to the IRA in Ireland.
‘Round about the same time a Panamanian registered cargo ship by the name of the Ramsland , chartered by the same gang who had organized the Valhalla , put into Boston harbour and  was promptly seized by the United States Coast Guard.
The Ramsland had secret compartments below decks but the Coast Guard knew all about those secret compartments.
They held no less than thirty tons of marijuana, another smuggling record.
The proceeds from the sale of those drugs were, of course, intended to fund IRA terrorist activities.’
‘We became quite interested in the drugs-terrorist connection,’ Talbot said, ‘and made some discreet enquiries.
At least five other drug-terrorist connections had been discovered and broken up.
It is believed that considerably more connections have not been discovered and so not broken up.
Why should Andropulos be an exception to what appears to be a fairly well established rule?’
‘A suitably chastened admiral sits before you,’ Hawkins said.
‘We live, we learn.
You two should join Denholm and offer your services to MI5.
Ah, the man himself.’
Denholm entered the cabin with Theodore, who handed over to Talbot some papers he had with him.
Talbot looked at them and handed them over to Hawkins.
‘Well, well, well,’ Hawkins said.
‘What an interesting coincidence or, in view of what I've just been learning, perhaps not all that much of a coincidence.
Fifteen of the towns that Greek Intelligence asterisked — if that's the word — on their list.
Only, in this case — my, my, my!— they give names and addresses.
Isn't that splendid?
Captain, a thought has occurred to me.
There's one of those towns marked with an asterisk that you omitted to mention.
Washington, DC.
Does that come under D for drugs or T for terrorism?’
‘Neither.
B for bribery.
Are you about through this list, Theodore?’
‘Two-thirds, I would say.’
‘And that will be the end of it?’
‘No, Captain.
There's still a last list.’
‘It would be gratifying if it held some more revelations, but  perhaps that would be too much to hope for.
How long have you been up and around, Theodore?’
‘Three o'clock this morning.
Three-thirty.
I'm not sure, I was a bit fuzzy.
If I had known what would be required of me this morning I wouldn't have gone to that birthday celebration last night.’
‘And it's now noon, or thereabouts.
Seven hours of beating your brains out when you weren't feeling all that hot to begin with.
You must be exhausted.
But I would appreciate it if you could at least finish this present list off.
After that, Jimmy, I suggest that Theodore has a drink, snack and snooze in that order.’
The two men left.
‘If you agree, Admiral, I suggest that Vincent contacts Greek Intelligence after Theodore has finished that list and furnishes them with a list of the towns together with the appropriate names and addresses.
Could help.’
‘And what do you imagine Greek Intelligence can do?’
‘Very little, I imagine.
But they can forward the list, with utmost urgency, to Interpol.
Admittedly, Interpol's writ doesn't run worldwide — they would have zero clout in places, say, like Tripoli, Tehran or Beirut — and they are an information gathering and dispensing agency not an executive unit, and they know more about bad people than any other group in the world.
And ask them if they suspect — suspect, not have proof — that Andropulos is engaged in drug-running.’
‘Shall be done, sir.
Sign it ‘Admiral Hawkins’?’
‘Naturally.’
Hawkins shook his head.
‘Admiral Hawkins here, Admiral Hawkins there, it seems he's signing his name everywhere.
Or, rather somebody's signing it for him.
I shall have to look to my cheque-books.’