

A.V.R. GO SOUTH!
By JOHN HUXLEY
THE PURCHASE OF half a mile of track by Avon Valley Railway members signals the start of the railway's long awaited southern extension and the hope that passengers will be able to steam towards Bath during the second half of 1993.
With passenger figures for 1992 up 66% on the previous year following the reopening of the railway from Bitton to Oldland Common, the £30,000 legal costs of obtaining the Light Railway Order have been all but cleared, and now a £10,000 loan has been taken out to purchase half-a-mile of rail which will be used to relay the former Midland Railway line south towards Bath — the flat-bottom rail being laid on concrete sleepers already in store at Bitton Station.
The trackbed within the Avon Valley has already been prepared for the relaying, with the ballast cleaned and put into piles ready for reuse.
The initial half-mile section will be the first part of the Railway's plans to lay south, operations initially taking the form of ‘topping and tailing’, the normal four-coach service train with a second locomotive, subject to final Department of Transport agreement.
This will be followed, in due course, by a further three-quarters of a mile of track, a run round loop and the construction of a platform at the River Avon, allowing passengers to enjoy the walk, boat trips, riverside pubs and a possible link up with a local country park.
Negotiations have also commenced with the local authorities regarding the railway's long term aids — to relay the track a further three miles to the outskirts of Bath — and initial reactions to these plans have been encouraging.
A survey of these structures on the line has been carried out by a firm of consulting engineers, showing that only one minor bridge requires any structural repairs.
This will then give the Avon Valley Railway a line length of around six miles from Oldland Common through Bitton to the outskirts of Bath.
The 71000 (Duke of Gloucester) Steam Locomotive Trust, in conjunction with the Great Central Railway (1976) Plc, have confirmed that 71000 ‘Duke of Gloucester’ will work into Marylebone, on Thursday November 12, in conjunction with the launch of the £2m share issue by the GCR.
However, the locomotive will not be working in with a train, as reported incorrectly elsewhere, instead arriving as a light engine from Old Oak Common.
Nevertheless, this will mark the first visit of a steam locomotive in the Ex-GC terminus since the extensive remodelling was completed.
Seats are still available on 71000's last public main line working of 1992, on Saturday November 7.
Tickets for the Welsh Marches Express are available from .
Nunney goes North
IN A MOVE bound to both surprise and delight Didcot-based Castle, 5029 ‘Nunney Castle’ is to make a three-month visit to the East Lancs-Railway at Bury.
The locomotive is due to arrive at Bury by road and make its first appearance at a hastily-organised Great Western Weekend over the weekend of November 14–15.
The Great Western Weekend will be made up of an intensive service using 5029, the railway's own resident ex-GW ‘Odney Manor,’ and another visitor, 2-8-0T 5220 from the Great Central Railway.
It is also worth pointing out that the ELR can field one of the most representative ranges of ex-Western motive power, as the steam fleet can be supplemented by ex-BR (WR) diesel-hydraulics,
Mention should also be made of 72XX 2-8-2T 7229, holder of the record for the fastest dismantling programme in preservation history, which is currently under long-term restoration in Bury yard.
5029 is due to remain at Bury until the end of February, and is subject to a six steamings a month agreement, so it should see  extensive use, and provide plenty of opportunities to experience GW (four-cylinder power in Lancashire ).
The move to the North of England also raises a number of possibilities for mainline operation.
In light of cancellation of 5029's programme of Northern running in the early part of 1992, investigations are currently under way to put together a limited number of trips (including, a short visit to the National Railway Museum, York).
Certainly a Settle & Carlisle or two cannot be ruled out.
7029 ‘Clun Castle’ made several trips in the North during September and October 1967, and to see what single-chimneyed Castle could do 25 years later would be very interesting.
Nunney Castle shows its  paces at Swithland on the Great Central Railway in 1991.
Squadron scramble
IT is hoped that 1993 will see the first working of an ex-B.R. main line loco on the former Mangotsfield to Bath branch when Bulleid Un rebuilt Battle of Britain 34072 ‘257 Squadron’ makes a visit to the Avon Valley Railway.
Negotiations are still being finalised, but it is hoped that 34072 will visit Bitton next year, possibly May, and work trains to Oldland Common.
TR Sunday service
THE TALYLLYN RAILWAY is all set to fight the recession with improved train services and better facilities for passengers.
Like many other tourist attractions, the Talyllyn saw a drop in traffic during the difficult 1992 season; but the railway is working hard to meet the challenge.
The Talyllyn is looking forward to a brighter future and plans for 1993 are well in hand.
An innovation will be an early season service when a Sunday train will operate on February 14th to March 27th and run through to October 31st.
The timetable will include the established ‘Vintage Train’(original TR Loco and coaches dating from 1865/6), and also a ‘Heritage Train’ which will include the historic coaches from the former Glyn Valley Tramway and Corris Railway.
On the locomotive side an ‘in depth’ examination is currently taking place on No. 6 ‘Douglas’to determine the full extent of the work required for a major overhaul in connection with the provision of a new boiler.
The total cost is likely to be more than £20,000 and a further £10,000 will be needed for major firebox and boiler repairs on No. 1 ‘Talyllyn’.
Other engineering work on the railway includes a full winter programme on permanent way work, completion of the installation of signalling at Tywyn Penre and further progress on the fitting of air brakes to locomotives and passenger rolling stock.
Work has also started on the construction of a new self propelled hedge-cutting machine while new passenger toilets at Tywyn Whard will be ready for the Christmas train service.
This will consist of ‘Santa Specials’ and an evening Carol Service train on Saturday, December 26th up to and including Sunday, January 3rd.
The Talyllyn continues to provide an all the year round agency facility for British Rail for both passenger and Red Star parcel facilities.
No, the Martians have not landed.
An East Lancashire Railway worker directs the giant grit blaster at the bunker of their newly acquired Jinty to remove rust.
Worth the journey
VERY FEW things in life beat seeing a steam locomotive in action.
And an ex-LMS 4-6-0 Jubilee  fulfils that dream for many.
Photographer JOHN FAIRCLOUGH caught 45596 leading a train up the Keighley and Worth Valley Railway to Oxenhope on October 18.
The train was part of the successful enthusiasts' weekend on the West Yorkshire branch.
A negative reaction
THE NATIONAL RAILWAY Museum's library is pioneering a new method of making their extensive negative collection available to the public.
The system, supplied by Primagraphics Ltd, is high quality digital imaging equipment which has been designed to store and index electronically the 750,000 images in the Museum's photographic archive.
This new expansion of the department has come at the right moment for the National Railway Museum in view of the recent acquisition of the Ian Allan negative collection.
This important collection increases the Museum's geographical and subject coverage and comprises  of approximately 70,000 images including views of locomotives, rolling stock, moving trains, railway architecture and civil engineering subjects dating back to the early 1900's.
Christine Heap, Curator of Information Services said; ‘The purchase of imaging equipment is an exciting development for the Museum which will eventually enable the public to have far easier access to our fascinating negative collections.
‘We have a wide range of photographs from locomotives to street scenes and carriage interiors to stations’.
The National Railway Museum has a varied programme of events to interest everyone over the half-term holiday from Saturday October 24 until Sunday November 1.
The events throughout the week include:—
‘From Eating to Sleeping’— Visitors are invited to take a detailed look into a selection of carriages, with an emphasis on passenger comforts in the early days of the railways, led by Curator of Collections Dieter Hopkin in the South Hall.
Tiphook Piggyback System Demonstration — This new innovative system will be actively demonstrated explaining how road vehicles can be successfully carried on the railway.
Signalling Demonstration — Have you ever wondered how railway signals work?
This demonstration shows how railways have improved communications between the signalman and driver over the last eighty years.
Platform Four Theatre Company — This extremely popular theatre group will be giving live performances, re-enacting significant periods of railway history in their own special style.
Storytime in ‘Magician's Road’— As well as being able to enjoy the interactive children's exhibition called ‘Magician's Road’, the Museum's younger  visitors will be able to listen to a storytime especially written for them.
Working Locomotive in the South Yard — Free rides for everyone!
Ride behind the Great Northern 0-6-0 Tank Locomotive No. 1247.
ON SUNDAY November 22nd, the Bath Area Group of the Swanage Railway Project are organising a coach trip to the Severn Valley Railway for a ‘Brakevan Tour’ of the line.
Using five freight brakevans, the train will be hauled by BR Standard 75069 and it will try to cover as much SVR trackwork as possible, subject to availability.
This will include various loops and sidings not normally used by passenger services.
The tour will be a round trip starting from Kidderminster with a break at Bridgnorth for refreshments and participants may also take part in a tour of the loco sheds.
The coach will be starting from Bath, with pick up points also at Saltford, Keynsham, Bristol (Victoria Street Station) and just off the M5 for the Gloucester Area.
The fully inclusive fare for the trip is £22, but it is regretted that persons under 16 years cannot participate.
Full details and conditions of the trip can be obtained from Swanage Railway — enclosing an SAE.
STEVE STANDBRIDGE AT THE GWR GALAS
GWR's Autumn galas see both steam and diesel
THE weekend of October 10 and 11 saw the Gloucestershire Warwickshire Railway hold its annual autumn steam gala.
Heavy freight 2-8-0- No. 2857, on loan from the Severn Valley Railway, hauled hourly services between Toddington and Gretton starting at 11am while 50 year old Bagnall 0–6–0 No. 2566 ‘Byfield No. 2’ could be seen at the head of a goods train shunting from the yard to the bay siding at Toddington.
The adjacent two foot gauge North Gloucestershire Railway celebrated its 30th anniversary year with guest loco Bagnall 0-4-0ST Woto, normally based at Ross-on-Wye, running trips every 15 minutes.
The Telford Horsehay Steam Trust's No.5619 was resident in the bay platform at Toddington attracting much attention from visitors, and a steam roller, Aveling and Porter No. 2 ‘Phoenix’ could be seen (and heard) crunching around the car park and yard.
At 18.30 a special evening train was behind 2857 in order to give visitors the chance to experience night steam, and on return to Toddington the loco was positioned in front of the station building to provide photographic opportunities.
The Gloucestershire Warwickshire Railway also held its annual diesel gala over the weekend of October 3 and 4.
Amid driving rain there were the passenger debuts of class 14 diesel hydraulic No.D9553 and class 108 D.M.U comprising M51959 and M52062.
The day was exclusively diesel powered and included the G.W.R.'s other operational class 14 No.D9539 and the former Vic Berry scrapyard shunter class 03 No.03069.
Sunday, while featuring the same diesel locos as the previous day, also boasted steam traction in the form of ex G.W.R. heavy freight No.2857.
The loco, on loan from the S.V.R., operated on its own and piloted by the two class 14s in turn, giving visitors plenty of choice, particularly when 11 departures per day were on offer with trains running every 45 minutes.
The D.M.U. appeared in grey and yellow livery for the only time prior to a full repaint during the winter.
North Gloucestershire Railway visitor Bagnall 0-4-0- ST No.2133 Woto runs round at Toddington
Aveling and Porter steam roller No. 10997 Phoenix in the yard at Toddington
Soon to be subjected to major overhaul ex-GWR No.5619 stands in the bay platform at Toddington.
Midland Trust add to their excursion trains
THE overwhelming success of the Midland Railway Trust organised excursions to London on November 21 and 28 have been so great that a third train has now been organised for Saturday December 5.
This train will be departing from Alfreton and Mansfield Parkway, calling at Langley Mill, Nottingham, Beeston, and Loughborough rather than commencing from Butterley Station.
Alan Calladine, the Midland Railway Trust's Development Officer, said: ‘The train on November 21 and the second train on November 28 is rapidly approaching that state.
It was therefore decided to run a third train on December 5, but this would clash with the start of our intensive Santa Special operations and so we had no choice but to operate the train from the Alfreton and Mansfield Parkway Station.’
The fare remains at £16.00 for adults and £10.00 for children giving a bargain day out for Christmas shopping in London.
On Tuesday, October 20 Mr Jolley, Station Manager of Castle Donington Power Station rededicated an historic electrical generator.
The machine is very different to the hug machinery at Castle Donington, it is powered by a large Petter Diesel Engine and is a 100KVA generating set which has been restored to full working order by a small, but dedicated group of volunteers at the centre.
The engine generator has been housed at the rear of the Matthew Kirtley Museum and this part of the building has been turned into something similar to a vintage powerhouse.
The Midland Railway Centre is launching a new venture in Ripley by opening its own shop, and booking office.
The new shop on Grosvenor Road in Ripley will be known as ‘Town Station’ and will be selling a wide range of toys and souvenirs during the lead up to Christmas.
In addition, the shop will be able to take bookings for the centre's many other activities, including Santa Specials, the Midlander Wine and Dine trains, the Firework Night celebrations, and the special excursion trains to London.
The Town Station shop was officially opened by the Mayoress of Ripley, Margaret Kent, on Thursday, October 22.
Alan Calladine said: ‘We are confident that this shop will be a success with its appealing range of gifts, toys and souvenirs and we hope that the people of Ripley and those shopping in Ripley will find it more convenient to make their bookings for the centre's special services than Butterley Station.’
Alan added, ‘We are very grateful to Margaret Kent for performing the opening ceremony.’
A special half-term holiday treat at the Midland Railway Centre will be the visit of Thomas the Tank Engine's Friends to the centre until November 1.
This event will see all the usual attractions at the Midland Railway Centre including the Matthew Kirtley Museum, the Country Park and the new Animal Farm being augmented by the presence of the Fat Controller, and Oswald the Talking Engine.
Oswald first appeared at the Midland Railway Centre in August and was an immense success.
Due to popular demand he will be making a return appearance over this Friends of Thomas event and all children are welcome to go along and talk to this now famous locomotive.
All children will receive a souvenir of their visit and a wide range of Thomas the Tank Engine souvenirs will be available from the centre's shop at Butterley Station.
Trains will run from 11.15 to 4.15 on each day and special family tickets will be available and as usual, all under fives will travel free of charge.
Last season's Santa Specials on the Midland Railway Centre's line.
Bookings are now being taken for the 1992 intensive operations.
NOVEMBER OUTINGS FOR No. 46521 ON BR LINES
By MERVYN TURVEY
THIS coming weekend sees some more activity on British Rail Network SouthEast lines.
Ex.
B.R./L.M.S.
Ivatt designed 2-6-0 Class 2MT No. 46521 will haul trains on both Sundays, November 1 and 8.
No. 46521 normally operates on the Severn Valley Railway, it is one of the two such locomotives which regularly operate on the railway and from time to time are loaned out to operate in other parts of the country.
Originally designed by the L.M.S.
for light branchline work the success of the design was such that building continued into British Railways' days and 46521 was actually built at Swindon in 1953.
It has been called down south for duty owing to the weight restrictions on the Henley branch.
This diminutive 2-6-0 tender locomotive hauled a special test train successfully between Eastleigh and Yeovil Junction on Thursday, October 15.
The weather was beautiful and those who were fortunate to know that his special was operating and were able to be somewhere along the route were fortunate to share a most attractive experience.
46521 hauled quite an extensive load which included three vehicles from the ‘Royal Scotsman’ train, two support vehicles from the Severn Valley Railway and two ex Southern Railway bogie brake vans from Eastleigh.
The consist was bogie brake (YTV) No.
ADS56289, W35467, 9004, C.R. 86, G.N. 807, C.R. 41 and bogie brake No. 56283 on the outward route to Yeovil Junction.
It will be quite a different train which operates next Sunday and the following weekend out of Twyford for Henley and return.
The stock will be five Network SouthEast T.S.O.'s with barred windows.
The train is likely to be ‘top and tailed’ with a class 37 diesel electric locomotive on the opposite end to the ‘Mickey Mouse’.
Trains will run hourly each way along the branchline between Twyford and Henley.
The first departs from Twyford at 09.45 with the return from Henley at 10.15.
This pattern continued throughout the day with the last trains being 16.45 from Twyford and 17.15 return from Henley.
Tickets are likely to be available only on the day.
Trains will stop immediately at Wargrave and Shiplake and passengers may join them at any stopping point.
Tickets will be on sale at the stations or on the train.
If printed in time tickets may be available a few days ahead of the programme from Henley and Twyford booking offices.
The cost will be £8 for an adult complete round trip and £4 for children.
THE Romsey Signalbox project completed a successful 48 hour stint at their base near to the junction of the Romsey to Southampton and Romsey to Eastleigh lines.
The watch was kept to celebrate the 10th anniversary of the project which still has quite a lot of work to undertake but is sufficiently complete now to welcome visitors.
The box stands at one end of a parcel of land upon which there is a complete turnout and associated signals.
These are all operated from within the box.
An electronic set of tricks simulates the real life timetable so that the operators receive and send all of the necessary signals as well as operating the appropriate signals.
Those on duty on Sunday morning were pleased to be able to witness the passing of ‘Taw Valley’ and ‘Sir Lamiel’en route to Andover and Exeter to provide steam haulage for the ‘South Western Ltd.’
This proved to be another successful steam operation by Network SouthEast in conjunction with Flying Scotsman Services.
REMEMBER the next mainline adventure will be on Friday December 4.
That is when ‘Taw Valley’ will head out of Waterloo for Salisbury at 4pm.
If you want a slice of the action tickets may still be available on .
It is a round trip and will see a ‘West Country’ class locomotive steam into Waterloo Station for the first time since Sunday July 9 1967.
The train is operating in support of the 34027 Locomotive Group from which the tickets are available.
The refurnished signal box stands in a small area of land complete with a section of track, a turnout and signals.
To the left can be seen a passing train on the Romsey to Eastleigh line.
Ex-B.R.
L.M.S.
Ivatt designed 2-6-0 Class 2MI No. 46521 heads a special test train along the normally freight only Romsey to Eastleigh line on Thursday, October 15.
Narrow gauge for S. Yorks
A NEW society has been formed in Rotherham, South Yorkshire.
The Rotherham Narrow Gauge Society was formed on August 1st 1992 by a group of local railway enthusiasts with the aim of building and operating a narrow gauge railway within the area.
The society is also planning to include Model Engineering tracks on the same site.
It is hoped to include, not only the smaller of gauges, 3½ins–5ins but also the larger 7½ins gauge.
So far there has been a very good response to the society, membership is climbing steadily, and many offers of help are being received.
The Society are now having talks with various parties, regarding a suitable site, and are hopeful of being able to start work on the project before the end of the year.
Anyone interested in joining the society should contact the group via the Membership Secretary at the following address; all enquiries, please enclose an SAE.
Anyone wishing to offer items of stock, materials, donations etc, would they also use the above address.
MANX COMPETITION WINNERS
THE JUDGING of Isle of Man Railways photographic competition has now taken place.
The contest which was open throughout the season until the end of August, attracted an entry of over 1,200.
Entries were submitted from as far afield as Switzerland and the U.S.A. Roughly two thirds came from the U.K.
Judges were photographers Percy Morrison and Brian Mitchell, together with railways engineer George Lawson and Alex Downie M.H.K.
There were three awards in both colour and black and white classes, with a top prize of £100. £10 consolation prizes were awarded for the best photo of each of the islands five vintage transport systems, a member of staff and the best junior entry.
Winner of the contest in the colour section was Manx photographer John Hall L.P.R.S. His long lens shot of a M.E.R. tram travelling through Laxey required much patience to correctly frame the tram whilst also keeping Laxey Wheel in focus.
In second place came Alan Turner of Dorset, who caught locomotive ‘Loch’ in full steam action.
Third place was another charismatic steam shot, titled ‘Sunset Steam’, by Paul Blowfield of Staffs.
This effect was created by the clever use of a pink filter.
The black and white section resulted in a win for another well known local photographer, Harry Cringle L.P.R.S. Harry's entry was a portrait study of steam railway fireman Selwyn Morgan.
Many entries were received in the member of staff section.
Second place was awarded to Bill Inglis for his very atmospheric shot of a steam loco leaving Douglas Station.
In third spot was that man John Hall again, this time with a shot of M.E.R. Car crossing Laxey Viaduct.
Best junior entry was by Daniel Booth, aged 12, a Groudle Glen Railway volunteer helper.
Transport Executive, Robert Smith, said: ‘The competition has proved to be a great success with a marvellous response.
We intend to use a good number of the shots for promotional and exhibition uses in the run up to the 1993 Year of Railways.
‘The contest has created considerable interest in the U.K. and has helped to publicise our forthcoming celebrations.
We hope to stage another competition next year, but this time the photos will have to be taken during the year to be eligible.’
And the  judges' comments?:— Percy Morrison said, ‘This was a terrific entry with many high quality photographs’.
Alex Downie MHK said of his task as a judge, ‘It was a difficult but enjoyable job.’
The full list of winners is:
The winning shot.
Laxey at a distance.
Fireman Selwyn Morgan…a winning study.
IN THE NORTH EAST
WITH DUNCAN YOUNG
Valley centre of excellence
THE WORTH VALLEY  Autumn Enthusiasts' weekend has become a perfect complement to their Spring event.
On previous weekends the Railway has succeeded in fielding a number of locomotives spiced by a visiting engine or a vintage train.
The 17 and 18 October saw both; Black Five 460 No 5305 from the HLPG and the Vintage Carriages Trust vintage train.
A special bonus came in the form of Standard class 2 Mogul No 78022 making an initial return to service after a protracted restoration.
Stuart Bray, Chairman of the Standard 4 Locomotive Group stated that there was still a number of small jobs to do during the winter including  completion of the lining locomotive .
Nevertheless, she looked splendid in a true branch-line environment.
Other locomotives in steam comprised 
During my visit, the Pannier appeared to be confined to Haworth Yard while the locomotive combinations on the two service trains were constantly changing — there was always a double-headed service throughout the day.
In Haworth Shed restoration projects were dearly making progress, especially 80002 the Standard class 4MT 264 tank while, at the other extreme 43924 the sole surviving Midland Railway 4F 260 was silently waiting her turn for overhaul.
Further along the line, Oakworth Station was closed and looking a little  dishevelled owing to platform repairs; a remarkable sight was the boiler of ‘City of Wells’ standing in splendid isolation in the sidings.
Construction work was also in evidence at Damems Station, Ingrow West and Keighley.
At Damems a building to the profile of the original station is being erected thus replacing the previous ‘hutmonts’ from Manchester Central — I hope the splendid Leeds ‘Niagara’Water Closet from the former buildings will be reinstated here!
The Bahamas Locomotive Society Museum Building is making steady progress; work was steadily proceeding in spite of the distractions of the Coal Tank and Jinty in Ingrow  West Yard and the frequent procession of service hands.
In and out of the station.
Bridge two at Keighley was still under repair thus  necessitating a cautious exit from the station by all trains.
The Civil Engineering Department have toiled long and hard with the exit from Keighley and soon their efforts should be rewarded.
For me, the highlights of the visit were the Vintage train and two runs behind the recently renovated Stainer 8F No. 48431.
Listening to the gruff Stanier exhaust beat and mournful hooter whilst observing the artefacts and rolling stock reinforces the opinion I have always held on the Worth Valley Railways — a centre of excellence!
Recently renovated 8F No 48431 at  Oxeotope after hauling a train from Keighley.
West Lancashire on parade
words and pictures JOHN SIMM
De Winton V.B. ‘Chaloner’ at Becconsall with a train
Peter Pan hauls a train towards Willow Trees
Montalban being prepared for action
Original WLR number celebrates ‘Grand Prix’ style
SIX OF THE BEST
NOT CONTENT with Physics or Maths homework 25 years ago, a group of young men wanted something more than the usual pastime so they built a railway.
On October 4th this year this little railway, for that is what it is being only two foot wide and 500 yards long, carried no fewer than 800 people in five hours.
Being a Silver Jubilee, passengers were serenaded by the Eccleston Silver Band as they rode behind four steam locomotives in a range of stock from our own home made coach to a Welsh coach from our No. 1 steam  engine's home of Llanberis to the diminutive but delightful Groudle Glen coach from the Isle of Man.
Besides Irish Mail and her stable mate Montalban we were delighted to welcome back a regular visitor in Peter Pan, the immaculate Wren Class Kerr Stuart of Graham Morris, while the show stopper must surely have been Chaloner, the vertical-boilered locomotive by De Winton from Leighton Buzzard Railway.
It is an intriguing machine, with records being broken as to how many people you can get onto a 2ft ×1ft footplate, and still run a train station.
The service was intense and an immediate turn-round was virtually possible at Delph because there were so many on the line.
It wasn't only steam  locos on parade because all the internal combustion collection was out in the loop and sidings, most of them adorned with enthusiast cameras and tape  measures on.
Other I/C  engines on display were the Atkinson Borderer 1972 articulated truck and trailer run by the Steam Transport Group; and a beautiful example of a Duple  Britannia-bodied Leyland Tiger Cub of 1958.
The event was an obvious success, as well as extremely enjoyable for all involved, so much so that there are reports of similar events being held every year as a prelude to Santa Specials.
To mark the event commemorative mugs were produced and a new handbook-brief history of the line has been printed with some 19 photographs and a pull out information piece for younger enthusiasts.
JOHN GOSLING'S STEAM REPORTS
A VINTAGE DISPLAY!
ANOTHER ‘Premier Line’ success was chalked up on Sunday, October 11 when the Severn Valley Railway held their annual Vintage Extravaganza at Kidderminster Town Station and yard.
Many thousands arrived by rail and road and local Kidderminster car-parks were specially  opened up to cope with the volume of visitors.
Preserved vintage buses ran shuttle services between the various town car-parks and a frequent 10 minute service operated between Kidderminster Station and Bewdley, using a wide variety of vehicles.
All bus rides were operated free of charge.
To complete the circular trip, frequent train services ran between Kidderminster and Bewdley, using either the regular timetabled steam services, or the preserved SVR Diesel Multiple Unit twin set.
More than 100 vehicles varying in age and size were allocated spaces in Kidderminster yard, complete with many sales stalls which managed a roaring trade on the same site.
On the rail side of events, a surprise appearance of a freight locomotive 58028, coupled to preserved SVR examples of Type Two power classification codes, D5410 and D7633 were stabled in platform two.
Cab visits were provided under the supervision of the staff with small donations being given which raised more than £32 during the day towards diesel preservation!
All the locomotives ascertained the interest with their diesel engine running on a shift basis.
British Rail at Bescot were thanked for their kind co-operation and loan of the freight sectored Class 58 to the SVR.
This is one main advantage of being BR main line connected.
Meantime, the 7½ inch gauge Coal Yard Branch Line was in full operation using a visiting 0-4-0T locomotive, scaled on ‘Cadbury Number 2’ and a feature on this railway will appear in SRN in the near future.
Standard gauge locomotives in operation this day included 
This was certainly the most outstanding Vintage Extravaganza on the SVR, with the widest variety in both rail and road transportation.
The Kidderminster Museum and catering room also provided light refreshments under the leadership of Jenny and John Holliday.
Many worked a complete 12 hour shift to satisfy all the visitors and customers.
Again Michael Draper, General Manager of the SVR, all staff and volunteers should be offered the highest congratulations for providing one of the most spectacular events in the social calendar of 1992.
ONE of the major attractions at Bewdley Station on the Severn Valley Railway is undoubtedly the Wribenhall Junction model layout in ‘N’ gauge.
Situated in a former ex-Great Western Railway coach, No.1160 liveried in chocolate and cream at platform one, the exhibition boasts a staggering 200 visitors per day during the operating season of the SVR.
With only a small admission fee, the large layout is mainly directed towards youngsters of all age groups but adults will definitely find much of interest.
The layout is owned by Alistair Kerr and assisted by a small band of volunteer workers, ranging in age groups between 10 and 20.
15 year old Andrew Stribblehill told SRN that the railway had locomotives at its disposal for operating trains, which are of the passenger and freight types.
The railway is fully signalled and operated in block sections using the old relay system through three aspect colour light signals.
Alistair Kerr is always keen for donations towards the vehicle in which the model layout is housed and the continued upkeep of the actual exhibition.
Alistair can be contacted via  , or while visiting the site, which is open to the public on the majority of Severn Valley Railway operating days.
ONE railway which has progressed from strength to strength is the ‘Coal Yard Branch Line’ at Kidderminster Town Station on the Severn Valley Railway.
This is a 7½ inch gauge which runs parallel with the standard gauge tracks and collects its name from the adjacent coal yard.
The operating line is over one quarter of a mile in length.
Although it has been in  existence for some considerable time, train operation for passengers has been provided by battery-electric power.
A pump trolley has also been a frequent sight, mainly designed for the youngsters.
This operates on a second parallel track.
Visiting locomotives are a main feature of the railway and during the Annual Vintage Day Rally on Sunday, October 11, a scale replica of 0-4-0T ‘Cadbury Number II’ in maroon livery was steaming in to the record books.
This  acclaimed the accolade of being the first steam locomotive on the railway!
Owned by Don Robinson, it was driven by ‘Nobby’ Clarke.
Built in 1984, it was originally owned by the late Arthur Glaize of Wolverhampton.
A four-wheeled diesel called ‘Rusty’ loosely based on a Rushton Shunter design, also celebrated its arrival recently and to date is mainly used for engineering and work trains.
With rides costing 40p for adults and 30p children, this adjacent part of the main SVR Kidderminster Station project deserves attention for all.
THE famous blue liveried A4 Pacific No.4498 ‘Sir Nigel Gresley’ which heralded its first visit to the prestigious Severn Valley Railway towards the end of September, also brought in many thousands of visitors for good measure.
During its four week stay at the SVR, the locomotive operated return journeys between Bridgnorth and Kidderminster.
Trevor Hammond, Fund Raising Officer of the A4 Locomotive Society, told SRN that the visit to the Severn Valley Railway had been most enjoyable.
They had received un-measurable co-operation in all respects from Michael Draper, General Manager of the SVR and all working staff and volunteers.
The locomotive left Kidderminster to return to its BR main line duties with a charter from Newport to Crewe on Saturday, October 24, with two further specials booked for Saturday, November 21 and Friday, January 1, 1993.
The November excursion is a ‘Cumbrian Mountain Limited’ between Bradford Forster Square and Carlisle, while the New Year's Day train operates between Carlisle and Farringdon Junction, both via the famous Settle and Carlisle line.
On the latter two charters, seats are still available for bookings from FSS 
The Society Annual General Meeting was held on Saturday, October 10 at the Gainsborough House Hotel in Kidderminster and members were invited to experience the comforts of the Ex-Great Western Saloon vehicle 80969 and two return trips from Bridgnorth the following day behind ‘Sir Nigel Gresley.’
This also included a buffet lunch and a toast to the Locomotive.
Richard Sale, SVR Steward managed the task of wine waiting and the serving of the guests.
The Saloon was attached to normal service trains and is entirely self-contained.
The vehicle consists of a kitchen and pantry, guards compartment and toilet in the centre, plus large panoramic windows at either end to view the splendid SVR scenery from comfortable lounge arm-chairs.
During the Vintage Sunday Extravaganza runs, Trevor Hammond explained that donations and new members are urgently required towards the £130,000 cost of the recent major locomotive overhaul and support coach.
Finance is also required to secure the future of the Ad Pacific.
Further details are available from  Donations may also be sent to this address.
0-4-0T Cadbury Number 2 was the first steam locomotive to work on the Severn Valley Railway's Kidderminster Station Coal Yard Branch Line.
Under the supervision of ‘Nobby’ Clarke, many younger visitors and adults enjoy the long ride of half a mile alongside the standard gauge platforms.
Severn Valley Railway Vintage Day at Kidderminster.
A special line-up of diesel locomotives at Kidderminster Town Station, headed by D7633, 58028 and D5410 for cab inspections by visitors.
The Class 58 had been kindly donated by Railfreight Sector at Bescot for the day.
LETTING OFF STEAM
Record put straight by the Cotswold
OH dear!
The gremlins have been at work again!
In your article in SRN No. 215, headed ‘Polish Plan for 2807,’ there are several inaccuracies.
This may be due to the fact that the article appears to be ‘lifted’ from my newsletter which appeared in the Autumn 1992 edition of the ‘Cornishman’magazine.
As I do not have any record of Richard Bean being a shareholder in Cotswold Steam Preservations, he would not be expected to know the background to 2807's history since being rescued by our society in 1980.
I hope the following  points will clear up any misconceptions:
1)
2807 was built in October 1905 not 1907.
It is the oldest privately-preserved standard gauge GWR steam locomotive.
2)
The tyres on the locomotive's driving wheels were found to be of different sizes after they had been reprofiled by a well-known company in South Wales.
Before then they were in typical ex-BR condition.
The tender wheels are perfectly correct.
3)
We have received different advice from different people on the scale of the tyres on the driving wheels.
Some people believe that they only need to be turned once more, while others say that they need scrapping.
One thing is for sure; the tyres are thin, and if we can get them removed and new  tyres fitted in Poland for a reasonable price, we will.
The pony truck wheels have very thin  tyres .
4)
When we sold locomotive 4277 we did not salvage any spared from it.
In fact we sold all the spares that went with 4277 to its new owner.
2807's spares are of course at Tyseley, not Toddington.
5)
Finally, although your readers will not doubt be aware the 2807 and 4277 share the same wheel arrangement and the same wheel diameter (4′8½″ on the driving wheels) the rod sizes are different.
Neither locomotives had connecting rods when purchased from Barry.
I'm sure many GWR aficionados will be  aware that a 42XX has the same controls as a 51XX and a 28XX the same as a ‘Hall’.
6)
Your reference to the need for connecting rods is very accurate.
We are urgently searching for a set — I've been informed that some surviving sets are twisted — and if it means that we have to look abroad for a new set in Poland than so be it!
At least things are moving now on 2807 and we may have more news in the near future.
We urgently require plans for a Churchward 3500 gallon tender tank — any readers have them?
HERE at Steam Railway News we endeavour to give as thorough an overview of preserved railway happenings as possible, as accurately as possible, when viewed against a strict weekly deadline.
Much of this information is gleaned initially from press statements and newsletters sent to us specifically for this purpose — we never thought that a ‘Share Holding’ in a particular society was a prerequisite to reporting their affairs.
If this was the case our staff would need a lot of shares and the ear of a  possibly extinct breed of Bank Manager!
The information published was assembled from Gloucester Warwickshire Railway release incorporating  ‘The Cornishman’ and thus was published in good faith.
We are, of course, always delighted to clarify misunderstandings.
Chance of a lifetime!
By RICHARD BEAN
EVER fancied swopping places with the man in the overalls caressing the regulator from inside your SLR viewfinder?
The answer, from work-a-day tinkers, tailors, soldiers and sailors (and company directors, clerics, academics and ex-BR drivers itching to get back inside a steam cab) has been a most definitely resounding yes!
Add the chance to accelerate and brake Britain's most famous locomotive, Pacific ‘A3’ No. 4472 Flying Scotsman, on almost a mile of running line, and you soon come to realise why the Birmingham Railway Museum's fortunes have been transformed since they granted their unique ‘School for Steam’the right of way.
Gresley's masterpiece is, of course, the most glamorous recent addition to the scheme, introduced last Autumn with Tyseley facing increasingly serious financial problems.
And she is proving a terrific attraction with JUST FOUR two-hour long weekend footplate slots remaining free (at the time of going to press) during her month long stay…two available on November 8, and one each on the 14th and 15th.
GLAMOROUS
At £95, the two hour long chance to tread surely the most glamorous footplate in preservation is the same price as the standard half-day long course based around the controls of Great Western Castle Class ‘Defiant’.
That includes instruction in safety and familiarisation with basic controls leading up to hands-on-regulator-and-shovel driving and firing courtesy of a pool of ex-BR time served drivers and firemen.
Plus the chance to drive an industrial, either Avonside 0-4-0T Cadbury Number One or Hawthorn Leslie 0-4-0ST ‘Henry’.
SUCCESS
These have proved to be such a success that there is now a virtual two month long waiting list at Tyseley with booking now stretching into April next year.
The Birmingham Railway Museum was known to be losing some £20,000 per year before it started the innovative programme, but have now used the windfall to wipe out a £90,000 overdraft.
A spokesperson commented: ‘It's true that without them we may well have closed.’
BOOSTED
The driving experience will be boosted even further during Christmas and the New Year when LMS Princess Class No. 46203 ‘Princess Margaret Rose’ plus GWR No. 6024 ‘King Edward I’arrive at their stabling point for main line railtour work.
Their respective owners have now agreed for them to be included in the package.
For further information and booking advice contact the Birmingham Railway Museum on  
Receiving a boiler wash out at Haworth is the Worth Valley's LMS 8F 2-8-0.
Railway's special award
THE West Somerset Railway have won a major prize in the Ratcliff Mobility Awards.
The railway won second prize of a certificate and £500 for their ‘Lorna Doone’ carriage with special facilities for disabled visitors.
The project was initiated following the statement from a disabled traveller one hot summer's day, when the guard and a volunteer helped the passenger into the usual place — the guard's van.
Carriage
‘Don't worry’ came the cheerful reply; ‘we're used to it’.
But to West Somerset Railway this was no longer good enough and funds were raised to convert a former British Rail parcels van into a special carriage.
Access is made via two Ratcliff passenger lifts and the carriage has been fitted with a spacious, specially equipped toilet, and wheelchair tracking.
The extra deep picture windows permit wheelchair users superb views as the train makes its way through the rolling Quantock Hills from Bishops Lydeard to Minehead.
Society get the parts
THE A1 Locomotive Society have at long last gained the first tangible components of the new A1 — the tender.
Final negotiations for the purchase of Flying Scotsman's spare tender have been complex and protracted, but have resulted in the Project obtaining the tender at an extremely attractive price.
Ian Storey is arranging transport of the tender to his works at Morpeth where the tank will be removed and renovation of the chassis can proceed, prior to building a new tank.
The old tank is of course a corridor design and not suitable for an A1.
Once it has been lifted from the frames it will be offered to the NRM who have expressed interest in it for a projected display.
The date of the move of the tender, though imminent, is not definite at the moment.
Because the Project is now stepping up a gear on all fronts, the society need to reorganise responsibilities to cope with the increased workload.
Donations, covenants and all correspondence should be sent to   and all general enquiries to    
Dargan's legacy
By JAMES SCANNELL
BRAY URBAN District Council has now started to accept bookings for its seminar: ‘Enterprise & Transport — William Dargan's Legacy’ which will be held in Bray Co.
Wicklow from November 6th to 8th.
The event will consist of lectures, exhibitions, displays and a host of other events honouring William Dargan, one of Ireland's greatest railway engineers of the last century who did much to improve Bray as a town between the late 1850's and early 1960's.
Bray has always been proud of its association with Dargan and the weekend seminar which has been organised by the Council is an attempt to honour this great man and it is hoped that it will become an annual event.
A number of papers covering various transport areas will be read by a panel of invited distinguished speakers but great interest is already being shown in the two Saturday, November 7th talks presented by the two local history societies.
Jos Loughman of the Bray Cualann Historical Society will present a slide show on ‘Dargan's Bray’ while James Scannell of the Old Bray Society will recall ‘Dargan's Funeral’.
A special visitor to the seminar will be Mr. R.A. Gailey, Director of the Ulster Transport Museum who will read a paper on ‘The Rise and Fall of the Railways’ and will include a slide show of the well known interpretive exhibition of Irish Railway Development currently running at the Museum which includes Dargan's own saloon coach which he used as a mobile drawing office.
It is also intended to have a model railway exhibition running in the local St. Thomas' Community College which will be open to the public for that weekend.
Full particulars about the seminar are available from the 
OVER the October Bank Holiday weekend in Ireland Saturday to Monday October 24th to 26th, the South Dublin Model Railway Club will hold their annual exhibition in 
In addition to many layouts on view, most of the Irish railway and transport preservation groups will have stands and there will be a special display dealing with Dublin trams.
Sponsored by Rank Xerox (Ireland), it is hoped that some of the exhibitors will be out in Bray in St Thomas' for the Dargan Seminar.
T9 FUND GETS RIGHT OF WAY
WE ARE able to report that contributions are beginning to arrive.
With the support of the local manager of Barclays Bank Plc it has been possible to open a high interest account.
That means that every contribution you can forward now will be earning money for the day when it will be necessary to strip down the T9 for its ten year overhaul, writes MERVYN TURVEY.
The London and South Western Railway built 66 engines of the T9 class between 1899 and 1901.
The one remaining example, No 120, was built in 1899 and entered service in August of that year.
It is now owned by the National Railway Museum and is on loan to the Swanage Railway.
An appeal for funds is being established now so that there will be enough money in the kitty to be able to commence work on the locomotive as soon as it is taken out of service next year.
T9 No. 120 is a beautiful little engine.
It has performed superbly on the Swanage Railway where it is ideally suited to the kind of work undertaken at that location.
Donations to the Fund should be addressed to:
Please make cheques or postal orders payable to ‘T9 Restoration Fund’.
There is no facility to accept credit card payments.
Every donation will be acknowledged by return of post.
Donations will be recorded on an electronic data base.
Information contained will not be released to any source.
You can help keep a locomotive on the rails
The T9 at B.R.M.L. Eastleigh Day on September 27th…
Standing below the cab is the locomotive support team…(left to right) Kneeling is Martyn Arnold.
Dave Sturt is the co-ordinator of the appeal for the fund raising appeal on behalf of the Swanage Railway Company.
Bluebell on view again!
By RICHARD BEAN
TELEVISION cameras turned their ‘quarterly’ gaze on Sussex's Bluebell Railway recently when the operation became the back-drop for Belgium's most famous moustache twirling detective, Hercule Poirot.
And the massive Independent Television outside broadcast unit ensemble helped to make it a busy day at Horsted Keynes with the Bluebell already geared up that day for the official launch of the Southern Q1 they have restored on behalf of the National Railway Museum.
Plus, of course, the usual service trains.
Actors David Suchet (Poirot) and Hugh Lattimer (Hastings) were filmed deep in conference inside their Pullman coach ‘Finall’ and then stepping out of the coach and then being driven away from Horsted Keynes Station — renamed for the day — by vintage car.
Earlier in the day the Bluebell had fired Maunsell-designed U Class 2-6-0 No 1618 connecting her to a four coach train for ITV's runpast shots to Sheffield Park, with the resulting episode due to be transmitted in February.
‘I suppose we are getting a bit  blasé about having television companies down at the railway,’ admitted Operations Manager Martin Millar.
‘On average I suppose  it's fair to say that they are down here once every three months so we know exactly what they want and how to give it to them.’
•Britain's best loved soap opera, Coronation Street, will also have a  smoky flavour later this autumn after filming took place on the Cheddleton-based North Staffs Railway's picnic area looking towards the Knotty's attractive base.
•The Derby 4F which was restored at the NSR was recently featured in a Granada comedy while working on the East Lancashire Railway at Bury.
‘The Life and Times of Henry Pratt’ will be broadcast this Christmas.
•Independent Television were most recently at the ELR to film background scenes for the Aussie bodice-ripping soap, Families.
Their cameras captured Class 40 (D335) slipping into Ramsbottom Station.
THE GLOUCESTERSHIRE Warwickshire Railway held a very successful Heavy Freight event on Monday October 19th featuring ex GWR locomotive No. 2857 (on loan from the Severn Valley Railway) and a rake of 17 Wagons.
The day was privately sponsored by a group of professional photographers, hence the secrecy prior to the event.
2857 performed well throughout the day and thrilled photographers with many spectacular run-pasts, especially on the bank up from Winchcombe Station to great Tunnel.
The day was marred only slightly by the presence of a few of that fraternity who find out about all such events, spend the whole day taking photographs and video and contribute very little or nothing back into the hobby.
SPARKS WILL be flying at Embsay this Saturday…and not just out of the chimney of their band of battling Yorkshire tank engines.
Guy Fawkes Night will come a week early in that part of Skipton this weekend when the steam railway ignite a big bonfire and firework display.
The Roman Candles and Pin Wheels will, of course, be enhanced by the evocative experience of a steam train ride at night.
‘The steam locomotives themselves will provide their own fireworks as they blast their way up the steepest sections of the Embsay Steam Railway,’ added Commercial Manager Stephen Walker.
‘Hauling what is the heaviest train of the year composed of  at least six coaches with a locomotive at each end for the train, travelling in each direction.
The sparks and steam of the locomotive together with the twinkling of the signal lamps merge with the flames of the bonfire and the bursting of fireworks to create a magical atmosphere that the whole family can enjoy.’
The bonfire will be lit at 7.00 p.m. with fireworks (pyrotechnics of the gun-powder variety) starting just 15 minutes later.
You can enjoy a steam trip either prior to the display, or after, as trains run at half hourly intervals from 5.30 p.m. until 8.30 p.m. in the evening.
All inclusive fare £3.00 and £1.50 for children.
There will be traditional refreshments and buffet cars on the trains.