

FREE INSIDE! 1992 EVENTS CALENDAR WIN A TENNIS HOLIDAY IN ST.
LUCIA COURIER'S SPANISH INFLUENCE STEFFI ON SELES AND SOUL FRENCH BLITZ USA IN DAVIS CUP SUPPORTERS OF BRITISH TENNIS.
MIDLAND The Listening Bank © MIDLAND BANK plc.
1990.
Britain's best selling independent tennis magazine
MAIN POINT — by ALASTAIR McIVER
The French Revolution is NOW
French tennis has given out a message.
We have proved that it can be done without necessarily having the best players — Haguellar
Behind the scenes at its National Training Centre at Roland Garros, work is already underway to capitalise on France's magnificent Davis Cup victory over the United States in Lyon in December.
While Yannick Noah and his players rightly basked in the glory of the remarkable victory for a few days, one of the men who masterminded the victory was already making plans to build upon the fantastic achievements of 1991.
Patrice Haguellar, who used to coach Noah and Leconte in a private capacity, and who is now France's National Coach, is a realist who looks upon the 1992 campaign as ‘…a new challenge’
‘French tennis has given out a message’, says Haguellar.
‘I have always believed that if you have organisation, belief, and players who want to work hard together, then it can be done.
We have proved that it can be done without necessarily having the best players in the world.’
Astonishingly, Haguellar and former players Francois Jauffrett (now the National Tennis Director), Erik Deblicker and Jean Claude Massias have achieved their success for French tennis in just 12 months, using the talent that was already available to them.
‘At the end of 1990, in December, we called together all rankings from 100 to 200…
Delaitre, Boetsch, Pioline etc. and we told them our ideas.
All throughout 1991, they were to travel abroad and work together.
Each group had a coach travelling with them.
We had three coaches travelling, sometimes four.
‘We wanted these players all to know that each one of them had a chance to be in the French Davis Cup team.
In all, we had about 15 players travelling in teams together throughout 1991…7, 8 or 9 together at one time.
We made a team to give them the opportunity to work together…to give them the respect…to give them the idea that they could be in the top 50, not by talking but by  working together.
It was like a chain, with Leconte and Forget at one end.
Our job was to try to bring them together.’
The results were astonishing.
At the time of the Davis Cup final, France had no fewer than 8 players in the top 100.
Haguellar had successfully used the Davis Cup carrot to motivate his lower ranked players.
This in turn pushed the higher ranked players to the heights at which Davis Cup success can be achieved.
Haguellar is quick to compliment France's Davis Cup captain for his input and influence on his country's success in the competition, her first since 1932.
‘Yannick had an important influence on the players.
He gives them confidence and  compliments , both on and off the court.
He knows them so well.
It's so important to know your players at certain moments in a match’
Another of the benefits of the travelling team system was the  camaraderie that was built up between the players, all of whom were effectively competing with each other for Davis Cup recognition.
‘This group had a very good team spirit.
We've always had that in France but this year it was so very special.
You know, even if we had lost the Cup, it would still have been a very good year for French players.
They all raised their levels,’ confirms Haguellar.
We will go to clubs and schools with the message — You can make it if you believe in yourselves.
Work hard and you can do it
Despite his praise for the achievements of the whole squad, Haguellar nevertheless singles out Henri Leconte for special comment.
‘You know, Henri had an operation in  August .
Around the time of the Yugoslavia match, we had an important talk with him.
We told him that he had to have a specific programme…that he had to train the hardest that he had ever done in his life.
From there, we saw an improvement every week.
We knew him so well and so when the time came and we saw how he was playing and how he was hitting the ball, that he could beat anyone’.
And of course, he did.
First, Leconte demolished Sampras in straight sets before teaming with Guy Forget to administer defeat in the doubles over the American pairing of Ken Flach and Robert Seguso.
So what of the future?
‘As we speak’, explains Haguellar, ‘Henri is working with 10 players.
We will go to clubs and schools with the message ‘you can make it if you believe in yourselves.
Work hard and you can do it’’
To support this message, the French Tennis Federation is having between 2000 and 3000 videos made of the Davis Cup triumph for distribution to schools and clubs.
‘We want to give the children the incentive’, Haguellar says.
So does he have a final message for the British in all of this?
‘People of the experience of Ian Barclay are good for you in Britain,’ he said.
‘The problem for him will be getting the message  across .
French tennis has got the message  across …organisation, belief and hard work…‘
Patrice Haguellar
Speaking My Mind
David Wynne-Morgan
The start of a new year is a time for pundits to come up with predictions they may well regret
The start of a New Year is a time for looking back on the past 12 months and also a time when self-styled pundits such as myself are unwisely tempted to look into their crystal balls and come up with the predictions that by the end of the year they may well regret
Looking back is easy.
1991 was a fascinating year for tennis fans and produced many moments that will live in the memory for many years to come.
Personally, I will never forget the sight of Yannick Noah, the French Davis Cup captain, leaping almost four feet off the ground to acclaim the first and the seemingly impossible French victory in the Davis Cup since the ‘Three Musketeers’ carried it off in the thirties.
It was a magnificent victory — inspired by Noah, executed with unrestrained artistry by Henri Leconte, with supreme efficiency and commitment by Guy Forget, and greeted with universal joy by the entire French nation.
It was the very epitome of what a great sporting occasion should be about and very seldom is.
My most abiding memory will not be of the joy of the French, but the terrible sight of Pete Sampras' face at the prize giving ceremony which looked as if he had come into intimate contact with an atom bomb.
The other moments I will treasure were the near-perfect serving of Michael Stich in his first Wimbledon final against Boris Becker, which puts a new and totally unexpected name on that historic trophy; the charmless street-fighter qualities of Monica Seles which nevertheless took her to the number one spot in the world while showing total contempt for most of the accepted standards of behaviour that should belong to a champion; and finally the conversion of Andre Agassi from teenage rebel to near-establishment idol at Wimbledon, where he appeared in shining white and won the hearts not only of his adoring army of fans, but also of most of the middle-age traditionalists.
He let his racket do the talking and discovered the magic of The Championships that he had previously derided, as have so many of the giants of the past.
Look into the future is far more difficult but here are ten predictions for 1992:
1.
Tony Pickard will motivate the British Davis Cup Team to perform to the very limit of its capabilities.
I predict they will take at least one of the rubbers in their first round match against France, the current Davis Cup holders, at the end of this month.
2.
France will find the challenge of defending the Davis Cup even more difficult than that of winning it in 1992.
They will not be the holders of the Davis Cup by the end of the year.
3.
Andre Agassi will return to make a major challenge for the Wimbledon title.
He might even win it.
4.
Monica Seles will retain her number one women's ranking and Jennifer Capriati will be her nearest rival by the end of December.
5.
There will be increasing resentment of the greed of many top tennis players, some of whom will do immense damage to the game they adorn.
6.
John McEnroe will announce his immediate retirement from the professional circuit after a last appearance at Wimbledon —‘you cannot be serious.’
7.
Ivan Lendl will not achieve his last great ambition — to be Wimbledon Singles Champion.
8.
Monique Javer, the American-born former US Collegiate Champion who wears the GB vest with such pride and always plays her best for her country as she did in the European Cup in 1991, will be the undisputed British No. 1 woman player by the end of the year.
9.
Jamie Delgado, the only Briton to win a world Junior Title, which he did in Florida in the 14 and under age category, will continue to develop as a potential world beater for Britain, provided he stays firmly under the wing of David Lloyd.
10.
The LTA's principal claim to fame at the end of 1992 will be the same as it is now — the richest tennis organisation in the world.
What is certain is that there will be many surprises in 1992, the game will have an ever-increasing worldwide audience, and there will be many more magnificent moments in 1992 that every tennis fan will treasure — and we, at Tennis World, will try to capture them all.
TOUR DE FORCE 
JOHN PARSONS ON FRANCE'S DAVIS CUP TRIUMPH
Allez-Henri!
Not since 1933, when thousands waved from gardens and fields as the boat trains sailed from Dover to Victoria, where 10,000 people were waiting to greet Fred Perry and the rest of the victorious British team which had brought the trophy back fro Paris after beating the French team, has the Davis Cup known anything like it.
The extravagant but spontaneous and absolutely marvellous celebrations which broke out in Lyon's Palais des Sports the moment that Guy Forget completed his four sets victory over Pete Sampras to make sure that France had won the Davis Cup again for the first time in 59 years, will become part of sporting folklore.
PRAYER
A few minutes before 5pm on Sunday, December 1st, all France it seemed was either holding its breath or, like team captain, Yannick Noah, was in prayer, as Forget, who had been well beaten in the opening rubber of the match by Andre Agassi, prepared to serve what was to be the final game of the 1991 competition.
There has been so much drama, not only over the first two days, when Henri Leconte had made his fairy tale return to Davis Cup play with his stunning defeat of Sampras in the second singles and then his inspirational contribution to  France's doubles success as he and Forget maintained an 8–0 unbeaten record together in the competition, that it was both right and proper that there should have been more to come.
If the noise from the uninhibited, cheering, stamping, singing 8,3000 crowd had felt intimidating to Sampras when the fourth set score reached 5–3 and he was also trailing by two sets to one, it was nothing compared to the tumult during the changeover after the American had held the 9th game to 15, with an ace.
DESTINY
Here was the moment of destiny, not just for Forget but for French tennis and, it seemed, for the whole of France.
Forget, who had just gone through the last of countless body punches from Noah,(who throughout, worked just as hard to encourage his players as they did to respond to him) literally ran from his seat, round the net to the far baseline in readiness to serve.
An overhit forehand from Sampras who, despite offering a far more solid challenge against Forget than he had done against Leconte, was still not as consistent enough with his groundstrokes as one would have expected from someone who had become ATP Tour champion two  weeks earlier, made it 15–0.
And by now, every point won by Forget received a wild, standing ovation.
On the next point, what initially appeared to have been an ace down the middle by Forget was shown to be no more than wishful thinking by spectators now spending more time on their feet than in their seats.
The linesman called it wide — Australian umpire Wayne Mckewan, who had been forced to demand ‘Silence, s'il vous  plaît ’, almost as often as he had needed to call the score, agreed — and Forget not only lost this point but the next two as well to be 15–40.
TRIUMPH
Sacre bleu!
Surely French hopes would not collapse now, so close to such a long awaited triumph.
As Sampras, who had suddenly found the steel and resilience that he could have done with in his match with Leconte 48 hours earlier, or even in the early stages of the third set against Forget, produced the lob to the baseline which made it 15–40 from the home team's point of view, Noah sunk back into his seat in disbelief.
Before the final had begun, when Forget had put their chances at about 3–1 against and French president, Phillipe Chatrier believed that they had no more than one in five chance of achieving the prize which had been his ultimate goal from the time that he led the French tennis revolution in 1968, Forget's possible vulnerability in moments of such stress had been one of the chief causes for such concern.
CRISIS
In earlier moments of crisis on this memorable afternoon, he had responded in a manner which shamed the doubters.
There had been in the brilliantly brave ace at 5–6 in the first set tie break, which denied Sampras the set point he had earned with an ace of his own.
There had been another ace, this time hit even more courageously with a second serve, to prevent Sampras breaking back to 4–5 in the third set.
Before, during and after this most magnificent of matches, Noah had stressed that the Davis Cup had nothing to do with the rankings or reputations.
It was all about preparing properly, having pride and big hearts and playing to the best of your ability at the right time.
The French had certainly prepared expertly.
While Agassi and Sampras, with supreme pre-final confidence, had flown home from Frankfurt after the ATP Finals for a few days of relaxation in Florida      before returning to Europe, Noah had taken his squad off to a Swiss tennis resort, where they trained for 6 hours a day, offered themselves for 30 minutes daily to the press for customary grilling and focussed wholly on the task in hand.
With the preparation unquestionably right, therefore, the question was, ‘could Forget demonstrate the big heart and the ability to play at his best at the right time?’
He did both, with what he called ‘four of the best serves I've hit in my life’.
The first was an ace, the second opened up in court well enough for him to steam in and put away a brilliant backhand volley.
And then came another ace, his 17th, to set up game, set, match and Davis Cup winning point.
Another superb serve led to no more than a defensive return from Sampras and Forget was so confident that the American would not be able to return his first volley that he only just stopped himself from throwing his racket into the air as he started to dance for joy along with the crowd.
But somehow Sampras did reach it and Forget managed to make sure with his second volley and said later ‘…but I'm not quite sure how I did it with the wrong grip’.
For the next 20 to 30 minutes, until after the trophy had been presented, there was brilliant pandemonium.
Forget rolled on his back on the court in the seconds before Noah and other members of the team joined him.
Leconte, with tears of joy streaming down his face, and Noah, were all taken shoulder high on laps of honour and Noah then led them, conga style, around the court while singing his hit record, ‘Saga Africa’.
Jean Borotra, 93, a survivor from the 1932 winning French team, who had watched every point from  Friday to  Sunday , offered his own congratulations to a new trio of Musketeers.
I ALWAYS HAD FAITH THAT LECONTE COULD BEAT ANYBODY, ANYWHERE AT ANY TIME — YANNICK NOAH
For Forget, who had demonstrated such courage under pressure, ti was a match which, according to Borotra, had ‘shown him to be a really great player’.
For Leconte, who only four months earlier had undergone back surgery for the third time in little more than two years, it had seen the re-birth of what was — and can be again — a gloriously entertaining, as well as effective, career.
The crowd's response to his resilient 6–4, 7–5, 6–4 defeat of a totally overawed Sampras, in his David Cup debut, plus their even greater support as he and  Forget beat Ken Flach and the hapless Robert Seguso 6–1, 6–4, 4–6, 6–2, with flurries of brilliant winners in the doubles, must have gone a long way to at least dimming the memory of the cruel booing he received in 1988 when he struggled against Mats Wilander at Roland Garros in the final of the French Open and then again at Bercy the following  November .
For Noah, it was a glorious culmination of dedication, endeavour and skill by what he called ‘…our whole tennis family’.
On choosing Leconte, which clearly caught the Americans by surprise, he said, ‘I decided ten days beforehand that he would play.
I wanted him to know that in plenty of time so that he could get used to the pressure.
I always had faith that he could still beat anybody, anywhere at any time’.
Both Noah and Forget also offered the suggestion that perhaps the Americans had been caught napping because they were over confident.
And for me, Forget's comment that ‘I don't think the Americans realised how much the Davis Cup meant to the French team and the French people’, said it all.
‘We have the soccer World Cup, the Tour de France and the Davis Cup.
They have 10 different things in America which are more important than the Davis Cup’.
Forget — On fire
Noah lifts the cup as the French team celebrate
The partying gets underway
TENNIS WORLD CLUB
GRAF TOPS THE POLL
Following her 1991 appearances at Nottingham, Wimbledon and the Midland Bank Championships at Brighton at the end of last year, we can confirm that Steffi Graf is the most popular of all the foreign players, according to Tennis World readers.
There are more members — and we receive more letters — for Steffi's fan club service, than for any other player, even Andre Agassi, who has overtaken last year's previously most popular male player, Stefan Edberg.
Our reader's letters page in this issue and earlier issues reflects the affection by which her British fans hold Steffi and her fan club membership endorses that popularity.
Our exclusive interview with Steffi elsewhere in this issue should go a long way to satisfying the demands of her fans, many of whom continue to demand more and more information about their favourite player.
Those of you who are members of the Steffi Graf fan club service already benefit from our news service letters which are sent out bi-monthly together with a black and white photograph.
You can become a member of this, or any other fan club service, for one year simply  by completing the form opposite.
Steffi apart, there are 12 other top players from which to choose, including world No 1 Monica Seles and the up and coming Jennifer Capriati.
Get to know Steffi, or Stefan, Gabriela, or Boris, Andre, or Arantxa a little better by subscribing to a Tennis World fan club service for one year — you know it makes sense…
COACHING COMMENTARY — OLGA MOROZOVA
We are delighted to welcome back LTA Rover coach Olga Morozova to Tennis World.
Her previous series offered invaluable international insight into the requirements of the modern game and this new and extended series will continue in that vein.
This month, Olga stresses the importance of good technique and how we can obtain it.
I feel that it is very important that everybody playing tennis has good technique.
If you do not have good technique then you will have problems hitting good shots.
If this is your situation, then everyone in the world knows it.
It doesn't matter at which level you play, if you play club tennis, then will know.
If you play professional tennis, then it is even more important to have good technique because I am always saying that in a draw of 64 or 128 people, they are all watching how you play and of course they will find out what is happening with your game.
If one finds out, then everyone will know and then you will be in trouble.
TECHNIQUE
What do I mean by good technique?
Technique, first of all, is the ability to use a stroke in the simplest way so as to achieve the best stroke.
When your technique is good, it gives you the opportunity to create any type of situation on the court.
If you have good technique you are free to do whatever you wish…to move your opponents around the court or to use a certain kind of tactic.
I feel that the most important part of any shot is the point of contact on every stroke which is in front of the body.
By having this, you are able to hit the ball anywhere on the opposing court.
It gives you the freedom of choice of shot.
You can go anywhere if you have this point of contact.
To have good point of contact, you have to have good footwork and to have good footwork you have to be very strong.
Nowadays, in modern tennis, with the modern rackets, the ball is flying…the power is unbelievable.
So you have to have much stronger legs.
Not only that but you have to have a much stronger body.
Modern tennis is not only placement, it is placement with power.
Tennis rackets give you a lot of power but the most power you get from the body.
What I Mean is the transfer of body weight to the shot.
To do it smoothly, to do it in the right time, you have to be physically very fit.
Coach every child as if they were the next Wimbledon champion
It's very important to become quicker, smoother in your movement, to bend down low or to be able to jump up high in order for you to get this point of contact.
COACH OUT WEAKNESS
Every time a coach gives a lesson to a 5 or 6 year old child, he has to believe that he is giving a lesson to a future Wimbledon champion.
When I played in the Wimbledon final, I knew that I had certain kinds of weaknesses.
I still have them.
I knew about them and Chris Evert knew about them, too.
She had less, maybe.
I didn't use her weaknesses enough but she used mind properly.
 Because I knew that I had my weaknesses, perhaps that is the reason that I was not more successful.
I hope that coaches in this country, when they are coaching youngsters, will coach them so that they do not have those kinds of weaknesses.
Take grips, for example .
It's a very important part of being a good tennis player to have a good grip, very important.
I have spoken of the point of contact but with the proper grip it will be much easier.
Some people say that grips should be individual but I believe that it is impossible to change the laws of nature.
Of course, your point of contact is not the same as my point of contact because you are taller and I am shorter.
Similarly, Abigail Tordoff, for example will have a much lower  point of contact than me, but the principle is the same.
The line of the stroke and its creation will be individual but certain things like footwork, body weight, point of contact…these should not change.
They should all be constant.
Such fundamentals should be the same for all.
So you see, that it is important for every coach in the country, even if he is giving a lesson to a child who doesn't have any kind of tennis talent, to give the lesson as if he or she was the future Wimbledon champion.
Olga Morozova
LLOYD DETHRONED
True drama unfolded in the third round of the Men's Vauxhall Indoor Tennis Trophy for more than one reason, as reigning champions David Lloyd, Slazenger Heston were almost certainly dethroned by event newcomers Royal Berkshire, and Team Excel Bath missed out on a golden opportunity to displace last year's Area 8 champions West Hants.
Bournemouth, losing the tie having been just points away from victory.
The David Lloyd club's defeat at the hands of the Bracknell-based side in Area 7 of the event, was as emphatic as it was surprising.
Britain's former No. 1 U–18 player Gary Drake, now 22-years-old, pulled off easily the result of the third round, defeating the Middlesex side's No. 1 — previously unbeaten — Chris Clark in a close three-setter to open up an early lead.
Heston No. 2 and fellow coach at the Club, Chris Hearn, soon felt the sting of Royal Berkshire's former Davis Cup player Jonathan Smith, falling to an emphatic straight sets defeat.
The two singles wins for Berkshire left the reigning champions in an irretrievable position and the home side added a dash more salt to their opponents' wounds as they clinched a full eight victory points from the remaining doubles victory.
Elsewhere around the country Dorset side West Hants more or less sealed the Area 8 title with an eleventh hour 2–1 away win over Team Excel — which required a final doubles rubber tie-break to separate the sides.
The other fixtures in the division saw Trophy experienced Manydown Basingstoke come out on top in their local derby clash against the Centrecourt Cardinals by a narrow 2–1 margin.
Queen's Club remain the only club to share the impressive 3-game 100% record with Royal Berkshire, as a result of their Area 5 third round victory against London's Connaught Club.
Just behind them in the table, following a fine win at home over David Lloyd Finchley, are the Walton Astro's who leap-frog above the team they defeated in second place.
The result was a good win for the two Astro players, with the pair only sealing victory — again in the eleventh hour — in the deciding doubles rubber.
With Royal Berkshire establishing a strong lead in Area 7, Riverside Chiswick also pulled out all the stops to move up a place above Carlton London — who sat out this round — by beating the unfortunate BBC, who remained at the foot of the table to record their first win this season.
By comparison, in Area 6, Record Centre Maidstone continue in sparkling form at the head of the table, achieving their third win of the season against Crawley, which, in turn, enabled David Lloyd Eastbourne to move up a place above the leader's victims.
The club's Jason Fry was undoubtedly the hero of the day, coming in at one rubber down to retrieve the match with a second string singles victory over Pavilion & Avenue Hove player Stephen Bloomfield.
He then teamed up with partner Jason Jones to clinch the vital seven victory points in the deciding doubles encounter.
Drake (left) defeated Clark to set Royal Berkshire on the road to victory against David Lloyd's Heston
Things remain neck and neck in Area 3 of the event, as City of Nottingham maintain the pressure on leaders and former champions Hallamshire Sheffield, following a 3–0 victory over Hallamshire's neighbours Abbeydale Park.
Hallamshire themselves dropped their first point of the season, but nonetheless earned a crucial away win against Leicestershire's in-form Melton Mowbray.
Last season's national finalists Watchorn Alfreton, of Derbyshire, may have left their title challenge a little late this year, but notched up their first victory in three games to jump up two places in the tables with more than a little help from experienced manager Ashley Broomhead.
The 33-year-old regular No. 3 took the helm at first string, and proceeded to open up an early lead for his side with a fine win over Neil Shorrock.
He then partnered doubles specialist Sean O'Donoghue to secure maximum points from the tie in the remaining doubles clash.
In the only match to be played in Area 2, Norman Green Solihull made dramatic headway, shooting up the table from fifth to third place, following their first win of the season against Corby.
Still at the head of the table, however, is Welsh club Wrexham, who have a point advantage over second place matchpoint Bramhall — with both clubs to re-arrange postponed matches.
Last season's North East regional champions Puma Sunderland toppled Ilkley from pole position in Area 1 by virtue of a resounding maximum point home win over Barnard Castle School.
Rivals Tennis World  Middlesbrough move up into second position — one above Ilkley — after earning their first win of the season against Topspin Darlington.
Ilkley remain very much in contention, however, on a maximum 8 points from the one match they have played, and two games in hand.
Clearview Brentwood maintained their unbeaten run in Area 4, but only after club No. 3 Ian Blakeman bailed the side out of trouble in the second singles contest.
Brentwood No. 1 Andrew Moir fell to Keith Tomlin in the opening singles clash, leaving Blakeman — a member of Yorkshire's national title-winning-side — with a rubber deficit to pull back, and having to do so against recent Cellnet National singles champion Martin Adebisi.
The pair on the day were evenly-matched, with three sets and three hours of play required to separate them.
Blakeman eventually  overcame the Welwyn No. 3 to level the match.
He then joined forces with partner Moir to clinch the doubles encounter and retain pole position for the Brentwood club.
Lower down in the division, Brentwood St Albans secured their second win of the Vauxhall season by defeating bottom-placed Harpenden to move up to within a point of second-placed Puma Welwyn City.
The Pumas, however, have a game in hand, as their match against Middlesex Polytechnic was postponed.
PARSONS' PERSPECTIVE — by JOHN PARSONS, DAILY TELEGRAPH
No changes needed……s'il vous plait
In recent times when the tennis calendar has become so crowded, a number of prominent voices in the sport have suggested that the Davis Cup, like the Federation Cup, should be played all in the same week — or two weeks — and at the same venue.
Even before the epic success of the 1991 Davis Cup final in Lyon, which left me ever more passionately against such an idea, I was convinced that such changes would do more harm than good.
The structural changes which would be necessary to reduce the present Davis Cup match format from three days, to one, would destroy the whole character of a competition which, in this commercially dominated age, is arguably more important to the world of tennis than ever before
The one word which seems to be uppermost in every discussion, decision or political behind-the-scenes scheming in tennis these days, is MONEY.
At Lyon, I have never heard it mentioned once.
Certainly there was prize money, though modest enough by today's standards, with France winning just under $200,000 for their efforts throughout the year.
Yet I am sure that Messrs Noah, Forget and Leconte neither didn't know nor care about that.
Indeed, all three of them would probably have willingly paid to have been part of the occasion which is now firmly entrenched in French sporting history.
Would the impact have been the same had the final, in this particular instance, been anywhere but France?
I very much doubt it.
Not even the same matches with the same results would have engendered anything like the same degree of  atmosphere or emotion had it been staged at a neutral venue, which is what the situation would be in most years if the one or two weeks idea was adopted.
The Davis Cup remains one of the world's greatest sporting institutions.
Long may it remain so.
Certainly it had a freshness and credibility about it which was in stark contrast to some of the other end-of-the year events which, however exciting or impressive some individual performances and achievements may have been, still involved direct or incidental features which do little for the public perception of the sport.
GREED
There is the  widespread image these days that most tennis players, most independent promoters and certainly the agents, are becoming too greedy for their own good.
In some cases that is undoubtedly true.
In the majority of cases involving layers, it is not, for unless they are ranked in the top 100, the major money-making opportunities are beyond them.
Even so, I did find it disappointing that financial matters occupied so much of the non-playing time at both the Association of Tennis Professionals Tour finals in Frankfurt and the Virginia Slims Championships in New York in November.
And of course, until it has been established rather longer, the prime feature from the Compaq Grand Slam Cup will remain the record prize money.
During Frankfurt, which ATP like to call the World Championships, even though to call the winner there the world champion would instantly devalue the  status of the top player in their world rankings,(irrespective of whether the ITF's official World Champion Panel makes the same choice or not) signs were bombarding us from all directions.
MARKETING
Of course they are rightly pleased to have agreed a new marketing contract with IMG for 1993–95 worth almost double the initial three year contract which guaranteed them $56m but is likely to be around $75m by the time it is completed.
And of course Frankfurt was the natural time and setting to confirm the details,(already divulged in this column some months ago), that the singles week top tier tournaments in 1993 onwards, will offer a minimum $1.7m prize money, compared with $1m at present.
Yet when one starts to look at  the overall picture a little more deeply, will the obvious strengthening of what will be nine single Championship weeks, be anything more than a move which enables the rich to get richer and actually sets into motion what could become a long term contraction, rather than expansion of the sport, especially if the much-needed  revival in the world economy takes longer to become bullish than some of the optimists have been forecasting.
In their annual report, ATP say ‘In order to remain competitive with other countries in the sports and entertainment field, the ATP must always look ahead and find new ways to expand our game and our business.
Major development during 1991 will enable the Tour to grow both the sport and our financial foundation in the future.
This growth, in turn, will provide benefits to our players, tournament sponsors and fans.’
For some players, tournaments, sponsors and fans, that will undoubtedly be true.
But for how many?
How, for instance, will a tournament such as the long-established US Pro Indoor tournament in Philadelphia, which was providing work for touring professionals long before the ATP even came into existence, benefit from such changes.
No longer in the calendar with a prime week of its own, an event which has only just survived this year through a last minute rescue sponsorship package, will hardly be able to reduce its prize money in 1993 from the $1m it already pays to the Double-Up new minimum of $625,000, even though it will no longer be guaranteed even one of the top ten ranked or other leading box office players.
Would the impact of the Davis Cup have been the same had the final been anywhere but France?
Under the present arrangement, single week Championship Series are guaranteed six top-rated players, although much to the surprise of four tournament directors, one of whom is on the Tour Board, the word ‘guaranteed’ has been changed to read ‘Tour goal’.
Under the new format, that goal will be stepped up to seven of the top eight players in each of the nine tournaments or 12 of the top 14.
Double week Championships Series events are firmly under the impression that, at the moment, they are guaranteed three of the top ten, which is, on average, what they received throughout 1991 — and sometimes it was rather better.
The projection for 1993 and onwards is that they will only have one of the top eight and three of the top 14.
NOT BENEFICIAL
somehow I do not see many of the tournaments, their sponsors of their spectators regarding that as being beneficial.
What the Double-up weeks will be able to do, that they are not supposed to do now, even though everyone involved assures me it happens, is to pay appearance money to the leading players to enter their tournaments in addition to meeting their unchanged commitment of eight single and three double-up weeks, and presumably the Grand Slams.
The next question to be asked is, ‘Where does that leave World Series events such as the Diet Pepsi at Birmingham?’
Since ATP took over the tour, World Series tournaments,(for which the minimum ‘financial commitment’ such as prize money, tournament fees and other costs are now called, increases in 1993 by 20 per cent to $300,000), have been allowed to pay appearance money.
In the first year of the new tour, Len Owen, then tournament director for the Benson and Hedges tournament at Wembley, revealed that they were expecting to have to pay $500,000 in appearance money, in addition to the same amount they had been offering in prize money when they were a protected event.
FORTUNE
If, in 1993 and beyond, the double-up Championship Series will also be in the open market far more blatantly than they are at present and (at the other end of the scale Challenger tournaments can include some players ranked between 10–50 — and presumably get away with paying appearance money too —) then the long term life expectancy for World Series tournaments) which for middle-range players are their bread and butter in addition to a stepping stone from their first step on the ladder to fame and hoped for fortune — cannot be improving.
Not only are they going to find themselves deliberately and actively squeezed from above and below by the very organisation, the ATP Tour, which is supposed to be protecting and encouraging them but they still have to compete against exhibition events, with open cheque books, for a handful of top  players.
Although we will never know officially, because the Lawn Tennis Association is understandably touchy and  secretive about such matters, I would be highly surprised to discover that they lost less than £500,000 on the Diet Pepsi event at the new National Indoor Arena in Birmingham in November.
In fairness to the LTA, in the particular circumstances of the time, I do not believe that they had very much option.
I happened to believe that it was important that they protected this week in the international calendar for Britain, especially as in two or three years time, there is the possibility of it being moved to a time when, in theory at least, it ought to be easier to attract top players.
To some extent, also, they were doubly unlucky in 1991.
Apart from having limited time to try and spread the gospel about the tournament in its magnificent venue, if, as should have happened, Jimmy Connors had played, if John McEnroe had survived his first round, if Pat Cash had looked better prepared and if, as certainly should have been the case, Jeremy Bates had taken the opportunity he had to upset Wimbledon quarter finalist, Thierry Champion, the whole picture may have looked so different.
Where I have to take issue with the LTA, however, is over its decision to increase prize money for 1992 by 20 per cent from $500,000 to $600,000, which will be exactly double the minimum requirement from tournaments in the same category on the ATP Tour, for 1993.
If anything, they would have been better off contributing less prize money (which they tried to do in 1991 but were not allowed to reduce what they had already promised) and used it instead to go into the appearance money pool, which will still have to be funded.
I would be surprised if the LTA lost less than £500,000 on the Diet Pepsi event
Of course the middle-range players, the workhorses of the tour, who support the game so well will be delighted with the prize money breakdown for Birmingham.
But they don't sell tickets.
They don't attract sponsors.
They don't attract the television cameras.
And if, which certainly appears to be the case from the changes being made for 1993, the ATP is not very interested in them either, then the LTA should look after it's own and British tennis' interests first.
WTA CLIMBDOWN
So to New York, where the world of women's tennis met for the Virginia Slims Championships to a background of political ferment, following my disclosure in The Daily Telegraph, that, like the men three years earlier, the women — or at least the WTA board — felt they were also ready to declare UDI.
On the eve of their presentation to the Women's International Professional Council, a group of British tennis writers, plus two from France, were summoned to hear Gerry Smith suggest that all they really wanted to do was to give the women players the same sort of voice in the game as the men; that they had no intention of tearing the women's game apart and that if they had been able to carry on negotiations quietly and in confidence, there would have been no problems.
By then, of course, he and members of the WTA board knew that the tide of opposition was flowing strongly against them.
They had clearly not done their homework so thoroughly as ATP before its coup d'etat over the Men's Tennis Council in 1989.
With almost every tournament director and the leading management companies either firmly opposing them or at least advising caution and most of their leading players apparently having doubts, a climbdown was already inevitable.
Not that one would get that impression from the announcement made by WTA after the formal statement by the WIPTC that the constitution of the Council would remain unchanged, at least until current contracts expire at the end of 1994.
They claim that the Council's agreement to establish a working group to review the whole situation, of which three of the six members would be representatives of the players, represented ‘the first step towards recognition of the players’ right to have an equal voice in the management of the game.’
In reality, it was little more than a face-saving formula.
What the WTA originally intended (it was not a matter of them seeking approval first) was to break away and form their own tour under a new company called WTA Inc, in 1993, with 10 $1 million tournaments and another ten offering $500,000 in prize money.
There was also a clear indication in the background that they would refuse to play in any joint events, such as Wimbledon or the French Open, unless they were paid equal prize money with the men.
The whole exercise was based on money matters, rather than reality.
As one delegate to the discussion put it ‘The women still don't understand what the real world is like when it comes to their commercial value but at least they've realised for the time being that  they have bitten off more than they can chew.’
As one who admires much of what WTA has done and enjoys watching the best women players compete against each other, because the entertainment value they produce can often be tremendous, I was sad to see that apparently they still do not appreciate how relatively well off they are under the present set-up and how much they could stand to lose from open warfare in the game.
One key fact they should remember is that outside the United States, by far the largest amount of their prize money comes from events organised and funded by national associations which, in turn, are part of the ITF.
That was not so on the men's tour, which means it would be very much easier for the ITF to set up its own women's tour linking many of the principal regular events such as Berlin, Eastbourne, Brighton etc, with the Grand Slams, than it would have been had they responded to the many appeals they had at the time to set up a men's circuit in competition with ATP…
…
On a lighter vein, congratulations to Jim thorn, head groundsman at Wimbledon for nine years, until his retirement at the age of 65 last July, on winning the 1991 award for Services to Lawn Tennis, presented annually by the Lawn Tennis Writers Association.
As secretary of that organisation, I have to declare more than a personal interest but the presentation, during the Association's annual dinner, held for the first time in the Debenture Holders Lounge at The All England Club, was clearly a most popular choice.
Jim, who gave a lively impromptu speech after chairman, Hugh Jamieson had presented him with his award, was in typically dismissive mood about his own talents.
He described being n charge of the grass courts at Wimbledon as ‘the easiest job in the world,’ adding, ‘You sit and watch the grass grow, tell other people when to cut it and then watch it grow again.’
Everyone connected with The Championships, however, not least the world's top players, know that Jim's expertise and determination, steadily developed since he first began working with grass at Shepherd's Bush Cricket Club in 1950, before going on to spend 25 years at St George's Hill, had more than silenced all the criticism which was developing about the state of the Wimbledon courts in the early 1980's.
The workhorses of the tour…will be delighted with the prize money
At the time, there was quite a campaign starting to build, calling for Wimbledon to dig up the grass.
Now, that has been quietened, with even some of the arch critics from those days, such as Ivan Lendl, saying that the courts are in perfect shape.
Indeed one of the best comments I remember on this subject came two or three years ago from Mats Wilander, another who struggled to find form on grass courts and might also be one of those happy to see them disappear.
Asked whether he felt Wimbledon should replace grass courts with some other surface he replied firmly, ‘yes, of course…if they want to destroy The Championships.’
COACHING CHANGES
As always at this time of year, there have been some notable changes on the coaching front, with Pavel Slozil switching from being with Steffi Graf to Jennifer Capriati, Pete Sampras once again breaking from Jo Brandi and then Stanley Franker, the man credit with transforming Dutch tennis, announcing first that he would be leaving Holland to work again in Austria, and then changing his mind in the light of a new and improved offer from the Dutch Tennis Federation, who, given that country's recent success (3 men in the top 40), were naturally unhappy about his impending departure.
Of the three, the split between Sampras, 20 and Brandi, from whom he parted for a few months at the end of 1990, was the greatest surprise.
It happened less than 72 hours after Sampras had paid warm tribute in Frankfurt to the veteran coach he said had helped him so much in a year which began disastrously without him but then led to outstanding success in the second half of the year, culminating in the ATP Tour Championships title.
According to someone who knows both of them well and was on the same flight back to America with them from Frankfurt it was clear that Brandi had no prior knowledge of what was about to happen.
Indeed, he was talking at the time about the possibility of him returning to Europe a few days later with Sampras for the Davis Cup final.
In the event, Pete's brother, Gus, travelled with him instead.
Sampras' original intention was to appoint as his new coach, Tom Gullikson, w ho a few weeks earlier had parted company from Jennifer Capriati when the Florida prodigy's father failed to persuade the USTA to pay for more than 30 weeks of work with is daughter during the year.
Capriati is one of a select band of prospects whose coaching is paid for by American tennis officials but whereas they felt the amount  being offered was generous, Mr Capriati felt that Jennifer needed a consistency of guidance and coaching on an even more regular basis.
In some ways, the coaching world is like a jigsaw, in as much that when a piece of the puzzle which one felt was the perfect fit is found not to be in the right place after all, then it goes somewhere else and another piece has to be found to fill the gap.
That being so, the Capriati's turned to Slozil, who had been in tear when Steffi presented him with a gold watch to mark their parting after five mostly triumphant years.
Sampras, meanwhile, was planning to talk with Tom's twin brother, Tim, who has been working with Eliot Teltscher and, although nothing had been settled at the time of writing, Andrew Agassi was looking for a coach who could help him improve what he knows remains a fundamental weakness in his game — his serve.
PASSING SHOTS
I could not help thinking there was a wonderful touch of irony in the fact that guy Forget and Henri Leconte, plus their captain, Yannick Noah became national heroes overnight in France for winning back The Davis Cup for the first time since the Musketeers — even though they now all live in Switzerland.
Tax men have a lot to answer for.
Work on the new roof on the Centre Court at Wimbledon, which will provide better viewing for at least 3,000 who previously had to peer round pillars, is reported to be ‘ahead of schedule’ for completion by the end of April.
Janet Jones, secretary of the British Tennis Umpires  Association , is to retire from the post at the end of this year.
The proposed million dollar match due in March between Monica Seles and Jimmy Connors, apparently never got beyond the talking stage.
Mike Ross, who organised an unofficial pre-Wimbledon men's tournament at the Wirral in 1989 and 1990, is reported to be trying to establish a similar event this year in Chichester.
Danie Visser took the opportunity of his selection to South Africa's first Davis Cup team to be announced since 1978, to protest that they have been placed in the bottom Group, so that it will take them at least three years to qualify for the World Group.
On player rankings, they certainly warrant a higher placing.
Adrian Quist, twice Wimbledon doubles champion and three times winner of the singles at the Australian Open, has died at his home in Sydney from cancer, aged 78.
Success for France
Diet Pepsi — $500,000 loss?
Graf — switched coaches along with Pete Sampras and Jennifer Capriati
Wimbledon roof — on schedule
SIMPLY STEFFI AND WHAT SHE WOULD LIKE TO BE REMEMBERED FOR
by BARRY WOOD
Perfection and peace of mind are still as elusive as ever for Steffi Graf.
Despite a 1991 that saw her largely relieved of the pressure of the tabloid press charting a private life that was in turmoil over allegations against her father Peter (since disproved), the last twelve months have brought her only limited satisfaction.
‘The pressure from outside (the press) usually doesn't bother me  too much.
It's always the pressure that I give myself, and I've given myself a lot of pressure this last year’, she revealed.
‘I've wanted to do much better than I've done.
There were times when I was frustrated and not satisfied with what I was doing.
I want to get back to good performances.
That's what I want now.
‘One thing I've not been happy with is that I've played so well during the practices, and whenever I step onto the court for a match there's a bit missing from what I can do.
That's been the biggest problem for me.’
But still, it must be better now than in 1990, as she watched many of her titles slip away, one by one.
‘Well’, she agrees reluctantly, ‘I've got my tennis together a lot more this year, especially after the first three months.
Then I started to play better tennis again.’
 DISSATISFACTION 
Another source of her dissatisfaction is a long-anticipated holiday that turned into a disaster.
Steffi had planned in 1990 to take a break in the  Caribbean after Wimbledon, but ended up in a hospital bed having her sinuses worked on instead.
She tried again in 1991, but later wished that she hadn't bothered.
‘I left on Monday morning from Amsterdam, where I met my brother and his girlfriend, and we continued to Miami, and from Miami to St Maarten, from St Maarten to Anguilla where we arrived in the middle of the night.
‘When we arrived, the first thing I did was arrange a flight to somewhere else.
I'd just won Wimbledon and wanted a lot of action, but there was nothing and nobody.
It was a big disappointment.
‘I have to tell you one thing.
The  Caribbean is out of my schedule, it's definitely out.
‘St Maarten was too crowded, and wasn't what I expected.
Another island was flat and the vegetation was very poor.
They had one beautiful hotel and one beautiful beach, but that's all the island had.
I couldn't stay for one day.’
Steffi is happy though that she is no longer the flavour of the moment for the more inquisitive press.
She has been left alone to lead something approaching a normal life now and then.
Occasionally she has been able to get away and walk the streets of London, or slip out with friends without looking over her shoulder.
‘Definitely, people have been respectful towards me and given me some free time.
The press have backed off a little bit and that's been nice’, she agreed with a smile.
Had any boyfriends crept through unnoticed, I wondered?
‘You think I would answer that?’, she laughed.
Actually I've been doing a few things this year when no one has recognised me and nobody knew.
‘There have been some strange reports boyfriend-wise, but it's been very quiet really.’
DELIGHT
Steffi never misses a chance of coming to Britain, not only for tournaments, and she told me of her delight at discovering a street market on a recent visit.
‘I've been back to London a few times in the last year, and I've had some great times there,’ she enthused.
‘I found a flea market in Holborn and was walking around for three hours.
It was beautiful.
‘It was a special day there I think.
The market was huge.
It was great and I was lucky to find it.
I started collecting small perfume bottles in black and silver.’
Now that she's 22 I wondered whether she had thought of fleeing the family nest and finding her own place.
‘I'm thinking about setting up a place of my own,’ she admitted.
‘The thing is, there's so little time in between tournaments and already I spend so little time in Bruhl and in Boca Raton, and it wouldn't make a lot of sense.
‘I've been thinking of getting something in New York.
but if I could live anywhere in the world it would definitely be London.!’
Gray, like Boris Becker, is an intelligent and sensitive person.
But while he has anguished over his role in life, to the point where it would surprise no one if he just threw in the towel tomorrow and went off in search of obscurity, Steffi appears to have suffered no such agonies and self-doubt.
Why, I asked her, does she think that is?
PERSONALITY
‘I think it's a personality type of thing.
I'm a quiet person and when I need to sort things out I usually sort them out myself’, she considered.
I also think I have good people around me.
I have my family who always help me, and some very good friends that I can talk to and discuss problems that I have.
‘I'm not the kind of person that talks about my problems — I'd rather sort them out myself.
It's who you have around you which is important.’
But she is concerned about many things in life.
I asked what upsets her most of all.
‘There are too many things to get upset about.
I think the worst thing for me is to see homeless people.
That problem hasn't been solved and it's difficult to understand.
Also, I love animals and hate to see them suffer.
‘I despise injustice and malice, and the know-alls of the world.
 Everyone has a right to live as they want, as long as it doesn't harm others’, she says.
Would she have liked to live in another time, I enquired, and her surprising reply was not entirely serious.
‘I would definitely like to have been there all the way at the start of history, at the start of human beings, to see all that happened.
‘I would like to have been a cave-woman, to see how we started.
I would like to have been the first person in the world’, she added lightly.
And who would she most like to spend an evening with?
It was time to get serious again, and she gave the matter a great deal of thought.
‘Oh man, it's a difficult question’, she replied, before deciding on Helmut Schmitt, the former German Chancellor.
I WOULD LIKE TO HAVE BEEN THE FIRST PERSON IN THE WORLD
As one of the most respected figures in women's tennis, and a member of the Player committee, I asked if she felt changes were necessary to the women's game at the moment.
‘No, I think we're doing really fine.
Although I've always been saying that the lower ranked players should get more money, and we should re-distribute the money.
If they make any changes that's where they should start.
‘Maybe that would help the lower ranked people to have the motivation and to get eager,’ she added, while acknowledging that might merely have the effect of less ambitious ones accepting good money for being relative failures.
Steffi did snap the whip at those who act  unprofessionally and tarnish the image of the sport.
There is no bitterness from her concerning the fact that Monica Seles has taken over her number one ranking, only disappointment that the young Yugoslav has not always acted in the true interests of the game since.
‘The number one player, and all players in fact, have a responsibility to the sport, the fans, the sponsors and the officials’, she insisted.
‘It is important to keep to commitments, always try one's best, and take one's responsibilities as an athlete seriously.’
That is something Graf has always done, and will continue to do.
One example of how she uses her position for the good of the game, and for others, occurred in October when, suffering from a painful wrist injury and against her doctor's advice, she played an exhibition, not for personal gain, but to raise money for multiple sclerosis.
That kind of attitude, putting the interests of others before her own, has earned Steffi the highest respect.
Still searching for perfection, she has no plans to retire for quite a while yet, when will she quit?
‘No idea’, she says, to many people's relief.
‘I'll play a few more years for sure.
SHOULDER
‘When I injured my shoulder (she was forced to return home from the Federation Cup and had to miss a couple of tournaments) I couldn't do anything.
No work-outs.
Nothing.
‘I was frustrated, angry and moody and realised then just how much tennis meant to me.
It's my life right now and if I'm playing well I'm happy, and if I'm not then I'm difficult to life with.’
but what will come afterwards?
‘I'd like to study again.
That would be one of my main goals.
For a start, I will travel and go places I've not seen, and return to places I've been to but not really seen because of the tennis.
‘I'd like to be busy and I couldn't just stop my life after tennis.
I've had a lot of thoughts, but haven't set myself exactly what I want to do.
I have a few ideas.’
Steffi appears to have everything, so I asked that if she could have one wish, what would it be?
‘To live for ever is too much to take.
Health for all the people around me’, she replied.
With her liking for the music of Simply Red, and her friendship with lead singer Mick Hucknall, doesn't she dream of being a member of the band?
‘Being a singer for Simply Red would be a nice idea, but I would definitely need a different voice to the one I have’, she laughed.
SINGER
‘I've never thought about being a singer.
I do sing in the shower.
I do that all day long actually, because I love music so much.
I know all the words and usually sing along.
‘I'm really into the Manchester, or rather North-West England, music scene at the moment, with the Stone Roses, Inspiral Carpets and especially the Charlatans.’
Finally, how would she like to be remembered eventually?
‘As a good tennis player.
That's all I need,’ she said.
Steffi — back on track
ACE in the pack!
Embassy season closes on a high note
The fabulous Chewton Glen Hotel, set in the beautiful surroundings of Hampshire's coastal region, hosted the end of season Embassy National Team Conference (NTTC), the Pack of Four, in December.
The event, organised by Tony Hoffman of Inside Out Promotions, brought together the four major winners of the NTTC season, namely the Masters champion, Yorkshire's Paul Robinson, Classic champion, Nick Baglin, from SKF Matchpoint, Alverstoke's Darren Quilty, the hardcourt winner and John Black, representing Breakpoint Mizuno, who is the official No. 1 ranked player.
TRIBUTE
The evening turned out to be a spectacular climax to a year of consolidated growth for Embassy tennis, a tribute to its commitment to the game over a three year period.
as if to underline the importance of this and previous Embassy events in the sporting calendar, many established sportsmen and women from other disciplines took time out to sit courtside at Chewton Glen in support of the concept.
Kevin Keegan, Ian Botham, Sally Gunnell and Nick Brown, not to mention figures from the world of showbusiness, Max Boyce and Fiona Fullerton, all took their courtside tables for the running buffet which was served during the tennis.
Sally Gunnell was one of the guests who certainly seemed to enjoy herself.
EFFORT
‘This has been a great evening,’ she said.
‘The venue, the welcome, the hospitality was fantastic.
The tennis was that good, it left me speechless.
I admired the effort that both players put into their performances.’
Such effort rewarded Nick Baglin, whose coolness earned him several crucial points in his final against Robinson, the Yorkshireman going down 6–3, 6–4, a match for which both players received a standing ovation.
In the semis, Baglin had defeated Black 6–4. 7–5, while Robinson overcame Quilty 6–3, 6–1.
Presumably it wasn't Kevin Keegan's or Ian Botham's after dinner exploits on the court which left Miss Gunnell ‘speechless’.
For it was those two, with a little help from Nick Brown, Frew McMillan and John Black, who entertained the  boisterous crowd with an exhibition set officially won by Brown and Keegan, 7–5!
All who were present and who sampled Chewton Glen's luxurious hospitality will undoubtedly hope that the hotel will host further tennis events in the future.
All the players were guests of the Hotel, and practise courts were made available to enable them to have the best possible preparation for the finals.
Additional support came from Freixenet Cordon Negro, Mizuno, Wilson and Nike.
All who sampled Chewton Glen's luxurious hospitality will undoubtedly hope the hotel will host further tennis events in the future
Organiser Tony Hoffman was naturally delighted with the final outcome of the Embassy year.
‘Everything was just perfect,’ he said, ‘but when one is fortunate enough to come to the Chewton Glen, it has to be right…the standard is so high.
I am delighted that we have been able to present Embassy with what I consider to have been our best tournament yet.
‘What we saw this evening has to be good for British tennis.’
THE CHEWTON GLEN
Pack of Four winner Nick Raglin (opposite page) receives his cheque from Geoffrey Couchman.
(Above) Celebrity doubles line up — Ian Botham, John Black, Nick Brown, Kevin Keegan and Frew McMillan
(Right) Winning partnership Keegan and Brown receiving Chewton Glen shirts form Mrs. Brigitte Skan
Sweetspot Fact File Monica Seles — World No. 1 Age: 18 Born: Novi Sad, Yugoslavia Resides: Sarasota, Florida Parents: Esther and Karolj Brother: Zoltan Hobbies: Modelling, acting, riding, swimming and collecting stuffed animals Sponsors: Fila, Yonex, Perrier, Matrix 1991 Tournament wins: 10 1991 Prize money: $2,457,758
JUNIOR SET by Alastair McIver
A VERY BRITISH COUP
Only time will tell whether the Lawn Tennis Association will receive an additional benefit to those already being reaped at its National Training Centre at Bisham, following its acquisition of former Wimbledon finalist Olga Morozova to its staff.
For in addition to the package that it negotiated with the delightful Mrs Morozova back in 1990, came the equally delightful and extremely talented Miss Roubanova, the 13 year old daughter of Olga and her husband, Victor.
Ekaterina Roubanova, the slim, gifted and articulate youngster is a Russian, although there are continuing negotiations taking place with the ITF to make her eligible to represent Great Britain in team competitions in the future.
The transition from the Moscow classroom, to Wycombe High School could not — and should not — have been easy for one so young.
Yet Ekaterina (Katia for short), takes it all in her stride.
‘When I first came here, it was hard because of all the people were different here.
They had different opinions about tennis.
I was going to a different school.
I wasn't used to it so it was quite hard but I really liked it.
I miss  my friends and of course my family…my grandparents.
I've got one of two best friends in Moscow.
I write to them a lot.’
Naturally, her tennis and school regimes changed also, although as she sees it, this was not necessarily a bad thing!
‘In Russia, I would get up at 7 o'clock and do some stretching.
School started at about 8.30 till about 3.30 and I couldn't miss any lessons.
After school, I had to get practise and it took about one and a half hours to get there.
FITNESS
‘I would play for about one hour and then have about half an hour fitness training.
I would get home at about 7.30 in the evening and I still had to do my homework.
I had a lot more homework to do there, than here.
It took me about three hours to do my homework so I was very tired after everything.
I didn't usually get to bed until 11 or 12 pm.
‘Here, it is much easier.
Wycombe High School starts at 9.15 am.
I have a break in the middle of the day because I don't do some of the lessons like music, PE and games.
For example, today, I had practice from 8am until 10am and then I went to school and had two lessons.
Then I came back to the courts at Bisham again before going back to school again at 3pm for history and then I come back and play again afterwards.
I couldn't do that in Russia because of the long journey.’
Because of the close links between the Rover LTA School at Bisham Abbey and Wycombe High School, such a schedule is permitted, although it may seem unusual, to say the least, to most schoolchildren.
Yet Katia is one of the ‘elite’ tennis youngsters of Great Britain, one of those who, because of her gifts, her talents, is afforded the opportunity to develop her tennis skills in accordance with her academic studies, and not despite them.
How, though does she cope with being coached for stardom by her mother, who oversees the girls' development at Bisham?
ATTRACTIONS
Katia smiles.
‘Sometimes it's really hard’, she says.
‘She always says that on the court she isn't a mum for me and I can't imagine that she isn't my mum.
Sometimes she wants me to work hard on the court and she is very serious and at home she is very nice to me.
I just can't imagine her being a coach and not my mum and she says to me…
I'm the coach and not the mum on court.’
Perhaps for Olga too, it is difficult to imagine that Katia on the court is just another tennis player, and no simply, her fun loving daughter.
And yet that is one of the youngster's attractions, that as well as being a very good tennis prospect, she is also a girl who enjoys life and the things other than tennis that it has to offer.
‘I like to dance, go to discos, watch films, read sometimes.
My favourite writer is French, Dumas.
The Three Musketeers is the best book I've ever read…‘
Katia's dual upbringing has brought her other cultural benefits, too.
For example, there aren't too many Russians who can boast to having seen The Phantom of the Opera, Cats, and the Bolshoi Ballet by the time they are 13.
Katia can.
Similarly, there aren't many young tennis players in this world who have actually possessed their own tennis racket before they were born.
Katia did.
‘It was a special one, for me.
When mum was pregnant, someone gave her a present, a small tennis racket.
I played with it when I was very young at home.
Actually, though, I started tennis when I was about seven.’
And she never looked back.
Indeed, now she is looking forward to a career in tennis.
‘I really want to be a tennis player.
My mum has never told me to have a goal.
She tells me to enjoy the game.
If it won't work, then it won't work.
I actually have my own goal to win one of the Grand Slam tournaments as soon as possible.
If I can't, I'll be really upset so I have to do everything step by step’
Like all young girls, she has her favourites on the circuit.
In Ekaterina's case, they are role models.
I think Capriati's great.
Her baseline strokes are unbelievable.
She's a good athlete and I really like watching her, probably because she's so young and such a good player.
Obviously, my strokes aren't as good as hers, or Seles', or Graf's because they play a lot more than I do.
So I just have to keep on practising.’
For a girl who places such emphasis on coming first, there was, perhaps, a poignant irony in the fact that she — and her mother and father — should be late in hearing news of the attempted coup in Russia last August.
Needless to say, it was a worrying time for the Roubanova family.
COUP
‘I was very nervous about my grandmother at that time.
She lives in Moscow.
It happened at the time of the National Junior Championships in Nottingham and we hadn't seen the television that morning.
We went to breakfast and Mark Cox was sitting there and he asked us ‘Didn't we know that there was coup in Russia?’ and he told us everything.
‘My mother was really surprised and upset.
We tried to call our grandmother but we couldn't get through.
After about three hours, we got through and we asked her what had happened and she said ‘everything is fine…the tanks are just across the road’, and my mum didn't know what to say because we were all so upset.
‘We were very nervous, worried about her but when it was all over…
I think that she was more worried about us.
We were watching everything on television.
It was awful.’
Now, some six months on, things are quieter, more settled.
For the Roubanova family, life is back to normal.
Katie is content.
IMPROVED
‘I'm happier, of course, because we're a family’, she says.
‘I think that I've improved my game a lot, also.
Personally, I think that I've changed.
When I was in Moscow, my grandmother was with me and everything that I wanted she was doing for me and I was a little girl who had everything.
She's not here now and I have to think about everything and do things on my own’.
Ekaterina Roubanova wants to follow in her mother's footsteps.
She wants to be a champion.
She has the facilities, the coaching and the ambition.
If all of that can combine to enable her to become that champion, that British champion, then never mind Spycatcher, the LTA will  undoubtedly have pulled off…a very British coup.
Victor, Ekaterina and Olga
OFF COURT
Family Finals
David and Scott Lloyd are just two of the father/son partnerships who will be competing in the national finals at Quietwaters Hotel, Golf and Country Club later this month (24th–28th Feb).
The Lloyds will be one of 16 father and son pairs who will join up with 16 mother and daughter partnerships to find out who will become this year's Remington/Daily Express Family champions.
David and Scott Lloyd
ITF RANKINGS
Stefan Edberg and Monica Seles have been named as the Official 1991 world champions by an ITF three man panel comprising Frank Sedgeman, Fred Perry and Tony Trabert.
Edberg won 6 titles during this year, including the US Open.
He had a win/loss record of 76/17 and the fewest number of 1st round loses of any other player in 1991,(one, in 20 tournaments entered).
He also had a 21 match unbeaten run between August and October.
Monica Seles enjoyed the remarkable achievement of having reached the finals of all 16 tournaments that she entered.
She won three Grand Slam titles (she didn't play at Wimbledon), and 7 other titles.
Between August and October, she had a 23 match unbeaten run, and the following month she won the prestigious Virginia Slims Championships in New York.
Both players will receive their awards at the World Champions dinner which will be held in Paris in May.
JO TAKES THE HIGH ROAD
Whilst most of the world's leading female tennis players were enjoying an end of season holiday.
British No. 1 Jo Durie was on the road coaching young prospects in Scotland and the North of England.
The three day tour included coaching clinics at indoor tennis centres in Stirling, Newcastle and Warrington, and is part of Pilkington Glass' ongoing commitment to grass roots tennis in Gt.
Britain.
commented Jo, ‘The overall standard of the children we are seeing is gradually improving although we still need to encourage many more children to play tennis’.
Additionally, Jo identified once again the ongoing flaws in the system which hinder progress.
‘The kids and the coaches are very keen but have no idea of the standard they have to achieve.
We should pay the coaches to go to tournaments and watch and perhaps they could put over to the kids how hard they have to work’
HOLDENE HOLD ON TO BROWN
Holdene Group plc have renewed their sponsorship of Nick Brown, who is now in charge of coaching the Laing Squad.
In addition, the company is extending its support for tennis by sponsoring LTA Rover squad coach, Ian Barclay.
Holdene Group plc is one of the UK's longest established computer dealerships and a UK Compaq supplier.
FRANK DICK JOINS DEWHURST
DEWHURST TENNIS ACADEMY
Frank Dick OBE, the British Athletics Olympic National Coach, has joined the Dewhurst Tennis Academy as the official fitness/conditioning trainer for the squad.
He will set individual training programmes, and offer advice and assessments for squad members.
‘As soon as I was introduced to the concept of the Dewhurst Tennis Academy,’ said Mr Dick, ‘and its sole directive to produce champions, I knew that I had to assist in this exciting initiative for British tennis’
SURBITON'S THIRD YEAR SUCCESS
EAGLE STAR
Surbiton LTC won the men's doubles over 45 event for the third year when they overcame Manchester Northern Club in the finals of the Eagle Star Inter Club Veterans Tournament held at Queen's Club during November.
Surbiton won by 3 matches with one drawn and so represent Gt Britain in the 45 age group in the European Club Championships in June (45's) and September (65's) at European venues yet to be decided.
The finals consisted of 8 men's and ladies' veterans events from 40 to 65 years and over.
The oldest player to take part was 81 year old Tom Rowney, who represented St. George's Hill, who lost to The 45 Club by 3 matches to 1.
Shirley Brasher, the 1957 French Open champion, represented Queen's Club, who won the ladies over 40 doubles with victory over Purley Sports, 4–0.
Over 400 clubs and 2000 players participated in the Eagle Star Championships, proving the continued popularity of Veteran's tennis in this country.
Shirley Brasher and Joyce Englefield
PHL TO MARKET NEW LEAGUE
NATIONAL CLUB LEAGUE
Paul Hutchins Tennis and Leisure, the company formed four years ago by the former British National Team Manager and Davis Cup captain, has been appointed by the LTA to run the already popular National Club League, which begins later this year.
In just four years, Hutchins' company has grown to become one of the major marketing and promotion companies in British tennis.
Apart from the National Club League, it also takes care of the tennis interests for Rover Cars, Nomura, Puma and Eagle Star.
Despite also being a Director of LET Leisure and the Riverside Racket Club in west London, Hutchins is still looking to expand.
‘My aim to continue to build up a specialist UK and International Tennis Consultancy and I want to be associated with marketing and promotion in the sport and leisure indoor development areas’, he says.
If anyone would like information on the National Club League, then please call .
WAINWRIGHT'S 9th
Defending champion Mandy Wainwright, from Essex, and Lancashire's Michael Ingham, took the prizes in the Midland Bank 16 and under Championships at Telford at the beginning of January.
Wainwright is no stranger to national titles.
This was her 9th to date and she is still only 15.
Ingham, seeded number two, took full advantage of the defeat of top seed Jonathan Hind to outlast Middlesex's Luke Milligan in a two hour tussle which saw the Lancashire lad recover from set and 3–0 down to win 0–6, 7–6, 6–4.
Wainwright defeated Surrey's Lorna Woodroffe, 6–4, 6–2 in the girl's final.
Bank a ball here!
It's one of the great anomalies of tennis, is it not, that the product which, in relative terms, costs the most, usually ends up being used the least?
Thankfully, all that is about to change.
In an initiative to be launched next month by tennis consultants Brian Hewitt Associates, in conjunction with the ITF and supported by a major sponsor, old tennis balls are to be collected at 2000 ball banks around the country and shipped to third world countries for additional and subsequent use.
BRAINCHILD
The scheme, called simply Bank a Ball, was the brainchild of Hewitt himself, who, having been advised of this long standing need by the International Tennis Federation's (ITF) Director of Development, Doug Macurdy back in October 1991, took it upon himself to create and develop a plan to overcome the problem.
‘In tennis clubs up and down the country, balls just disappear’, said Hewitt, himself a member of a club located near to his office in Durham.
‘Once they have been used, tennis balls are then generally ignored by the members.
I sat there in ITF's London offices, listening to the problem and it just came to me.’
Hewitt sent out a proposal to 80 carrier companies and within days, he was receiving back positive acknowledgements.
By far his greatest publicity coup, however, came when he was invited to discuss the idea with Derek Jamieson on Radio 2.
‘A friend of mine, Anthony Cherry, who produces Prime Time for the BBC, saw in this some journalistic potential and is currently looking at it for the BBC programme 40 Minutes’, says Hewitt.’
Then another friend, David Vercoe, who happens to be the controller for Radio 2, suggested it for the Jamieson show.
We went live on air by telephone for about ten minutes, at about 8.25 am.
Ten minutes after we put the ‘phone down, I was getting calls from carrier company executives from their car ‘phones.
It was just incredible’.
Hewitt expects to raise between 500,000 and 600,000 balls for the ITF's overseas aid programmes in the first year.
The balls will be collected from the pick up points in clubs and leisure centres around the country and despatched to the ITF's central warehousing facility, in Slough.
DEVELOPMENT
From there, they will be sent to countries in Africa and the Far East, in fact anywhere where the ITF runs tennis development programmes.
Bank a Ball is here.
If you want further information on how you can help tennis in the third world countries, then please contact Brian Hewitt Associates on .
BAHAMAS BOUND
The winners in our 1991 Spot the Ball competition have been announced by Wilson.
Tennis World readers Mr and Mrs Lower, from Chesterfield, came nearest to marking the exact location of the ball in three separate challenges and therefore win for themselves an all expenses trip to the fabulous Carnivals Crystal Palace Hotel in the Bahamas, courtesy of Carnivals and American Airlines.
No one was successful in pinpointing the exact location of the ball in three separate challenges.
10 lucky runners up will each receive a revolutionary Wilson Hammer tennis racket, worth approximately £200 each.
They are .
Our congratulations go to all winners and our thanks go to everyone who took part and made this first ever tennis, Spot the Ball competition such a huge success.
The Carnivals Crystal Palace Hotel, the Bahamas
BARR TEAMS UP WITH DURIE
In an exclusive joint promotion, Johnnie Barr, of Barr Sporting Tours, is teaming up with Jo Durie to offer holiday makers the chance to be coached by the British No 1 at La Manga Club.
Jo and her coach, Alan Jones have been booked for the week of 11–18 April 1992, and will be on hand daily to help you with your game, whether you're a beginner, intermediate or advanced player.
The location is the beautiful La Manga Club, situated deep into the Mercurian Hills of the Cost Calida in Southern Spain and the week includes:
Return flights and transfers
Shared  accommodation 
Car hire
Unlimited tennis on La Manga's Club 17 floodlit courts
2 hours coaching per day from Alan Jones and Jo Durie
One day golf event
Welcome cocktail party
Gala dinner
In addition, you will have full use of the Club's other facilities, including swimming pool, gymnasium and squash courts.
The cost for this great week is £599 and bookings can be made by calling Barr Sporting Tours on  and will be accepted on a first come-first served basis.
CHRISTMAS BONUS FOR GRIFFITHS
19 year old Barbara Griffiths from Middlesex, won the 17th annual British Women's Tennis Association tournament which was held at the Queen's Club just prior to Christmas.
She defeated 22 year old Leicestershire's Anne Simpkin in the final, 7–6 6–4.
Barbara, the national 18 and under champion in 1989, collected the £300 prize money after going through the tournament without dropping a set, and defeating top seed Sarah Bentley in the semi final.
Simpkin defeated the 2nd seed, Virginia Humphries Davies in a tough three set quarter final encounter.
INSIGHT — THE WORLD'S BEST COACHES ON THE GAME'S GREATEST PLAYERS
JOSE FINDS A WAY
by Lailee van Dillen
It was hard for me to leave Spain, where I was very well known and settle in Palm Springs, California,’ says Jose Higueras, a former Davis Cup player for Spain from 1974 to 1980.
After many years of modest living and involvement in tennis Higueras has found new fame.
People ask for his autograph more today, than when he was a star for Spain.
The reason is sound.
Jose Higueras has coached two french Open champions.
In 1990, Michael Chang was his protege and in 1991, Jim Courier outlasted Andre Agassi in the final in Paris to score a point for the Higueras school of coaching over that of Nick Bolletieri's Academy.
Jose attributes his success in sharing his tennis secrets with his life experience.
‘I grew up on clay courts in my hometown of Diezma-Gradada.
I look at tennis differently than some coaches.
I have an eye for championship clay court style with a technical and a mental approach that I nickname, ‘heads and feet’.’
Higueras admires various styles of coaching, but relishes clay court play.
‘On clay courts I was trained to make the other guy play tennis all day.
Banging balls wildly doesn't make it on clay.
Although you should shoot for your best shots, you should prepare to run on your feet all day.
You must use your head.’
Last year's French Open champion, Jim Courier, solidly proved that the success of the talented Michael Chang in 1990 was indeed, no one-off fluke.
After coaching back to back French Open champions Higueras gained deserved notoriety.
Higueras says, ‘I first watched Jim Courier play in the opening round of the tournament in Indian Wells, California.
Jim was tentative, tense and not hitting the shots he practised in our work sessions.’
Higueras talked with Courier.
‘I  explained to Jim his assets.
First he has a powerful game.
Second, he's capable and smart on the court.’
Higueras adds, ‘if I could be born again, I'd take that big serve of Jim Courier's.
It would save me a lot of miles running!’
Jim Courier listened to Higueras, whose patient language smooths over the most sensitive of discussions.
His accent and his difficulty in communicating in English to his players has, ironically, aided his coaching style.
Higueras speaks calmly, softly, selecting only the necessary words to help his pupils.
MANNERS
He is famed for his gentle  demeanour and sophisticated manners, and he dresses in comfortable blue jeans, coloured shirt and tennis shoes.
He insists on a quick hug from his young son Jordi who accompanies him to some of the major events where Courier plays.
‘I told Jim to believe that he competes significantly better than most players.
Jim is dedicated.
His great serve and forehand are technical merits, but it's his drive which singles him out.’
Courier's routine included uniquely designed workouts by his fitness trainer, Pat Etcheberry.
Courier  practised all out sprints on the track.
Greg Brittenham, from the National Institute of Fitness and Sport, coached Courier in running drills and discovered that the aerobic capacity Courier possessed was similar to marathon runners.
Interestingly, Higueras identified a paradoxical change.
‘Why hurry a match, I asked Jim?’
In the Newsweek Champions events, he didn't.
Higueras saw Courier play smart.
It was against Andre Agassi.
He  lost the first set, but went on to win the match and the event.
‘That match against Andre Agassi was a turning point for Courier.
He realized how to best utilize his assets to  manoeuvre the play.’
Within weeks, Courier won the Lipton International Players championships and entered the top ten.
Higueras warned Jim, ‘Once a player is as close as you are to being number one in the world, the adjustments should be fractional in your game.
It may take time to move from number ten to number one in the world, plus you will require one to two years for tiny adjustments in  your game.’
Courier flew to Europe and experienced a disappointing performance in Rome.
He was high from his US victories, then had a sudden slump.
Courier's final messages from Higueras were to relax on the court and play smart.
‘My philosophy with Jim was that once you go onto the court, play every point deliberately.
Jim'£s chances of winning are tremendous when he plays each point as though it was match point.’
SLUMP
From that momentary slump, Courier went on to win the French Open title.
Jose Higueras watched as Jim Courier accepted the plaudits.
It was only one year before, that Jose applauded his protege Michael Chang for winning the same Grand Slam event.
‘When I first watched Michael Chang play tennis,’ Jose recalls, ‘I told several people that I believed Chang could do well at the French Open.
I thought it might take two years of training.’
Higueras admits, ‘I worked on Michael's game.
Chang achieved his potential fast, spotting his strengths and hitting the ball on the rise.
Plus, Chang executed well during match play.
Chang surprised me by winning the French Open so soon.’
What did Higueras spot in Michael Chang which caused him to envisage Chang in stellar performances on French clay?
Chang's speed was the best of any other player.
He had great feet.
Chang's forehand and backhand were shots he hit with early preparation and a low error factor.
He hit through the ball, disguised the passing shots well and had great depth on his shots.
Chang's return of serve was powerful.
FLEXIBILITY
Then, Higueras noticed Chang's ability to use his head, think smart and flexibly on the court during match play.
‘Michael Chang has the top championship qualities of ‘heads and feet’.
Chang thinks on the court.
He adjusts.
He plays smart tennis on the move.’
Higueras says Chang inherited his competitive ability.
‘That's hard to teach,’ he admits, ‘and probably a family quality.
However, if you train with a coach who's been under pressure conditions, it can make a difference in your own performance.’
Higueras fondly remembers what he considers to be Chang's greatest match.
‘Michael was only seventeen years old when he played Ivan Lendl in the French Open in 1989.
Lendl was the number one player in the world at the time.
Michael was down two sets to love.
He struggled back, showing tremendous mental effort.
Then his body cramped.
‘In the fifth set, Chang fought against physical pain, challenging Lendl to the ultimate.
In the final game, Chang cramped severely.
No one knew if he could finish the match or would be forced to concede.
Chang made it to match point on Lendl's serve.
Chang cramped over and over.
He stepped up just a few feet from the service line to receive Lendl's second serve.
Chang's nerve stunned Lendl.
He tried to force the number one player in the world to make his shot.
It's not very often in the history of tennis you see a seventeen year old try that on centre court in the French Open.’
A startled Lendl double faulted.
‘That was rare too,’ Higueras says.
As coach to Michael Chang and Jim Courier, Higueras was able to offer Grand Slam preparation advice to both champions.
‘Just before the match I check if a player has problems.
If something bugs them, I want them to tell me before they walk on court.’
PLAN
Second, perhaps most importantly, Higueras says, ‘I reconfirm what the game plan is.
And finally, relax, stay calm, yet intent on your plan.
‘I remind Chang or Courier of one thing,’ he says.
‘Realize the tennis court is the same size for everybody around the world.
Also, other issues are going on around the globe, not only tennis.’
Higueras contributes perspective to the players.
‘I suggest to the players that they simplify the game.
I always expect them to play their best and act their best on  the court.
‘During the months of long training sessions Higueras repeats, ‘Be aware of what you do best.
You're going to win matches with your big weapons!’
Jose Higueras observes tennis with a wide angled lens.
In his approach he includes sensitive ear to the parents of players.
‘There is a positive and a negative side to parenting a tennis player.
On the positive side, parental support helps when it is in co-ordination with respect and belief in the coach who really needs to take over the job.
SUPPORT
‘On the negative side, over involvement from parents or over protection causes a player to suffer in his game.
It is difficult to step back.
Parents who trust the coach should distinguish between the confusing issue of good, positive support versus negative over involvement.’
Higueras suggests young tennis players  pursue education while practising tennis.
‘There's nothing wrong with college!
Turning pro at twenty, rather than fifteen will not be a disadvantage.
‘Enter the professional tour with sound basic strokes and complete all round game before challenging the big guys on the tour.
If you have holes in your game, like the absence of a slice backhand, work on them.
You'll need them on clay.’
Jose Higueras, father of two, a son Jordi and daughter, Jenna, with wife, Donna, feels like a lucky man.
‘I'm fortunate to have coached Michael Chang and Jim Courier.
When I arrived in America, it was tough for me.
Maybe I bring Spain's clay court history to my coaching,’ he muses.
Higueras is circumspect about his tennis philosophy.
‘When I step back from it all, I see tennis was invented a long time ago.
In some ways it's a simpler game than we make it out to be.’
Courier — Dedicated
Higueras
Courier
Courier — French Champion
Chang — Thinks on court
HAMPSHIRE HURRICANE
WILKINSON INSPIRES FIRST EVER COUNTY TITLE FOR HAMPSHIRE
Defending champions Essex were demoted after earning just two wins
Hampshire captured its first ever county title when its men's team triumphed at the recent LTA Winter Indoor County Closed Championships at Telford.
After a dramatic ‘slide rule’ finish, Hampshire's men edged out Yorkshire by a single rubber after three had tied on two group wins.
Boosted by the appearance of Chris Wilkinson, who had just returned home after gruelling 5 month tour of the Far East and Australasia, Hampshire went on to their historical achievement with some  sterling doubles' performances by the whole team.
On the opening day, they trailed Yorkshire 4–2 after the singles, despite an encouraging win for 18 year old Nick Weal over the vastly more experienced Simon Ickringill.
They then stunned the County Week champions by taking all three doubles matches, with Paul Scullard and John Vinnell saving a match point in their 2–6, 7–6, 6–4 defeat of Ian Blakeman and David Hirst.
Though they failed to make up a similar deficit against Essex on day two, losing 5–4, their two doubles victories kept up their tally of rubbers going into the final day.
Yorkshire proceeded to squander the final two doubles in a 6–3 win over the previously unbeaten Essex, and Hampshire went back on court needing to win all three doubles matches to secure the necessary 8–1 margin over Middlesex.
After comfortable wins for their first and third pairs, it was left to Julian Godfrey and Laurence Matthews to clinch the championship with a nail biting 7–6, 7–6 success over Richard Pannell and Dylan Williams.
Hampshire thereby completed a remarkable run in this competition, which has seen them win groups 4 to 1 in successive years.
Defending champions Essex found that two wins and 14 rubbers were insufficient to prevent them suffering relegation along with Middlesex.
They will be replaced next year by Group 1 debutants, Durham and Cleveland and Lancashire.
The women's competition was a two horse race between last year's winners Surrey and previous champions Essex.
Both eased their way to victory over Yorkshire and Surrey to set up a final day showdown.
However, with Sarah Bentley making her singles debut for Surrey, the holders wasted little time in establishing a winning 5–1 lead to retain their title.
Yorkshire defeated Sussex to finish third, but both teams were demoted.
Joining Surrey and Essex in Group 1 next year will be Lancashire, back after a year's absence, and Norfolk.
Hampshire's winning team —(left to right)
JUNIOR TENNIS WORLD
CROSS IS THE BOSS!
The Coventry leg, the second of the LTA's 1991/2 Junior Winter Indoor Circuit, was won by 17 year old Karen Cross, from Devon, her first 18 and under title.
Seeded three, she defeated top seed Amanda Wainwright 7–6, 7–6.
Miss Cross began the match well, reeling off the first four games for the loss of only four points.
However, Wainwright offered stubborn resistance, and responded with some hard hitting from the baseline to level the score at 6–6.
In the tie break, Miss Cross offered more consistency and ran away with it, 7–3.
CHANCES
The second set followed a similar pattern to the first, with Cross making the most of the chances offered and edging past the Essex girl in just under two hours.
It was a very impressive comeback for Cross, who had been out of the game for six months with shin splints.
Under the guidance of Shirley Brasher, Karen had worked hard to resume the high level of play prior to her injury, and fully deserved her victory at Coventry.
Perhaps the biggest surprise of the weekend was the upset of Berkshire's Heather Matthews, who was defeated by the fast improving Claire Taylor (Oxon).
Taylor won 6–1, 6–3 before falling victim to Cross in the semi-final 6–0, 6–4.
In the other semi, Wainwright crushed Lucie Ahl (Devon), 6–1, 6–2.
The outcome of it all is that Wainwright heads the points table with 55 and is followed by Karen Cross with 48.
SERVICE
The boys' draw was headed up by Barry Cowan (Lancs), whose consistency on ground-strokes and swinging left handed service saw him reach the final with a semi final victory over Essex's Matthew Coombs, until recently a member of the Dewhurst Academy.
Cowan won 7–5, 6–3.
In the final, Cowan met up with Mark Schofield (Lancs), the number two seed who himself had come through a tough semi-final meeting with fellow Bisham boy, Philip Fowler.
Schofield won a long and taxing three setter, 6–3, 4–6, 7–6, and went on to defeat Cowan 6–4, 6–4 in the final.
Despite that defeat, Cowan heads the table with 61 points.
He is followed by Coombs, who has 41.
The third Cup Tournament took place in Telford at the beginning of February.
Sally Eve 
Karen Cross
REEBOK REWARDS
Janine Carr (pictured below), from Bedhampton, receives her cheque for £200 and a Reebok footwear and clothing contract from Reebok technical advisor, Kevin Gilchrist, as her reward for winning the girls' 16 and under section of the 15 tournament Reebok Grand Prix Grand Prix, 1991.
Other winners of the circuit, which ran through the summer and which culminated at Woodford Wells in October, were Natasha Giles and Greg Saffrey (both 21 and under), Martin Calver (16 and under), Tilly Callow and Jeremiah Brindle (12 and under).
Kelly Von Stauffenberg used the double elimination format to full advantage at the 14 and under winter circuit tournament at Bisham Abbey, played at the beginning of December.
Having lost in the first round to Sarah Lochrie, 7–5, 6–4, she then fought her way back into the tournament to beat Jasmine Choudhury 7–5, 6–3 in the semis and Felicia D'Amelio 2–6, 6–4, 6–4 in the final to take her first national title.
There was similar ‘first time’ success for Scotland's Barry McColl, who won his first national title with a win in the final over Justin Layne 6–1, 6–1.
McColl is the first Scot to have won a boys' winter series title.
Janine receives her contract from Kevin Gilchrist, Reebok technical advisor
BATES LEADS THE WAY
As the  Solihull stalwart prepares for his 16th consecutive Davis Cup appearance, JOHN OAKLEY reports on Britain's most loyal player.
Jeremy Bates has been described as moody, magnificent, temperamental, highly talented and, perhaps most frequently, unpredictable by his critics but on one account they are in a complete accord.
His loyalty to British tennis has never been questioned.
For the past seven years, Bates has been the one constant factor in the British Davis Cup team for since his debut against Portugal in 1985 he has never missed a match and has played singles on every occasion.
Not only that but Bates, in a period when the game in Britain has been at its lowest ebb, has won 16 of his 27 singles, 10 out of 17 in live rubbers, and 6 of his 11 doubles.
CHALLENGE
Now, as he approaches his 16th successive tie against France, the current Davis Cup holders, in Bayonne, Bates will again spearhead the British challenge.
On paper Britain has little hope.
After all, only 16 months ago, Henry Leconte and Guy Forget teamed up to give France a crushing 5–0 victory against Bates and company at Queen's Club — and that on grass.
Bates, however, is not pessimistic.
‘There will be no pressure playing against France’ he says.
‘We are not expecting miracles but we think we can do well.
‘We are an improving team and the spirit is great.
France will take us lightly and I'm not worried about the crowd.
In a smaller stadium they will not be so passionate as they were when they beat the Americans in the final.’
The 29-year-old British number one will have butterflies in his stomach when he goes on court but says: ‘You never play well unless you are a bit nervous but generally I've reacted well to the Davis Cup and I enjoy it.
NIGHTMARE
‘Some people take to the Cup more than others.
You've got to feel sorry for Pete Sampras who had a nightmare in the Davis Cup final but others thrive when playing for their country.’
In his seven years as a playing member of the team, Bates has twice helped Britain gain promotion to the World Group, in 1985 and again last year, and has once, in 1987, had the disappointment of being relegated.
Bates was actually in the British Cup squad for a couple of years before making his playing debut and says: ‘I learned a lot from being in the team with Buster Mottram.
Then I was only the orange peeler.
‘when I played my first match against Portugal I was lucky because it was a bit of a doddle.
We didn't lose a set and, though it was easy, for me it was special.
‘then in my next match against Switzerland I beat Heinz Gunthardt when he was about 20 in the world and that was a key win for me.’
Gunthardt had been a Wimbledon quarter-finalist that year in singles and had won the doubles title with Balazs Taroczy of Hungary so Bates' victory at the time was a little short of sensational.
Britain went on to beat Israel 4–1 at Eastbourne to regain their World Group status and Bates added: ‘I was playing number two to John Lloyd in singles and that was great for me.’
The following year he beat both Sergio Casal and Emilio Sanchez in a 4–1 victory over Spain at Telford and said: ‘I made a good start in the Cup so the first few matches will always stick in my mind.’
DOUBLES
The Spanish match was Lloyd's last Cup appearance and from that time, Bates has always played number one for Britain.
Since then he has played singles while Stephen Shaw, Andrew Castle, Richard Whichello, Chris Bailey, Danny Sapsford, Nick Brown and Mark Petchey have all been tried and Bates has also paired up with Shaw, Castle, Brown and Colin Dowdeswell in the doubles.
His place alone has never been in doubt.
Britain were relegated from the World Group in 1987 after playing both Mexico and Yugoslavia away on clay and, following two unsuccessful attempts, they beat both Poland in Warsaw and Austria in Manchester last year to win back their place among the world's top 16 tennis nations.
As Bates says: ‘It's always a great feeling when the team does well.
You spend eight or nine days together for one big effort over one weekend and it's completely different to playing in a tournament.’
So it's off to France and win or lose Bates can be relied upon to give his all for Britain.
He's that type of guy.
Bates — Not expecting miracles against France
Petchey
One year On…
It was better late than never for the 12 lucky winners of a tennis holiday at the Sport Hotel in Eilat, Israel
The Gulf War may have been responsible for the postponement of the finals of the Head/Isrotel/Tennis World tournament, which were due to be staged at the end of 1990, for one year, but it certainly didn't dampen the enjoyment of the 12 regional winners who eventually took off for Eliat at the end of November 1991.
Regional winners from  Solihull , Hoddesden, Telford, Westcliff, and two London clubs took off from Heathrow on a grey morning, courtesy of ELAL, to the sunshine of Israel's southernmost resort and the Sport Hotel, where the organisers of the tournament, Clive Bertram and Ian Latham, duly set the competitive proceedings in motion.
After three days intense competition in temperatures  approaching 90 degrees, it was the ladies from Hoddesden, Alison Widdicombe and Valerie Morrison and Battersea father and son team of Hiralal and Viren Soma who took the honours with victory in the finals over, respectively, Liz Simpkin and Chris Leverington, from  Solihull and ‘Essex Boys’, Steve Fleming and Andrew Bacon.
Fleming and Bacon played no fewer than 65 games in their two matches, firstly defeating Telford's Ray Bratt and Shaun Crampton, 6–4, 4–6, 8–6, before losing to the tough Somas, 4–6, 7–5, 6–3.
The ladies event was a more straightforward affair, although Widdicombe and Morrison had to work hard to defeat Nicky Addison and Midori Stoyle (Globe LTC) in their first match.
In the end, the Hertfordshire pair scraped by 7–6, 5–7, 6–1.
No such problems in their final, however, where they beat Simpkin and Leverington 6–4, 6–2.
For their efforts, the winners each received Head Discovery rackets with bags, together with trophies.
In reality, though, everyone who experienced the trip was a winner.
Sightseeing trips to Jerusalem, snorkelling in the Red Sea, climbing Mt.
Sinai and experiencing the local cuisine were all part of the fun on offer, not to mention the facilities of the Sport Hotel, of which the swimming pool was by far the most popular.
Grace Reginiano of Isrotel and Tennis World's Fiona Taylor accompanied the group on its trip — the culmination of over a year's doubles' competition from over 500 tennis World readers.
If anyone would like details of special group rates for tennis holiday trips to the Sport Hotel in Eilat in the months of April, October and November, then call Grace Reginiano Isrotel on .
Three days intense competition were rewarded by the magnificent facilities of the Sport Hotel, including (opposite page) the swimming pool)
READERS' LETTERS
ANGRY OF ASHTEAD
As a mother of two teenage juniors, I took exception to your maliciously mischievous article ‘Tennis on our Terms’ in the October issue of Tennis World.
Your implication that the high handed attitude of the LTA has contributed to the demise of junior tennis in this country is so far removed from the truth that I believe it bears some examination.
Statistically, and contrary to your suggestions, the Junior Series Tournaments appear to be doing quite well.
In 1988 — there were 700 entries in 4 pilot tournaments.
In 1990 — there were 12,118 entries and 239 tournaments
In 1991 — there were 12,118 entries and 239 tournaments (at time of writing)
My reading of these figures would be that they reflect a surging interest and are not quite as unpopular as you would indicate.
The £5 registration fee that you so chastise the LTA for introducing is not (as you imply) to be paid at every tournament but is an annual membership fee.
With it comes a copy of the LTA magazine which includes  practical information and also insurance on tennis equipment.
I find it hard to believe that this amount would be likely to deter someone from participating in a tournament.
EXPENSIVE
Unfortunately, tennis is a very expensive game and the cost of shoes and rackets is substantial, but an additional £5 fee to be paid to the association for registration is hardly going to deter someone from seeking match play.
I think it is important to remind ourselves that the objectives of the LTA in introducing the Ratings scheme was to attempt to upgrade the standard of play in this country, to instigate a more competitive attitude and encourage a more  professional approach.
We are still languishing in the Edwardian era, when our great British Women's champions wore corsets under their tennis dresses and our great British men's champions wore corsets under their tennis dresses and our great British men's champions wore long flannels…when the bulk of entrants at Wimbledon were British because it took six weeks to cross the Atlantic, and another six to reach Australia!
Now, we have to attempt to compete internationally, with a stimulating junior programme, as exists in other corners of the world.
Belgium, Israel and Finland have players in the top 100 of the world.
We don't.
Our juror programme has not been working.
It had to change to give us a chance to advance.
In inviting the JTO's to Baron's Court in 1989 for discussions of the development of the junior programme, the LTA were seeking to include all those worthy volunteers who have contributed so much for so many years to the running of junior  tournaments in this country.
Their intention was to introduce a new format to provoke competitive opportunities for our young players.
Existing junior tournaments, were criticised as being protracted, with weak early round matches, inadequate club facilities and expensive catering.
The change was radical.
Three day events, players segregated by standard rather than age group, all results yielding points to a national grid, match times that could be predicted with reasonable accuracy resulting in reduced time wasting at tournaments and less  dependency on club catering and facilities.
The fact that there was resistance to these proposals was entirely predictable.
Many tournaments (as you emphasised), have been in place for a long time and often with the same people running them for decades.
PROBLEMS
However, no organiser was forced to co-operate, and many did, in fact, choose to retain the status quo.
Understandably, this group has felt uncomfortable.
The winds of change blowing through their established structure has presented awkward new problems and undoubtedly caused much resentment with those unable or unwilling to compromise.
Others delighted in the innovation.
They adapted quickly and successfully.
Ex-King's Cup player Robin Drysdale echoed the sentiments of many, at the conclusion of his first Series event at his club in Bracknell, when he said ‘these events are terrific for the kids and I shall definitely be running one again next year.’
A number of the tournaments to which you refer in your article had reduced entries because they are conflicted with other new events and not because of deteriorating interest.
There has been a fall out with the grass court tournaments as the better juniors are now seeking matches on cement to prepare them for the nationals at Nottingham.
Perhaps a solution for the JTO's that are finding difficulty in coping with the current situation would be for those of them that have both hard and grass courts at their club to run a two tier event, i.e. a Series tournament on the hard courts coupled with age group doubles and mixed on the grass.
This would entice those chasing points and keep their ‘old guard’ club juniors happy.
SOLUTIONS
So lighten up, tennis World.
Let's seek solutions and not encourage conflict.
The LTA are attempting to probe forward.
You are berating them for their audacity.
Are you on the side of progress, or just plain old protest for its own sake?
If you are trying to establish a respectable place for yourself in the tennis market place, let's see some more balanced reporting and less tabloid journalism.
Please?
Editor's Note
Thank you very much for your letter, Mrs Cox.
It is only right — and  traditionally par for the course — that anyone with a vested interest in defending LTA policy, should in fact do so.
However I fail to see firstly what you are trying to prove with your figures.
No one is disputing that the  number of tournaments has increased and with it comes an overall increase in the numbers of people playing in them.
What our survey revealed, however, was that numbers ‘on average’ were decreasing, partly because there are too many overlapping tournaments and partly because of the imposition of a registration fee.
It was not me who stated these truths — it was our correspondents in response to our survey.
Are you suggesting that I should ignore them?
Your reference to balanced reporting is surprising, to say the least.
In the last three issues, we have supported the Rover scheme, the adidas Challenge and British juniors and  tournaments in a very positive way.
In this issue alone, we have a feature on Ekaterina Roubanova, reports on all LTA winter series events, a feature on Jeremy Bates and a report on the Maureen Connolly trophy.
With respect, it is no good saying that we are unbalanced in our editorials if you are going to be selective in your reading of the magazine.
REGISTRATION
Moving on, and if I may say so, you have hit the nail on the head with your reference to the registration and its rarely stated function to boost the circulation of the LTA's own magazine.
It's a poor reason, is it not, for introducing it into the cost structure of a game which, as you rightly say, is ‘…very expensive’.
The point is — and our survey reveals it — that such an amount does deter some youngsters from participating in tournaments and again with respect, I would guess that few of them come from the lovely part of the country from where you write.
No one is disputing that a more professional and competitive junior structure is welcome but the question that we have to ask is ‘Area we welcoming people into the better system that we are creating?’
If the LTA really wants to break down the class barriers in British tennis, then let it encourage families of lesser means into the game — not discourage them.
BRIGHTON SUCCESS
I am great fan of tennis, especially women's tennis and a couple of weeks ago I went down to Brighton to the semi-final matches of the Midland Bank Indoor Championships.
It was the first time I had ever seen a live tennis match — Wimbledon has always been out of the question financially, and the Midland Bank tournament offered me the chance to see live international tennis at a reasonable price.
I really enjoyed the day, and I was a little put out by the articles I read in a couple of daily newspapers throughout the week, which criticised the tournament for staging what they called ‘just a one-woman show’.
In this way they were referring to the fact that Steffi Graf was the only top ten player there.
Isn't this comment just a little unfair to the players such as Zina Garrison, Katerina Maleeva, Pam Shriver and Natalia Zvereva?
I enjoyed all the tennis that I saw, not only Steffi Graf's match — in fact the match I enjoyed the most was the semi-final between Shriver and Zvereva, and Elna Reinach and Sandy Collins.
Tournaments such as Wimbledon may boast larger fields, but for some it is too costly, or inconvenient because of extensive queuing, or the possibility of play being scratched due to rain.
I enjoyed the Midland Bank Championships despite its smaller field, and I will certainly be returning next year.
AIN'T TENNIS GREAT
With me being a football fan, Leeds Utd to be more specific, I never took much interest in tennis.
But then a great thing happened.
I had a fortnight off school when Wimbledon was on, and it has changed my life ever since.
The thing that kept me glued to the TV was the gorgeous Jennifer Capriati with her magnificent looks, great personality and brilliant tennis.
She has opened me up to the world of tennis, although I do admit that I only take an interest because of her.
I buy four other magazines, as well as the best — Tennis World.
I enjoy reading them all, especially the readers letters section in your magazine.
At this point I would like to say how great Steffi Graf is, and how her loyalty to her fans, and genuine great attitude to the game shows up the likes of Monica Seles.
I'm going to have a go at the BBC as well as everyone else.
I know we can thank them for showing some tennis, unlike ITV which doesn't show any at all, but they don't show half as much as would all like.
We get a little Federation Cup, which is on now and again, and just the final from Brighton which is broken off at the end of the second set for snooker.
Unfortunately, my parents won't splash out on  satellite TV, so I'm stuck with teletext to find out any results, and pathetic BBC coverage to watch any tennis.
By the way, why can't we have a  tournament or two every year up here in the North?
PS Please, please print my letter and please put a few more Jennifer Capriati pictures in your magazine.
Editor's Note;
Especially for you, David!
STEFFI THE BEST
I am writing to congratulate Steffi Graf on her win at Brighton as she displayed her tremendous strength by coming back from a set and 2–4 down in the second to win 5–7 6–4 6–1, and lift the title for a record 5th time.
I would also like to back up Susan Cooper's letter in the November issue of Tennis World entitled Steffi OK because when I was at Brighton, Steffi actually stopped and posed in the street to have her picture taken with me, and also Steffi signed every autograph everyday without fail, outside and inside so I think this proves that Steffi is the best at recognising her fans, no matter what it takes.
Well done Steffi
STEFFI NORMAL
It was one of the best days of my life on Saturday 26th October.
I went to see the semi-finals of the Midland Bank Championships in Brighton — the first time I'd ever seen a tennis match live.
The moment I'd been waiting for so long had arrived.
I held my breath as the announcer introduced the players for the first match.
Then there was Steffi Graf, my favourite player, just a few feet away from me.
I couldn't quite believe that this was the same Steffi that I had read about in Tennis World and that she was actually there.
I realised then more than I have before, how normal she really is, with emotions and weaknesses like anyone else.
Knowing that made me feel closer to Steffi and the other players.
They don't have superhuman powers to help them deal with the superstar image and pressures that they have had to put on them by the media and their fans.
This hasn't stopped me admiring, respecting and feeling affection for Steffi.
Her win at Brighton in a tough final has proved, even to those who still doubted after her Wimbledon win, that she is back!
I, on behalf of all her other fans around the world, would like to wish her the best of luck for 1992.
GRAF GREAT
I just had to write to you, to tell the Tennis World  readers what a certain, beautiful lady has done for tennis and for her supporters.
That person is of course Steffi Graf.
From my experience, in Brighton, she has shown what a caring, young, attractive lady she is, especially when she took time out to meet her own supporters and to sign autographs.
We had our photo taken with her, plus she had presents from the supporters.
She made a lovely speech.
How many other tennis players would take time out to meet  the supporters, like Steffi does?
We do appreciate you Steffi, for everything you have done over the years and for that special week in Brighton.
WELL DONE STEFFI
Yesterday, while watching the thrilling final of the Midland Bank Championships at Brighton, I was very interested to hear Barry Davis' comment on the fact that not one of the world's top 10 players had participated in the event with the notable exception of one Steffi Graf.
This of course is something I was aware of having witnessed a news conference with Miss Graf in mid-week, in which she very politely criticised her absent rivals saying that none of the top ranked players needed the vast amounts of money to be gained by playing in lucrative exhibition events.
She made the point that players such as these (Seles, Sanchez-Vicario) should be supporting tennis by playing in WTA registered events.
She was, of course, very right.
However, Barry Davis also pointed out that while these players blatantly break WTA rules by playing exhibitions when tournaments with prize money exceeding $225,000 is also taking place, that, perhaps some of the blame should rest on governing body which allows this to happen,— the WTA themselves.
After all, what's the use in dishing out a $20,000 fine to the likes of Monica Seles when it's just loose change to her?
As she said herself, she would have played in Brighton had Graf withdrawn with her wrist injury — she also had ‘no problem with the fine’.
This attitude is wholly disappointing and unacceptable.
There should be no room for this sort of passive interest in the general well being of tennis — especially from the player ranked No. 1 in the world.
The WTA should use it's authority more efficiently.
Not for the first time this year, Seles had been let off with a mere slap on the wrist.
Maybe the WTA should adopt the policy of docking ranking points in future?
This I feel sure, would change the attitudes of such players and make Seles in particular realise her responsibilities.
She's obviously desperate to hold onto her No. 1 ranking and absenteeism begs the question of her shying away from a confrontation with Graf for fear of losing her ranking points lead.
Graf, after all , has beaten her twice this year.
Once again, Steffi Graf has shown herself to be the best player in the world by far — in more than one sense.
Her  professionalism , dedication and attitude should be an example to one and all.
Well done Steffi — keep up the good work and keep winning.
You're the Greatest.
MAC'S  OMISSION A DISGRACE
I am writing to express my shock and disgust at John McEnroe's omission from the Davis Cup final USA Team.
What on earth is Tom Gorman playing at?
Is this how he rewards the loyalty of the most gifted player of the last decade, arguably ever?
John McEnroe enabled the USA to reach the semi-finals this year by answering Mr Gorman's plea to play singles because certain other players preferred to play at Queen's or  practise elsewhere for Wimbledon.
John, however, chose the honour of representing his country over financial gain and valuable ATP computer points, earned through tournament play.
Since the USA has no established pairing at present, John offered to partner either Sampras or even Patrick McEnroe, himself a very competent doubles player.
But to my astonishment, Mr Gorman has forgotten that loyalty, and McEnroe's response when nobody else was interested back in the summer, and chosen instead the tired partnership of Flach and Seguso.
To say they are has-beens is cruel, but their recent Grand Slam record speaks for itself.
I would like to finish by saying that Davis Cup matches always bring the best out of John McEnroe, whether in singles or doubles, and he must not be judged by his present tournament form.
In fact I'm sure that the news of his exclusion was a factor in his recent early defeat at the Diet Pepsi event in Birmingham.
Also, it will be very interesting to examine the Davis Cup record of those ‘flavour of the month’ players such as Courier, Sampras etc in about 10 years time.
I bet it will not begin to compare.
P.S. Tennis World is brilliant — keep up the good work.
Mac — omission 
RESULTS — RESULTS — RESULTS
CELLNET CLIMAX AT CENTRE COURT
A tournament which gives youngsters the chance of competitive singles play in a national context is just what tennis in this country needs — Bill Knight
The inaugural Grand Finals of the Cellnet Singles Challenge — an enterprising national tennis tournament set up to boost competitive singles play in this country — were staged at Basingstoke's sumptuous Centrecourt complex at the beginning of December, with some of the country's leading club players competing for honours.
Since the beginning of the summer, tens of thousands of club players had battled it out in club league qualifiers around the regions, in Men's Open, regional play-offs, with all concerned hoping to carry their club's name through to the prestigious finals in Hampshire.
MAIN EVENT
The climax to the main event saw Wrexham's Simon Ainley pave the way for an appearance in the final against North London's Martin Adebisi, after he pulled off a surprise victory in the event's semi-final over Sunderland's top seed Ashley Kershaw, by a 7–6 7–5 margin.
Adebisi's first national singles success in a major tournament since returning from America, where he was studying Accountancy in Washington DC, followed a 6–2 7–5 semi-final won over Staines' Andrew Mustill.
The 21-year-old tennis professional, who represents both Barnet and Welwyn LTC, relied heavily on a strong serve and volley game which particularly suited the indoor surface at Centrecourt.
The first set of the final saw both players looking to find their footing, with little being given away.
Indeed honours were shared all the way to a tie-break in which Adebisi was able to switch up a gear and take a firm hold of the situation, winning 7–2, to take the first set.
SUCCESS
The second set unfolded in much the same way, with the Herts player — who recently scored another major success when he beat the nationally-ranked Neil Dyson in a county friendly — rally from 4–5 down to hold his serve and make it all-square, before breaking Ainley's service in the following set to go 6–5 ahead.
This dramatic turnaround was subsequently converted into victory as Adebisi held his service game to take the set, the match and first ever championship title.
Prestbury's Nick Baglin looked a class ahead of the rest in the U-18 event, as he secured the title with a dramatic three-set victory over Norwich's Jim Carrara.
Baglin set up the chance of national success after the most devastating result of the weekend — a 6
0 6–0 whitewash drubbing over Poole's Graham Hobbs in the semi-finals.
The seventeen-year-old all-round sportsman, who plays his tennis at Matchpoint Bramhall tennis club Stockport, duly faced Carrara in the following day's final with a great sense of expectation.
Carrara, for his part, had secured a place in the final by virtue of a rather one-sided 6–0 6–3 victory over Frome's Chris Davis.
The first set was an evenly-based affair, but Carrara seized his chance at 4–4, when he broke Baglin to go one ahead and then duly held his own service game to establish a one-set lead.
Baglin emerged for the second set looking more determined, and quickly set about re-establishing himself in the match.
The result was plain to see as he stormed through the set to earn a morale-boosting 6–2 win and take the match to a third set.
Baglin quickly established a 3–0 lead in the deciding set, but his opponent was not yet ready to give up the fight, lifting himself to take the next two games.
Sensing the danger, Baglin then responded and mounted a final flurry to clinch the Cellnet national title 4–6 6–2 6–2
It was Nottinghamshire's Marc Powell who secured victory in the Men's U-14 event, overcoming the Wirral's nationally top five-ranked player Daniel Curtis in a final which saw both players display a great deal of spirit, skill and flair.
Powell had notched a notable scalp in the event's semi-final, when he dismissed the strongly-fancied North London player Sam Neathey in a thrilling two hour three-setter.
The 13-year-old West Bridgford LTC player managed to grapple his way from one set behind in this epic encounter, eventually wearing down a smaller-framed Neathey to take the match by two sets to one.
Curtis looked extremely sharp in his 6–0 6–1 dismissal of Broxbourne's Nick Lester to set up a final which, on paper, looked evenly balanced.
SIZE
Powell, who is rated in the top fifteen in the country in his age group, used his size advantage to great effect in both matches, but it was particularly noticeable in the first set of the final, in which he powered his way into a 6–1 opening lead.
Curtis then came back at him in the following set, to take a 4–2 lead, but the Nottingham player was swift to respond with a counter-attack, taking the next two games to square the set.
Nerves were edgy as both players dropped their service games to remain neck and neck at 5–5, but it was Powell who was able to break Curtis at the crucial moment to regain the lead.
Powell's first major national title was secured as he held his service to clinch the set 7–5 and the match 2–0.
The rewards for all the tremendous effort and excitement witnessed by the crowd — which included two international players of note in their day, former British National champion Chris Bradnam, and the LTA's Manager of Men's National Training, Bill Knight — were a silver commemorative trophy each, plus a week's tennis holiday at Roger Taylor's tennis camp in Portugal — with the exception of Adebisi.
The Men's Open champion was in the enviable position of collecting a week's luxury holiday in San Antonio, Texas at he John Newcombe Tennis Ranch.
SCREENING
However, perhaps even more significantly, certainly for the junior players, is the opportunity they have earned to go forward for a personal screening at Bradnam's unique Herts-based Dewhurst Tennis Academy, the operation which has firmly set about the task of uncovering a future British Wimbledon champion.
You know where you heard the names first!
‘A real bonus for British tennis,’ was how Bill Knight saw the Challenge.’
A tournament which gives youngsters like the U-14 winner Marc Powell and U-18 winner Nick Baglin the chance of competitive singles play in a national context is just what tennis in this country needs,’ concluded the former British Davis Cup player.
Martin Adebisi
Maureen Connolly '91
ALASTAIR McIVER REPORTS FROM CARDIFF
The British kids have a tough lot…they have some tough baggage to handle.’
Glenn William, the captain of the latest, successful, American Maureen Connolly U21 team to visit these shores, was talking about the inherited problems of British players who have been reared against a background of international failure and negative attitudes.
This was clearly evident on the first day of the event, sponsored again by ADT Auctions, where Gt Britain won only one set in her opening four matches, this despite having good opportunities in at least four of the eight sets that she eventually lost.
The implications of being 4–0 down in an 11 match contest were telling, and despite a spirited  display by Virginia Humphreys Davies in the opening contest on the second day, when she outlasted Lisa Albano to reduce the deficit, there was little anyone could do to delay the inevitable.
TALENTED
The writing would have appeared to have been on the wall from the moment Lincolnshire's Sarah Bentley (now representing Surrey), let slip a 5–1 opening set lead in the first rubber, a lead that included a missed set point.
Her opponent, the immensely talented shotmaker, Jessica Emmons, a 21 year old Maureen Connolly  debutante from Scottsdale, Arizona, needed little further encouragement.
From 1–5, she won eight straight games, and Sarah's challenge was effectively over.
‘I don't think that she expected me to run down the shot’ said Emmons, referring to her magnificent dash across the baseline to reach an all but winning forehand from Bentley which would have given her not only the first set, but also the psychological ‘first blood’.
The British player, standing close in on the net, chose to leave Emmons' shot, which dropped comfortably inside the baseline.
PAID THE COST
Defeats are brought about out of such missed opportunities and Sarah paid the cost dearly, eventually going down 7–5 6–2.
Dorset's Colette Hall also had chances in her encounter with Shannan McCarthy, 21, who is attending the University of Georgia and is currently No. 2 in the American Collegiate rankings.
Colette led 5–3 in the first set tie break but lost 4 points in a row to give the Americans their third consecutive set of the tournament.
Two breaks of serve in the second gave McCarthy her victory and the Americans were on the way.
Even Sam Smith's valiant attempts to reduce the deficit came to nothing.
Some fine and competitive rallying in which was arguably the best match of the three days, saw her come very close to Audra Keller, a 19 year old form Tennessee who was playing in her third consecutive Maureen Connolly Cup event.
Sam recovered in the third set from 1–3 to lead 5–4, but she was unable to close out the match against a tough opponent who rarely deviated from her game plan of staying back and slugging it out from the baseline.
Sam eventually lost 6–4 2–6 8–6.
‘Sam played an admirable match’, commented British team captain Ann Jones.
‘The matched each other until 4–4 in the third and then her returns got a bit shorter and Audra was able to take advantage.’
The British pairing of Colette Hall and local girl Sarah Loosemore was unable to win a set in the doubles against Lisa Albano and Emmons, despite leading 5–4 and serving in the second.
They missed two set points on Hall's service, the Americans levelled at 5–5, reached — and then won — the tie break with some easy.
Great Britain were –0 down.
It was a position from which they were never to recover.
The second day's play followed much the same pattern of the first, the difference being Humphreys Davies' three set victory over Lisa Albano.
Such a victory was always on the cards, for Miss Albano stood only 10 places above her British counterpart in the world rankings, at 456.
Yet Humphreys Davies played with spirit in recovering from set and 2–1 down to win 3–6 6–2 6–3.
Amy Frazier, the American's highest ranked player with a world ranking of 28 hit too hard, too accurately and too consistently for Sarah Loosemore, who was never allowed to get into her stride.
The home girl won just 6 games.
Sarah was followed onto court by Hall, who only managed three games against Emmons, a result which ensured that the United States won the Cup for the 16th time in 19 contests.
In the light of the one sided nature of the contest, Glenn William was quick to highlight some of the difficulties that he felt hindered the development of British tennis players, in relation to the situation in his country.
First he tackled facilities.
‘My club alone has 16 indoor courts and 16 outdoor courts.
There are 8 full time coaches at the club.
How can you have a country like Wales with a climate like this and develop tennis players?’
It's a valid question which the ITI will take years to answer.
And yet it was when he went on to talk of systems that one felt that he was offering something innovative and new to modern day tennis thinking.
‘In my State of Michigan, we have adopted a programme where we try to identify athletes rather than tennis players.
We go to the track meets, the basketball matches and we select kids and we give those kids scholarships based on athletic merit.
We might select three and they would be a peer group for each other.
We don't encourage them to give up their other sports, we just want them to have the same chance in tennis.’
as if to endorse his programme, he confirmed that ‘…
Meredith McGrath (who was ranked as high as 28 back in  November 1990) was found on a basketball court rather than a tennis court.’
William took his argument one step further by saying, ‘I believe that cross court training is terrific for the child's  development .
The trend in the States now is for the child to play less tennis.
They are more into weights, running…they spend more time on general fitness.’
William felt that such radical ideas,(despite their proven success — Amy Frazier is one of his former pupils), would find little favour either here or nationally in his country.
‘The problem for people at the USTA and the LTA is that they are too far removed from what is going on in tennis to know what is really required,’ he says.
People at the USTA and LTA are too far removed to know what is really required — Glenn William
Sarah Bentley
Jessica Emmons
GB captain Ann Jones with Sarah Bentley
WORLD RANKINGS