

CRUSOE'S ISLAND
The image of the island is to be found and cherished, above all, in the stories it has told about itself, and perhaps believed of itself, for nearly half a century since it emerged into the troubled and hungry peace of 1945.
It is an image, by and large, that coheres and satisfies.
Crusoe's fabled isle contained all he needed to sustain life — given, that is, that he had rescued so much of use from the wreck, not forgetting a Bible; and Defoe's most compelling point was that the island is a self-sufficient place to anyone who can bring courage to the task of living in it, along with an inherited faith and a few tools.
Britain since 1945 has proved much like that, though not altogether like that.
It brought ashore from the near-disaster of Hitler's war the survivals of a long literary past, including the longest of all theatrical traditions in human history, and found some surprisingly untraditional uses for them, as Crusoe once did for his tool-kit: most notably the fictional realism that Defoe's novel about a marooned sailor, in 1719, once made the inspiration of all Europe.
It has lived, among other things, a life of intricate self-contemplation, rather like Crusoe keeping calendar of the days and weeks and faithfully observing in solitude the ancient usages of his tribe.
As one of its authors and artists, a London Welshman, once remarked, Britain is ‘necessarily insular’, as if its bordering of ocean were somehow intrinsic to it and essential to its whole being.
It has watched its own health, too, both physical and spiritual, with an attentive and critical self-reverence.
It has regarded itself  solemnly, satirically, whimsically, respectfully.
And an age of empire past, it has waited for the world to come to it.
No vain hope, as it happens, for (as to Crusoe) the world came.
It is doubtful if, even in the nineteenth century, the power of the British literary mind over the earth has ever been greater than in the late twentieth century.
Its language, after 1945, suddenly became the lingua franca of the world — the first mankind has ever known — and more than half of the world's mail, it is said, is now in English.
Its theatre, since the mid 1950s, has been widely acknowledged the world's wonder.
Its fiction is vast, and vastly translated.
Its journalism and its polemical tradition, whether in politics or in the arts, is unignorable, its broadcasting the world's delight.
Only its poetry, composed in a minor key, is (for better or worse) widely disregarded.
In a post-imperial age it has shown a vitality more than sufficient to live to itself.
That self-sufficiency is literary; and literature, it seems clear, easily outpaces most other national endeavours.
In no other respect is Britain effectively insular.
Its economy, as a world trader, is sensitive to every trade wind that blows.
Its defence has been largely the concern of other powers since the fall of Singapore in 1942; and the British independent nuclear deterrent is no more than a phrase, since it is not independent and, as the Falklands crisis of 1982 showed, it does not deter.
Its policies, domestic and foreign — not least its tardy entry into the European Community in January 1973 — have been largely a belated reaction to the original achievements of others.
Its political system is antiquated, compared with its neighbours, and it enjoys in free Europe the melancholy distinction of boasting no government since the war to represent the majority will.
Its public welfare, heralded as a prospect unique on earth when Parliament accepted the Beveridge report in 1943, was in relative decline as early as the 1950s before its continental rivals; its industrial growth so slow that by the 1970s it was the poorest member of the Community, as it then was, excepting only Ireland and Italy.
Its literary pre-eminence, then, is extraordinary: not just in its sudden and easy victory over such historical rivals as France and the United States but in itself.
Britain annually publishes three times as many titles, relative to population, as the United States; and most books published in Britain sell abroad, if calculated as to copies.
European cities receive its acting companies as theatrical revelations, never questioning that London is the theatre-capital of the world.
It was not always so, even in recollection.
And all that is utterly unlike the slow decline of many of its services and manufactures, and utterly unlike the endless, indecisive bickering of politicians elected on minority votes and representing, all too often, the declining powers of sectional interests in unions and industry.
The sufficiency of British literature is almost as remarkable if contrasted with the other arts.
London is the great city of art auctions, with New York; but it has never in this century rivalled Paris or New York as a place for painters and sculptors to live in.
Since Edward Elgar's first symphony in 1908, British music has enjoyed its greatest age; but in international reputation it has made Britain little more than one musical nation among many.
The British film, intermittently lively as a creative form, has seldom contrived to free itself, for long, of a humiliating dependence on foreign capital.
Broadcasting is pre-eminent, at least in the ever-creative medium of radio; but television borrows from abroad as much as it creates at home.
The Crusoe syndrome is largely confined to the printed book, then, and in part to theatre.
In most other matters, since 1945, Britain has been effectively a dependent state, whether in peace or  in war, and the dominance of British fiction across the world is unmatched by almost everything else, though some might hopefully seek exceptions in education, broadcasting and financial services like marine insurance.
The Crusoe syndrome, as I have dared to call it, is nowhere absolute, and British literature since 1945 has succumbed to occasional, and occasionally catastrophic, influences from outside itself.
In 1955 London theatre saw Samuel Beckett's Waiting for Godot , a play composed first in French and later in English by a detribalised Irishman living in Paris, and theatrical minimalism was suddenly the rage.
On 1 January of that year Kenneth Tynan, then its most eminent drama critic, saw Bertolt Brecht's Mutter Courage in Paris, and portentously told his wife ‘I am a Marxist’— initiating a period of left-wing licence-to-bore almost as deadly as James Bond's licence-to-kill.
The 1970s saw a brief vogue of denying the referentiality of language, when the jargon of la nouvelle critique was earnestly borrowed from Paris by advanced spirits, and novels for a time were called texts and denied social significance.
There have been attacks from within, too, on the allegedly crippling tradition of British gentility in poetry and fiction, demands for a more Hegelian style in Anglo-Saxon philosophy, for French critical strategies, and for American fictional tolerance of the unmentionable.
No forgotten outcast on a remote island ever had to put up with anything like this.
The historian of the new Elizabethan age that began with the death of George VI in February 1952 would dutifully record the passing enthusiasms of the age along with its artistic victories.
Britain is an island, but it is not culturally isolated.
To be an island is to be exposed to the world, after all, not protected from it, and there is no keeping of foreign fashions out of London.
I hope to have done justice to some of these  shock-waves of taste, and without undue reverence.
A sudden dedication to a foreign influence like Hegel or Derrida, brief but intense, is about the only thing there is that can cause the British to lose a sense of humour or a sense of proportion, and during the first London production of Waiting for Godot in 1955 I was reproached by strangers seated around me for laughing, though I still think it a funny play.
The British seeker lost in the German metaphysical jungle, the homecomer from Paris dinner-parties armed with the latest idea, or what he hopes may pass for that, are abiding images for fun-making; and cultural insularity is a vice to be levelled against the British only by those who do not know them, though those who do sometimes have cause to wish it were true.
Decades have their spirits, their haunting obsessions, their characteristic aspirations; and though this book is governed not by chronology but by groups, by issues and by congeries of like minds, it is still possessed, always and inevitably, by a sense of evolving time.
The years pass in parade like pageants in a dream.
The 1940s were a decade split by the great peace that ended the last European war in May 1945, but it has its own domestic character — a character soon to be forgotten by succeeding decades, though in The Girls of Slender Means (1963) Muriel Spark aptly called it a time when ‘all the nice people were poor’.
It was idealistic and austere; its classic authors were George Orwell, who died in January 1950, and his friend Arthur Koestler; its spirit was resolutely decent and fiercely anti-totalitarian, its chosen mode a polemical prose that lost nothing of its edge by being cast, at times, into argumentative fictions like Animal Farm (1945), though its true forte was the  article; and its best poet, Dylan Thomas, was manifestly a survivor from an earlier age.
The 1950s saw the birth of the New Novel, more or less in the coronation year of 1953, with the first published fictions of Kingsley Amis, Iris Murdoch and William Golding: polemical still, but intent now on reviving a tradition of realism that had flourished first in eighteenth-century England, with Defoe and Fielding, and had faded somewhat in critical reputation in the inter-war years; and a revived realism spread rapidly into theatre, with John Osborne's Look Back in Anger (1956) and the first dramatic experiments of Harold Pinter.
Next came the 1960s, perhaps the least Crusoe-like of the post-war decades, when a garnishing of foreign influences, like the fictional devices that decorate John Fowles's The French Lieutenant's Woman (1969), was sometimes felt to be a fashionable obligation, though it may be significant that Fowles's novel remains deeply rooted in a realistic tradition.
The 1970s saw a return to a nationally more confident mood, with Amis fully established as a novelist and Philip Larkin as a poet, both of them roundly disdainful of foreign fads, and with the new drama of Tom Stoppard openly contemptuous of an intelligentsia once content to borrow its values from sources as alien and unassimilable as Lenin and James Joyce.
And the 1980s have seen a determined rejection of imported fashions, the British novelist or dramatist speaking to his people in the confident expectation that the world at large, too, will insist on taking notice and asking for more.
All that represents an impressive reversal.
The preceding age of English literature, after all, between the two world wars, had been notably un-British: its finest poets an American called T. S. Eliot and an Irishman called W. B. Yeats, its greatest novelists — Bloomsbury apart — James Joyce and a handful of Americans who, for the most part, had preferred to stay at home.
By the  1930s the United States was coming to look like the rising star of the literary tradition, whether in poetry, drama, fiction or critical debate.
Between the wars, in a word, English literature briefly ceased to be British, and there were those who imagined the change might easily be irreversible.
Why, after all, should one small island in the North Atlantic continue forever to dominate a language it had once created, given that well over three-quarters of its native speakers now lived outside it?
The doubt could be whispered in the 1930s, shouted in the 1940s and tacitly accepted as an established truth in the 1950s.
Art follows wealth, it was said, as it did in the city-states of the Italian Renaissance; and it may continue to do so, even if the new patron happens now to be democratic and many-headed.
Plutocracy inevitably governs the arts, it was suggested, as surely as it governs the terms of the trade.
And to be rich, in the post-war world, could only mean dollar-rich.
That view has been little heard since the 1960s, when London reasserted a traditional suzerainty over theatre and literary publishing, and that so silently, and so naturally, that the reversion passed almost unnoticed.
In that age English literature, like a prodigal, came home.
This book, which might as easily have been entitled The Triumph of Realism, might equally have been subtitled The Return of the Native.
Amis, Pinter and Osborne are London-born.
J. R. R. Tolkien was born in South Africa, to be sure, Iris Murdoch in Dublin and Tom Stoppard in Czechoslovakia, but they settled into their lifelong home in childhood, and no one doubts they are British authors.
By the late 1980s British publishing was issuing over 50 000 titles a year, more than 40 000 of them new titles, or well over a hundred (on average) for every working day.
That is a lot of books.
London, as it watched the decline of New York and Paris as theatrical capitals, maintained over fifty  theatres, subsidised and commercial — of which most, on any week-day evening, were usually given over to legitimate theatre.
British fiction, whether in original or in translation, often dominates sales across the world, and in a manner that might sometimes remind one, a little distantly, of the vast international triumphs of Walter Scott and Charles Dickens in their heyday.
Economic growth since 1945 might be slow, and often was, manufactures sluggish and the national balance of payments too often in deficit; but in literature, by the 1960s, Britain was back.
The whole world, by then, including the socialist world, wanted English.
Students of literature, traditionally resentful as they often are to be told they might be engaged in anything severely useful, found they could sell their talents abroad as teachers, and had to tolerate the uncomfortably realistic view that the nation might recover through the teaching of English some small part of the wealth it had lost on technical adventures like building and running Concorde.
In literature, if in little else, Britain was again a world power.
That return was uninfluenced by expatriates such as T. S. Eliot or Ezra Pound but profoundly influenced by the British past.
If the native genius in literature is for comic realism, as I suspect, then the old-style Modernism of Eliot and Pound had little to say to it, or indeed to any attempt — serious or comic — to analyse a real world or to describe it.
Modernism had been largely solemn.
It was also hostile to realism and to any continuous attempt, by whatever means, to depict the real.
That distinction marks out British popular literature and sub-literature as well as poems, plays and fiction.
Ian Fleming's James Bond novels, from Casino Royale (1953) onwards, characteristically enough, are largely a comic creation; and though no one would dare call the Bond thrillers realistic, their strength was always at least as  much in terms of observed social manners — dress, food, drink and forms of address — as in their innocently violent fantasies about sex and power in the age of the Cold War.
The new comic tone was radical rather than left-wing, what is more, which may have been salutary to critics who glibly confuse social reform with socialism.
Amis's admiring study of Fleming,The James Bond Dossier (1965), acknowledged much of all that with a characteristic bluntness, and in ‘a spiteful tangent’ or side-swipe against Eliot and Modernism he remarked that ‘a few mentions of (say) Nestlé's condensed milk, Woodbines, Spinks's plum-and-apple jam and Scotch-and-Apollinaris would have done The Waste Land a world of good’, the lack of a socio-temporal context having left Eliot's poem ‘just one more of the featureless, flavourless lumps of cultural lumber it purports to be superior to’.
This was a moment not for fairness but for plain speaking.
Modernism, by then, had been around for a long time, and much of it looked ready to be stacked away into the attic.
If Eliot had only managed to be funnier, some had come to feel, he would also have been more accurate.
Life, after all, is funny.
Soap, whether radio or TV, suggests a similar national contrast.
Mrs Dale's Diary , which ran for twenty-one years on BBC radio from 1948, was always gently laced with humour; its rural rival,The Archers , which began two years later, is a broadly similar amalgam of the playful and the sentimental; and between them, in a sub-literary sort of way, they illustrate the power of a revived realism in post-war Britain: quite different from the grand-opera histrionics of American TV soaps like Dallas or Dynasty , which are scarcely funny at all, at least in intention, and wildly unrealistic as images of how the rich in the United States really live.
British radio works far closer to the texture of ordinary life than that, engaging as it does a deeper sympathy for a shared  world of ordinary experience and a total lack of awe.
It is accurate, in aspiration, and The Archers takes serious trouble to get things right over the sowing and harvesting of crops.
It mixes humour and sentiment in a characteristically insular way.
When Grace Archer died on BBC radio in 1955, some twenty million people, it is said — perhaps half the adult nation — tuned in to hear, though by the 1980s television had reduced the audience for radio soap to a mere three million.
The comic, the melodramatic and the sentimental easily mix anywhere; but on the eastern seaboard of the Atlantic it is comedy, always comedy, that ultimately prevails.
In 1954, for example, Galton and Simpson created Hancock's Half Hour on radio: satirical playlets about the pale squalor of outer-suburban life that launched a series of tiny exercises in comic realism to replace the music-hall turns that had once dominated the BBC Light Programme: an earthy, irreverent spirit of realistic comedy translated into visual terms in 1960, when Granada TV started Coronation Street as a comic reflection, for mass audiences, of back-street life in the urban North.
All that is a stirring of a native spirit, ultimately uninnovative and well within the constraints of the public will.
‘We reflect society,’ a director of soap once remarked.
‘We must not try to lead it.’
To reflect society can only mean comedy, in such a world, if a work is to convince as any sort of mirror, and the preference of other nations for melodrama and the bleeding heart has nothing to do with the habitual temper of British life.
The grumbles of J. Alfred Prufrock in early Eliot are endurable if they are meant to be ridiculous, but only then; and sitting around on Margate sands, or anywhere else, trying to connect nothing with nothing may be all right for Harvard men abroad, but (as Eliot must already  have discovered when he wrote The Waste Land ) it has nothing to do with the daily life of the Londoner.
Or with living anywhere.
In a review of John Betjeman's verse-autobiography Summoned by Bells (1960), Philip Larkin remarked approvingly that Betjeman, in his triumphant lucidity, had managed to bypass the whole light industry of exegesis; that Eliot's famous demand about the need of poets, in the present state of civilisation, to be difficult could only be an ingenious bit of intellectual job-creation, a Modernistic charter to make work for unemployed critics; and that the tradition of Kipling and A. E. Housman stood ready to hand for instant revival, ever eager to prove that poetry can still enjoy a reading public if only the poet is prepared to be simple, moving and memorable.
He was altogether right.
Eliot's demand for difficulty, in retrospect, by now looks perverse as well as obscure.
It is precisely in confused situations, after all, as travellers on the London Underground know, that people need clear maps, and the complexities of modern civilisation call not for literary difficulty but for literary clarity.
Eliot's argument, never entirely convincing in its own age, had by the 1940s ceased to convince altogether.
In 1940 Winston Churchill, as Prime Minister, told a crowded House of Commons stunned by the fall of France: ‘My policy is victory’.
By 1945 that policy had worked, and anyone who still wanted to get lost in mazes like Pound's Cantos was to be left to pursue his passion like a solitary vice.
By 1945 the real world was simply too urgent for prevarication.
A hungry nation that rationed its scanty food-supplies till 1952 needed to be fed, its industries built or rebuilt, a health service kept open to all.
The new Britain may have looked like a waste land by 1945, or at least a bomb site, especially in its inner cities.
But it  was surely natural for it to feel a flutter of impatience with a fading tradition of Edwardian Modernism that had once invited the educated reader to find metaphysical foundations to his faith before he could believe life meant anything or was worth living.
The tasks of survival suddenly looked too urgent, and too grave, for the intellectual indulgences of Modernist metaphysics.
The new fiction of the age revived two contrasting types of English hero.
The first hero was gauche.
He was an effortless survival of the 1930s, where fiction had abounded in well-meaning young men who had striven to Do the Right Thing and come to grief, at least till the last page of the story.
P. G. Wodehouse's Bertie Wooster had been like that, in the Jeeves stories; so was Tony Last in Evelyn Waugh's A Handful of Dust (1934), a model country gentleman who loses child, wife, estate and ultimately England itself, marooned as surely as Crusoe in an inland jungle where he is forced to read Dickens's novels to an illiterate half-caste.
Like Brideshead Revisited (1945), the novel is a fiercely funny tragedy: a paradox anticipated by Little Dorrit , however, which Waugh's luckless hero is left endlessly reading aloud to his captor, and a paradox utterly characteristic of a nation much given to finding laughter in despair.
The hero of Waugh's Sword of Honour trilogy (1952–61), again, is virtuously gauche; so is Kingsley Amis's Lucky Jim in 1954, a comic hero usually as polite in aspiration as he is socially incompetent in practice; and so, it must be imagined, was the young Betjeman who, as he revealed in ‘A Subaltern's Love-song in New Bats in Old Belfries (1945), adored girls too strong for their fainting admirers, whether at love or tennis:
With carefullest carelessness, gaily you won,
I am weak from your loveliness, Joan Hunter Dunn.
The radio sketches that Galton and Simpson created for Tony Hancock in the mid-1950s are a back-street version of the same rueful joke: the hero, discomforted by every encounter, gets it wrong when he is trying hardest to get it right.
The point is in no way irreverent or anarchistic.
In fact it is only because he is trying so hard to get it right that he can be said to get it wrong at all, and the gauche hero is above all the example of social over-anxiety, like Betjeman's subaltern weak for love on a Hampshire tennis-court: his palms moist at the first handshake, one imagines, his over-careful manners a veneer masking racking uncertainties, and an over-developed sense of social duty enforcing its own inner punishment.
In life you cannot win, such works suggest, though you can find fun, even faith, in losing.
The luckless hero of Waugh's Brideshead ends tragically without wife, mistress or home; but he has followed Waugh himself to Rome and its consoling faith, and at mass an altar-flame burns for him in his soul ‘farther in heart than Acre or Jerusalem’.
That was one man's choice.
But it started no religious fashions in post-war British fiction, which is rootedly secular, its heroes as unbelieving of a world beyond the grave as they are insecure in the only world they know.
The second hero, by contrast, is self-sufficient.
That looks incompatible with gaucherie, and perhaps is, but it represents no more than the incompatibilities that individuals daily enact in their own lives.
British fiction since 1945, whether novels or plays, abounds in heroes who are benignly self-contained, and ashamed (if at all) only of their own lack of any need for love.
They are emotionally strong: but can it be right, they wonder, to be so strong?
‘There isn't much loving in any of your  kindnesses, Jane,’ the middle-aged hero of John Osborne's Inadmissible Evidence (1965) complains to his daughter in a long, unanswered diatribe against the younger generation — a new race of adolescents capable, for the first time, of subduing the earth around them and thinking nothing of it: ‘not much kindness, not even cruelty, really, in any of you.’
The spectacle of such self-sufficiency is vividly disturbing, especially in the young.
The hero of Simon Gray's comedy Otherwise Engaged (1975), in similar fashion, only wants to be left alone to play his new recording of Wagner's Parsifal , but he is successively interrupted by neighbour, brother and wife, who succeed in disturbing him and fail only to interest him.
Even the fact that his wife has a lover, is pregnant, and is uncertain who the father is, fails to hold his attention: he would rather listen to Wagner.
Denis Cannan's Dear Daddy (1976), again, another successful stage comedy, tells of a virtuous middle-aged family man whose life is triumphantly self-organised down to its last petty details — exactly one-third of a bottle of wine at dinner every evening — until the comfortable domestic order he has created in his second marriage turns into an object of irrational despair to those around him; and when his first wife, ruined by alcohol, abruptly re-enters his world, he is forced to accept a share of deferred responsibility for the wreckage of her life.
Iris Murdoch's novel A Fairly Honourable Defeat (1970) poses the far more terrible hypothesis of a being utterly without compassion who takes delight in wrecking the lives of others: his self-sufficient malignity seemingly motiveless until the last pages of the book, when a tattooed number is noticed on his arm, and a casual remark —‘I spent the war in Belsen’— forces the reader to think back through his destructive conduct as ‘an instrument of justice’ in destroying a happy marriage and endangering a harmonious relationship between  two men.
The novel argues in cold, unremitting fidelity to its own thesis that in life the evil may in the end go unpunished and live happily ever after; that the truly self-sufficient being, if he anywhere existed, would be ultimately inviolable, fearing neither reproach nor self-reproach; and that those who are strong enough to live without sympathy are forever beyond the reach of compassion or revenge.
‘The food would probably be excellent,’ the novel ends, as Julian the camp-survivor muses happily to himself in a sunlit Paris where he has settled, staring into a favourite restaurant in the Latin Quarter: ‘He began to examine the menu.
The sun was warm upon his back.
Life was good.’
A later Murdoch novel,The Sea, the Sea (1978), explores in the same unblinking fashion an aspect of human selfhood from another angle: its ageing hero, living cheerfully for himself and cooking dishes that hardly anyone else would want to eat, suddenly rediscovers a lost love, is deranged enough to kidnap her, fails to regain her love in captivity and is forced to accept, by the end, that his old self-sufficient life is all there is or can ever be.
An earlier hero, in The Black Prince (1973), is a failed writer who creatively fulfils himself only in the enforced loneliness of a prison cell when he is convicted for a murder he has not committed.
Solitude is always some sort of choice.
But to be alone is not, in the end, to be lonely, and there are those who discover that in the end they need no one but themselves, and that solitude is more than enough.
That acceptance is perhaps more grim than smug, but as a comment on a modern post-industrial state it is, after all, quietly and sensibly realistic.
Such heroes do not live like Robinson Crusoe, who survived on his island without tinned or frozen foods, refrigerator, air-conditioning or central heating.
Britain after 1945 is full of people who live alone because they like it, or  at least because they like it better than any of the available alternatives.
They are the first tribe in human history of wilful solitaries since the dissolution of the monasteries, but their motives are in no way God-directed.
Given supermarkets and modern kitchen equipment, oneness can easily be physically comfortable.
Psychologically so, too, given books, radio and television; and with the right temperament, it can even be emotionally serene.
The temptation to stay alone at home and hear a favourite programme rather than go to a party is after all vividly real.
Philip Larkin, a life-long bachelor, memorialised that dilemma in ‘Vers de société’(1971), a short poem where the conclusion, though finely balanced, is only marginally in favour of going out for the evening.
‘All solitude is selfish’, the poet recalls having been told; and no one now
Believes the hermit with his gown and dish
Talking to God (who's gone too); the big wish
Is to have people nice to you,
and the motto nowadays, he reminds himself, is ‘Virtue is social’.
But the ultimate truth, as the poem starkly concludes, is that one goes out to counter the overbalancing fear of being alone:
…sitting by a lamp more often brings
Not peace, but other things,
and the ageing solitary reluctantly lifts his pen to write an acceptance-note.
Even love, as he had explained five years before in a poem briskly called ‘Love’(1966), calls for a lot of cheek: ‘…the blind persistence/To upset an existence/Just for your own sake.’
Plainly a lot to ask of anyone — far more than a momentary invasion of privacy, which can be bad enough — and it is an  argumentative point that paradoxically makes self-sufficiency sound humble rather than arrogant.
A humble self-sufficiency — hard-earned, often enough, like Larkin's, and subject to sudden, spasmodic panics of loneliness or a fear of being thought insensitive — are the hallmark of many a post-war British hero, and no talk of anti-heroes can entirely rob it of its modicum of cautious praise.
All heroes are in some measure anti-heroes, after all, if the term means that they are opposed to some antiquated sense of heroism that their creators are eager to question or discredit.
‘The humble man,’ as Iris Murdoch winningly remarked in The Sovereignty of Good (1970), ‘because he sees himself as nothing, can see other things as they are’, which sounds like a snug, confident view of humility, far removed from the self-lacerating anxieties about identity and self-image that mark out much of American fiction, or the radical scepticisms of Sartre and his disciples in post-war Paris.
Those who, like Iris Murdoch, speak of a ‘selfless attention’ to others as a supreme mark of virtue — hard to achieve and harder still, as a duty, to discount — surely imply something like a deep security of inner being.
And even after due allowance has been made for the undeniable fact, easily forgotten as it is, that literature is written by writers, and that writers are likely to be highly exceptional beings who actively prefer working alone, there is still something persuasively representative about the man in the play who would rather listen to a new recording of a favourite opera than to the problems of his neighbours and relatives.
Other people may not be hell, as Sartre said, but they can undeniably be a nuisance.
Hamlet the black prince knew that.
There is nothing much to be proud of, to be sure, in all this; and the self-sufficient hero, who knows it, is nothing of a boaster.
One is fun, so they say.
But to be  all too sure of oneself — of who one is, of what one wants — might easily mean riding for a fall, and heroes in that style are prudently disinclined to flaunt their state of mind or to recommend it to others.
The best hope is candidly to explain what one is, like Julian the camp-survivor and destroyer in A Fairly Honourable Defeat , and let others think what they may.
But then the camp-survivor, by definition, is an extreme instance and a limiting case.
More representatively there can be a sneaking hope that to explain is somehow to justify; and the novels, plays and poems that depict British self-sufficiency and its lapses often smack, like Larkin's poem ‘Vers de société’, of a sort of rueful mock-modesty: a determination to put a case for oneself as well as to record a mood.
To prefer solitude with a book or a record-player is after all to have a case to answer —‘It's wrong to be by yourself’— though not, as some would say, an unanswerable case.
Most books and music, one might reasonably reply, are better than most talk, and wives and lovers do fuss so.
All this, in the end, is more than a question of style: it is a question of judgement and of taste, and ultimately of morality.
There is an emerging argument here, if not for chastity, then at least for a prudent continence and a cool response to such favours, sexual or other, as the world may choose to offer.
That insistence on selfhood is characteristically national.
In American fiction solitude, if in any way chosen, is commonly the sign of an unhinged mind like Saul Bellow's Herzog; and if not chosen, a matter of earnest compassion.
‘It's wrong to be by yourself’ is an American song, after all, and it is not on the whole a British sentiment.
American poets can be so thunderstruck by the sheer oddity of being a poet in America at all that they often deny to the poet, in advance, any claim to represent a people or even a social class; and  classic New York drama in this century, as in the plays of Eugene O'Neill and Arthur Miller, has concentrated painfully and insistently on the pre-eminence of family ties and the ineluctable need of everyone in that world to be loved, as they continuously imply, by their closest relatives.
The great Latin literatures are implicitly social even when not explicitly that, and they seldom give credence to the view that a sane being in emotional health might reasonably prefer to be left to himself.
The self-sufficient British hero, then, is nationally distinct.
He simply does not need to be loved, apparently, whether by his relatives or anyone else; he does not even, at all reliably, want it.
The narrator-hero of Kingsley Amis's The Green Man (1969), in most respects an ordinary chap, has to be persuaded by his wife even to drop in for family meals.
There is something impressively strong about all this, even if some would say that, like Diogenes telling Alexander to get out of his light, it looks a little like the strength of those who are content to be emotionally starved.
Either way, a cheerful and faintly self-questioning sufficiency stands as the hallmark of the modern British literary mind, and it is without obvious sources at home or abroad.
Victorian literature, after all, seldom if ever deals with the matter, and Wordsworth's bliss of solitude was an ideal aspiration of the poet, not a state he often claimed to have achieved.
It is a mood resembling nothing, perhaps, in literature, on a long view, unless of Aristophanic comedy; but that must be coincidence.
In the comedies of Aristophanes a hero is bothered and bludgeoned by a succession of intruders and enemies, much like the heroes of Otherwise Engaged ,Dear Daddy or The Sea, the Sea .
For those who love labels, then, modern British literature in that aspect might conveniently be called Aristophanic — provided, that is, it is well understood that its novelists and playwrights  cannot be assumed to have taken any attentive interest in ancient Greek comedy, and that coincidence is all it is.
Coincidental or not, the Attic resemblance goes a little further.
Popular Athenian sentiment in ancient times showed little sympathy for aliens, deviants or whingers, and it could be rough on women as a species; and there is a strong male smell of British-is-best among writers newly emerged after 1945.
All that is reactive.
Modernists of the 1910s had been Latin-lovers, and often enough (like Pound and Eliot) immigrants; Bloomsbury was ardently francophile; and in the 1930s W. H. Auden and his school, if only to show they were not Modernist and not Bloomsbury, had haunted Hamburg and Berlin and admired German communism.
1940 had put paid to all that when, to echo a slogan, Britain and her Commonwealth stood alone, and the post-war cultural world was in little doubt that British was best.
Some of the results of that mood were odd.
With a fine disregard for what was happening across the Channel, the Attlee government convinced itself and others that the British welfare state was unique in the world — to be deeply startled in the 1950s by the news that many continental neighbours had a more generous provision of social welfare than the United Kingdom.
The empire, at least in Africa, was thought likely to outlast the century, not least by socialist ministers; and it was imagined that the Marshall Plan, paid off by the end of 1950, might represent only a brief and passing reliance on the economy of the United States.
NATO, when it was established in 1949, could be represented as the revival of a war-time coalition rather than a realistic acceptance that Britain could no longer defend herself.
And the European Community — even the Treaty of Rome which had created a European Economic Community without British participation in 1957 — could be dismissed by  Tories and Socialists alike, in its early years, as a dream and an illusion.
The underrating of Europe, the overrating of home, were two sides of the same coin.
Kingsley Amis's third novel is symbolically called I Like It Here (1958).
In his first,Lucky Jim , there had been an offensive character called Bertrand, a painter and a pacifist who preferred his name to be pronounced in the French manner: clearly a late derivative of Bloomsbury and a poseur of the worst water; and even if he were not a rival-in-love of the hero, that (one feels) would be all that needed to be said about him.
John Wain's The Contenders (1958) ends with the most resonant and decorous of all English four-letter words, ‘home’, and the emphasis on a familiar term is the concluding point of the novel: ‘In English I said ‘Home’.’
Philip Larkin, when asked by an interviewer if he ever read foreign poetry, archly replied ‘Foreign poetry?’; and there is a celebrated photo of the poet seated at the Scottish border, where the boundary-stone reads simply ‘England’.
Cities and regions can be even more confining.
John Braine's first novel,Room at the Top (1957), was set in his native Yorkshire, and it contrived to make even London sound cosmopolitan and far away.
And though Iris Murdoch occasionally sets a novel in Ireland — if that is the probable setting of The Unicorn (1963)— she commonly writes as someone who is a Londoner and proud of it.
A Word Child (1975), indeed, is so specific in its references to places, and especially to places on the London Underground, that the narrator remarks he was once tempted to call his story the Inner Circle; and Martin Amis's London Fields (1989) is almost as detailed about Notting Hill as if it were a guide-book.
All this is a fresh literary image of home.
Britain by the 1950s was no longer a waste land awaiting a sign or a  messiah, as in Eliot, or a fading tapestry of social detail to recall earlier days as in Virginia Woolf.
It may be scruffy, but it is where one belongs, and the only place one ever will belong: a world of pub-going rather than café-haunting, usually more self-examining than woundingly self-critical, and pleased (even grateful) to be alive, in a cautious sort of way.
It is undefeated, after all — alone, apart from Russia, among the combatant nations of Europe — though it has heard the wings of defeat, and narrowly escaped its claws.
It is tea and scones — and where else can you get a good cup of tea or a decent scone, or real beer, as the hero of one of C. S. Lewis's space-fictions reflects as he returns to earth and finds himself — miraculously and blissfully — in England and in a country village.
Of course his first move is to go to a pub.
The principle of British-is-best was not without its challengers.
If Britain means tea, scones and mild unchilled beer, it also means moderate views, courtesy to strangers who ask the way in the street, and above all an avoidance of violence even as an idea.
It was possible to dissent from all that, especially after a visit to New York.
‘The concept of gentility’, one young post-war critic complained,
still reigns supreme.
And gentility is a belief that life is always more or less orderly, people always more or less polite, their emotions and habits more or less decent and more or less controllable; that God, in short, is more or less good,
and he quotes, as an instance, Larkin's famous early poem ‘Church Going’(1954), where an unbeliever, once  he is certain that ‘there's nothing going on’, enters a country church:
Hatless, I take off
My cycle-clips in awkward reverence.
The trouble with the British, the critic went on, and above all with British writers, is that they have no experience of invasion or concentration camps, and think politeness will always get you through.
The argument is perhaps more tactical than serious, and it is a notable irony that the article was collected in 1968, in the very year when gentility, even in Britain, suffered a temporary eclipse.
Talk about ‘forging a new language’ to describe new experiences forgets that an old language can sometimes express novelty better than any other; and the case fails to notice, too, that life depends on contrasts: that you cannot have informality without formality, bluntness without courtesy, indecorum without decorum.
But tactical or not, the argument remains striking as a passing diagnosis, if unpersuasive as a programme.
British literature is indeed polite.
It is also, paradoxically, hard-hitting.
On the opening page of Amis's first novel, Jim mentally decides on his own word when his professor uses another, deferentially pretending as an untenured lecturer to look amused at a weak professorial joke, and he promises himself to make another sort of face to himself when next alone.
All this is a study in decorum, indeed — a decorum only narrowly maintained — but not in submission; and the demands of gentility do not inhibit the novelist when he writes.
They add spice to the mixture.
As for the artistic effects of invasion and concentration camps, that can only prompt the awkward question whether the ensuing creativity of occupied Europe ever justified the price that was enforced and paid.
British literature since 1945 has not proved a coterie literature, on the whole, though it has occasionally grouped itself, at least notionally, into informal sets.
That, too, may have been reactive to Modernism and Bloomsbury, which were certainly coteries, though in a land traditionally sceptical of manifestoes and cynical about self-advertisement it may as easily have been the reassertion of an ancient mistrust.
The Modernists had enjoyed a brief life as a London group after Pound settled there for a dozen years in 1908; Bloomsbury was already one, first in Cambridge and later in London and Sussex, sharing not just a range of assumptions and convictions but an intimate web of social and amorous relations.
In the 1930s Auden & Co. had been another; with Auden himself, as early as his undergraduate days at Oxford in the late 1920s, confidently apportioning literary roles to Isherwood, Spender and himself.
All this looks continental, above all French, and the post-war world was to prove less tidy and less lucid.
Dylan Thomas was a cult-poet, indeed; but in Britain, at least, his poetic followers achieved little, and even before his death in New York in 1953 his influence was greater in America than at home.
Koestler and Orwell met and became friends during the war, but it takes more than two to make a coterie, and in conversation Koestler denied having taught Orwell anything important about communism: it was a meeting, not always entirely harmonious, of like minds.
As for the Movement, or the Angry Young Men of the 1950s, the intellectual and popular press were not wrong to believe that a new race of novelists (and others) had appeared in the first months of the new reign, soon after the death of George VI; but the name Movement coined by a Spectator journalist in 1954 never seemed likely to fit for long, or Angry Young Men either; they never met as a group, though they were (at least for the most part ) acquainted.
A Zeitgeist is all the more convincingly that, it may be argued, if it reveals itself simultaneously and without conspiracy or foreknowledge, but some of the cards in this pack look pretty wild.
Colin Wilson's The Outsider , for example, which by a glorious coincidence appeared in May 1956 — the very month of the appearance of John Osborne's first performed play Look Back in Anger — was a bookish, self-educated exegesis of a fat clutch of heady topics including violence and mysticism, all untidily carved out of a huge, unfinished novel about Jack the Ripper.
The book and the play were inevitably reviewed together, and the play is undoubtedly an explosion of anger by a young dramatist obsessed by a fierce personal conviction that he has been socially slighted.
Colin Wilson, however, may have been justified in remarking years later that he has never been angry about anything and Kingsley Amis has grown angry by growing conservative and old.
Radicals need not be angry at all, and Lucky Jim is too confident a book, surely, to be described in that way.
Its keynote is not anger but scorn.
There were, none the less, one or two groups in post-war Britain that merit the name of coterie, if the word implies a repeated or regular gathering of like-minded writers in the same room.
The Inklings, centred on war-time and post-war Oxford, were such a group: they were dedicated to a revival of Christianity and to literary story-telling, and they engendered the novels and polemics of C. S. Lewis and Tolkien's huge romance The Lord of the Rings (1954–5).
That is a rare instance, in British literary annals, of a band of brothers achieving in broad terms, for a time, what it had once set out to do.
Other groups are less coherent.
Amis in a radio interview has spoken of his war-time friendship at Oxford with Philip Larkin as if it had succeeded only in inverted terms.
‘We had it all shared out,’ he remarked of his  meeting with Larkin in April 1941.
‘I was to be the poet, he the novelist.
Funny how it turned out’, meaning that it turned out the other way.
Plainly Britain is not France.
But even in Britain literary friendships, often formed as early as school or university, can start a periodical, write a manifesto and continue spasmodically through life to inform a style and promote a habit of mind.
People often write novels because they know a novelist, poems because they know a poet, plays because they know a playwright.
Such alliances tend to be as fleeting as the chance encounters and re-encounters of fictional characters in Anthony Powell's A Dance to the Music of Time (1951–75); and the conversation of young friends, as potent in all likelihood as any literary influence there is, is largely beyond the reach of the historian, even the contemporary historian, except as guesswork.
When Amis visited his friend Larkin at Leicester University College after the war, fresh from the army, he sat in a chair in the senior common room, listened to the academic gossip, sniffed the air and said: ‘Yes, I could stand this’— to become a lecturer in Swansea.
No wonder, then, if Lucky Jim , dedicated though it is to Larkin, was thought to be about life in Swansea University College, which it never was.
The creative mind is moved at least as much by those it knows as by what it reads, but the matter is largely obscure and often simply undiscoverable.
If, then, in the pages that follow, I group authors by friendship, acquaintance and sheer fellow-feeling, even though strangers or near-strangers, this is a device adopted for clarity and convenience, and little more.
Orwell/Waugh
Parallel lines, it is said, never meet.
The literary lives of Evelyn Waugh and George Orwell ran parallel through the 1930s and 1940s, and they met only once — in 1949 — the meeting proving wholly unmemorable, as it happens, for its conversation.
The dogmatic gap between them still looks unbridgeable: Right against Left, Christian against secular, ancient against modern.
They had entered the Second World War opposed in attitude, and emerged little changed.
So it must have seemed even to them.
Born in 1903, a year before Graham Greene, they met only when Orwell was dying; and only a few letters are known to have passed between them, all composed in polite terms, as if to strangers.
For some twenty years they had taken opposite sides, reliably and predictably, on all the resounding issues of religion and state.
And yet, as if to contest all that, there is evidence that each read the other with respect, even avidity, occasionally sending copies of recent books as if eager for comment and commendation.
Their marriage of mind barely peeps above the surface of surviving documents, though it is plain enough in the two masterpieces they produced in 1945,Brideshead Revisited and Animal Farm .
Respect was always guarded.
Some months before his early death in January 1950, Orwell had agreed to write an article on Waugh for an American journal.
Drafted in March 1949, the article never emerged beyond a few notes, mainly about Brideshead itself, though the task led him to reread all Waugh's  early works, including his biographies, and it was evidently one the dying man approached with enthusiasm.
The notes are sadly predictable, however, in their dogmatism.
Waugh was a good writer ruined, Orwell concluded, by superstition: ‘about as good a novelist as one can be…while holding untenable opinions’, and the death of Lord Marchmain at the end of Brideshead predictably repelled him, when an apparently unregenerate peer silently makes the sign of the cross and the two lovers, though divorced, realise in a religious ecstasy that they can never marry.
‘The veneer is bound to crack, sooner or later,’ Orwell acidly remarks.
‘One cannot really be Catholic and grown up.’
That was the secular side.
For the other, Waugh had already praised Orwell's Critical Essays (1946) in somewhat distant terms, as representing ‘at its best’ the hated humanism of the Common Man.
That Rooseveltian tag was much in the air as war ended, on both sides of the Atlantic, and it was a populist view for which Waugh, whose aspirations were unfailingly patrician, never hesitated to disguise his profound distaste.
‘I do not presume to counsel my sovereign on the choice of her advisers,’ he once grandly told a journalist who had rashly asked him how he was going to vote in a parliamentary election.
But it is notable that his review of Orwell is not hostile or ungenerous.
He aptly compares him to Edmund Wilson, as a stylist, and one feels Orwell's formula could easily have been returned: about as good a writer as one can be while holding untenable opinions.
Waugh especially admired Orwell's pioneering essay on the social implications of the vulgar seaside postcard, ‘The Art of Donald McGill’(1941); but he lamented his rooted incapacity to esteem or even entertain any hint of religious sentiment — all the more striking and regrettable, he argues, in one plainly  endowed with ‘an unusually high moral sense and respect for truth and justice’.
The contrast looks complete.
But it may still be worth striving to see the Right-Left medal of that contentious era as a whole, its opposite sides complementary as well as antagonistic.
All over the Western world an intelligentsia had recently been at war with itself: the screaming-point being reached and passed in 1935–6, with Mussolini's violent seizure of Ethiopia and the outbreak of civil war in Spain.
Waugh and Orwell took opposite sides on Ethiopia and Spain; but not on Hitler, for whom Waugh never showed a particle of sympathy, and his anti-Hitlerism was even to become something like a practical ideal for Orwell.
‘Why can't someone on the Left ever do something like that?’ he remarked admiringly to Anthony Powell in 1941, when he heard Waugh had joined a commando unit.
Beneath their opposition there was often an undercurrent of admiration and fellow-feeling.
‘Unlike a lot of people, I thought Brideshead Revisited was very good,’ Orwell remarked in a letter in July 1948, ‘in spite of hideous faults on the surface.’
Waugh might have agreed even with the complaint about surface faults, which he was shortly to concede in a new preface and expunge by revision.
He had already admired Animal Farm which, as he tells in his diary (31 August 1945), he read promptly on its first appearance to spite his cousin Claud Cockburn, who as a loyal Communist Party man had warned him against reading Trotskyite literature.
(Counter-suggestibility was something else Waugh and Orwell had in common.)
The book evidently proved a pleasure rather than a duty, part of the pleasure being political; and there is an added spice to his enjoyment of Orwell's anti-Stalinist fable that needs to be pondered.
The copy of Animal Farm Waugh read in the summer  of 1945 to spite his communist cousin had been sent to him by Orwell himself, whom he had never met.
In fact Waugh had just written to him as a stranger to thank him for his ‘ingenious and delightful allegory’— his gratitude all the warmer because, as he flatteringly remarks, he had tried to buy a copy and found it sold out.
Authors like to be told such things.
A second letter is similarly formal; and only the third —‘dear Orwell-Blair?— which do you prefer?’ breaks any ice, hesitating between a famous pseudonym and Orwell's real name of Eric Blair.
Once again he has to thank him for a new book, this time Nineteen Eighty-Four (1949); but now he sounds cool.
It had ‘failed to make my flesh creep’, he reports guardedly, in a phrase he was to repeat years later about it in his life of Ronald Knox (1959), and failed because it had denied the existence of the soul and omitted all mention of the Church.
And that, Waugh protests, is simply incredible.
However bad things might prove to be decades hence, in 1984, they could not be so bad that religious feeling would simply have died out; and he promises to visit Orwell in his illness, which he did.
Nothing memorable happened at their only meeting, in a Gloucestershire sanatorium, though Malcolm Muggeridge once remarked that he would have loved to see and hear them together, and it is still open to anyone to write an imaginary conversation of the event.
As Muggeridge says, it must have been visually interesting, at least, with Waugh's ‘country-gentleman's outfit and Orwell's proletarian one, both straight out of back numbers of Punch ’.
If nothing else, their congeniality was stylistic.
The debonair style they both preferred for handling issues gave or grim was part of an improbable legacy from  P. G. Wodehouse, whose inter-war writings they had both admired from boyhood on.
In fact they exchanged hints for Orwell's own essay on Wodehouse (1945); and years after Orwell's death, Waugh was to praise him in a broadcast for having generously helped to save Wodehouse from the undeserved public disgrace of prosecution as a war-time Nazi collaborator.
The common secret of their fiction, in brief, was to put Wodehouse's gaiety to a serious purpose, and it was a secret they were happy as strangers to share.
Hard to remember, between readings, that Brideshead and Nineteen Eighty-Four are funny books: one recalls so vividly the gravity of their themes, so little the gaiety of their prose, that a rereading can easily surprise.
Both, what is more, were masters of a species of invective at once tough and suave.
This is a style of abuse that has excited some natural envy among professional satirists.
‘Pow, and you're down,’ Norman Mailer once remarked admiringly of Orwell's prose, in a televised interview, imitating with a boxer's punch the flash of a fist.
That pow is a gift Waugh and Orwell shared.
It is there when Orwell calls the Left ‘Bolshevik commissars, half gangster, half gramophone, escaped quakers, vegetarian cranks and back-room Labour party crawlers’, or when he dismisses the Marxist dialectic as an argumentative Pea-and-thimble trick; there again when Waugh reviews Stephen Spender's flatulent autobiography World within World (1951):
To see him fumbling with our rich and delicate language is to experience all the horror of seeing a Sèvres vase in the hands of a chimpanzee.
Such masters of the merciless put-down must have studied each other 's writings through the long intellectual civil wars of the 1930s and after with a mounting  respect that no dogmatic divide could dim.
If not soul-mates, they were always style-mates; and the fierce trenchancy that characterises literary life at its liveliest, in a polemical age, never found finer exponents.
‘British intellectual knife-throwing’ and American admirer once appreciatively called it, as one accustomed to the blander or blunter literary world of the United States.
It is sad that Orwell should have been bedridden and dying when he met Waugh, for the first and last time.
They might have enjoyed each other.
Beyond style there are profounder kinships.
Orwell's mind-transforming discovery in 1937, in Barcelona — that political extremes meet and that fascism and communism are much alike — is one Waugh had already made, and the charge that he was ever knowingly indulgent to fascism is unjustified.
His views on Ethiopia and Spain in 1935–6 had been misguided, many would say; but it is a question whether fascism, in his own understanding of the matter, ever entered into it, though Christianity decidedly did.
His irreverent view of black states had already been comically revealed in Black Mischief (1932); and as a convert to Rome in 1930 he watched in 1936, and without regret, the overthrow of a Spanish Republic violently intolerant of a Church he loved.
In any case he had the deepest contempt, first to last, for the facile conceptualising that often passes for advanced thought, rather like Orwell's contempt for W. H. Auden's partisan poem ‘Spain' (1937):
The conscious acceptance of guilt in the necessary murder
of which Orwell had derisively remarked in ‘Inside the Whale’(1940) that it could only have been written by an innocent for whom murder is at most a word.
Orwell's jibes at Auden's emigration to New York in January  1939, too, with Christopher Isherwood, were to be echoed shortly after by Waugh in Put Out More Flags (1942), which he composed on a troopship.
He called Isherwood Parsnip in that novel because of his face, presumably, and Auden was Pimpernel because he had saved Thomas Mann's daughter from the Gestapo by contracting a Platonic marriage.
Running away from a national crisis, at all events, was conduct that Waugh and Orwell saw as one.
The large dogmatic difference remains.
But it may not be too late to suggest that Waugh's reputation for right-wingery — a reputation swallowed by Orwell and many since — has been mildly overdone.
His mind was too surprising, as Orwell's was, to be so easily labelled.
In A Tourist in Africa (1960), for example, a travel book composed long before hostility to apartheid was widely fashionable, Waugh bluntly called it ‘racial insanity’, on the grounds that it ‘fantastically choose[s] pigmentation as a determining factor’.
Black/white, he argued, is a ‘preposterous frontier, being grossly over-simple, and the world needs far more discriminations than simple divisions between negro and white or Gentile and Jew.
Snobbery, as he knew, if subtly and intelligently interpreted, is vastly different from racialism, and one reason why Waugh was not a racialist is that he was so inveterately and intricately a snob, and devotedly believed in shadings and gradings.
‘Stable and fruitful societies have always been elaborately graded’, he wrote, and the mistake of apartheid was to make a single decisive distinction on one ground — skin-colour — and then to elevate into a rigid legal system what rightly belongs to a world of personal inclination.
In sum, Waugh was conservatively anti-modern rather than right-wing, and racialism (as he rightly saw) was ‘rather modern’— meaning Victorian, unlicensed by traditional religion and unknown to the universal Church.
Orwell would not have put it like that.
But his mature convictions were the effect of a long organised retreat from the simple dualities of youthful Marxism — capitalism against socialism, bourgeois against prole — and the first of his books ever to see print,Down and Out in Paris and London (1933), had been emphatic that Marxist analysis fails to correspond to observed experience, the gradations insisted on by the kitchen-staff of a Parisian hotel or the destitute of an English doss-house being there because the poor want them to be there and not by compulsion.
Hierarchy is not imposed from above, then ‘but demanded from below: a fact that many theorists of class-conflict are powerless to understand and incompetent, at times, even to remark.
It is notable, what is more, that the contempt of Orwell and Waugh for simplistic systems like apartheid and communism — black or prole versus white or bourgeois — has nothing, in the end, to do with egalitarianism.
Neither of them believed that mankind was equal, or could ever be so, or would ever seriously wish to be so.
All systems based on the ideal of equality break down in action: that is a point that might be expected of Waugh, but it is Orwell who makes it the more forcefully: ‘Some animals are more equal than others’, as the pigs decree in Animal Farm , symbolising the easy self-justifications of Leninists in taking and keeping power.
The folly of Moscow and Pretoria, both would have agreed, lies in their common determination to institutionalise differences where nature itself offers only subtleties and complexities.
Marxism and racialism are ‘rather modern’, as Waugh would have put it, mindful that the medieval schoolmen and Renaissance Jesuits he idolised would have seen no merit in either of them.
They are bookish, theoretical, and what Orwell in ‘Inside the Whale’ once perceptively called ‘largely based on a sense of personal immunity’.
(Who, after all, ever  thinks of himself as a bourgeois?)
Perhaps all that makes it easier to understand why Orwell was so anxious that Waugh should read his books: anxious enough to send him copies, though to a stranger.
As novelists, however, Orwell and Waugh evolve not towards each other but, technically speaking, in opposite directions.
Waugh's novels grow towards realism as he ages, that is to say, after 1945, and Orwell's away from it.
Orwell, unlike Waugh, was never a natural master of narrative, and his uncertain career in fiction had begun, after much trial and error, with Burmese Days (1934), where he had exploited his youthful experiences in the Burma police.
It was only in the last six or seven years of his life that he discovered that his talents lay elsewhere: in polemics, above all, and in what Waugh in his letter of thanks for Animal Farm had called ingenious and delightful allegory.
Strictly speaking Orwell's book is perhaps less an allegory than a conte philosophique like Voltaire's Candide or Samuel Johnson's Rasselas ; Swift's Gulliver's Travels is not far off here either, as a source, and it is certain that Orwell profoundly admired Swift, as Waugh admired Voltaire.
English fiction in 1945 was already beginning to return to its eighteenth-century roots — a return confirmed soon after by Kingsley Amis, John Wain and Iris Murdoch, where the realism of Defoe and Fielding was to be self-consciously revived.
Orwell and Waugh, older by a generation, belonged to an earlier and a sparer tradition.
Characters are cut-outs, mental events are banned as if the Bloomsbury tradition needed to be ruthlessly exorcised, and names like Miles Malpractice in Vile Bodies explain character in boldly extra-realistic ways, much as they might have done in  Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress .
This is a daring technical return.
Waugh had seen the opportunities of the conte almost twenty years earlier than Orwell; but he had exhausted his interest before war broke out in 1939, so that Brideshead and the Sword of Honour trilogy are firmly planted in a revived realistic tradition.
Orwell saw the point of technical reaction rather belatedly, but the example must have encouraged him.
In a war-time article on Smollett he remarked that several writers had recently tried to ‘revive the picaresque tradition’, instancing Waugh and Aldous Huxley — adding that the experiment had not been entirely happy, if only because they had betrayed a sense of strain in an effort to be shocking.
The term picaresque is used pretty loosely here, no doubt, as it often is, to mean something like episodic and comically adventurous.
That fits Waugh's 1930s fiction well enough, and in an age that had been reading Proust, Joyce and Virginia Woolf it must all have looked startlingly diagrammatic and technically reactionary: a reactionary politics aptly matched by a technical reaction.
Why did British fiction so suddenly revive the conte philosophique in the years around the war's ending, along with its fierce, diagrammatic crudities of tone and substance?
Anthony Powell, who once encouraged Waugh to write his first full-length book — a biography of Rossetti (1928)— has suggested that Waugh revived simplicity because he was himself simple:
He saw human beings not as a mass of contradictions but as a particular sort of person — a great nobleman or a poor scholar or a spotty-faced announcer from the BBC.
That was all they were, and they had to go through life like that.
But that is talent speaking of genius, and it overlooks the protective colouring by which genius can seek to mask its own sensitivities.
‘’ He was an extraordinarily uncomplicated man,’Powell adds, ‘who saw life in very simple terms.’
Simplicity, however — at least the sort that scores in argument or fiction — can be a highly achieved state of mind, ‘costing not less than everything’, and only highly complex beings arrive at it at all, or need to seek it out.
Perceiving that fascism and communism were more like each other, by 1945, than either was like the civilisation of the West is an instance of achieved simplicity, and one that Waugh and Orwell independently shared.
In his autobiography A Little Learning (1964) Waugh was to observe that at the age of sixteen he noticed that his publisher father, ‘whom I had grown up to accept with complete simplicity’, was in fact a highly gifted actor in everything he did.
Orwell's simplicity was much like that parent-figure: it can suddenly look more complicated, and more assumed, than one had at first supposed.
He once remarked that good prose is like a window-pane, meaning that you ought to be able to see through it without seeing it; and anyone who has ever tried to write prose like that, or to see human creatures in life or fiction like Waugh's early fictional characters, will know how much clutter of mind and words needs first to be cleared away.
Windows have to be cleaned often if they are to be kept clean, and literary clarity, too, is always likely to be an effect of long labour.
If Waugh and Orwell did not exactly despise the complexities of Modernism, Joyce-style or Eliot-style, at least they recognised, and early, that such complexities were not for their times and not for them.
An urgent age needed something sharper and cleaner than that.
Orwell once modestly remarked that Joyce's Ulysses made him feel like a eunuch taking singing lessons, and Waugh's artist-hero in Brideshead briskly calls modern art bosh.
Stupid people have thought such things about Joyce, to be sure, and about the school of Picasso.
But that does not mean that all who have thought such things are stupid.
Seeing the convergence of communism and fascism took a kind of intelligence that Joyce and Eliot did not have, and one they might not much have respected.
That convergence is the concluding point of Animal Farm , which ends on a sudden vision of a resemblance, even an identity, between the warring representatives of two dictatorial orders: ‘…already it was impossible to say which was which’.
By a supreme irony Waugh Was to echo the point, coincidentally, in the very letter to Nancy Mitford that bore the tidings of Orwell's premature death.
That was in January 1950, when Europe was still reeling from the revelations of the Nazi death-camps, opened less than five years before, and the voluminous confirmations of the Nuremberg trials of what war-criminals had done there.
Waugh knew as well as Orwell that Nazism was not a conservative idea but a false and perverted progressive idea — an idealism gone wrong.
‘Gas chambers were not a Nazi invention,’ he told her.
‘All ‘Progressives’…believed in them, and called it Euthanasia’, characteristically exaggerating a sensible point with ‘all’.
Half a century before, it is true, H. G. Wells and Havelock Ellis had proclaimed that socialism would require the extermination of the unfit by the state; and soon after, Bernard Shaw had urged scientists to devise painless methods of killing, since the new society would tolerate only workers, and the doctrine of the sanctity of human life, like all doctrines of sanctity, was antiquated claptrap.
To adapt Orwell's last sentence, it is almost impossible to say which was  which, so profound and intimate are the links that bind the intellectual socialism of the early twentieth century to the National Socialism that sought confidently in the 1930s to replace it.
A pity Orwell and Waugh found no chance to discuss such weighty questions when they met, for the first and last time, in 1949.
On modern totalitarianism there is a kinship of interest between them deeper than the ocean and higher than the stars.
Such, too, was the theme that intensified in their fiction towards middle age, which may be called the agony of a lost Eden.
The idea, which smacks of Milton, was potent in the age.
Edwin Muir's One Foot in Eden (1956) is a last collection of poems by an Orkney poet whose passion for ancient myth was an expression of something deeper still — a profound distrust of the urban, the rootless and the industrial — and he repeatedly glimpsed, with a painful sense of loss, a paradise beyond grey modernity:
Oh here the hot heart petrifies
And the round earth to rock is grown
In the winter of our eyes;
Heart and earth a single stone.
Until the stony barrier break
Grief and joy no more shall wake,
as he ended ‘Song for a hypothetical age’, in near-despair.
Muir was to die soon after, in 1959, and it is a poem that poses in brief the same paradox as Milton's epic.
How, after all, can one miss something one has never known?
Waugh and Orwell, like Muir, knew that one can.
Eden is always somewhere else, or someone  else's — or else it is snatched away after only a moment, at most, or only distantly seen, felt or known.
Paradise is lost, so to speak, almost before it is found, and it is never possessed and savoured.
Winston Smith, Orwell's hero in Nineteen Eighty-Four , dimly knows there was once a free England before the Party seized total power, and he wanders off alone into the London slums to find memories of it.
Brideshead , too, is an exercise in passionate nostalgia, and of a kind that has sometimes been held to be embarrassing, since it celebrates the dying life of a great country house, though such critical embarrassments may be more ritual than real.
True to form, Orwell in his notes on Waugh disapprovingly named snobbery and Catholicism as the two driving forces of the novel, and as a secular radical he must have felt obliged to reprobate the one as much as the other.
Kingsley Amis, similarly, once remarked on television how much he disapproved of the book —‘Nobs’ appeal,’he remarked crushingly, ‘the appeal of nobs,’though he generously added that he often reread it.
There is plainly a surprising depth of sympathy here between Waugh and the secular, radical mind, and one somehow richer and deeper than either religion or politics: a fellow-feeling about a paradise forever beyond reach.
What is that lost Eden?
Orwell in his notes offers only the ghost of an answer when he remarks that Waugh's loyalty was to a form of society no longer viable, ‘of which he must be aware’.
Waugh is indeed aware of it, and that is the piercing tragedy at the heart of Brideshead .
More than that, and far worse, he is aware that he could not have it for himself even if it did exist.
Difficult, at this distance, to shut out of mind photographs of Waugh in his later years in his modest country house, forever trying to look like a country gentleman and forever (as a friend once remarked) looking like a bookie.
That was the notoriously comic side of his social  failure.
But in Brideshead the point runs sharper and deeper.
As the novel amply shows, those who want can't have and — what only makes it harder to bear — those who have don't want.
The hero's Oxford friend, Lord Sebastian, has the magnificent baroque pile of Brideshead for his ancestral home, and he detests it.
‘It's where my family live,’ he says distantly, and slowly drink himself to death.
Charles Ryder, whom he introduces first to the enchanted world of the great English house and then to Venice, would give all he ever had, and far more, to live in such high ceremonial heavens —‘I was drowning in honey, stingless’— and is forever shut out.
The novel, in that aspect, is romantic autobiography.
As a boy Waugh had longed to go to Eton, which might have made a radical of him and where he might have met Orwell, and did not; his first aristocratic wife left him after a year, and for an Etonian; and his sojourns in a great Elizabethan house in Worcestershire as a young man, the guest of a friend, allowed him to glimpse a world of moats, battlements and rolling parkland from which in spirit he never awoke.
‘The smiling meadows of Worcestershire and the noble line of the Malvern hills that I love so dearly’, he wrote to a member of that titled family from the swamplands of British Guiana in January 1933, missing and yearning for a home he knew could never be his.
In much of his fiction, early and late, Waugh turns from comedy to the haunting thought of a lost Eden; and in a nation that had once been the first industrial civilisation that can only mean a pastoral world.
He wrote his own novels like that, and read the novels of others like that.
The best part of Nineteen Eighty-Four , he told Orwell in his letter of July 1949, announcing his visit, was ‘the delicious conversation in the pub when Winston tries to pump the old man for memories of pre-revolutionary days’, and one might easily have  guessed that Waugh would think that episode the best.
It is about a paradise one cannot have.
Orwell's point here was perhaps richer than Waugh's, in the end, and richer simply because he was Orwell.
Everyone, after all, knows that conservatives are in love with the past: everyone expects it.
It took an Orwell to see that radicals need it too, and need it more than others.
‘He who controls the past controls the future’ is the message of his last utopia: a sense of history is ultimately power, since a people is guided and governed by a collective sense of what it means to itself and to the world, and history gives it that sense, and only history.
When Winston Smith and O'Brien pledge themselves to a revolution against dictatorship, the toast is not to the future but to the past which, as O'Brien puts it with mock gravity, is ‘more important’.
Marxism, after all, was a theory of history, and a radical one.
To understand the world one is in is to understand where it came from, and how it came; and it is only because it is understood, or thought to be, that one can aspire to change it.
That is why radicals need the past not just as much as conservatives but more than they.
At the age of twenty Evelyn Waugh wrote a story for Harold Acton called ‘Anthony, Who Sought the Things That Were Lost’.
Winston Smith seeks such things in Orwell's last book when he enters the slums of London to find someone old enough to remember an England he himself had never known.
At the end of Brideshead , too, Waugh's hero is defeated in a similar search, though he is allowed consolation.
Waugh perceived a resemblance between the two books himself, and in his letter to Orwell on Nineteen Eighty-Four he reproached him in a jibe as potent as any he ever made to friend or enemy: ‘Men who love a crucified God need never think of torture as all-powerful.’
That, after all, at the end of Orwell's book, is just what Winston Smith has been  forced to think when, subjected to torment of mind and body, ‘he loved Big Brother’.
Strange, perhaps, that the conservative should be more optimistic than the radical, but it is notable that Brideshead does not end in Orwellian despair.
Its hero has lost wife, mistress and even the cause he fights in, since the war against dictatorship lost most of its point for Waugh on a day in June 1941 when Hitler invaded Russia.
Even the great country house his hero had once hopelessly loved, as an outsider, has been ruined by military occupation; and the army that has mined it, as he bitterly recognises, is his own.
‘I have been here before’ is his echoing cry as, in the deprivations of war and middle age, he remembers his time there with Sebastian twenty years before: two youths in love, one clutching at a toy to recall the lost innocence of a child.
And so Charles Ryder, now a convert, goes to mass, and in the family chapel he had once in agnostic youth admired only as a work of art in a strange and alien style.
To borrow Sebastian's words, he has buried something there, and wants to find it.
‘I should like to bury something precious in every place where I've been happy,’ Sebastian had once told him, after wine and strawberries on a summer hilltop, ‘and then, when I was old and ugly and miserable, I could come back and dig it up and remember.’
More fortunate than Orwell's hero, Charles is back to dig it up.
He has lost everything and gained a faith, and he knows that in the chapel a flame burns for him.
No wonder a fellow-officer remarks how cheerful he looks, when he comes back.
For he has discovered that the task of one's mature years is to forgive the follies of youth: for having loved too much, above all and too often, and too soon.
Christian Revival: Tolkien and Lewis
Christianity, someone once said, is the eternal afterthought of history.
The dictum echoes a mood wider than post-war Britain, where the moment of Christian revival among the lettered was brief and limited in scope.
It was none the less a moment of grave concern to unbelievers of any reliable militancy.
William Empson, a lifelong and dedicated atheist, returned from the Far East in 1952 expecting to find little more demolition-work on religion needing to be done, at least among the lettered, and was horrified to discover that the devout spirit of T. S. Eliot, in his absence, had spawned a host of converts in the critical world.
The popular success of C. S. Lewis's broadcasts, published in 1942 as The Screwtape Letters , aroused at least as much indignation as their provocation had plainly sought and deserved, being composed in radical irony out of the mouth of a Devil instructing an acolyte how to spread scepticism and moral confusion through the modern world.
Believing in God was bad enough, it was felt: believing in the Devil, which few enough modern clergymen were known to do, was far worse.
To coin a phrase, Lewis's war-time broadcasts on behalf of God put a pigeon among the cats.
In The Emperor's Clothes (1953) Kathleen Nott called the Christian revivalism of Eliot, Lewis and others no better than a revived superstition; and in a scathing attack on contemporary dogmatics and the anti-progressive views of  literary Modernism she remarked, in tones of ultimate scorn, that Lewis's interest in the Devil had plumbed unusual depths.
Religious conviction, in that age, and still more religious observance, were seen as naturally conservative; and the Christian revival of the 1940s was openly regressive, anxious above all that the world might be changing too fast and too far.
The school of Tolkien, if one may so describe it, was an attempt to throw on the brakes: to rediscover a national and personal selfhood by discovering the roots of faith.
In the years between the wars G. K. Chesterton and Evelyn Waugh had been converts to Rome.
The Inklings, as they liked to call themselves, were more commonly Anglican, but their views were blatantly traditional and unashamedly patriotic and backward-looking.
J. R. R. Tolkien (1892–1973), a Catholic by upbringing, wrote in praise of the remembered virtues of the British Tommy in the trenches during the First World War, and the enormous and highly improbable success of The Lord of the Rings (1954–5), for all that it began as a cult in the United States rather than at home, struck a chord that was ultimately insular, tribal and boldly British.
Where Modernists like Pound and Eliot had been intruders into island life, the new school of Christian apologists, in every sense that matters, were British bred even when they were not British born.
Tolkien had been brought from South Africa at the age of four; Lewis was a Belfast man schooled in England for whom, like his Mend Tolkien, the Western Front had proved the deepest trauma of a largely bookish life; Charles Williams, an Oxford publisher who died in 1945, was a Londoner; Dorothy Sayers, who died a dozen years later, the daughter of an Anglican clergyman; and Owen Barfield a London solicitor who shared with his friends a passion for all things lexical, and above all for the etymology of  words.
This was emphatically, in its loyalties, a native school.
Its religion, though always Christian, was not precisely uniform.
Charles Williams and Dorothy Sayers were touched by Anglo-Catholicism.
Lewis was a mainstream Anglican who had angered Tolkien, on his conversion, by preferring Canterbury to Rome; but his title Mere Christianity (1952) summed up his disdain for all denominational differences, and he never accepted the charge of belonging to any one wing of the Church.
John Heath-Stubbs, another Oxford man who may count as the poet of the group, was a lifelong Conservative and High Churchman in reaction to a boyhood spent attending a progressive school in the Isle of
Wight.
Events soon conspired to advance their cause.
The peace of 1945 brought revelations of what a radical and atheistical regime like the Hitlerian could achieve in terms of human suffering, and it prompted a mood of religious revival throughout Western Europe, in Germany and beyond.
Titus Groan (1946), the first of Mervyn Peake's three Titus books, is not exactly religious fiction, but its setting of Gothic nightmare is worlds away from any secular imagination, and its success is said to have surprised author and publisher alike.
This was a mood that did not last; the secular spirit is natural, it is more than ever clear, to modern industrial states — so much so that it invades even the clergy.
But the school of Tolkien was still notable in creating a large, sudden surface ripple in intellectual life: a surprising return to a sense of the supernatural and the transcendent that modern technology and modern philosophy, between them, were supposed to have finished off for good.
The group was a coterie, meeting for beer in an Oxford pub on Tuesday mornings and for readings in Lewis's college room on Thursday evenings; and it  came close, for a time, to qualifying as a sect.
Tolkien and Lewis had met as early as 1926; in 1939 Charles Williams had moved as a publisher from London to Oxford, and by the last years of the war Christian revival was in active literary life.
Its inner lines of force are obscure.
‘We had a common view,’ Lewis once conceded in a letter, but we had it before we met,’insisting that no one ever influenced Tolkien: ‘You might as well try to influence a bandersnatch.’
Dorothy Sayers may never have met Tolkien, though she knew Charles Williams and had been profoundly stirred, as a translator of Dante, by his Figure of Beatrice (1943).
The theology of the group was sufficiently united by the fact that, amid a secular intelligentsia, it was after all a theology.
And that was enough.
Tolkien was a Catholic who never entirely ceased to resent Lewis's preference for Anglicanism; others were High Church; and Lewis, who always claimed to see religion as an escape from superstition rather than from atheism, held himself scrupulously above such disputes.
His own model of churchly behaviour, he once remarked, was Russian Orthodox, where people sit, stand, kneel or lie flat, and ‘no one takes the slightest notice of what anyone else is doing,’ the guiding motto in religion (as in life) being to mind your own business.
Friends, he would have said, agree because they already agree, not because they persuade one another, and the achievement of the group was less to instruct in virtue or in doctrine than to reassure themselves, and others, that religion and modern literature can live together, and that there were those on earth — a previous few — of sympathetic piety and like mind.
That mind was anti-Modernist and (what is far different) anti-modern.
Since its mood was anti-superstitious, and many twentieth-century superstitions — theosophy, yoga, Marx and Freud — are  Modernistic, or count as such, that was perhaps only natural.
Tolkien in his letters freely admitted, as a professor of English, to reading little of anything written since the Middle Ages, to taking no interest in the present state of English fiction, to dish-king T. S. Eliot intensely, to finding Robert Graves an ass, and to thinking Browning's poems shallow and vulgar.
Lewis was markedly less exclusive and less austere; but he had once borrowed a copy of Eliot's verse in 1926 from John Betjeman, then an unsatisfactory Oxford pupil, and it had enraged him — so much so that he had organised a cabal to write spoof verse in the Eliot manner to introduce into his quarterly Criterion .
The joke came to nothing, as it deserved, but the hunger for a literary tradition more narrative and less diagrammatic, more reverent of ancient story and less of modern despair, survived to the end.
To the starved world of pre-war Modernism the Christian revivalists promised sudden, limitless riches.
Tolkien had finished The Lord of the Rings by 1949, though it was refused on his terms and did not begin to appear for another five years, on a non-royalty agreement — to be coolly received by reviewers at home and rapturously welcomed in that heartland of Anglo-Saxon romanticism, the United States of America.
But it was an adolescent cult on both sides of the Atlantic before the 1950s were out: one of the great fictional bestsellers of the mid-century.
Lewis began his Narnia stories for children in 1949, but he had been publishing fiction for adults since Out of the Silent Planet (1938), a mixture of space-fiction and theology that he was soon to extend into a trilogy, ending with That Hideous Strength (1945).
His early lack of success as a poet ended in triumph as a novelist, polemicist and literary historian — careers he continued in triple tandem for the rest of his life, in Oxford and after 1954 in Cambridge.
Where his friend Charles Williams had achieved only phantasmal fictions  that struggled implausibly to marry realism and the supernatural, Lewis turned that improbable formula into stories that compel attention.
By the mid 1950s, with Tolkien's prose epic and the Lewis trilogy in wide circulation, the fiction of Christian revival was a sudden, active contender in the world of letters.
Technical experiments like stream-of-consciousness had died of inanition some years before, and they left few heirs; and the poetic tradition of Eliot had been abandoned even by Eliot, who by the 1950s was writing little but plays.
A handful of reactionary dons, meanwhile, had improbably made their mark and attracted the ardour even of the young.
Revival had won.
The revival was firmly based on story.
Modernism had had no truck with narrative momentum; and Eliot's Post-war plays, which began with The Cocktail Party (1950), were always more compelling as moral analysis than as plot.
His own love of stories, though real enough, was private, almost furtive — he was a dedicated reader of the Sherlock Holmes stories, for example— but it would take a sharp eye, and a good memory, to notice the quotation from Conan Doyle's ‘The Musgrave Ritual’ buried in his pre-war play Murder in the Cathedral .
Christian revival, by contrast, was openly partisan of narrative.
Lewis, whose youthful enthusiasm had been for Norse sagas and the verse tales of William Morris, seems to have been converted to Christianity by considering whether the Christian myth might not, after all ‘be something more than a fiction.
This was an under-storied generation, and by the 1930s profoundly discontented with the literary starvation-diet of the age; virtuously repelled, too, by the sexual obsessions of literary  Freudians and D. H. Lawrence; and angry at the postures and impostures of Modernism, as they saw it, and the bloodless flimsiness of Bloomsbury fiction.
A health-cure, they held, may be healthy for a time, but it was always hard to imagine any of them, at any time, with a copy of Joyce's Finnegans Wake (1939) in hand.
And then the worm turned.
One day, in desperation, Lewis said to Tolkien: ‘Tollers, there is too little of what we really like in stories: I am afraid we shall have to write some ourselves.’
Story meant fable.
The fiction of Tolkien and Lewis is a compound of ancient fable — classical, Norse and Wagnerian — with an eye cocked to modern reality, and it might have been written to prove that there is a reality beyond realism.
The Lord of the Rings is a Wagnerian tale partly domesticated — its style reminiscent, as befits an Edwardian boy, of the Kipling who once wrote Rewards and Fairies and delighted children with Puck of Pook's Hill .
Wagner in his day had preached purity of heart and heroic deeds.
Tolkien's epic is more like a romantic reflection of pre-1914 British life and of those models of manly virtue he had once witnessed and cherished, it seems likely, in the grim camaraderie of the trenches in the First World War.
It is also playfully lexical, in a manner that engagingly unites the bookish child and the ageing professor of Anglo-Saxon, and its word-games are totally unlike those of Joyce — more to do with etymology than punning, more Germanic than Latin, and ultimately populist and patriotic in their insistence on how English arose out of its pre-Conquest roots.
The name Tolkien, he once remarked in a letter, is based on the German word for foolhardy: which is what, when he finally had his huge romance published, he must have supposed himself to be.
But then it was a labour of love.
Nobody, he once remarked, believed him when he said it was an attempt to create a world in which a  language agreeable to his own private aesthetic might be made to seem real, and even his childhood seems to have been enlivened by inventing as well as learning remote languages.
But beyond all that, the book celebrates a concern that a later age was to call ecological.
To the Victorian mind — and Tolkien, like Ivy Compton-Burnett, was born in 1892, and proudly a native of that age — a hatred of industrial capitalism was more naturally conservative, even Conservative, than radical — a wholly sensible view that might be worth recovering; and The Lord of the Rings is a conservative tract for green England and the moral attributes of a pre-industrial world.
At the conclusion of The Return of the King , the third of the three books — Tolkien always denied they were a trilogy — Frodo and his friends ride back to their lost land, to discover that ‘they cared about it more than any other place in the world’, though its cottages and gardens have been laid waste and replaced by ugly new houses and factories belching smoke; and they defeat the ruffians who had defiled it and resume the kingdom of little men.
That echoes a dream even nearer to his heart, perhaps, than Christian myth: a rural, unviolated England of cherished corners and familiar food and drink.
The Lord of the Rings is a study in threatened cosiness, of loved haunts lost and daringly recovered.
Begun in the 1930s, it must have seemed after 1940, during the Nazi occupation of continental Europe, as if nature were imitating the nightmare of art; and in the end it celebrates a victory.
Tolkien's romance was an amalgam, then, and a potent one; and its improbable success in his sixties lay not just in proving itself a bestseller but in making of itself the heart and mind of an international cult: a cult that was to spread to England from romantically-minded lands like California and the Antipodes.
It filled a space long empty.
Its little man-shaped creatures, first  paraded in The Hobbit (1937), hark back not just to Kipling but far beyond him to medieval romance.
Its prose, often breezy and sometimes disturbingly vatic, is a late reflection of Malory and Bunyan, and commonly more vigorous than refined.
Its passion for etymology, real or invented, appealed to a vanishing social world that adored word-games and crossword puzzles, and it reflects Tolkien's early years as an editor of the Oxford English Dictionary : in fact he thriftily reworked his philological papers into the texture of his fiction.
His mock-learned apparatus — appendices, maps of Middle-Earth and indexes — suggest a sense of erudition amiably mixed with bonhomie and fun; his no-nonsense Christianity a hunger for the spiritual and a yearning for roots.
The Lord of the Rings squanders small effort on stylistic distinction or argumentative scruple.
Its interlacing plot reflects the medieval stories its author loved; its style, bold and unsubtle, rails against the age of dictators and the sour technocrats who governed Britain after the fall of Hitler.
It is one of those rare books the love of which can easily turn into an addiction.
Tempting, now that its cult has faded, to conclude that it is a phenomenon in the history of publishing rather than of fine writing.
But all that would be to ignore its symbolic potency in defying a despotic age just lived through and narrowly survived.
That defiance was at once conservative and Conservative.
To turn Christian, in the 1930s and after, was to declare for the past, and only Graham Greene among notable pre-war literary converts to Rome was to maintain anything like a left-Wing view of public affairs.
The only question here can be the shade of blue: but there can be little doubt that, as befits Oxford men, the blue of Christian revival tended to be dark.
Lewis once remarked to a colleague during the Attlee premiership of 1945–51, and quite without irony, that it could not be  disputed that the prime minister was an agent of the Devil.
He was notably more libertarian than Tolkien, for all that, who as a Catholic had supported Franco during the Spanish Civil War.
Lewis was inclined to ground his grudging acceptance of democracy on the doctrine of original sin; Tolkien rejected it on the grounds that public virtue cannot be mechanised or formulated.
But The Lord of the Rings is still a hidden diatribe against concentrated power, and it prefigures a fashion for ecology and small-is-beautiful.
It is instructive to recall that the cause of conservation was conservative before it was ever radical.
After all, it is about the conservation of the old and founded on a suspicion of the new.
Virtue, to such minds, was not institutional but inescapably personal.
Like Swift they valued the generosity of the heart but not of law-makers, suspected all justice that was not severely retributive, and found confirmation for their faith in the fact that the bloody new tyrannies of Europe were more often atheistical than Christian.
The Christian despotism of Louis XIV had been content with outward obedience rather than the subjection of the heart: Hitler and Stalin were mass-murderers because for them outward obedience was not enough.
At that point the convictions of the Christian revivalists touch Orwell's and Koestler's, and overlap.
But the secular mind looked to them a starved mind, desolate of passion because robbed of faith, and it never occurred to them to doubt that religion possesses and monopolises the spiritual life.
Christian revival was appropriately confessional, and there is no problem for the historian here of the secretive heart.
This was a highly polemical school; its literary triumphs belong as much to the article or essay as to narrative; and its most private griefs and imaginings are by now part of the national and international consciousness.
In the highly private world of mid  century England, all this is astonishing.
It is even, on occasion, embarrassing, to anyone who retains a talent to be embarrassed.
Tolkien's romance is not a book for the trained critic but for the enthusiastic semi-amateur with an avidity for self-improvement; and in intention, at least, it is essentially sexless.
But Lewis's fiction Till We Have Faces (1956) is the outcome of a private dream that haunted him for decades, based on the ancient myth of Cupid and Psyche, though it outpaces at times his capacity to tell.
So does A Grief Observed (1961), seemingly a diary on the death of his wife, which breaks every rule of decorum, classical or other.
These were minds so naturally paced to the business of authorship that writing, from their middle years, must have absorbed their waking hours, their conversations and their dreams.
They wrote as they breathed, and their talk and their books were openly and unblushingly self-revelatory.
Christian revival rose and fell, as a literary phase, in the dozen years and more that followed the peace of 1945.
Curious to think it overlapped with young realists like Amis, Iris Murdoch and John Wain; still more curious to think that Wain was a pupil of Lewis and a junior member of Thursday evening meetings in his Oxford college.
(He was the young man who hoped Tolkien would not read from the manuscript of The Lord of the Rings ).
But the overlap in dates — Tolkien's book began to appear in the same year as Lucky Jim — is fortuitous, not significant, and the overlap in time was not a collision of rival forces, rather the side-by-side running of parallel tracks.
The new realism owed nothing in technique or substance to the romances of Tolkien and Lewis.
It was not a derivative but another way.
‘I admired Lewis and his friends immensely,’ Wain reported years later in an autobiography; but ‘already it was clear that I did not share their basic attitudes,’which were Christian, conservative and anti-modern.
Romance and realism, if not exactly enemies, were always opposites.
The new realists took an unblinking look at the human effects of welfare economics and the emergent morality of a nation slowly quitting austerity for affluence; the old romantics looked rather to recover a world of fine fabling like Spenser's Faerie Queene or the Victorian children's stories of George MacDonald.
Lewis read the great realists of the past, even of the present, and he sometimes admired them; but he saw their world as little better than a health-farm, held himself bound by no especial duty to study his own times, and longed for richer fare.
‘What is the point of keeping in touch with the contemporary scene?’
Since God had created the universe, the artist should honour Him by creating in his turn.
He was ultimately forced to see that the realistic tradition had proved too strong for his friends and for him: ‘Jack didn't kill the giant.’
It was great fun, all the same, to have tried.
At a larger distance, none the less, a pattern of partial unity of purpose grows faintly visible, and the old romancers and young realists of post-war Britain by now look one in what they denied and defied, even if they remain opposed in style and in the positives of dogmatic faith.
Both, to begin, were hostile to the growing prospect of a corporate state where power belongs less to parliament or cabinet than to organised interests such as unions, multinationals, federations of employers, state monopolies and established institutions like professional bodies.
The Labour government that died in 1951 had been tolerant of the corporate state, reverent of union power and credulous of collectivism, and its spirit  persisted: by the 1970s half and more of those in full-time employment in Britain were employed, directly or indirectly, by the state.
Authors, who are commonly self-employed, were naturally less forgiving of the corporate idea.
Amis's Lucky Jim is not Tolkien's Frodo.
He would not, one might guess, have destroyed the ugly new houses left by the occupying power of his homeland but lived in one of them; and though (like the heroes of Tolkien and Lewis) he likes beer as well as wine, he is not interested, as they were, in the cosy provincial life of the academic coterie.
He wants London.
His choice is wealth: he is at once the traditional hero of British fiction in search of a happy marriage and prosperity — Tom Jones or David Copperfield — and, in his brisk competitive zeal, the first fictional yuppie.
He is Frodo not in what he wants but in what he casts aside: arbitrary power, reverence to the collective principle, deference to what is foreign and all hints of artistic pretension.
But he is nothing of a nostalgic.
He likes it here and he wants it now.
The romancers and the realists, again, were at one in their anti-Modernism.
Charles Williams had been a friend of T. S. Eliot, but Lewis's distrust of Eliot had been implacable, and their first meeting in 1945, at Williams's instigation, had been no better than guarded, though they later joined as Anglicans in retranslating the Book of Common Prayer version of the Psalter.
That Eliot was at once right-wing and Christian had counted for nothing, apparently, in earlier days.
Lewis, in any case, was conservative rather than right-wing, and the alien world of Eliot's French-style royalism and his longstanding admiration for the Action Française never remotely appealed to him.
Democracy might not be much, in his view, but everything else is worse; and a robber-baron, as he once remarked to the Marxist scientist J. B. S. Haldane, is better than an inquisitor, since  greed sleeps easier than dogmatic certainty: ‘where Mammon vacates the throne, how if Moloch takes his place?’
Eliot, in any case, looked to him the leader of a hated literary avant-garde; the world of his poetry contemptibly dry and thin, as Lewis imagined, his mind seemingly unstoried, his passion for Sherlock Holmes a secret too well kept to save him.
And he never wrote a novel.
Tolkien shared those views.
He and Amis make an improbable duo, their births separated by thirty years and their convictions by still more.
But at least they were united in wanting story and more story, and their worldly success suggested that by the 1950s the world was on their side.
Modernism was played out, and it seemed absurd on all sorts of grounds that there should be no contemporary equivalent to The Faerie Queene or Trollope's Barchester novels.
A nation had rediscovered its tradition of fiction — or rather, two traditions, the romantic and the realistic.
It had come to its senses.
Its fiction, in a powerful sense, was patriotic.
Tolkien's book celebrates the virtues of the common Englishman under heroic strain.
Amis's third novel is called I Like It Here (1958), and when its hero stands reverently by the grave of Henry Fielding in Lisbon he acknowledges a debt at once literary and moral.
The new fiction was contemptuous of modernistic tricks like stream-of-consciousness, which by the 1950s looked etiolated and, what is perhaps worse, un-English.
Proust and Joyce were not Englishmen: Malory and Fielding were.
In Tolkien and Amis alike — Christian and secular, conservative and radical — there sounds a common note of defiance and pride.
Speaking of the Commonwealth at the time of Dunkirk in 1940, Churchill had talked of the old lion with her lion-cubs about her, and a lion that had beaten a unicorn must have ancient strengths that Modernism and Bloomsbury alike between the wars had failed to acknowledge or to note.
To a generation  emerging after victory, and to some of those who had taught them, those strengths and virtues seemed to have been underrated or ignored for too long.
The Coronation of Realism
In June 1953, with memorable pageantry, Elizabeth II was crowned queen, an event that promoted music rather than literature, among the arts, and design more than either.
But though it served as a symbol, it symbolised something real; and it marks, aptly, a revival of realism in British fiction.
Within a year of the event three first novels appeared in London that demanded an attentive scrutiny of the new age.
The three novels were Lucky Jim, Under the Net and Lord of the Flies .
Their near-simultaneity was coincidence, in the sense of being beyond all collusion and foreknowledge, though all were by graduates of Oxford engaged in teaching and over the age of thirty.
Two of them — Iris Murdoch and William Golding — are said to have composed a good deal of fiction before succeeding at last with a publisher; succeeding, as Golding once remarked, not because he had tried to please but because for once he stopped trying and wrote the book he had always wanted to write.
Kingsley Amis's Lucky Jim , on the other hand, was only the second novel he had ever written, and he has since admitted that he was glad that the first was not published.
Along with other novelists, playwrights and poets, the three coronation novelists represent something plainly wider and looser than a coterie, though a Movement was promptly announced by a nameless journalist.
They had precursors.
Philip Larkin had  already published two novels —Jill (1946) and A Girl in Winter (1947)— before he established himself in 1955, with The Less Deceived , as the best poet of his generation; and John Osborne's first play ever to reach the public theatre,Look Back in Anger (1956), was written by an actor untouched by academia who had been writing for several years and a stranger to all of them.
But though composed in ignorance of rival works, many of these writings were seen at the time, naturally and unhesitatingly, as the product of a single mood and of a single set of mind.
Easy to say that the Movement was never more than a journalistic invention — the more so since its principals were (almost certainly) never together in one room.
But it might be better to say that resemblances are all the more significant for that.
A movement moves: it does not, and dares not, coalesce; and to capitalise it was no more than a modest journalistic hyperbole and a useful summary of an undoubted shift in literary taste.
Another collective title, the Angry Young Men, was to prove in the long term more accurate as prediction than description.
Lucky Jim is too confident a book to be called angry, its predominating mood a scorn for a stuffy old order about to be swept away; but some of Amis's later novels, such as Stanley and the Women (1984), which was written by a sexagenarian, fizzle with fury.
Under the Net and Lord of the Flies are too philosophical to be called angry, Golding (in any case) was always seen to be a spirit apart, and a few of these authors were strikingly young at their moment of first success.
Their class origins, too, were rapidly fictionalised, but the notion of a sudden demotic invasion of polite letters can only be called extravagant.
Literature — above all fiction — has never been a notably gentlemanly profession in Britain, as Dickens and H. G. Wells illustrate; and the Bloomsbury group had been upper middle-class rather than aristocratic.
That did not prevent Somerset Maugham, in the sanctuary of a villa in the south of France, from shuddering at the private fantasy of a shaggy-haired mob seizing sudden sway in literary London — an effect, as he imagined, of the welfare state; and he was certain that their social origins were unprecedentedly humble.
‘They have no manners,’ he wrote spiritedly in a newspaper.
‘They are scum’: the sort of people, in fact, who become cabinet ministers.
Strong words, to be believed and echoed through the 1950s and after by many critics at home and abroad, not least in the United States.
It is sobering to report that there is nothing in it.
The myth that Britain is in some exceptional sense class-ridden dies hard, especially in America, perhaps because many are reluctant to acknowledge class-divisions and class-accents nearer home.
The new novelists, in any case, were nothing like under-privileged; and as for the welfare state, it had been founded by the Asquith government after 1908 and was new, by the 1950s, only by recent extension.
The Butler Education Act, designed to open higher education still further to the poor and unconnected, was not post-war, having been approved by a coalition government in 1944; and the new novelists cannot have owed their years at Oxford to R. A. Butler, since they were all undergraduates there before that year.
No British university, in any case, is or ever has been socially exclusive, and the myth of an undergraduate Brideshead of champagne lunches set among gothic quadrangles is little more than an effect of Evelyn Waugh's selective social recollection.
The poor have been students in Oxford and Cambridge continuously since the Middle Ages, and some of their ancient colleges were founded with statutes that explicitly excluded the rich.
There is nothing remotely unusual, in any case, about a British social upstart writing a novel.
Dickens's social  origins were lowlier than those of anyone in the Movement, by a mile: not one of them ever worked in a factory as a child, as he did, or even as an adult.
Iris Murdoch's father was a civil servant, Amis's an export clerk, Larkin's a provincial city treasurer, and John Wain's a dentist and an alderman.
That is nothing like the invasion of a new social class into British letters in general or into fiction in particular.
Talk about the new working-class hero, too, looks odd when you consider how few of its heroes were that; odder still if you think back to the waifs and strays of Dickens, Smollett and Defoe.
But the new novel was, in its own fashion, new.
It represented a sharp recall to a down-to-earth reality, an openness to radical ideas and a frank rejection of refined fictional experimentation, whether Bloomsbury-style or other.
Above all, it demanded accuracy.
All that had its 1930s precursors, such as the early fiction of George Orwell and Graham Greene; and in an open letter to Elizabeth Bowen, written several years before the Movement was ever heard of, Greene had remarked that the novelist has a simple duty to tell the truth and to get it right: ‘By truth I mean accuracy — it is largely a matter of style’.
Characters must not go white in the face, that is to say, or tremble like leaves —‘not because these phrases are clichés, but because they are untrue.’
Greene was in mid career when he wrote that.
But though his mind was, and remained, romantically anti-Establishment, at once Catholic and mildly left-wing, his fiction never seemed impelled by any serious desire to alter the social system of a nation from which, after the war, he was willingly an exile, and his arguments concern rather the writer's alleged duty to refuse all favours from the state — even ‘the bourgeois state’, as he calls it — and to live in romantic independence, royalties apart: surviving (in Joyce's famous phrase) by silence and cunning.
If the  soldier's duty is loyalty, Greene claimed, then the writer's is disloyalty.
That sounds more like a pose defiantly struck than a programme of reform: more Byron than Dickens.
The new novelists, of the 1950s, by contrast, were authentic radicals in a Dickensian tradition; and in the post-war age realism, quite rightly, was felt to be radical.
The point, once obvious, has ceased to be that, and it may need to be restated.
Realism is radical because any purposive attempt to change the world depends on a conviction that it can be described, even that it has been described; and it is the chosen task of realism to describe.
To frame a programme, a manifesto, or a legislative act, a dim sense of injustice is not enough, still less an attitude of defiance.
That is why self-conscious fictional experimentation like stream-of-consciousness tends in its social effects to be conservative, whatever its aspirations; and the later fiction of Joyce and Virginia Woolf cannot be seen to embody any serious proposal to change the world, or to represent a belief that the world could ever be changed.
Such fiction marches happily with political impassivity and an acquiescence in things as they are.
Realism, to be sure, is not restricted to one's own world, as Defoe proved when he wrote Crusoe .
William Golding's second novel,The Inheritors (1955), and his favourite, is about the historically remote world of Neanderthal man, conversing in cries and grunts and on the point of being supplanted by smooth and hairless superior beings; his third,Pincher Martin (1956) drowns its hero on the second page and recounts his thoughts in the rest.
There are no easy party affiliations here.
But Golding's fictional imagination is plainly disturbing to established assumptions, to complacency, to amiable acceptance.
It is untrifling and serious, even open to the charge of blasphemy.
As Salman Rushdie perceptively remarked  several years before Satanic Verses (1988) forced him into hiding to escape Muslim extremists outraged by his handling of the Prophet, realism can break your heart.
It would be misleading to present the revival of realism as a total abandonment of technical experiment.
All new starts are in some sense experimental, a revived realism not least; and it is after all mildly experimental, in a way, to return to a half-deserted tradition forged in England two hundred years before in the age of the Hanoverians.
Realism had flourished with Defoe, Richardson, Fielding and Smollett, and these were to be the presiding deities of the new British novel.
Angus Wilson claimed to have read and reread Richardson's Clarissa , for all its immense bulk, starting at the age of eighteen, admiring above all its triumphant creation of fantasy out of realistic detail — a realism made transcendent — though he also admired the ‘God's eye view’ of the great nineteenth-century novels.
Fielding, Amis once remarked, showed that fiction can uphold a moral seriousness ‘without evangelical puffing and blowing’; his Take a Girl Like You (1960) has been aptly called a modernised replay of Richardson's Pamela ; and when asked by a journalist which of the great novelists of the past he felt the closest affinity with, he replied reverently: ‘With Fielding, though it seems a gross impertinence…’.
John Wain, who is said to reread Johnson's Rasselas every year, has the heroine of his first novel,Hurry on Down (1953), call herself Moll Flanders because she has just been reading Defoe's novel and scents a resemblance to herself; and Iris Murdoch, who seldom reads twentieth-century fiction at all, is profoundly immersed in the great realistic fiction of earlier ages, whether English, French or Russian.
Under the Net (1954), her first published fiction, is technically speaking a memoir-novel like Crusoe or Moll Flanders , being composed as autobiography in the first person; and The Sea ,the Sea (1978), like Crusoe , is in part a diary where the narrator — male, as usual— is himself so unaware as he writes of the astonishing end there will be to kidnapping his lost love that the reader is as surprised as he when it finally unfolds: an audacious exploitation of the fictional memoir never attempted by Defoe himself.
Golding's Lord of the Flies (1954) is in the third person, though like Defoe's most famous novel it is about an island marooning; but Rites of Passage (1980)— the first of the Tarpaulin trilogy — is a memoir-novel, composed not just in the first person but in a pastiche of the English of the Napoleonic wars, especially in its sea-terms — a sort of ‘sub-Jane Austen language’, as he has breezily put it.
In post-war Britain, it is clear, fiction consciously returned in technique, in morality, even occasionally in style, to its Hanoverian roots.
There are two eighteenth centuries vivid to the modern literary consciousness.
The one, familiar between the wars to Bloomsbury and the Sitwells, was mannered, urbane and aphoristic, dressed in silks and powdered wigs and usually more French than English.
That imaginary age, and not the robust world of the new novelists of the 1950s, was what Evelyn Waugh celebrated in the opening paragraph of The Ordeal of Gilbert Pinfold (1957) when he predicted that the present age of English novelists would one day be ‘valued as we now value the artists and craftsmen of the late eighteenth century ‘: a late-rococo world where Victorian exuberance had been replaced by ‘elegance and variety of contrivance’.
Himself apart, Waugh may have had Anthony Powell and L. P. Hartley in mind, those careful craftsmen of post-war fiction.
The first sentence of Hartley's The Go-Between (1953), which appeared when its author was nearly sixty, has by now entered into the valhalla of literary allusion:
The past is a foreign country: they do things differently there,
where the vocabulary, the syntax, even the punctuation suggest a high honing of stylistic effect reminiscent of Gibbon rather than Swift, of Beckford rather than Defoe.
That is one eighteenth century.
The other is the far gamier world of Defoe and Fielding, and it is that memory that Amis and Murdoch revived.
Such fiction, unconcise and more naturally given to carnality than wit, had been unashamedly dominated by story, and it was characteristically fast-paced and impatient of extended description, whether of scene, of motive or of mind.
Dismissive of anything that is not narrative, it would have seen E. M. Forster's gentle and reluctant admission —‘Yes — oh dear yes — the novel tells a story’— as merely faddy.
Narrative is suddenly, and once again, the blood and guts of fiction, and Waugh's remark that ‘the exuberant men are extinct’ was out of date even as he wrote, though only just.
A sudden contempt for technical finesse was perhaps only natural.
The ordinary stuff of realism at its most immediate seldom needs elaboration, since it is something the novelist shares with his reader.
There is small need to explain; and the whole activity, so the novelist may reasonably feel, is self-justifying.
‘A blow on behalf of the ordinary universe’ Golding once called his own fiction in a BBC interview, explaining what he had thought himself to be about when he wrote Pincher Martin .
The new novel was rootedly ordinary, and the refined reflections of a Mrs Dalloway walking down Bond Street, for example, or the fantastic world of Tolkien's Frodo, are equally alien to it.
As Golding was to remark in Stockholm in 1983, on receiving the Nobel prize for literature, fiction has far more to do with the general mind of mankind than with the writer's own  quirks and obsessions: ‘not just what the writer is thinking, but what a huge segment of the world is thinking.’
Words, he went on,
may allow man to speak to man, the man in the street to speak to his fellow, until a ripple becomes a tide running through every nation — of common sense, of simple healthy caution — a tide that rulers and negotiators cannot ignore…
teaching us to be temperate in ourselves and moving mankind as a whole ‘a little nearer the perilous safety of a warless and provident world.’
Such fiction concerns the attainable, un-utopian virtue of daily life.
Golding's own fictional worlds, unlike Amis's or Murdoch's, have tended to be enclosed, which may be natural to one whose early experience has been in naval life and schoolteaching; and unlike theirs, powerfully concerned with the perils of code-breaking and a sense of shame.
Iris Murdoch's fiction has centred rather on a search for goodness, most often by means of loving relationships; Amis's with a sense of decorum and indecorum — with social habits and rules made, altered and broken by the changing generations.
All that, though it eschews propaganda, still sounds programmatic, and the new novel of the 1950s was plainly a committed literature.
It defined itself sharply against a dilapidated Modernism that had denied knowledge and flirted with radical scepticism.
In his Harvard thesis of 1916 T. S. Eliot had claimed any knowledge of reality to be little more than a perilous mental construct: ‘we are forced to admit that the construction is not always completely successful,’ being ‘always about to fall apart.’
But it is an odd kind of belief that one accords to propositions one cannot claim to know; and Eliot's talk of mental constructs, plainly an uncomfortable compromise  in itself, sits oddly with his intense dogmatism about morality and public affairs.
The radical instability of the Modernist view of knowledge, whether moral or social, was manifest; and if Iris Murdoch, among the new novelists, was alone in her capacity as a professional philosopher to counter poor arguments with better, it was equally clear that no one had to be a philosopher to see that the scepticisms of the inter-war years were implausible and ultimately self-contradicting.
That is the more rational side of the debate.
Some other aspects of the anti-Modernism of the new fiction, it must be conceded, were at times more chauvinistic than reasoned.
Modernism always had an irremediably alien air about it, having reached England at around the turn of the century in the hands of immigrants: Conrad from Poland, Eliot and Pound from the United States, Wyndham Lewis from somewhere vaguely transatlantic.
It had rejoiced, as alien coteries naturally do, in its own intellectual isolation; and in disdaining narrative, or at least fast-paced narrative, it had disavowed one of the native strengths of the tradition.
James Joyce, its greatest master of fiction, never settled in England, though he chose to live and die a British subject.
Some alien imports are quickly acclimatised into artistic traditions that last for decades or centuries, and nobody bothers if most of Shakespeare's sources were continental, if porcelain came to England from China by way of Saxony, or if almost all the literary kinds the English tradition has excelled in, excepting only the detective story, have been borrowed from abroad.
But Modernism had the odd distinction of starting foreign and staying foreign.
Regarded as a whole, it was unassimilable.
It is even a question whether it ever seriously sought assimilation.
That is not to say that it left no trace, with its demise, and the anti-Modernism of the new novelist was not  instinctive or immediate but of slow and uncertain growth.
Some of the new realists began their literary lives in homage to Eliot, Joyce or Samuel Beckett.
Iris Murdoch when young wrote Beckett a fan-letter, and her first published book was a critical study of Sartre (1953).
In the 1950s John Wain proposed that the task of the Movement in verse was to consolidate the tradition of Eliot and Pound.
Philip Larkin began as a poet in the tradition of W. B. Yeats, and only slowly came to see that Thomas Hardy, not Yeats, was to be his poetic master.
After flirting with Modernism in his earlier fiction, John Fowles was to deride the whole idea as late as 1982, with Mantissa , which makes elaborate fun of the tradition of Joyce and argues that fiction may find it hard even to survive the grinding tedium of the nouveau roman .
‘At least the French are doing their best to kill the whole stupid thing off for good,’ the heroine remarks; and when her lover solemnly tells her that modern fiction can only be about the difficulty of writing fiction, she asks why writers bother to put their names on title-pages.
Two years later Julian Barnes, in Flaubert's Parrot (1984), entertained the same subversive point in a novel of impish erudition: the past, he suggests in his opening chapter, is rather like a greasy piglet, and anyone who tries to seize it is bound to look ridiculous.
The extremists of Modernist scepticism, as in la nouvelle critique , might proclaim the Death of the Author and deny that intention was ever knowable: but authors were still interrogated, and after some fashion known.
The trouble is that the past, like the present, is in the end not optional, and it is natural to be curious about it.
One has to understand it to live at all.
No wonder, then, if realism, which makes a claim to know past and present in unequivocal terms, returned to fiction and repossessed the field.
It was like melody in music.
Once tried, it was too potent ever to be abandoned for good.
The flirting remains, perhaps to assure the sophisticated reader that Modernism has been absorbed and transcended, not merely ignored or forgotten.
Fowles's finest novel,The French Lieutenant's Woman (1969), is decorated with parodistic devices far less integral than in Joyce's Ulysses , as if a technique needed to be aped and mocked in order to be exorcised.
When Paul Sayer won a literary prize for a grimly realistic first novel,The Comforts of Madness (1988), in which an insane narrator never speaks, he confessed that it was an imitation of Beckett's Malone Dies (1956): ‘I could see how he avoided telling about the main thing: that's something I tried to do in my book,’ though it does not read like Beckett.
Modernism may be a spectre at the feast of the new realism, and little more.
But it can make its presence felt, at least to those with imaginations to see: first admired, then feared, and finally mocked and looted for fragmentary hints and occasional ideas.
That rejection, in the first instance, was anti-cosmopolitan.
A youthful flirtation with Marx and Sartre might be allowed, even encouraged, as wild oats are sown before they are gathered, and both Amis and Iris Murdoch were teenage communists; but the new realism, simply because it was realist, was bound to take its lessons from nearer home.
Its ordinary universe, as Golding called it, was highly unlike Yeats's candle-lit salon or Pound's cloak and broad-brimmed hat.
It cooked and washed the dishes afterwards and preferred pubs to cafés, and its fiction cheerfully describes a world of kitchen squalor and bedsit intimacies.
Reviewing Pincher Martin , Amis once mildly reproached Golding for failing to ‘turn his lifts of originality, of intransigence, and above all of passion to the world where we have to live’, since the novel is set remotely on an island in the Atlantic.
The reproof, justified or not, is significant.
The new novel usually starts from where  one is, seldom from a vision of a lost world or future utopia.
Beryl Bainbridge has told how she finds plots for her novels by visiting the newspaper repository of the British Library in north London, looking out old daily papers for crimes and bizarre happenings.
Reality is what is going on under your nose.
‘You find something,’ she once remarked in an interview, ‘and then you wrap your own life around it.’
Amis's reproof to Golding was in the end too absolute.
Realism is at most an ingredient of fiction, in any case, and never more — even when it is the principal ingredient — and to call a novel realistic can mean no more than that one element has tended to prevail.
It is like flour in cooking: no recipe consists of flour alone, though many utterly depend on it to be what they are.
To imagine that the revived realism of the 1950s and after excluded other possibilities, then, is to misunderstand its nature, and the chauvinism of the school was always something of a pose.
Realism welcomes admixture; it even requires it.
It forbids its own purity.
All fictions, as Henry James remarked in a preface, even the most realistic, need to be artificially opened and closed —‘relations stop nowhere’— so that artifice is its essence, first and last.
Realism is not a narrowing technique, then, but a liberating, and there is no fictional technique it does not, on occasion, readily combine with.
It embraces multitudes.
Iris Murdoch has spoken of novels as tending to be either crystalline or journalistic; and the journalistic, which she practises, sounds like a free-wheeling and ever-hospitable realism: ‘a large, shapeless, quasi-documentary object…telling with pale conventional characters some straightforward story enlivened with empirical facts.’
Omit the pallor, which is an odd and perhaps over-modest intrusion into the account, and that sounds like Defoe or Dickens or Proust — or Murdoch: its converse, the crystalline novel, being ‘a small quasi-allegorical object portraying the human condition,’ which sounds like Rasselas , Waugh's Decline and Fall or Orwell's Animal Farm — not to mention the fiction of Muriel Spark, which can be artfully, even heartlessly, diagrammatic.
A year or two later, expanding on her analysis, Iris Murdoch dubbed the journalistic novel ‘loose and cheerful’, adding gaily that she was inclined to start writing a novel in the hope that ‘a lot of people who are not me are going to come into existence in some wonderful way’— though frustrated, sometimes, by the prevailing theoretical power of her own philosophical mind.
But then realism, as she knows, like journalism, does not exclude analysis: in fact her first book,Sartre , had ended in a mild sense of exasperation against philosophy itself, which she believed had frustrated Sartre by making him unable to write a great novel, ‘a tragic symptom of a situation which afflicts us all’.
We know the human individual to be unique, that is, and uniquely precious, but the net of abstraction can forbid the fiction-writer to present it as either precious or unique.
Months later, in her first published novel, she finally broke with the dominance of abstraction; and Under the Net dances lyrically and playfully around the philosophical idea suggested in its title.
Abstraction and theory imprison us, or try to do so, as if in a net, and the novel tests and demolishes the allegedly superior power of abstract thought over a thinking and feeling life: ‘how far conceptualizing and theorizing divide you from the thing that is the object of theoretical attention.’
That sounds rather like Wittgenstein's famous injunction in Philosophical Investigations (1953)—‘Don't think, look’— and it is marvellously coincidental that Wittgenstein's greatest book, too, appeared posthumously — he died in 1951 — in coronation year.
‘No theory explains everything,’ she remarks elsewhere, ‘yet it is just the desire to  explain everything which is the spur of theory.’
With her first fiction, then, Iris Murdoch joined the ranks of theorists who are part sceptical of theory; and though her writings never lose the marks of a philosophical training, they suggest a training that has been lived and effectively outlived, a sense of theory turned questioning and whimsical.
‘There are some parts of London which are necessary and others which are contingent’ is quite a good joke, though perhaps you would have to be a philosopher as well as a Londoner to see the point of it.
To understand the world, then, and understand it well enough to contrive to live in it, there is no one way: not fact, not theory, not particularity, not abstraction; and explanations of whatever kind are not universal answers, merely part of a progressive and accumulative act of learning and knowing.
The mythical, for example, as she argues, is not ‘something extra’, since men live in myth and symbol all the time, and one myth can be needed to free the mind from another — liberating it to contemplate goodness, which has no ultimate purpose beyond itself.
The only authentic way to be good is to be good ‘for nothing’: that was to become the ringing insistence of her finest treatise,The Sovereignty of Good (1970).
In this author philosophy and fiction continuously interact and are, at most, only formally distinct.
Her philosophy can at moments read like a novel, in its invented illustrations; her novels, in their discursive passages, much like philosophy in unbuttoned mood.
But then the severely discursive is ultimately inadequate, as she knows, which is why mankind needs ever more fictions to live by, why there have to be new novels as well as old.
If a truth is complicated, a character remarks in An Accidental Man (1971), ‘you have to be an artist not to utter it as a lie’.
That, though it is from a novel, sounds like one for the seminar.
But the  seminar could never do the whole of what a novel does, since theory falsifies where stories teach wisdom.
Fiction arises here out of a lively discontent with systems and systematisers.
Philosophy is very small, as she once told a fellow-philosopher and, what is worse, ‘counter-natural’.
Fiction, then, is rather like architecture or plumbing — a necessary art.
A duty to describe is the moral hallmark of the new novel.
In an age when avoiding the point had grown to be associated with Modernism and was ceasing to look like an amusing trick, realism looked courageous, unblinking and unbowdlerising.
W. H. Auden had remarked years before, in a sonnet called ‘The Novelist’(1939), how alarmingly inclusive the fiction-writer looks, compared with the poet:
…he must
Become the whole of boredom, subject to 
Vulgar complaints like love, among the Just
Be just, among the Filthy filthy too…
That was written twenty years and more before the trial and acquittal of D. H. Lawrence's Lady Chatterley's Lover in October–November 1960 — an event that made more headlines than practical difference, though it marks a convenient turning-point in British official attitudes to literary obscenity.
The new novel is just and filthy.
It is not for the squeamish, but equally it is not for the merely despairing.
It entertains the possibility of amelioration and even of cure.
To be modernist, a post-war French aphorist once remarked, is to mess about with what cannot be mended (‘bricoler dans l'incurable ’).
That is not an assumption made by Amis or Golding or  Murdoch, and that is the plain sense in which they are not Modernists.
They believe the world can be made better, and that literature can help to make it so.
They are not for messing about.
In texture the new novel is comic.
The journalist who in 1954 invented the term ‘The Movement’ aptly called the temper of its fiction ‘sceptical, robust and ironic’.
That, too, was a return to roots, if one accepts that comedy (and above all social comedy) is the true genius of the nation and the thing it does best.
The point is not new: Samuel Johnson believed that Shakespeare's comedies reveal a profounder instinct than his tragedies: ‘his tragedy seems to be skill, his comedy to be instinct’.
Comedy, in any case, is not necessarily optimistic, and it can tellingly present a tragic world — a point readily overlooked by those who confuse literary forms like tragedy with states of mind like a tragic view of life, as if over-obsequious to a terminology or eager to be confused by one.
Some tragedy consoles, after all, and it is arguable that some of its consolations are facile and false.
The matter of fiction, in any case, given that it aims at realism, does not readily divide according to the classic view.
‘All sorts of tragic experiences,’ Amis has remarked, ‘have comic capsules secreted in them.’
Comedy is radical, too, in the sense of forcing the reader to reconsider traditional reverences: tragedy can flatter and soothe with an assurance that even in the dungeon or on the scaffold the heroic mind is invulnerable.
Comedy, what is more, is arguably a higher skill, as many a performer knows.
‘A concert pianist is allowed a wrong note here and there,’ Amis observed in his introduction to The New Oxford Book of Light Verse (1978), ‘a juggler is not allowed to drop a plate.’
The most refined skills, in that robust view, are not in the Royal Albert Hall but at the end of the pier.
All that suggests a fierce and self justifying pride in comic technique; and  the technical resources of the new realism, though sometimes self-effacing, are not trivial.
Lucky Jim may survive in the memory as a series of farcical moments, but it is also a tightly plotted novel;The Green Man (1969), a nightmarish ghost-story, has one of the most ingenious plots in English fiction.
If the British are a whimsical nation, their whimsies can be well researched and well rehearsed, like the epigrams of an accomplished conversationalist, and as carefully planned.
That, to be sure, is not the manner of Anthony Burgess, a Manchester-born novelist of Catholic upbringing who has lived much of his abundantly creative life in Italy and Monte Carlo; and his A Clockwork Orange (1962) and Earthly Powers (1980), though lit with humour, suggest a darker and more haunted vision.
But then Burgess, though a master of many moods, seems to mistrust the comic, and believes that entertainment falsifies the world by concentrating on matter rather than manner.
That, like his exile, suggests a soul apart.
By and large, the new novel since 1953 has moved most naturally between social comedy and farce.
The sources of that mood — sceptical, robust, ironic — though ultimately eighteenth-century, are far more immediate than Fielding or Smollett.
Open one of the new novels of the 1950s and read a page at random, and one is reminded of the inter-war comic fictions of P. G. Wodehouse or the early social novels of George Orwell.
Lucky Jim as an over-night visitor drunkenly burning his host's sheets with his cigarette-ends, and desperately trying to disguise the damage with a pair of scissors, is farcical in a Wodehouse sort of way, though the social rank of the characters is down more than a notch or two.
The scene is Orwellian, too, not just in its suburban setting but in its prevailing emphasis on a pained sense of demeaning social inferiority and skimping poverty.
But there the resemblances end, and an Amis novel  offers a far more carnal world than Wodehouse or even early Orwell, its sexuality gamier by a mile.
Comic skills are exploited with an evident pride in technique, like the juggler tossing his plates, but there is a sudden expansion in range.
The unmentionable is now to be mentioned: in fact, six years before Lady Chatterley's Lover went into paperback, it is wheeled centre-stage.
Radical, flippant and brash, the 1950s novel takes avid pride in its accuracy; and in presenting the post-war world with a compelling image of itself, it cannot plausibly omit the predominating drive of sex.
Its hero is all of a kind with that world of austerity and shortages, and the fashionable search for the working-class hero may have led critics into missing some of the deeper connections here.
There is nothing new about working-class heroes or heroines in English fiction; what is new in post-war Britain, on the contrary, is the slow fade-out of a class of odd-jobbers and wage-earners of modest habits and narrow horizons familiar to all earlier ages of British fiction.
Post-war Britain is not the age when the working-class hero arrived on the literary stage but rather the moment when, with some evident reluctance, he left it.
The new hero may start out in life as untenured or a drifter — seldom as a wage-earner — but he settles down.
He was a yuppie decades before the word was invented, and his stated objects in life were self-promotion and a settled life.
And that, after all, is a pattern entirely familiar in British fiction.
It is Tom Jones, it is Edward Waverley, it is David Copperfield.
In a last chapter the young rover turns, and by his own eager wish, to settle into a life of married affluence.
These are fictions about experimenting with an impecunious and occasionally feckless life of adventure, and then giving it up.
An escapade or two can help to teach what the world is like, and even why it is what it is; but novels in this age-old tradition of English  fiction, though often radical, are in no way revolutionary.
Things are what they are, and mankind is unchanging, even if men and women change as individuals from moment to moment.
Scott's Captain Waverley, as a southern Whig, is momentarily infatuated with the Jacobite Highlands, but he returns south and is pardoned for his treason.
The heroes of Under the Net and Lucky Jim follow a broadly similar path, bemused at lit by false starts and coming by the end to see the social world as it is: various, unstereotypable, kaleidoscopic and as fast-shifting as the shades of an opal, but in the end a place to settle into and improve rather than a system to defy.
The game is self-promotion, and a game is more fun if you observe the rules.
It is then, and only then, after all, that you can hope to play it better and to win.
What learning process — a sort of out-of-school education in life itself — is above all a study in embarrassment; and the embarrassable hero is abundant in comedy and alive outside it, even in the final awesome scene of Golding's Lord of the Flies .
That scene, as Golding has often told, was the first he conceived of, and he invented the rest of the book with the conclusion already in mind; and it tells of a frightened boy ‘tensed for more terrors’ who staggers to his feet to find not his tormentors but an officer in a white-topped cap:
He saw white drill, epaulettes, a revolver, a row of gilt buttons down the front of a uniform.
A naval officer stood on the sand,
and as the island burns he tells of two boys killed, and childish tears flow:
The officer, surrounded by these noises, was moved and a little embarrassed.
He turned away to give them time to pull themselves together; and waited, allowing his eyes to rest on the trim cruiser in the distance.
And so the novel ends in total shock, much like occupied Europe in 1945, with a sense of all civility and order disrupted and about to be restored, and not at all like the cosy world of Coral Island.
Embarrassment is usually comic, especially in fiction.
But here Golding offers the extremest instance of how it might be tragic too.
The theme is so persistent as to invite analysis.
Embarrassment, it seems clear, is a major concern of the British psyche, and the dreams the British dream, if opinion-polls are to be believed, tend to be about social embarrassment, with amorous fantasy playing only a disappointingly minor role; and if that is to be taken in evidence, then it may be said to represent a more powerful obsession than sex.
The deepest psychic hurts are to a sense of decorum, and Lord of the Flies ends with a hint of normal life to come: the boys will be scrubbed and dressed, one may be sure, their barbarities and indecencies put behind them, and sent back to school.
Civility has been shattered on Golding's island.
But it will return.
Doing all that means doing the Right Thing, and any such notion, in life or in fiction, depends on a shared acceptance of what the Right Thing is.
That acceptance is not a characteristic of British life, merely a truth of it.
Any settled society has right and wrong ways of living together — not least revolutionary societies, which tend to be conformist beyond all others.
The oddity of the British achievement has been to turn its sense of social conformity into an international commodity.
Its heroes do not characteristically commit suicide or ride off into the sunset: they settle down, marry, and make  comfortable and elaborate treaties with the world they live in.
Lucky Jim ends with Jim getting a wife and a City job.
Idle to say that such conformity is merely British: if it were so, the world would not so readily understand British fiction or buy it; and buy it does, whether as novels, films or TV serials.
Waugh's Brideshead Revisited in the 1970s was watched across the face of the globe on television screens, like Galsworthy's Forsyte Saga before it.
British realism is distinctive not in being realistic but in being exportable, embarrassment and all; and it is hard to resist the conclusion that the world buys it, including the American and Soviet worlds, because it is curious about what it is to be British.
The shoreline that appears from the deck of the Calais packet is a fabled shore; and if a language is a dialect with an army, as somebody once said, then English is a dialect famed not just for its armaments but for its gentility and civic virtue.
Such international curiosity is far from new.
Defoe and Richardson enjoyed it in the eighteenth century, Dickens in the next.
It seems worth asking why, though it remains a question hard to answer, and impossible to answer in strictly literary terms.
Social embarrassment, duly fictionalised, is an odd commodity to export, and it does not figure in official balance-of-payments figures; but it has been selling around the world since Fielding's Tom Jones and Scott's Waverley , not to mention Wodehouse's Bertie Wooster.
Wooster, after all, in the inter-war Jeeves stories, was eternally trying to do the Right Thing and succeeding (if at all) only on the last page of the story.
That too is what Charles Ryder does in Waugh's Brideshead , more or less, or Guy Crouchback in Sword of Honour ; or Amis's Lucky Jim; or the savagely dishonoured hero of Golding's Tarpaulin trilogy.
Embarrassment is under no obligation to be comic, though it is most naturally that, and as a fictional theme it is of  inexhaustible power and seemingly unending appeal.
The political aspects of the new fiction are hardly easier to generalise.
William Golding, the oldest of the new novelists, has told how his first novel emerged from reflecting, as so many in the 1940s reflected, how readily Hitler and his National Socialists had revived barbarism in our times, and in a modern and advanced industrial state.
The thought was (and is) unnerving, and it illustrates how close realism sits to radical analysis, how misplaced the critical stricture that it is merely cosy.
Lord of the Flies is a novel about English schoolboys marooned on a desert island — a Defoe-like subject, though unlike Crusoe it uses the third person — but reversing Defoe, it tells of their rapid descent into savagery, totem-worship and the childish joys of torture and terror.
There is a Nazi in everyone, so schoolmaster Golding suggests, and there since childhood; and civilisation is no more than the thinnest of thin veneers, as Hitler showed, masking a base, innate craving to rule and be ruled.
The point is unrelenting and sharp.
And yet Golding is nothing like a political novelist in terms of British domestic politics, and his views about political parties, whatever they are, are not publicly a part of his fiction.
With Amis and Iris Murdoch the matter is more lucid; and both can be seen, by now, as socialist novelists who at varying pace soon ceased to be that.
John Wain — another Movement novelist — is said to have voted Conservative as early as 1951, before he ever published a book, as if silently laying down a marker for the future: but then that was in the days of Winston Churchill.
Iris Murdoch's war-time communism had given place, well before her first novel ever appeared, to an interest in Sartre's Existentialism: a natural stepping-stone, in the 1940s, along a well-trodden path that leads out of the simplifying preconceptions of Marxism; and though earlier partisan interests flickered back half into life in the 1960s, during the Vietnam war, she had already abandoned Marx, and publicly, before the 1950s were out.
The salt itself,’ she remarked sadly of socialism as early as 1958, ‘seems to have lost its savour.’
Reality, in any case, is not ‘a given whole’, as she wrote soon after her disillusionment; that is why one is ‘forever at odds with Marxism’.
A dogma that once looked profound had been shown to be no more than a simplistic diagram; and social reality is too complex, in the end, to be embraced by any single theory of history or of class.
There is no class-war in advanced industrial states, in any case; and the village idiot posted at the town gate to welcome the Messiah, though never out of work, is always likely to get bored with the job.
That rejection of simplicity came soon.
‘It doesn't apply,’ Kingsley Amis remarked to himself as an adolescent Marxist on joining the army during the war and glancing around the barracks at his new comrades.
Life is far more richly graded and shaded, in reality, than terms like working-class and middle-class allow.
The shift of Amis's mind, thoughtful and unphilosophical as it is, has been broadly a pattern to others of his age.
An ex-Marxian socialist in post-war Oxford, he was to avow as late as 1957, in an address to the Fabian Society called Socialism and the Intellectuals , that he had voted Labour in every election since 1945, and ‘unless something very unexpected happens, I shall vote Labour to the end of my days — however depraved the Labour candidate may be, and however virtuous his opponent.’
That Something Very Unexpected, whatever it was, happened shortly afterwards: by the 1960s Amis was a figure of the New Right, and by the late 1970s publicly Thatcherite.
But that, after all, is to tread a path  that many trod.
In 1979, similarly, Iris Murdoch remarked she was glad Labour lost; and she was voting Conservative, not without reservations, by the 1980s.
It might be rash to conclude that all that represents a rejection of radicalism; better, perhaps, to say that it is the sense of radicalism itself that changed.
By the 1970s it was no longer obvious that socialism was radical.
With over half the British labour force by then state-employed, whether directly or indirectly, competitive private enterprise in a dynamic style inspired by Japan, West Germany and the United States had come to look to many, and with some reason, like a radical option.
Competition, as more and more noticed, can favour the poor in a way state monopolies are never likely to do; in fact it is precisely through concentrated economic power, not least in the great nationalised industries and services, that the rich can sometimes best thrive.
Socialism-for-the-rich had by the 1970s ceased to be a mere phrase and become a visible fact.
Welfare provision, too, can be higher in the capitalist West than in the socialist East, as the two Germanies illustrate; and the migration of the poor across the Iron Curtain, as many remarked, has not been in the direction of socialism.
By the 1970s the goal-posts of political debate had been momentously shifted.
A century earlier Sidney Webb, in Fabian Essays (1889), had argued that socialism was both efficient and irreversible.
That was a view common enough by the 1940s, even among anti-socialists.
But it was widely abandoned by the 1970s, a decade that historians may come to dub the graveyard of the socialist idea.
In those years socialism finally ceased to look undeniably left-wing, whether east or west of the Iron Curtain; and if fiction changed its politics in that age, so did the world around it.
It is the natural business of realism, after all, to reflect the world; and if realism did not cease to be radical, radicalism turned realistic.
Competition, it is  now clear, unlike monopoly, can be highly radical in the sense of destructive of traditional interests.
As early as 1958 Iris Murdoch had perceptively observed that ‘there is nothing in between’ the technicalities of socialism and its highly simplistic morality: argumentatively speaking, that is , you cannot get from central planning to such ideals as equality of opportunity or of condition.
That was a truth the British learned by living it.
And if the discovery radicalised its parties, not least the Conservatives, and left Britain without a genuinely conservative party in parliament or in the country, that odd effect of the demise of socialism passed almost unnoticed in an age eager to recover and proclaim the competitive principle.
Fiction itself traces the shift from the collective to the individual, from respect for the state to respect for the person.
The new English novel is above all about the search for goodness.
With Golding, exceptionally, that can mean a long backward glance into history or even prehistory — to the world of lost innocence of Neanderthal man in The Inheritors , or to the pre-industrial world of the sailing ship in the Tarpaulin trilogy.
In others it more commonly invites a searching look into the here-and-now, or at least into worlds close enough to be remembered.
Golding and Murdoch represent the opposite poles of fictional genius: the one imposing a commanding pattern on his narratives, as if in allegory, the other (at her best) exploring a moral hypothesis with all the freedom that friendship, acquaintance and love naturally offer in life itself.
Both stand outside religion, as formally understood; but sympathetically, as if longing at times to be inside, and sadly conscious of its  insuperable intellectual difficulties.
They are, so to speak, Christian fellow-travellers.
How can omnipotence be just?
How can omniscience be reconciled with free will?
Such ancient and well-tried difficulties with the concept of the divine haunt their fictions, which remain essentially this-worldly, however, in their moral concerns, and never theological.
The new novel, unlike the fictions of Tolkien and Lewis, is stubbornly secular, but with an ear cocked to the supernatural; it is no more anti-religious, that is to say, than Philip Larkin's poem ‘Church Going’, which intones sympathetically the values of an empty place where the dead lie buried and where prayer has once been valid.
Iris Murdoch briefly warmed to Buddhism in her middle years, and more recently adopted a congenially fellow-travelling stance to Christianity much like Larkin's: ‘There are advantages,’ she has remarked in an interview, ‘in staying with the icons of one's own people.’
So the new novel is not a party to faith, only to a faintly envious sympathy with those who are faithful.
Larkin, in his poem, had paused at the door of a village church to make sure there was nothing going on before modestly venturing in as a tourist.
Goodness is an intellectual search and enquiry, first and last, and not, as in the novel of earlier centuries, a reaffirmation of known truths.
It is a seeking rather than a finding, and it ends with few certitudes.
This is a fiction composed by university graduates — the first such school of fiction in English — and its primary emphasis, only remotely Cervantic, is on the dangers of false intellectualism and simplistic theories, and above all the arrogant notion that membership of an intelligentsia constitutes a credible claim to superior wisdom or superior virtue.
The new hero, like Don Quixote, gets it wrong by study, but unlike Quixote he gets it right (more or less) by living, and he characteristically needs  to educate himself by life after having partly de-educated himself through books.
That is a pattern of fiction broadly like the world of Quixote or Mr Pickwick, but with the large difference that the new hero can change, and does.
He unlearns the false learning of the schools by watching, listening and seeing; he is changed by life.
The campus novel — that highly characteristic invention of the 1950s in Anglo-America — provides a natural arena for that debate, since a university can easily represent a claim to false superiority, and such claims by their very nature cry out to be tested and explored.
C. P. Snow's The Masters (1951) is a precursor rather than an instance: it tells a story of an election within a Cambridge college, a bitter tale of disappointed hopes; but it hardly questions the intellectual claims of academia, and it ultimately belongs, like other Snow novels, to a world of administrative ambitions where a university is seen as an out-of-town version of Whitehall.
Promotion is everything there — easily more than love, power, sympathy, or sex.
Such novels may not greatly dignify the world they describe, or even get it right; but their fascination with the inner workings of an administrative system are ultimately reverent, and Snow himself was to end his career in London and not in Cambridge, where he had begun as a scientist: a peer and, briefly, a government minister.
Born in 1905, and publishing fiction in the 1930s, he belongs to another age.
Amis's Lucky Jim is something other; so is William Cooper's Struggles of Albert Woods (1952), written in slapstick vein by a follower of Snow's; so is Angus Wilson's Anglo-Saxon Attitudes (1956) and a fistful of novels soon after by David Lodge and Malcolm  Bradbury, both of them professors of English in civic universities.
Here the campus is king and no breath of doubt is admitted that time spent at a university is the decisive influence on life, even if the claims of life take one willingly, even defiantly, out of universities forever.
Bradbury's first novel,Eating People is Wrong (1959), tells what it felt like to be a first-generation student in a civic university like Leicester in the 1950s, puzzled and intrigued as a humble newcomer by liberal values of knowledge-for-its-own-sake and a wholly unfamiliar style of life.
His friend David Lodge has explored the same theme in farcical vein in Changing Places (1975),Small World (1984) and Nice Work (1988), where farce is sophisticated by literary allusion and softened by the hint that humane values, however easily forgotten in the contest of fashion and the struggle for careers, may yet be of intrinsic worth.
The point is made more seriously, and more savagely, in Bradbury's The History Man (1975), a fiercely partisan novel where an academic militant is exposed as a manipulative hypocrite, his ambitions directed more to sex and money than to revolution.
Marxism can be a way to get rich or get laid.
In the 1950s, in one fashion or another, academia suddenly looked important.
Dons were no longer the comic derelicts that flit through Victorian fiction or the novels of Evelyn Waugh.
They seek, and sometimes have, power.
Their voices can carry around the world on radio or television, their printed utterances as prophet or pundit resound through newspapers and journals; their more reflected views to be memorialised, sage-like, on the bookshelf.
Universities mark no mere rite of passage, now, between school and society.
They are, at least potentially, places for creativity, power and prestige.
That sudden creativity has engendered its own literature.
In a 1975 introduction to his first novel,Jill , Larkin  has revealed what his college life in war-time Oxford was like, and how he first met Amis there — an account somewhat amended by Amis in his contribution to Larkin at Sixty (1982); and collections of essays with titles like My Oxford (1977) and My Cambridge (1977) have assembled reminiscences of how mind and character were once forged round and about the tender age of twenty.
The campus novel has its theatrical equivalent, too, in the plays of Simon Gray, who went to Cambridge, and in Jumpers by Tom Stoppard, who went to no university at all.
By the 1960s and 1970s, for a brief and intense phase, there was no greater theme in all fiction than this.
To understand why, the image of a tumbling wall might make a fitting emblem.
Ivy-covered or not, universities had once protected themselves as if by walls from the outside gaze; effortlessly so, on the whole, since for centuries the world beyond had little curiosity about them, they cost the taxpayer nothing, and their inmates were proverbially remote and ineffectual.
The new academic, by contrast, could be a creative artist, and he could dazzle the world as a poet, a dramatist or a novelist.
He could also be a sage, TV-style, and an acclaimed public figure.
The new campus novel is about such people, and by them: not just about dons but by dons.
C. P. Snow had been a scientist at Christ's College, Cambridge before he turned to fiction; William Golding, a Salisbury schoolteacher who gave up teaching with the success of Lord of the Flies , has never exactly written an academic fiction, but The Spire (1964) is about the enclosed scholastic world of medieval architecture.
These are older men.
By the time Lucky Jim appeared, however, Amis was a lecturer in English at Swansea, though the novel is more likely to be based on recollections of a visit to his friend Larkin at Leicester, to whom it is dedicated; and Bradbury's Eating People is Wrong was written by a graduate student at Manchester University.
Iris Murdoch's prolific fiction touches only occasionally on academia; but she loves plots based on relations between teacher and pupil, master and disciple, and her interest in philosophy is so well known a fact that it informs any reading of her books, which are often felt to convey modern philosophical issues in lucid and digestible form.
British universities can seldom afford the American luxury of Writers on Campus, but the ivy-clad wall can tumble from inwards, and in the 1950s it did.
It is not that writers invaded universities.
Academics became writers.
The hero of the campus novel, like his creator, often had one toe inside academia and the rest out.
That is the fruitful ambiguity on which the new fiction was based.
Lucky Jim abandons that life at the end of the book, forever convinced that its intellectual corruptions are subtler and deeper than those of money-making, and cheerfully enters the world of finance.
The Lawrentian hero of A. Alvarez's first novel,Hers (1974), makes a broadly similar choice, selling off his hardbacks as a final gesture of abandonment; and when the hero of Michael Frayn's The Trick of It (1989) beds a lady whose writings have been the subject of his lectures and publications, he finds the experience amorously disappointing.
All this smacks of disillusionment, though not exactly of regret.
Academia is by now a necessary experience, in a manner it is never likely to have looked to Defoe or Dickens — something to be lived, for a time, and not forgotten — but quit in the consciousness that it is ultimately unlivable.
That it should need to be exorcised in that fashion, however, or at all, still leaves it looking potent, richly formative and far from innocent, and the fiction that ultimately emerges from it is ex-academic in much the same sense that it is ex-socialist.
Academia is to be savoured, even devoured, and then  transcended.
There is a world elsewhere — usually financial or literary London — and it is a world indeed in the worldly sense, enticingly garnished with the gratifications of the flesh and even the Devil.
But one must first sit and ponder, apparently, behind the ivy-covered wall.
The borderline cases here are instructive.
Philip Larkin spent his last years as a university librarian at Hull, where he administered but did not teach; John Wain resigned a lectureship at Reading to live in Oxford, where he spent five years as a professor of poetry; Iris Murdoch, though willingly leaving an Oxford teaching post in her middle years, has lived there, or near it, married to a professor; and David Lodge and Malcolm Bradbury either retired early or went part-time.
Some toes, evidently, may be left in the water.
But all that is to characterise rather than to explain, and the lofty prestige of universities in the post-war world remains a phenomenon that has still to be convincingly analysed.
Their influence on fiction, immense as it has been, is evidently only part of a larger pattern of social influence.
Some day the theme may find its historian, who will find many taxing questions to answer.
Why, for example, did the author of Lucky Jim wait for nearly ten years before following his own hero to the metropolis?
Literature sometimes gets ahead of life, but with realistic fiction one wonders how it can.
The search for goodness could take the new hero into academia and out again, despairing of its false intellectualism and its established assumption that to be intelligent is only and always to be an intellectual.
In that severely limited sense, and only in that, the new anti-Modernism was anti-intellectual.
It hated pretension, however, because it loved the life of mind; and what Golding once called a ‘blow for the ordinary universe, is a denial, often explicit, of a pre-war tradition of fiction composed for an intelligentsia and self-consciously excluding the vulgar appeals of fast-paced narrative and clarity of assertion.
There, at least, the new novelists — secular though they were — and Christian revivalists like Tolkien were altogether at one; and Lord of the Flies and The Lord of the Rings , which coincidentally appeared in the same year, share that large element in common .
They are equally a protest against Bloomsbury and Modernism, against novels without narrative momentum, incidents unbased on a shared knowledge of a familiar and engrossing world, and analysis without moral commitment.
The ordinary universe is a social manifesto as well as a literary position.
Under the Net ends with its drifting hero finding work;Lucky Jim with marriage and a job.
The love of money, then, is not (as one was told) the root of all evil.
Mankind seeks status even more avidly than wealth, and more self-corruptingly; and intellectual affectation can be a darker sin than whatever vulgarities arise out of a simple greed for gain.
Samuel Johnson, who was something of a hero of the new school, once remarked that a man is seldom so innocently employed as when he is making money, and that celebrated remark might serve as a slogan for much of modern British fiction.
Whatever is the matter with British life, it is not materialism.
If only it were…
A man might be more virtuous if more selfish, after all, as more than one eighteenth-century moralist proposed, and more generous if he had more to be generous with.
Behind the new anti-Modernism flits the shadow of that old anti-Modernist D. H. Lawrence.
Lawrence died in 1930, but his mounting vogue in the decade or two after his death, not least in universities, had kept a flame  of thoughtful anti-Modernism alive.
Larkin has told how Lawrence was one of his favourite novelists when he was young, along with Isherwood, Maugham and Waugh, and many in and after the Second World War were to ponder the strange, radical genius of famed humility of social origin and ambiguous political stance who had helped keep the realistic spirit alive and potent in an age when its intellectual prestige stood low.
‘A work must enact its own meaning’ and ‘Never trust the teller, trust the tale’— such Lawrentian tags, garbled as they may have been from the writings of the Master, could inspire and cheer the literate young of the 1940s.
Lawrence's rising reputation in the years after his death made the critical shift back to realism easier.
‘It was as if a key turned,’ Margaret Drabble once remarked of her easy transition from student days at Cambridge to the life of an instant bestseller in realistic fiction with her first novel,A Summer Birdcage (1962).
Between the world wars that tradition had thinned.
But its thread since Defoe is unbroken, and it is the absence of any break in a national tradition now nearly three centuries long that helps to make it effortless.
Realism is a technique which, being known from childhood reading, never needs to be consciously studied, and certainly the effort required to compose a corpus of novels, like the noteworthy succession of Anita Brookner romances that began with A Start in Life (1981), is always more likely to be emotional than technical.
Realism, though humanly exacting, is technically what comes naturally.
The analysis of a remembered life, after all, or of the life around one, is continuous with living itself: with gossip heard and overheard, with unspoken thoughts, with watching and listening to friends or strangers.
If realism can break your heart, as Salman Rushdie remarked, it comes easily in every other sense.
It can arise from talk overheard on the top of a bus, or anywhere.
No one who reads such  books can doubt that they are composed by those who find novel-writing, in the most flattering sense of the word, easy: the sheer fertility of the school forbids any other interpretation.
Such books are commonly fast-written and substantially unrevised.
It is the ultimate paradox of this highly academic school of fiction that it defies all the usual rules of academic scrupulosity, as if fiction were a breaking-out, a holiday from cares.
But then Lawrence, too, one of the first university-trained novelists in the language, had not behaved otherwise.
The new realists proclaimed two large truths about the world, the one severely literary and the other not.
The literary truth is that Modernism was in the end a starved and blighted world, joylessly based on a denial that language can depict the real.
That was its challenge.
But as the new realists and the Christian revivalists equally understood, mankind needs its shared experience of reality; and conversation apart, it is doubtful if anything but fiction can do it as well, or do it at all .
Modernists never wrote stories, as that word is commonly understood, and to all public appearances they seldom read them.
‘I am unable to be confident from Mr. Eliot's writings,’ iris Murdoch once reproachfully wrote in a theoretical defence of realism, ‘that he has ever enjoyed and admired any novel.’
The remark, if not strictly accurate, is profoundly just in a general sense.
Modernism seldom speaks of a shared experience.
It refuses to tell; it even denies, in its extreme theorising moods, that there is anything certain to be told.
Eliot's Four Quartets , like Pound's Cantos , alternate dizzyingly between the sceptical and the dogmatic, and by the 1950s that paradox had come to look insoluble.
If intellectualism only leads to a cultivated despair or a  hankering after dictatorship, then it is time to give ordinary intelligence a chance.
The new fiction tells of a world its readers live.
Accuracy, which is first and last its claim to existence, has many aspects, of which the simplest is mimicry; and Kingsley Amis happens, not coincidentally, to be a notable mimic in conversation.
Realism is an extended version of that conversational gift: it  mimics the real world.
In British terms that means reflecting the multifarious ways in which speech and gesture reveal or seek to conceal social status and social pretension: and in a fast-shifting, highly unrigid world like the British, status is far more often a matter of pretension than of birth.
Like Shaw's Eliza in Pygmalion , you are what you decide to be, more or less; and no people on earth, one may suspect, is so adept at jumping hierarchies by efficiently switching accent or style.
Self-promotion of that sort may be a matter for amused comment, but it is widely accepted that one may choose one's Place in the pecking order, or try to, and that in Britain parentage does not irreversibly define class.
‘Look, I know it's a dodgy topic,’ some one remarks in Amis's Stanley and the Women (1984), ‘but you are lower class, aren't you, darling?’; to which the admirably candid reply is:
I was before I came up in the world, true, but lower-middle-class, not working-class.
Very important distinction.
My old dad got really wild if you said he was working-class.
Worse than calling him a Jew,
which sounds as if parentage counts, but not to the point where it counts for everything.
And no one is stuck with it unless he wants to be.
Class accents lie at the heart of such mimicry, though on the printed page a betraying turn of phrase, or a tell-tale choice of words like ‘dodgy’ or ‘darling’, can be  represented more easily than an impure vowel.
Such differences are not a distinguishing truth of British life, merely a truth.
France, Germany and the United States have them too: in fact it is a question whether any large language-system is without them.
Vocabulary and articulation often reflect social standing in Britain, to be sure: but where do they not?
It would be more surprising if it were otherwise — or so the new novel seems to tell, or remind.
Since dress, gait and table manners instantly distinguish social rank, all over the world, why not speech as well?
People need to be told these things, after all, and without asking, so that a few clear social indicators are a simple necessity in life and not, in themselves, a matter for regret.
Language, in any case, is often the subtlest indicator that there is: much better than clothes, since one can daily or hourly change one's clothes.
The fertile play of dialogue in these novels, often predominating on the printed page, is a constant stream of signals flashed to the reader to help him estimate the age, the mood, and the standing — real or pretended — of their characters from instant to instant.
These are status-hungry beings eager to define a place in the world for themselves and for others.
To perceive that fiction can describe a known and shared experience — to accept, in effect, the chief claim of realism — is to perceive that, in the end, no single or simple doctrine, whether Marxist, Christian or other, can do the whole job.
‘This doesn't apply,’ as the teenage Amis remarked in his army barracks, abandoning Marxism because it failed to fit the real world.
You cannot, in a post-industrial nation, make more than fitful sense of an early Victorian doctrine of class-war.
Hence the pull of tolerance.
Realism signifies a love, or at least an acceptance, of diversity.
In his second novel,The Inheritors , Golding has stood so far back from modern historical progress as to imagine the  supersession of innocent, hairy Neanderthalers by ‘bone-face men’ in a prehistoric age: they wear clothes or, as the primitive eye sees it, they step outside their skins.
No shared knowledge there, but an imaginative leap that stretches realism to the farthest point and yet preserves its characteristic obsession with speech and gesture.
The realistic novelist's world is a roomy one, large in space and time.
As Iris Murdoch has remarked in admiration of Dickens and Tolstoy, the great novelist creates a house fit for free character to live in: free, that is, to live lives untrammelled by the allegorical or the stereotypical, to be as quirky, unpredictable, and self-contradicting as beings one knows in a real world.
The stream of novels that followed the coronation of realism in 1953 may in all likelihood have proved even wider, in scope and tolerance, than the founders of the school ever dared to hope or to expect.
Its polarities are form and language: Muriel Spark the mistress of form, her designs tightly, even constrictively imposed; Anthony Burgess of language, a successor (perhaps because of his Irish ancestry) of Joyce.
Paul Scott's Raj Quartet , a fictional foursome collected in 1976 and with the pendant of a fifth novel,Staying On (1977), is a vast canvas devoted to the transfer of power in India and its sequel: too close in time to be seen, altogether clearly, as historical fiction, too distant in place to be a shared world; though like E. M. Forster before him, Scott chose an alien sun to define the outlines and shadows of the English abroad, where their habits of mind look all the sharper, odder and more endearing against the background of an exotic land.
Anita Brookner's novels are London-based, and they revive in their concise and elegant style, in fictions at once grim and yet subtly self-mocking, the Brontëan theme of lonely, loving heroines more sensitive than beautiful —‘she was attractive enough for a clever woman, but it was principally as  a clever woman that she was attractive’— and, as in the Brontës, without the solace of a happy ending.
They teach the bitter truth that in the life of a great city one needs others and yet is always alone.
Such a vision is as microscopic as Paul Scott's is panoramic; and a future historian, reading the Raj Quartet or J. G. Farrell's Siege of Krishnapur (1973), which tells of the Indian Mutiny, might easily make the mistake of supposing that the British are nostalgic for lost empire.
That would be a misunderstanding.
As Kipling complained, they hardly noticed it when it was there; and since its conversion into a Commonwealth of Nations in 1947, with Indian independence, they have hardly noticed that a Commonwealth is not the same thing.
The attraction of India is not the breadth and scope of the imperial idea but the sniff of a richly coherent world that novelists rightly value as the supreme end of fiction.
As Graham Greene once created a Greene-land, habitable only by creatures distinctive of his mind, so do novelists since his day seek a setting that holds together, and one that gives character a space to breathe and act in.
That setting can be imperial India or a lonely flat in a great city haunted by thoughts of lost love.
Either way, it is a coherent world to be de fined and explained, at once like and unlike the world that readers know.
If tolerance is essential to such fiction, then the novelist tolerates, even if he does not defend or excuse, much that is outside the range of other arts, not excluding affectation, pretension, self-contradiction and sin: ‘among the Filthy, filthy’.
This is a secular world, in its emphases, even if some of its novelists like Barbara Pym and A. N. Wilson have been dedicatedly Christian.
It is not religion that drives it, or theory; and the rejection of Marxism now looks, in retrospect, like an inevitable part of its natural growth.
Whatever novelists may believe about the universe, they do not demand of their readers  a formal belief in God or the Devil, or in the forces of history, and the tolerances they expect are wide.
Amis's Stanley and the Women drew blood, for a time, from feminist opinion, and is said to have been blocked for a period from entry into the United States; and Salman Rushdie's Satanic Verses (1988) forced its author, a Muslim-born Indian, into hiding in 1989 for its alleged blasphemy against the Prophet.
But such incidents are wildly exceptional, and based on fanatical misunderstandings of what fiction does or seeks to do.
Realism educates slowly and by stages, teaching how to alter a world rather than transform it.
It is in its nature neither conservative nor iconoclastic.
Amis's The Old Devils (1986) is a withering portrait of ageing desire, a theme seldom treated in literature since Shakespeare's sonnets; but its final message is one of pity.
If some of these novels, like Iris Murdoch's The Bell (1958), stand tiptoe at the door of faith, they are content to remain there and not to enter in, at least as worshippers.
They offer hope rather than salvation, consolation rather than cure, reform rather than revolution.
They are prudent.
The world is what it is, and will remain so; and you learn to live within it by adjusting yourself rather than it.
No wonder Anthony Powell called one of his novels The Acceptance World (1955).
The hero of such books does not submit.
But he adapts, not without pain; and even the most romantic heroine learns to accept, like the heroine of Anita Brookner's Providence (1982), that her lover was after all bound in the end to prefer another.
The learning theme is classic.
In Greek tragedy, in most of Jane Austen's novels, a leading figure in the drama realises with a sense of shock that the world is other than once imagined, and accepts that it is so.
Such fictions are about recognition.
Realism hardly admits of simple recognitions, Greek-style, and in the diversity of social life there is unlikely to be a single moment when, as in a religious ecstasy, life is seen as a whole.
Modern fiction deals rather in the partial illuminations of the moment.
Life can dazzle with its sensuality, its colour, its sheer abundance of choice.
And in the end it offers not one way, as the ideologue or the mystic would claim, but rather an acceptance that diversity is forever a fact of life.
Instead of choosing one road or another, like Hercules at the crossroads — sin or virtue, company or solitude, capitalism or collectivism — as ancient religions and modern dogmas have sometimes demanded, it invites one rather to settle into a questioning and critical acceptance of things as they are.
Most reality, after all, is beyond understanding.
‘What puzzles me,, someone remarks of her new kittens at the close of Under the Net , ‘is why those two should be pure Siamese and the other ones quite different, instead of their all being half tabby and half Siamese.’
And to that ultimate challenge of the book the herb cannot reply, except by realising that he does not know the answer, and that he is glad he does not know.
For all theories, in the end, cheapen and despoil.
‘I don ‘t know why it is,’ he finally admits.
‘It's just one of the wonders of the world.’
A Critical Moment
For some twenty years after the ending of the war, in 1945, literary criticism was a dominating force in the Anglo-American literary mind.
It was as if a bit player had become a star, a menial suddenly promoted into the centre of things.
Something comparable, and no less surprising, had happened a century earlier with the art-criticism of John Ruskin, and there is often something unnerving in the spectacle of an activity once thought of as specialist and tedious catapulted into sudden acclaim.
The effects, though short-lived, were astounding.
For the length of an entire generation, literary criticism profoundly affected the creativity, even the morality, of the age.
It changed how people lived as well as how they thought: a sort of secular church, so to speak, and like many churches a hotbed of internecine sects.
It provided, too, intellectual drama.
Post-war criticism was ‘gladiatorial’, as John Wain remarked years later, in 1972, when the excitement had died down; and attractive to the young for just that reason, since the young feed on moral drama: ‘they need to feel that they are proving themselves by bravely attacking something powerful.’
There never had been such a moment, for critics; there has never been such a moment since.
Literary criticism, it is easy to forget, is a kind of literature as well as a kind of criticism, and some of the best prose of the post-war years belongs to the journals and critical collections of the age.
It is not a wholly secondary activity.
It is also, simply because it is critical, a sort of potential morality — even an actual one — and no one can understand the Age of Criticism without gasping that, like the Crusades or the Reformation, its prime purpose was a far-reaching reform of the human spirit.
No missionary was ever more dedicated than this.
When it ended in the mid 1960s, to be replaced in quick succession by sociology, anthropology, and linguistic theory, it turned introspective in its defeat, wasting its energies on the grimly unavailing task of seeking, and never finding, a theoretical basis for what it did or had once done.
The critical theories that engaged the 1970s, however, are no part of this story, except as an epilogue is part of an epic.
They belong to an era of withdrawal, when criticism turned inward and ceased, out of self-doubt, to address any world beyond itself.
That was not the mood of the 1950s, when critics held sway far outside universities and learned journals, and knew it.
The retreat led by theorists was of a dwindling army that felt itself to be beaten, and at best it could only remember its victories.
But the claim to criticise the world through its literary culture, in its day, had been little short of a claim to rule that culture and that world.
The phrase ‘The Age of Criticism’ seems to have been the invention of the American poet Randall Jarrell; and like the Enlightenment, and some other dignified terms of intellectual history, it began as something like a term of dismissal.
There was always something faintly implausible, on either side of the Atlantic, about confusing a critic with a great man.
Perhaps that is why the age was shortlived.
The fame of Lionel Trilling in New York, of F. R. Leavis in Cambridge, peaked in the years after 1945, in their middle age, and their consciousness of fame and influence reached its climax in the early 1950s with the appearance of two essay-collections, Trilling's The Liberal Imagination (1950) and Leavis's The Common Pursuit (1952).
Such books are essentially collections of  moral tracts.
But they emerged out of an analytical fervour: the practice of stylistic analysis pioneered in Cambridge before the war by I. A. Richards and his pupil William Empson.
The mood of that enquiry was romantically scientific, so to speak, impelled by a search for technicality based on a confident assumption that science had provided the arts with a lasting model of analytical objectivity.
Impressionism was out: henceforth, it was felt, the study of literature must emulate the natural sciences if it was to hope to survive as worthy of any dignity and respect.
Practical criticism, Cambridge-style, crossed the Atlantic in the 1940s and returned after 1945 under the name of the American New Criticism; to be emulated in 1955 in Interpretations , a collection of analytical essays by various hands edited by John Wain.
Four years earlier F. W. Bateson of Oxford had founded Essays in Criticism , a quarterly meant to emulate or surpass Leavis's Scrutiny (1932–53), then nearing its natural end.
By the early 1950s the riot was on.
To be new was to be critical.
To be conservative, intellectually speaking, was to be uncritical — immune to American academic influences, unanalytical, culpably cosy.
The lines were drawn, the terms of a new moral drama, as gladiatorial as any boat-race or general election, were widely accepted and understood.
‘I believe in criticism’ was a slogan to gather a coterie and even a crowd.
The claim that literary criticism can influence life, if you let it, or even transform it, is not in itself absurd.
Nor is the claim that you should let it.
Some of the larger literary claims made by the New Critics of the 1950s, by contrast, are to be quoted now only to indicate a mood forever lost.
Critical analysis, one student journal proclaimed, ‘generally produces results more significant than the best creative work now being written,’ a judgement offered not as a complaint but as a boast:
As the inventor of the most complete terminology of the creative process, the critic, borrowing his methods from the logician as well as from the psychologist, has replaced the metaphysician, since his findings show with a greater exactitude the nature of what we are.
That confusion between terminology and rigour, truth and exactitude, was to prove a weakness to the New Criticism in later years, since it laid on the critic a continuous duty to adopt or devise terms rigorous enough to satisfy himself and others.
It coexisted with an ardently self-purifying ethos, where every emotion in literature and life was to be tried and tested against moral examples offered by the great poets and novelists of past time: by Blake's Songs of Innocence and Experience , by George Eliot's Middlemarch , by the fiction (above all) of D. H. Lawrence.
The important thing, as John Wain was to put it years later in ‘The Vanishing Critic’, looking back wonderingly over a good quarter-century at his own vanished youth, was ‘to respond to life with one's emotional priorities in the right order.’
In other ages that had been the task of the Church, and it is hardly an exaggeration to say that, for some in the 1950s, criticism was an organised religion.
A belief in criticism was an affirmation to be made in earnest assemblies of like minds.
The morality of the critical moment is more interesting, in the end, than its techniques, and that interest may prove abiding.
The literary intelligence at work in the best post-war critical journals still looks as arresting, in its moral urgency, as Ruskin's Modern Painters or the essays of Matthew Arnold or George Eliot.
This was an embattled and a battling faith.
A battle needs two sides, and the New Critics quickly found an enemy in the bland Sunday reviewing of Harold Nicolson, that elegant survivor of a politer age, or in the amiable and  harmless writings of Lord David Cecil.
The New Critic, by reaction, liked to look tough.
‘I have been waiting for a long time to get my hands on this one’, a review of Nicolson by Kingsley Amis began.
The book was called Good Behaviour (1955), and no doubt the very title was an incitement.
By then the conventional restraints of courtesy were felt to have had their day, and outlived it: the New Critic was above all a rebel, even a terrorist.
The position of the New Criticism needs to be put in focus.
Its moral claims were, in the most literal sense of the word, conservative, in that it enjoined ancient truths and established values, and Samuel Johnson as well as William Blake was a hero.
All that could easily coexist with political and religious radicalism, and in William Empson it did.
Born in 1906, he was eleven years younger than Leavis but far more precocious, and spent his early teaching life, as a pupil and disciple of his Cambridge mentor I. A. Richards, in the Far East.
When he finally returned to England in 1952, an unreconstructed radical from the 1930s, he was appalled to discover that an acquiescent temper of mind, even Christianity itself, had returned to haunt a literary world he had once supposed forever cleared of the religious taint.
His mounting literary reputation was by then sustained by poems as well as criticism, though he had abandoned the writing of poems before the war: ‘It struck me they were bad,’ he told an interviewer years later, ‘I didn't want to print them’; so that though his Collected Poems (1955) were a minor intellectual sensation when they finally appeared, they belong to another time.
For the last forty years and more of his life, down to his death in 1984, Empson wrote almost nothing but prose.
His first post-war book,The Structure of Complex Words (1951), combines a lexical passion for the history of words with a free-wheeling fascination with literary  Freudianism.
But it is still a work of analysis, not of dogmatics.
Milton's God (1961), by contrast, represents a coming-out: it is a dogmatic work with no holds barred.
It is the only continuous book he ever wrote after 1945 — the rest is all essays and articles — and perhaps the only entire book by any British-born critic of the age to work moral and literary concerns into a single exercise of radical intellect, as indifferent to tact as to fashion and concerned only with truth itself.
Once mistaken for a joker, he could henceforth be seen as a crank: an important advance in reputation, though this playful and darting mind was seldom so serious as when it was spoofing, or so earnest in intent as when making a joke.
The comic, in his contention, is what in literature is above all else revealing.
Poetry, he once wrote as an undergraduate, ‘is written with the sort of joke you find in hymns’.
Most people have never noticed that there are any jokes in hymns, so that the point is characteristically mind-stretching.
A talent, It is said, hits a target: a genius hits something you did not even know was there.
Empson's criticism never looked merely talented, and it hit something you did not know was there.
It was a mind unique, too, among British critics of the age in possessing a world-view wholly peculiar to itself.
Few critics bother to have a theory of history, unless a borrowed one.
Empson's was his own.
Variously influenced in youth by Freud and Marx, by Richards and T. S. Eliot, he emerged defiant of his sources to adopt a view of civilisation which, by the time he came to write Milton's God , was fiercely and outrageously his own.
This is criticism as original thought.
Humankind, to summarise, has been moving shoddywards since about 480 BC, when Confucius, Buddha, the Second Isaiah and Pythagoras died: to be succeeded, sages of wisdom and toleration that they were, by a return to superstition not unlike the reactions that tragically followed the  Enlightenment or Victorian rationalism.
Monotheism, for Empson, is the arch-villain of human history and the prime source of intolerance, and it is a villain of irrepressible energy: first the Judaic revival, then the foundation of Christianity, then Islam.
No wonder Milton was aware that the ways of God needed more justifying than even the greatest of English epics could contrive to do; and Paradise Lost , as Empson believed, is a poem more than occasionally conscious of the ultimate injustice of the dogma of atonement, and it thrives poetically on its contradictions.
Ambiguity is no longer a verbal device to be lexically explored, by the 1950s, but a self-lacerating truth of the poet's mind.
This was to stake a large claim to moral originality, and it is a work that has earned the right to be revered and detested.
Like the writings of Johnson and Coleridge it raises the possibility that criticism can be serious, in the sense of making a lasting difference to conviction.
Milton's God was Empson's last book, in his lifetime, though when he died he was collecting at least three others:Using Biography (1984), on Marvell, Dryden, Fielding, Yeats, Eliot and Joyce;Essays on Shakespeare (1986); and a book of Renaissance essays, as well as a massive ragbag (as he called it) of papers and reviews dating back to the 1920s which, when it posthumously appeared as Argufying (1987), was rapidly seen by many to be the finest critical miscellany in the language.
Empson's criticism bespeaks a man of some social rank, and in manner it is appropriately insouciant and grand.
This is radicalism at its most aristocratic.
He seldom troubles to verify a reference or document a case, his rejections tend to be magisterially dismissive, his judgements readily upstage even his most august victims.
He once reproached Sir Philip Sidney for his famous refusal of a cup of water on a Dutch battlefield as an act that looks ‘aggressively holy’, and it is hard to  imagine any other critic of the age allowing himself such a remark, or even conceiving of it: The okay thing would be to drink some of the cup himself and pass it on, leaving most of it to the other man…’
There survives a long and highly circumstantial account of his conversation with the Queen when he was newly a professor at Sheffield, and one is seldom in doubt that this is one who has moved among the great, and without strain.
All that is essential to his critical insouciance.
To criticise, in this vein, is to forget reverence and argufy; it is also, for Empson, to fantasise.
His favourite verb-form is ‘would have been’ and ‘would have thought’, and he shows an endless propensity to turn everything — Shakespeare's sonnets, Marvell's supposed marriage, the autobiographical subtext to Joyce's Ulysses — into a story, and usually a rather good story.
That happy and wholly characteristic confusion of fact and supposition makes his criticism as readable, at times, as an eccentric novel by a country gentleman more at ease at a hunt-ball than in a classroom, at a levée than in a seminar.
Empson was not a scholar, and hardly wished to be one, though he respected scholarship — especially the kind that had once produced the Oxford English Dictionary to provide others with a godsent place to start a critical argument.
No doubt there is something mildly shocking about such behaviour, academically considered, though on a long view The Structure of Complex Words may look like the most sustained compliment ever paid by a critical mind to a great dictionary.
Nor was he anything of a theorist, and hardly troubled to read much of the new wave of bother-headed' critics, as he called them, spawned by the 1960s.
He saw things in a flash and put them down in a sentence or at most a paragraph.
In his post-war writings authorial intention, banished to the servants' quarters by Richards and the  American New Criticism, was restored to a dignity it should never have lost; and his abandonment of discipleship to Richards now looks with hindsight both belated and inevitable.
Few geniuses seems so untouched, in a fashion-ridden world, by the fashions of the moment.
His ferocious anti-Christianity, in no way the creature of fashion, never waned even in old age; and he never forgot that literature is about something, and that it matters whether that something is true or false.
His largest fault, perhaps, and one natural to a good hater, was a congenital inability to accept that mortal creatures hold incompatible views and behave in ways incompatible with their views, so that to the end of his days he declined to accept any difference between holding a speculative opinion that is evil and being bad.
That intransigence, though ultimately unrealistic, remains impressive in its obstinacy.
‘A man who believes in Hell,’ he once wrote, ‘can't help relating the prospect of it to his feelings about life in general’.
It is a remark that engagingly suggests how little, as a devout atheist, he understood the relation between religion and life.
Most believers, it is likely, find it difficult much of the time even to remember what it is they are supposed to believe.
The reversion of criticism, at least in academies, from practice to theory after the demise of Scrutiny in 1953 and the appearance of Empson's last lifetime book in 1961 was perhaps something to be expected, as failures of nerve often follow phases of confidence and excess.
It is also regrettable.
With the revival of theory, criticism lost the greater part of its contact with English, with literature, and with England itself.
Theory was no longer a drawing-room activity, as in the eighteenth  century.
It was now, by its nature, an international enquiry, like the physical sciences.
There is no distinctive British contribution, and can be none.
A set of dogmas borrowed from Paris in the 1960s and earnestly debated in international conferences has no national existence, and seeks none.
Perhaps peter Fuller's Theoria (1988), a call for a return to earnest Ruskinian values by a critic who had lost his faith in Modernism, contrives to be theoretical and distinctively British at the same time; but that is the work of an art critic.
The loss of critical nerve, though widespread, was never general.
It can be charted in the rise and fall of journals which, as early as the 1950s, moved from severely literary concerns into a mixture of politics, the fine arts and travelogue.
Cyril Connolly's quarterly Horizon died in December 1949, after a ten-year run: the very type of the pure literary review, but unable to thrive, apparently, in austerity Britain.
Connolly's famous valedictory —‘It is closing time in the gardens of the West’— may be little more than the self-excusing of an indolent man, but what replaced Horizon (1940 — 50) and Penguin New Writing (1940–50) was something far brisker and far less mandarin.
Encounter was launched in London in 1953, an Anglo-American monthly whose appeal was always international, and above all intellectually anti-communist; and the London Magazine started in the following year, first under the editorship of John Lehmann, then of Alan Ross — a general magazine where literature is no more than one concern among others.
There was no place in the new Elizabethan era, apparently, outside universities, for a specifically literary journal mainly concerned with the Condition of England.
Even TLS , which momentously abandoned the anonymity of its book-reviews in 1974 under the editorship of John Gross, is cosmopolitan and more-than-literary in its range; and its newer rival the London Review of Books , begun in 1979 with Karl Miller as editor, was a fortnightly avowedly conducted in imitation of the New York Review of Books : both of them, as it happens, Anglo-American and more in their choice of authors and topics.
Compared with pre-war journals like John O'London's Weekly , this is a highly anti-insular and anti-cosy world.
Ideas, as everyone knows, have no frontiers.
But literatures sometimes do, and these are journals that have chosen to dedicate themselves to ideas.
That guarantees a certain deliberate power to disturb.
There are bedside books but no bedside ideas; and books, plays and films are now assumed to exist less to amuse or console than to stimulate and provoke.
The Condition of England, for all that, remains a question in the wider critical polemics of the age.
Both F. R. Leavis and C. S. Lewis, for example, though dogmatic opposites and even rivals, believed in Englishness, though Lewis was a Belfast man and Leavis mistakenly supposed, by some, to be Jewish.
When Lewis moved his teaching from Oxford to Cambridge in 1954, for the last nine years of his life, the drama of that confrontation was somewhat intensified, and it was not always noticed in the heat of debate how much they shared.
Both were essayists rather than scholars, belonging to an age before English studies had accumulated its own technical machinery; so that their freedom to polemicise about past centuries now looks, in retrospect, like a liberty lost.
Both saw English literature as the expression of a nation, and had little truck with foreign theorising.
Both were rootedly masculine in their view of life; both ardent moralists; both, as sages, contrived to attract a following that could be independent of all considerations of religion and politics.
That Leavis was secular  and Lewis Christian matters less, on a long view, than one might expect.
Lewis's Allegory of Love (1936), the book that made him known, was almost all written while he was still an atheist; and his Christian polemics, which began as war-time broadcasts, never prevented him from winning secular admirers.
Nor did his pervasive conservatism of mind repel radicals in any altogether reliable way.
Leavis, a radical socialist before 1950, turned briefly liberal before adopting in his last years a bitterly conservative stance that favoured no party of state, hating economic growth and the European Community, so that long before his death in 1978 his idealism had been soured by the varied spectacle of human folly; but though always outside religion, he was in no way hostile to it, and admired its moral seriousness.
The differences, then, were supremely literary.
Both, too, were good writers.
Leavis's reputation as a crabbed stylist and boldly innovative thinker who had been rejected by a university where he spent his entire life was largely a figment of his own mind, and so much of his post-war life was devoted to mythologising his own career that it is difficult, by now, to recognise what a conventional figure in his place and day he always was.
A devotion to T. S. Eliot was commonplace, almost compulsory, in Cambridge literary circles in the 1930s and 1940s; a devotion to D. H. Lawrence only mildly less so.
Seen in his context, which was inter-war Cambridge, Leavis was never much of an innovator, and it is hard to see his critical notoriety, which reached its apogee in the 1950s and early 1960s, as anything other than a triumph of style.
His claim to persecution, sincere as it was, was an invention, and no other critic has made of his own stigmata the stuff of critical debate.
‘For the first half-dozen years of Scrutiny I had no post and no salary, and was hard put to it to make a living,’ he once wrote in characteristic vein.
In fact his university post  followed the foundation of Scrutiny by only four years, in 1936, and his college fellowship too; he always, unlike most of his colleagues, had a private income; and his birth and upbringing, as the son of a prosperous tradesman, was well up to average and perhaps a little above.
His career was privileged beyond Lewis's, as recounted in his memoir Surprised by Joy (1955): no trauma of pre-1914 boarding schools, no fighting on the Western front (only ambulance work), no pecuniary struggle to survive.
But his pose as a victim of a harsh literary establishment was utterly essential to his own sense of being and to a craving for young disciples; for unlike Lewis he seldom enjoyed, for long, or sought to enjoy, the friendship of his contemporaries.
As myths go, the Leavis myth was widely successful: but then what teacher, when he tells the young that he has been ill-treated by the world for his opinions, is not believed?
An early collaborator, late in his career, revealed to an astonished world that, in his first writings Leavis had fabricated evidence as quotations.
That contrasts wildly with his reputation, which was that of a fearless truth-teller, and one of his post-war disciples has told how Leavis's convictions about the ‘mechanised vulgarity’ of industrialism so possessed his youthful consciousness that its abandonment amounted to ‘a personal crisis lasting several years.’
This sounds like the more-than-religious intensity of a man without religion.
But like other religions, Leavism offered the sweet joys of antagonism.
As Donald Davie has remarked, his concept of a minority culture was modelled on the ‘gathered church’ of the Dissenters — a communion of saints — and the irreplaceable charm of Scrutiny to the post-war undergraduate lay ultimately in the simple fact that on every issue it made things look simple: ‘a present of perhaps a dozen authors or books or whole periods and genres of literature which I not only need not but should not read.’
This was a radicalism that asked little, in practical terms, of its adherents: in fact life became pleasanter and easier.
A future director of the National Theatre who admired Leavis's lectures at Cambridge has since remarked that ‘all we students pretended we sped to his lectures to imbibe his humanism,’ whereas in fact they were enjoying his character-assassinations: ‘Strange that a great moralist should be so destructive about creative artists.’
Not so strange, perhaps if one reflects that all moral dramas need villains as well as heroes, and that Leavis above all offered moral drama.
When he attacked C. P. Snow in Two Cultures ?(1962), it was the last act of a drama in which he had played for thirty years.
Drama is a set of oppositions.
‘The great English novelists are Jane Austen, George Eliot, Henry James and Joseph Conrad, ‘Leavis's Great Tradition (1948) authoritatively began.
Dramatic oppositions can be between good and bad or, more subtly, between good and good.
Leavis always laid claim to the subtler view of controversy, but his doctrine was always easily open, as he knew, to cruder interpretations, and the fire-and-brimstone of his prose sometimes made it hard to interpret or understand in any other way.
‘Critics have found me narrow,’ his opening paragraph continues, ‘and I have no doubt that my opening proposition, whatever I may say to explain and justify it, will be adduced in reinforcement of their strictures,’adding bitterly that ‘the only way to escape misrepresentation is never to…say anything.’
That gambit illustrates Leavis's magisterial grasp of polemical style, and it succeeds at once in looking bold and in insinuating craftily.
‘Critics have found me narrow, implies that his reputation is already controversial, a truth of which he was justly proud, and it is a provocation aptly calculated to make one read on; and to claim that the only way to escape misrepresentation is to say  nothing implies that something momentous is about to be said, that it is his habit and custom to do so, and that he is widely hated because he does.
These are attention-getting claims, skilfully imparted, and they represent a growing contrast between Leavis and Lewis.
Where Lewis looked at the world around him, even when he was writing autobiography, Leavis looked ever more attentively at himself.
‘He should have called his paper ‘Why I am a great critic’, a disciple sadly remarked on leaving one of his seminars.
In the long wake of a critical career that had begun in the 1930s avowedly in imitation of Richards and Empson and which ended with his death at the age of 83, his final achievement of style was above all to create, for a time, a compelling image of himself.
And no one who writes badly ever succeeded in doing that.
Lewis's self-image, though less carefully cultivated, has lasted longer in the English-speaking world at large, and even swollen since his death, which was in 1963, into something of a cult.
He is even the subject of a play.
Some of the reasons are religious; some literary; some to do with his well-merited reputation as a blunt-talking character who, like Samuel Johnson, drew the wisdom of his conversation and letters from ancient sources, Christian or pagan, as much as modern — a wisdom somehow as congenial to the sceptical as to the godly.
Oddly enough, his criticism gives off less of a religious odour than that of Leavis, who was secular all his thinking life.
It is Leavis rather than Lewis who, when he writes of literature, sounds washed in the blood of the Lamb.
Leavis's Great Tradition is headed by a motto from a letter of D. H. Lawrence declaring that writing makes him feel as if he ‘stood naked for the fire of Almighty God to go through me.’
Spilt religion, all too clearly, can be more intense than the real thing, and Lewis was always far too much of an Enlightenment  man for talk like that.
It would have embarrassed him, even sickened him.
He largely avoided the novels of Lawrence, as a theme, and found such enthusiasm even in the act of religious worship both perilous and extravagant.
‘Leavis demands moral earnestness: I prefer morality,’ he once told Kingsley Amis in a characteristically Johnsonian antithesis, adding that he would sooner live among people who did not cheat at cards than among the sort who are earnest about not cheating.
The classical spirit in which he was trained never lost its hold upon him; the spirit of the pagan authors he revered in their original languages coexisted in his mind with an Anglicanism more committed in substance than fervent in style; and as the new novel of the 1950s revived the techniques of eighteenth-century fiction, so did Lewis's critical prose revive the world of hard-hitting supper-party debates that Boswell records.
His early defence of Shelley and Milton against T. S. Eliot's attacks had been a paradoxical defence of their classicism of style; his influential essay on metre a defence of using classical terms to describe English poetry; and his finest work of literary history, awkwardly entitled (as part of a series)English Literature in the Sixteenth Century excluding Drama (1954), extolled the ‘golden’ voice of Sir Philip Sidney and Edmund Spenser, as opposed to‘drab’, in a critical climate in which Metaphysicals like Donne and Herbert counted for more than their courtly forerunners among the Elizabethans.
This was a classical mind.
The introduction to medieval and Renaissance literature that appeared some months after his death as The Discarded Image (1964), based on the accumulated notes of lectures he had given for decades in Oxford and Cambridge, deals sympathetically with authors who, as he approvingly remarks, quote Homer and Hesiod ‘as if they were no less to be taken into account than the sacred writers’; and the break in the  European spirit he saw as a consequence of the seventeenth-century scientific revolution is magnified here, in a sweeping argument, far beyond the familiar classroom shift from the Middle Ages to the Renaissance.
It is a shock, no doubt, to find so humanistic a writer denigrating Renaissance humanism, which he saw as philistine and obscurantist: the New Learning, he believed, created the New Ignorance.
But this is not an easily predictable intelligence, and he associated humanism with book-burning extremists and a rule-bound notion of literature which would, if England had followed France into a restrictive classicism, have castrated its literature and thwarted the genius of Shakespeare, Milton and Bunyan.
He loved what the humanists did in reviving the Ancients, and hated the ferocity of their adversarial style: ‘If their manners were often like those of giants, so were their labours’.
His rhetorical mastery, in the end, is a mastery of praise, unlike Leavis's, and it flourishes best where a tribal loyalty combines with an issue of faith.
The temper of the Book of Common Prayer, he once wrote,
may seem cold to those reared in other traditions, but no one will deny that it is strong.
It offers little, and concedes little, to merely natural feelings: even religious feelings it will not heighten till it has first sobered them; but at its greatest it shines with a white light hardly surpassed outside the pages of the New Testament itself.
In the 1960s the British critical tradition split between history and theory.
I shall consider only the first of these here, since theory has no independent insular life, and in an order only partly chronological.
Post-war Britain found its own literary history, at least since mid-Victorian times, still unwritten.
That left a lot to do.
Academic English was a recent invention, largely of the inter-war years; and even where it existed it had commonly stopped with the early nineteenth century.
The study of Chaucer, Shakespeare and their contemporaries was not much better off.
Before the 1950s there was no such thing as a critical study of Piers Plowman , for example, or of Sir Gawain and the Green Knight .
In these circumstances the critical historian was forced to be original, and literary history was perforce boldly innovative.
Kathleen Tillotson's Novels of the 1840s (1954) linked the fiction of Dickens, Thackeray, Elizabeth Gaskell and the Brontës to the social history of their times, exploring the techniques of serial publication, and in a concentrated masterpiece of creative scholarship it demonstrated how intimately public events affect literature, and literature in its turn events.
Frank Kermode's first book,Romantic Image (1957), elegantly demonstrated how the image of Modernist poetry was not discontinuous from late Victorian critical ideas, connecting the poems of Yeats and Eliot to their forebears in the 1890s.
In The Victorian Sage (1953) John Holloway revived the faded reputations of Carlyle, Disraeli, George Eliot, Newman, Arnold and Hardy as controversialists, and set himself to show, as a trained philosopher, how Wittgensteinian analysis could be brought to bear on their forgotten polemics.
These are all writings by academics in early or middle life; and though animated as argument, they are deliberately cast in an academic mould.
Donald Davie's Purity of Diction in English Verse (1952), by contrast, is touched with the spirit of the manifesto: the first book of young poet and lecturer who, though still a Leavisite, was eager to prepare the way for a critical acceptance of his own verse.
The book is an imaginative outgrowth of practical criticism, but it  breaks new ground in its choice of late Augustan poets — Charles Wesley and Samuel Johnson — and (by a bold leap of association) Wordsworth, Coleridge and the later Romantics: its chapter on ‘Shelley's urbanity’, paradoxical in its very title, showing the entry of a commanding new critical voice.
The book registers a new-found fascination with Ezra Pound, too, on whom Davie was soon to write two books, as opposed to T. S. Eliot — espousing a failed Modernist against the acknowledged leader of London literary opinion — and its tactic of saying-the-other-thing was soon to become the mark of a critic eager to clear a space for himself and for others of like mind.
The book might, in its day, have served as a poetic manifesto for the Movement — a sort of critical defence of the Angry Young Poet — but events were to take another turn, leading him in 1968 to settle in the United States for twenty years; to produce, on his return,Under Briggflats (1989), a critical history of British poetry since 1960.
All these instances illustrate the radical possibilities of historical thought.
An age defines itself by choosing another age — usually a forgotten or neglected age — to teach itself new manners through old customs.
History can make one's own world look different.
The Victorians had favoured the medieval, Modernists the seventeenth-century Metaphysicals, Bloomsbury and the Sitwells the early eighteenth century.
The poets and critics of the 1950s shifted their gaze towards poets who had worked after the death of Pope, novelists who followed Jane Austen, critics of culture who followed William Cobbett.
Such shifts of view are dedicated and tactical all at once.
A self-defining attitude struck by an aspiring mind can, in an instant, turn into a conviction passionately held.
Then it mellows.
‘If critics have any reason for existence,’ one of them has said, ‘this is it: to give assurance of value, and to provide somehow  perhaps anyhow — the means by which readers may be put in possession of the valuable book.’
The critical moment was not folly, and it has left monuments which, though now mostly neglected, deserve to last.
To abandon the past, and knowledge of the past, is always to abandon more than that.
It is to surrender all purposeful hope of changing, through literature or any other means, the world in which one is bound to live.