

News
Of DWEMs, PC and self-censorship
Pocahontas wasn't a Dead White European Male (in case you're not familiar with the current acronym) but she is definitely PC (Politically Correct).
She was, as any schoolchild knows, a female heroine from the native population of the Americas whom we (beat your breasts, US and European citizens alike) mistreated, exploited, dispossessed and massacred.
Lothar Baumgarten, the German artist, has come to New York just in time to express this fashionable sense of discomfort with an installation which occupies the whole of the recently restored spiral of the Guggenheim Museum.
‘AMERICA Invention’, he calls it, and its consists of the names of the indigenous peoples of the Americas, from Alaska to the Tropic of Cancer, painted in the same colours as body paints on the parapet of the spiral.
It is a work about oppression through naming, or rather, misnaming: as any schoolchild knows, American Indians weren't really Indians; we just wished they were, so we imposed that name on them.
Baumgarten is not opportunistic with this installation.
He has been working in this vein since the late Sixties, when only hippies, greens and cranks thought it was important.
Now it comes with the official blessing of German government sponsorship, a gift to the guilt of the American people.
He is a lucky artist.
He actually has a subject, unlike most artists today.
These post-ideological times are rough on an avant-garde that always needed an orthodoxy against which to kick.
Whether the various communities of native Americans will be very interested in this case is debatable, but that's not really the point.
The aim of ‘AMERICA Invention’ is to make us reflect on ourselves and our failings.
So far and so good.
An examination of conscience and a sense of virtuous purpose is always to be recommended.
Danger lies only where too much zeal is applied to redressing the cultural balance.
Because most of us have ignored non-European cultures in the past does not now mean that European and European/American culture have become less valid or that we must be tempted to rewrite history twisting facts to suit our present crisis of confidence.
It is possible now to go through the whole liberal arts course at Stanford University without ever reading Shakespeare (a DWEM) and there are many musems in the US now which cannot contemplate an exhibition without first measuring it up against the PC yardstick.
That way lie new injustices and the most insidious censorship of all — self-censorship.
Sevso treasure
‘Sotheby's claim that it is an unwitting participant rings hollow’
New York Supreme Court refuses auction house's application to withdraw
Whatever happened to the case of the Sevso silver, the Roman hoard valued conservatively at £40 million, blocked in a New York court since February 1990 when Sotheby's proudly announced it to the world, only to have the Lebanon and Yugoslavia, and later Hungary, claim that it had been removed illegally from their countries?
The matter had gone quiet since summer 1991, but is due now to burst forth again, this time with the real substance of the evidence from all parties, as a consequence of an opinion given 3 December last by Judge Carol Huff in the New York Supreme Court and due to be confirmed in a Court Order last month.
Judge Huff declared that the court would not allow the application by Sotheby's to be discharged from the action and in the process she made some critical and revealing remarks about the auction house's role in the whole affair, which we reproduce below.
She also allowed Croatia to continue the claim first lodged by Yugoslavia in March 1990.
Now these two points have been resolved, it will allow the process of what in legal parlance is called ‘mutual discovery’ of evidence to continue, which had ceased while Sotheby's motion was pending.
The plaintiffs, that is the Lebanon, Croatia and Hungary, will be anxious to see those parts of Sotheby's evidence which had been blacked out in the documents made available to them, and then only shown to the court.
It may well be that Judge Huff's knowledge of what is in those parts lies behind the tone of her comments and her refusal to allow Sotheby's to bow out.
The plaintiffs are also waiting to hear the depositions, hitherto withheld, of three important witnesses: Richard Camber, a former director of Sotheby's; Felicity Nicholson, head of the Antiquities Department at Sotheby's, and Dr Anna Bennett of the Institute of Archaeology in London, who conducted the scientific tests on the treasure before it was first revealed to the world in February 1990.
Sotheby's case for being discharged from this hugely expensive and  embarrassing case rested on the argument that it was merely the custodian of the treasure, was unaware that its export licences from the Lebanon had been fraudulently acquired, and that it had no further interest in the treasure.
It was supported in this claim by the Trustee of Lord Northampton's Settlement, who is co-defendant.
Both Croatia and the Lebanon objected on the grounds that Sotheby's had been far from complete in its discovery process, and was trying to slip out from the case before the evidence of Mr Camber was made available.
This is expected to be particularly revealing as Mr Camber, a curator at the British Museum before he went to work for Sotheby's, heard about the hoard from an ex-colleague and became involved in negotiations over it in Switzerland some time before Lord Northampton, presenting himself as the single owner of the treasure, first approached Sotheby's in 1988 with a view to selling.
They also object on the grounds that, while Sotheby's disclaims any ownership interest in the treasure and was merely the agent for Lord Northampton, they are by no means convinced that this is the case, especially as it has come to light during the discovery process that the former chairman of Sotheby's, the late Peter Wilson, played the leading role in the treasure's acquisition and had a share in its value, inherited by his sons, Thomas and Philip.
Judge Huff comments, ‘Information gained in discovery fuels the claimants’ charge that Sotheby's connection to the treasure is vastly greater than that of a mere stakeholder…
While Sotheby's-New York…disclaims any ownership interest in the treasure, the claimants contend that whether any of Sotheby's affiliates possess a beneficial interest in the treasure is a significant and unresolved matter.
In fact, evidence indicates that former principals of Sotheby's  acquired ownership interests in the treasure as early as 1980 — information Sotheby's claims it first learned in this suit — and that these individuals were instrumental in securing the Lebanese export licenses for the treasure, which were allegedly forged’.
The use of the plural is pregnant with implications that evidence she alone has seen shows that among Sotheby's staff not just Peter Wilson had a share in the treasure.
She clearly does not believe that Wilson can have acted in this matter without the knowledge of people in the auction house: ‘Sotheby's claim that it is an unwitting participant rings hollow.
It appears that as far back as 1984, perhaps even 1983, the authenticity of the Lebanese export licenses became an issue when a museum curator [the Getty]contemplating purchase of the treasure rejected the licenses as forgeries.
As a result, agents of the owner, who happen to be former principals of Sotheby's, arranged for the procurement of another set of licenses from the Lebanon’.
This year therefore we can confidently await further revelations in a case which already has most of the ingredients of the G.K. Chesterton formula for a thriller.
Ultimately, of course, the decision will turn on whether any of the plaintiffs can produce convincing evidence that the fourteen superb fourth-century vessels were found within their territories.
Both Sotheby's and the lawyers for Lord Northampton have assured us that up till now they have not seen a shred of proof.
As the accompanying article by a Yugoslav investigative journalist suggests, however, it may well be that for political reasons the Yugoslavs have been fighting the case with at least one hand tied behind their back.
Now that the Croatian Commission has been confirmed in its role, and the archaeologist who first put pressure on the government in Belgrade to put in the claim has become Minister of Culture, we may begin to see some of the evidence they say they have collected.
Art baptism
Antony Gormley's ‘Sound II’(1986) in the eleventh-century Norman crypt of Winchester Cathedral.
During the winter months, the crypt is flooded by an ancient well and water rises to the statue's knees
Cultural property
‘Yugoslavia covered-up over the Sevso treasure’
Allegations that political interests blocked crucial evidence
In ex-Yugoslavia, as in all socialist, east European and Third World countries rich in art but poor in everything else, the only national heritage protected by law is the politicians themselves.
That is why, from the very beginning, the Sevso saga, one of the largest and most far-reaching art scandals ever, has been treated as a top secret issue in Yugoslavia.
The public of this ex-country first learned about the treasure on 4 March 1990, when Emilio Marin, Director of the Archaeological Museum in Split, published his article about the silver treasure that ‘could have been found in Yugoslavia’.
‘David Keys from The Independent in London sent me his articles,’ said Marin, surprised that the national press and institutions concerned with the preservation of the cultural heritage had shown no knowledge of or interest in the silver, whose sale had been announced by Sotheby's to loud fanfares the month before.
The potential £40 million value put on the treasure was not an aphrodisiac for a country that did not, and still does not, have an art market.
But because the scandal broke at the time when one of the most popular pastimes in Yugoslavia was hunting for the scalps of former politicians, the moment the British press reported the involvement of Yugoslav diplomats, Tito's family and the Yugoslav National Army, the silver became interesting.
Immediately, Vesna Jurkic Girardi, Director of the Archaeological Museum in Pula (today Croatian Minister of Culture) got the case moving by bringing charges against an unknown person who had excavated archaeological treasure in the region of Barbariga in Istria and smuggled it out of the country.
On 15 March, Yugoslavia lodged a formal claim to the silver in the New York State Supreme Court, where the Lebanon had already lodged a claim.
In Belgrade, a Federal Commission consisting of incompetent but powerful top politicians and generals was authorised to lead the investigation, but their motto was to be: ‘Silver Stands for Silence’.
When the British papers printed that Scotland Yard believed the silver to have been dug up at the Barbariga army base and smuggled by a Yugoslav diplomat, the Federal commission said, ‘The press is to be criticised for all such insinuations’ and ‘the control of the diplomatic bag is so rigorous in Jugoslavia that it is absolutely impossible for the treasure or anything else to be smuggled out that way’.
Federal army headquarters were also furious: ‘Now they have made the archaeologists discredit the reputation of the Yugoslav National Army’, complained Vuk Obradovic, army spokesman.
But the documents and witnesses to prove that the army conducted archaeological excavations have been found, this despite the fact that the area of Barbariga has been closed to archaeologists since World War II, and the islands of Brijuni were off-limits to the public once they became Tito's residence.
In December 1990, in Belgrade, I had a chance to see some documents from a Federal government ‘top secret’ file.
‘Federal Action Rome’ consisted of confused correspondence between Yugoslav diplomats and some then top politicians: Prime Minister Ante Markovic, the Minister of Foreign Affairs Budumir Loncar, and the Minister of Interiors, General Petar Gracanin.
The names most frequently in the file are the names also in the article about Scotland Yard: Aleksandar Miso Broz, son of the late President Tito; Goran Strok, car-racing ace and now a business man in England; Anton Tkalec, coin dealer in Vienna, now in Zurich, and some ex-members of the secret police and army establishment.
One of the most interesting letters arrived in Belgrade on 13 March 1990.
Mr Rikanovic, Yugoslav ambassador in London reports to his superiors that ‘the embassy has been visited by Mr Marcus Linell and Mr Julian Thompson [both directors]from Sotheby's’.
After that visit, Mr Rikanovic suggests that ‘because court proceedings like this one can last two to three years and be very expensive, especially in the U.S., the case should be moved to a Swiss court where the whole proceeding would be faster, more efficient and much cheaper’.
Mr Rikanovic almost certainly knew nothing about Swiss law, by which anyone holding an item publicly for three years without judgment against him acquires title, but it is interesting that the visit occurred just at the time when Lord Northampton sought to have the ownership dispute heard by the Swiss courts.
In the meantime, some suspects were interrogated, but the Croatian side never got hold of the whole file before the war broke out in the summer of 1991.
According to sources in the Federal police in Belgrade, Mr Svetozar Zecar, head of the Federal Commission, was approached by Philip Wilson, one of the share-holders in the treasure and son of the late Peter Wilson, the Chairman of Sotheby's who played a leading role in its acquisition, and offered a deal: two Sevso vessels or a large lump sum of a percentage of the sale profits.
This seems to have appealed to the Federal Commission because Mr Zecar came to Zagreb with the same proposition.
The Croatian Commission, created at the same time as the Federal one, refused the offer, however, and then the war began.
Since Croatia became an independent state in June 1991, Raymond Harding, the New York lawyer acting for the Yugoslav government, has become the lawyer for the Croatian government.
It took the Croatian archaeologists almost a year to obtain permission to get into the Barbariga military base.
‘The army did absolutely everything to make our research impossible,’ said Mrs Jurkic Girardi.
‘They took away our films, developed them and gave them back damaged.
They followed us wherever we went, interrupted our work, and finally made us stop altogether, ostensibly because of the heat’.
According to Milan Ramljak, President of the five-man Croatian Commission and lecturer in law at Zagreb University, in spite of the war and the absence of any help from the Federal Commission, Croatia has managed to collect together a large file of evidence, including soil sample analyses which may be significant when they can be compared with analyses of the treasure and the cauldron in which it was found.
What is in that file is not as yet available to journalists, but apparently it contains an affidavit by an ex-policeman who was present at the discovery of the treasure.
Prague
Division of cultural property as Czechoslovakia splits
Czech and Slovak Republics argue over ownership of art
A draft agreement covering the ownership of works of art and the division of cultural property was among the scores of treaties and agreements drawn up between the Czech and Slovak Republics prior to the 1 January dissolution of the seventy-four-year-old state of Czechoslovakia.
December last, the Czech and Slovak Ministries of Culture signed a draft agreement covering future cooperation and the administration of ‘mutual settlements’ concerning ownership.
Already signed by Slovakia's Minister of Culture, Mr Dusan Slobodnik, and ratified just before Christmas, the Czech minister of culture, Dr Jindrich Kabat, is expected to add his signature before the end of February.
Under the agreement, both ministries will appoint two commissions each: one will compile a list of ownership claims; the other will arbitrate in cases of disagreement.
Until the respective commissions have finished drawing up their lists, ministry officials are reluctant to predict how many claims are likely to be made.
Those demands that have so far been made have come from Slovakia, the most controversial concerning a fourteenth-century Italian Gothic altar.
The altar was originally brought to Slovakia by a count who installed it in his castle in Bojnice, central Slovakia.
Stolen in 1933, it was taken to Prague in 1934 for restoration after its recovery.
It has remained in Prague ever since and is currently on show at the Czech capital's National Gallery.
Mr Vit Vlnas, head of the National Gallery's archives, says: ‘The National Gallery has no reason to give back the altar, whose holding is based on a legal agreement.
We have no reason to give it to some foreign country.
It would be a very bad example not only to Czech society, but also to the wider art community’.
In support of the National Gallery's case Mr Vlnas points to a 1946 agreement signed between Slovak officials and the gallery exchanging the altar for 380 prints, ten Gothic paintings, and twelve Gothic statues.
As far as Mr Vlnas and the National Gallery are concerned the contract remains legally binding.
In arguing the Slovak case for the altar Mr Richard Marsina, a historian charged with heading the Slovak commission for drawing up claims, points to Prago-centrism — one of the grievances that led to Slovakia following its path to independent statehood.
‘People in Prague could ask for anything’, he said, ‘and they [art works and cultural objects]were never given back’.
He also explained that the first Czechoslovak Republic (1918–38) was a unified state and that there was no national gallery in Slovakia.
Another case involving Jewish cultural objects brought to Prague after the World War II from Bratislava and Prestnov has already been settled in Slovakia's favour.
The artefacts have been returned to the Slovak capital and will eventually be shared with Prestnov.
Both cities still have a tiny Jewish population.
The agreement between the two ministries also provides for the care of cultural objects and monuments that belong to the other but cannot be moved.
The Czech Republic, for example, has pledged to care for the grave of the Slovak poet Jan Kollatr, who is buried in Prague.
Chester Beatty Library theft
Former curator jailed for five years
Auction houses and buyers argue over compensation
The Dublin Circuit Criminal Court has sentenced David James, former curator of Islamic manuscripts at the Chester Beatty Library, Dublin, to five years imprisonment on thirty-six charges of theft, carried out between 1983 and 1989 (see The Art Newspaper, No. 17, April 1992, p.2).
James pleaded guilty to all charges.
In addition to the theft of manuscripts and pages from Korans, James admitted to taking paintings, rugs and book-bindings from the library.
It was estimated that James made around £100,000 from his criminal activities.
The thefts came to light early last year when Daniel Walker, head of the Islamic Department at the Metropolitan Museum, New York, was offered two pages of a tenth-century Koran by a London dealer.
Mr Walker sought advice from a colleague who, some years earlier, had worked at the Chester Beatty in preparation from her doctorate.
She recognised the page.
On the final day of the trial the police noted that around £385,000-worth of stolen material had now been recovered, with James's cooperation.
Some £75,000-worth is still thought to be outstanding and has been traced to Germany, Syria, Bahrain, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Jordan.
Public institutions including the New York Public Library, the Davids Collection in Copenhagen, and private collectors in Europe and the Middle East were innocent purchasers.
The money arising from the sale of material was lodged in an account in Hamburg by Oliver Hoare, the London dealer with whom James had most contact.
Hoare was apparently unaware that the account — in the name of Islamische Antiquitäten — had been set up by James.
Some of the material was offered at Sotheby's in 1985, 1986 and 1989, leading now to lengthy disputes and claims for compensation.
In a statement to The Art Newspaper, Sotheby's noted that the issue is ‘particularly complicated because the thief, who was also the seller, was an employee of the library which owned the manuscripts.’
Material returned by the New York Public Library was still with Sotheby's last month, due to a dispute over compensation.
One owner of former Chester Beatty material — although he has in the past denied this — now proving reluctant to return it, is David Nasser Khalili, the dealer/collector who is offering his collection on loan to the British nation (see The Art Newspaper, No. 21, October 1992. p.1).
In 1989 David James spent part of a sabbatical employed by Khalili as acting curator of the Khalili Gallery and Salesroom for Oriental Art in London.
James was employed to assist in the cataloguing of Khalili's collection of Islamic art.
He is now resisting requests to return Chester Beatty material, including a segment of a Mamluk Koran, three pages of another Koran and two miniature Korans, on the grounds that he bought the works in good faith and is entitled to compensation.
Sotheby's confirmed to the Irish Times that some of this material was purchased through their rooms.
The director of the Chester Beatty, Dr Michael Ryan has stated that there is no question of the library buying back any of the outstanding material.
Moscow
Money for stolen art investigation may have led Russian to his death
Senior officials linked to thefts of war
A number of Russian newspapers have recently drawn attention to the mysterious circumstances surrounding the death in April last year of Anatoliy Sviridenko, one of Russia's leading researchers into art thefts.
Sviridenko's colleagues claim that his death was the result of his attempts to investigate a lucrative clandestine operation involving works of art from the so-called Zagorsk Archive, a collection of art treasures held as war booty stored in the Pivnaya Bashnya (Brewer's Tower) of the Holy Trinity Monastery in Sergiyevyy Posad (formerly Zagorsk).
It is believed, although not confirmed, that the missing drawings from the Koenigs Collection which resurfaced last September in Russia were held in the same monastery (see The Art Newspaper No. 22, November 1992, p.8).
According to Sviridenko, the archive held almost 16,500 paintings with practically no records or markings.
Having done some professional checking Sviridenko came to the conclusion, according to his colleagues, that works of art from this collection were being smuggled abroad and replaced by copies.
A few days before his death Sviridenko's investigation supposedly led him to a very senior government official involved in purchasing art works.
This same official was linked with a group of French antique dealers.
The investigations into the death of Sviridenko (who was found dead on a disused railway line) was closed at the end of 1992.
The Russian Ministry of Internal Affairs does not intend to start an investigation into possible thefts from the Zagorsk Archive.
Save the Irish Country house: a film and a conference
The continuing loss of Ireland's Georgian architectural heritage — once through politically motivated neglect, now largely for economic reasons and sheer indifference — continues to be a tragedy for that country.
The efforts of the Irish Georgian Society, energetically headed by Desmond Fitzgerald, the Knight of Glin, have done much to highlight the plight of buildings at risk.
On 26 February a conference will be held in Dublin on The Future of the Country House, focusing on historic houses and gardens and the problems of their maintenance and conservation.
Topics to be addressed will include: how to harness national and international resources; the role of tourism; the role of the EC, and that of voluntary organisations.
Papers will be presented by Pyers O'Conor Nash, Francis Fulford, Hugh Montgomery-Massingberd, Eileen O'Mara, Mary Banotti and Geraldine Walsh among others.
The cost of the day is £35 (including lunch).
Bookings can be made at the Society's Offices, 42 Merrion Sq.
Dublin 2. tel. 01 767053.
Another recent initiative on the Society's part is the production of a film, ‘The Irish Country House’, narrated by Anjelica Huston, celebrating different aspects of Irish houses and castles.
The film will be shown at eight American venues, including the Walter Reed Theatre, New York, on 17 March.
Stuttgart
Germany saves collection that outshines Thurn und Taxis
$29.7 million paid by Baden-Württemberg for library of 1,300 manuscripts
They have been acquiring books fairly seriously for about 550 years,’ says Christopher de Hamel, Sotheby's manuscripts expert, of the Fürsts zu Fürstenberg.
In fact, until December last theirs was the largest private library of manuscripts in the world, with works dating back to the seventh century and texts of great importance to German history, the natural sciences, military history and the Grand Tour.
Just before Christmas the State of Baden-Württemberg pulled off the coup of acquiring the nearly 1,300 manuscripts for DM48 million, by common consent a very reasonable price.
The intermediary in the deal was Christoph Graf Douglas, head of Sotheby's Germany, who pleaded strongly for the collection to remain intact in Germany.
Negotiations were conducted in great secrecy when the manuscripts had already got as far as the freeport in Zurich and were being examined by two well backed dealers and by representatives of the Getty Museum.
In fact, the three greatest masterpieces in the collection could not have been sold outside Germany in any case, being on its list of national treasures: the quarto thirteenth-century Hildesheim Psalter; the Sacramentary in uncials; and the Nibelungen manuscript ‘C’.
The elderly Fürst zu Fürstenberg has retained the last for unstated reasons (just as he has also not revealed his reasons for selling), but perhaps because of its profound significance to the Romantic conception of Germany and, of course, to Wagner's Ring cycle.
The collection, besides its dynastic accumulations, does in fact owe a great deal to an ancestor, the aggressive collector Freiherr von Lassberg (d. 1855) who was fired by distant German history and bought widely after the secularisation of religious institutions in the region of Lake Constance.
The zu Fürstenberg put twenty very important manuscripts on the market in 1982, earning himself a mere DM4 million, but impoverishing the tout ensemble of the library.
There has been some lobbying for the manuscripts now to stay exactly where they have always been, which is in the princely Hofbibliothek in Donaueschingen, surrounded by the greatest private library of printed books (500 incunables and 130,000 later works) in Germany.
Speaking to the Art Newspaper Graf Douglas confirmed, however, that the collection will go to the State Library at Stuttgart, the capital of Baden-Württemberg.
Row explodes over party political dominance of Venice Biennale
In Italy, everything for years now has been political, even art, but just as most of Italian life is kicking against the ever looser traces of the big political parties, the Biennale has come up with a wholly unreconstructed, wholly political, Board of Management, approved under pressure from the Christian Democrats by the Prime Minister Giuliano Amato on 15 January.
This Board, whose role is by no means a formality, as it has to vet every one of the artists shown at the exhibition, is now made up of people who reflect the old groupings: seven Christian Democrats, six Socialists, two PDS (formerly Communist), one Liberal and one Social Democrat.
Those who know anything about art are in a small minority; those who represent the most local of local interests, the majority.
In response to the cry of protest in the Italian press and Le Monde, two members have resigned.
The Chairman of the Board was due to be appointed at the end of last month, and is expected (according to the old ‘rules’) to be the Christian Democrat Gian Luigi Rondi (who admitted to not even knowing who Francis Bacon was), the last one having been a Socialist, the architect Paolo Portoghesi.
Dealers, collectors and Christie's to fund Chatsworth book
The initiative of a generous group of dealers and collectors backed up by Christie's will enable an important book to appear later this year.
To be published by Phaidon, it will cover the 1,000 or so Italian drawings in the Chatsworth collection of the Duke of Devonshire.
In 1984 Christie's held a major sale of drawings from Chatsworth.
The cataloguing work has been undertaken by Michael Jaffe, former director of the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, and some funding was available from the Getty.
The project, however, was in danger of foundering from lack of money until Luca Baroni of Colnaghi rallied to its assistance.
During the Christie's London Old Master drawings sale last season he approached a number of leading dealers (‘I'm sure Noel Annesley thought I was organising a ring’ he commented) and arranged a meeting.
The next day, the majority of those approached — Galerie Mikaeloff, Paris; Luca Baroni himself; Munich collector Wolfgang Ratjen; Yvonne Tan Bunzl; Katrin Bellinger; Flavia Ormond; Arturo Cuellar; and Kate de Rothschild — pledged £10,000 between them, which will be matched by Christie's.
The two- or three- volume catalogue should appear to coincide with a survey exhibition of drawings from Chatsworth to be held at the British Museum this year.
Volkswagen/Turner scholarships
Applications are now being sought by the Tate Gallery for the joint-funded Volkswagen/Turner scholarships, worth £20,000.
These were established in 1948 and awards are made biennially to one or more candidates over a one or two year period.
The successful candidates work as guest curators at the Tate Gallery and prepare an exhibition and publication based on their research.
In selecting scholars, preference is given to projects which further the cataloguing of the Turner Bequest, but proposals of any related subject are considered.
Application forms to be returned to the Tate Gallery no later than 19 March.
Past and current Turner scholars have worked on Turner's drawing papers, Turner and the Rhine, Meuse and Mosel, Turner's lectures on perspective, and vignettes engraved after the artist.
Exhibitions
The ‘Century of Titian’ at the Louvre
‘This is a show about painting, not about the meaning of Venetian civilisation’
Michel Laclotte's farewell show as director of the Louvre includes the first sight of its eight newly cleaned Titians
Michel Laclotte, director of the Louvre, is retiring next year, and ‘The century of Titian: the golden age of painting in Venice’ is the big statement with which he wishes to leave the scene.
His speciality is fifteenth-century Italian painting, but an exhibition on that theme is an impossibility nowadays, as very few institutions will lend panel paintings, so he has chosen to examine how Giorgione and Titian defined Venetian painting throughout the sixteenth century: ‘Titian, of course, lived to a great age, dying in 1576, but although Giorgione died in 1510, his influence is also pervasive’.
He is emphatic that the works are to speak for themselves and about themselves: ‘This is a show about painting, not about the meaning of Venetian civilisation’, he says.
That is in contrast with a current vogue internationally, and in Paris at the Musée d'Orsay in particular, for sociologically oriented exhibitions, where the works of art are used principally as documents.
The nature of a painter's technique is never scrutinised so closely as when a work has just been cleaned, and at the heart of the exhibition will be eight of the fourteen Titians in the Louvre's own collection that have just been freed of their treacly, dark varnishes and retouchings.
These are ‘Christ crowned with thorns’, ‘St Jerome’, ‘The Virgin and Child with SS.
Jerome, Stephen and Maurice’, ‘Allegory of Alphonso d'Avalos’‘Woman at her toilet’, ‘Portrait of a man’, ‘The Virgin and Child with St Catherine’ and ‘The supper at Emmaus’.
The Louvre will be awaiting critical reaction with some apprehension after the violent, largely ill-informed polemic which erupted in France over their recent cleaning of the huge ‘Wedding at Cana’ by Veronese (see The Art Newspaper No. 24, January 1993, p. 11).
Scholars, on the other hand, are all agog to see how these hitherto heavily obscured works will now measure up to the rest of Titian's oeuvre.
Although Laclotte has been largely responsible for the choice of works, he emphasises that this is a collaborative exhibition, with different parts of the catalogue by different specialists, not always in perfect agreement with one another: ‘There is no absolute truth in matters of attribution, just opinion’, he says.
‘I am opening the exhibition with late Bellini and the early sixteenth century.
Alessandro Ballarin is covering Giorgione, the young Titian and their influence on Sebastiano del Piombo, Palma Vecchio, Bonifazio and artists such as Pordenone, Cariani, Savoldo and Dosso Dossi.
Konrad Oberhuber has attributed many new drawings to Giorgione in his section on the drawings and engravings by Giorgione and the young Titian, but Ballarin does not entirely share his views.
Giovanna Nepi Scire is doing Titian in his maturity, the years 1520 to 1560, and his influence between 1540 and 1580 on Bordone, Schiavone and the three major figures, Tintoretto, Veronese and Bassano.
Terisio Pignatti is covering Veronese; Françoise Viatte and Roger Rearick the later drawings, and Francesco Valcanover the last phase of Titian's life.
That last phase in Titian's painting is very free, very tragic, ending in the agonising ‘Flaying of Marsyas’ from Kromeriz, and you see similar expressionistic qualities and tragic subjects in Tintoretto, Veronese and Bassano’.
This is a large exhibition with 135 paintings and 140 drawings and engravings.
Laclotte is generally happy with the collaboration he has had from institutions world-wide, with important loans coming from the Prado, the Accademia in Venice, the Metropolitan, the Hermitage, the National Galleries in London and Washington, the Galleria Borghese in Rome, among others.
There are a few major gaps, however, such as the Duke of Sutherland's Titians, which no amount of string-pulling could unloosen; Giorgione's ‘Tempesta’ and his ‘Venus’in Dresden, which is in a ruinous state, and his ‘Three philosophers’in Vienna, which the Kunsthistorisches Museum, after some hesitation, decided not to lend.
On the other hand, Laclotte has managed to assemble all the half-figures by, or attributed to, Giorgione and all the Sebastiano del Piombo's from his Venetian period, including the ‘Judgement of Solomon’ from Kingston Lacey, Sussex.
The National Trust here bent its rather strict rules on lending in honour of the importance of the exhibition.
When asked how he has chosen between the various versions of the same subject by Titian, Laclotte says that he has simply aimed for the best.
For example, he is showing the Metropolitan's ‘Venus and Adonis’, although he would also have borrowed the one recently auctioned at Christie's and bought by the Getty Museum, had it not been in restoration.
As to the display, he says, ‘It will be very beautiful, very sober; no evocations of the Renaissance’, which is in keeping with the rather austere, modernist presentation of the eighteenth-century galleries opened earlier this year (The Art Newspaper No. 24, January 1993, p. 7).
The catalogue is published by the Réunion des Musées Nationaux.
The exhibition runs from 20 February to 31 May.
New York
Modern designs at the Met
Star exhibit: the Christopher Dresser album the V&A could not afford
A major album of drawings by the late nineteenth-century British industrial designer Christopher Dresser (1834–1904) acquired by the Metropolitan Museum of Art last year has given the impetus for the museum's current survey of its designs for modern decorative arts, ‘Drawings for Design: Christopher Dresser to the Present’(until 4 April) organised by J. Stewart Johnson, Consultant for Design and Architecture of twentieth-century art and David W. Kiehl, Associate Curator of prints and illustrated books.
The early history of the album is unknown, although it was in America at one time, as it bears a tantalising price of $35 inscribed in the upper right corner of the first page.
In 1991, it appeared in a books and manuscripts sale at Phillips where it was bought jointly by the Fine Arts Society and the dealer Michael Whiteway for £13,000.
Immediately offered to the Victoria & Albert Museum for £40,000, the museum, although interested, was unable to purchase it as its funds were exhausted by the purchase of two huge albums of eighteenth-century architectural drawings from Elton Hall.
An unidentified spokesman for the V&A was quoted in The Independent newspaper of 16 May, 1992 (which featured several colour illustrations from the album) as stating, ‘We have always said that we could not raise the money to buy it, but would be very happy if someone would buy it and give it to us’.
After the British Museum turned the book down, the dealers applied for an export licence, which, to their annoyance, was deferred.
The Export Reviewing Committee subsequently reported that the dealers had circumvented them after withdrawing the export licence and dismembering the book, sending the individual sheets (each valued at an sum below the licence threshold) to New York.
The Fine Arts Society denies this, but by lowering the price to £35,000, just under the export limit, and selling to a foreign buyer, they also avoided the 17% VAT (sales tax) on their profit which they would have paid had they sold to a British institution.
Besides the Dresser drawings, the Met's exhibition features other notable groups of designs, which Johnson has tellingly juxtaposed with similar examples by different ‘schools’: several rug designs by 1920s British designer Eileen Gray are placed near a group of anonymous Bauhaus rug designs which strongly suggest Klee; fabric patterns by such diverse talents as the American painter Stuart Davis, French couturier Paul Poiret and anonymous masters from the Wiener Werkstatte are remarkably similar, as are finely finished watercolours for furniture by the American L. and J.G. Stickley Company and Swedish designer Erik Gunnar Asplund.
Although there is a small case of sketches juxtaposed with finished products (a Richard Meier key ring and a Hans Hollein wristwatch), it is frustrating that larger objects in the Met's collection (from an 1879 Tiffany mixed-metal salver and a Woodstock cabinet made at Byrdcliffe Colony around 1904, to 1988 chairs by Emilio Ambasz and George Ranalli and a Morison Cousins prototype ‘Soup to Nuts’ bowl for Tupperware) could not have also been included beside their preparatory drawings.
Paris
Not the MoMA show but Matisse 1904–1917 only
Detailed examination of the artist's early years will not travel to Russia after all
The Pompidou Centre will be showing a selection of the Matisse works already seen at the Museum of Modern Art, New York, from 25 February to 21 June.
Rather than just a smaller version of the New York show, it has been reshaped to provide a detailed overview of the years 1904 to 1917, and around 130 paintings, together with drawings and sculpture dating from these years will be displayed.
The decision not to simply take over the entire MoMA show was made partly on the grounds that the Pompidou has already mounted a major Matisse retrospective (in 1971), and partly through a desire to study in depth a period of the artist's life now viewed as fundamental for the development of twentieth-century painting.
Organised by Dominique Fourcade and Isabelle Monod-Fontaine, the entire fifth floor of the Pompidou will be used for the show.
The first room will be hung with a group of Fauve works, centred around ‘Luxe, calme et volupte’(1904, Musée d'Orsay).
Following this a group of monumental figures from 1908 to 1910 will include ‘Nu bleu (souvenir de Biskra)’(Baltimore Museum of Art), ‘Baigneuse a la tortue’(Saint-Louis Art Museum), ‘La Danse I’(Museum of Modern Art) and ‘La Danse II’(Hermitage).
The 1911 room will show four ‘Interieurs symphoniques’: ‘l'Atelier rouge’(Museum of Modern Art); ‘La famille du peintre’(Hermitage); ‘l'Atelier rose’(Pushkin Museum); and ‘Interieur aux aubergines’(Musée du Grenoble), a new loan, not seen in New York.
Works from the war years will include: ‘Une vue de Notre-Dame’(Museum of Modern Art); ‘Porte-fenêtre a Collioure’(Musée national d'art moderne); ‘La fenêtre’(Detroit Institute of Arts); and ‘La leçon de piano’(Museum of Modern Art).
In addition, a number of works from the Statens Museum for Kunst, Copenhagen have been added for this showing.
The show has been sponsored by the Elf Aquitaine Foundation.
Initial plans to tour the exhibition to Russia, and to show the entire span of the artist's activities, have now been shelved.
A Moma spokeswoman indicated that the decision had been reached by the Pushkin and Hermitage museums, the two principal lenders to the New York show, together with the Pompidou and MoMA itself.
In the early stages of the planning of the New York show, it had been mooted that the pictures from the Russian, French and American institutions could be lent to each musem in turn.
The Russians have declined the offer to take on such a major project at the present time.
In New York, projected final attendance figures are 900,000.
In 1989 ‘Monet’ at the Royal Academy, London, had 658,000 visitors.
What's on at Pallant House
Pallant House, an elegant eighteenth-century red brick town house in the centre of Chichester, will be holding the following exhibitions in 1993: 6 February to 3 April ‘John Piper and the Stage’, focusing on his close association with Chichester Cathedral; 20 April to 12 June ‘Ivon Hitchins's Nudes’, commemorating the centenary year of the artist's birth; 29 June to 18 September ‘Henry Moore and the Sea’, includes drawings, sculptures, models and graphics; 5 October to 1 January 1994 ‘The Patronage of Contemporary Artists’, modern British art from private collections.
Have a horrible time, courtesy of Kabakov
Just before his departure from the Stedelijk Museum, its director, Wim Beeren, is offering us a final, off-beat exhibition experience.
Until 28 March, the veteran Ukrainian artist Ilya Kabakov is filling eight rooms of the museum with an installation called ‘The big archive’ invented specially for it.
It is the fifteenth in a series called ‘The Russian world’ which he has created for museums in various countries over the last five years or so.
His subject is always scenes from everyday life, the psychology of the common man in Soviet society.
Thus ‘The big archive’ is the image of a bureaucracy verging on the insane.
The galleries have been rebuilt to form rooms which in turn are divided into yet smaller spaces: offices full of tables, counters and filing cabinets.
There is no choice about the way through; if you enter you can only earn the right to emerge by submitting yourself to a series of confrontations with the work.
Loudspeakers lead the visitor from one counter to another, where he is deluged in official documents, forms and certificates to fill in.
To get out he has to supply information about his identity so that he can be put into the right bureaucratic pigeon-hole.
After the umpteenth rubber-stamp this  infuriating rite of passage, as it were, terminates: exit.
What Ruskin made of Tuscany
While Ruskin's relationship with Venice has been explored through both exhibitions and publications, the exhibition at the Accademia Italiana is the first to concentrate on Ruskin and Tuscany.
Organised by Janet Barnes, Keeper of the Ruskin Gallery in Sheffield, the show draws on the collection of the Gallery which Ruskin founded in 1875 and called the St George's Museum.
As part of the Guild of St George it was intended to be a means of bringing craftsmen into contact with works of art, especially of the Middle Ages, early Italian Renaissance and Gothic revival, and with objects of natural beauty.
Ruskin's foundation, which was to promote the education of working men in Sheffield, was not unlike that of the Victoria and Albert Museum — both reflected Victorian anguish over what was seen as a loss of artistic standards in industrial manufacture and craftsmanship.
Concentrating on the art and  architecture of Pisa, Florence, Siena and Lucca, the exhibition includes drawings made by Ruskin of details of Santa Maria della Spina in Pisa, the head of the monument to Ilaria del Carretto in Lucca Cathedral by W.G. Collingwood, and the façade of the Badia Fiesolana by Thomas Matthews Rooke.
In addition, among the 270 exhibits are watercolours, architectural drawings and studies of painting and sculpture by J.M.W. Turner, Edward Burne-Jones and Ruskin himself, among others, as well as nineteenth-century daguerrotypes of buildings and churches and excerpts from Ruskin's diaries.
Loans have come from the Ruskin Galleries in Bembridge on the Isle of Wight and from Ruskin's former home at Brantwood in the Lake District (both owned by the Ruskin Educational Trust), the Ashmolean Museum which also houses a body of material bequeathed by Ruskin, and from private collections in Britain.
The accompanying catalogue by Jeanne Clegg and Paul Tucker is published in English and Italian (Lund Humphries, £17.50).
After showing at the Accademia in London until 7 February the exhibition travels to the Ruskin Gallery, Sheffield (20 February–10 April) and the Fondazione Ragghianti, Lucca (1 May-12 June).
London
White-out at the Tate
Robert Ryman exhibition shared with MoMA, New York
A survey of the career of Robert Ryman, the American artist noted for the white paintings which he has been making for nearly forty years, is the most significant exhibition of contemporary art to be taking place in London this spring.
Following its launch at the Tate Gallery (17 February-25 April), a prestigious international circuit has been arranged for the exhibition which goes to the Museo Nacional de Reina Sofia, Madrid (8 June-23 August), New York's Museum of Modern Art (22 September-4 January 1994), the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art (3 February-17 April 1994) and the Walker Art Center, Minneapolis (23 July-2 October 1994).
The selection of eighty-one canvases and other works of art has been made by Nicholas Serota, director of the Tate Gallery and long an admirer of Ryman's work, which he showed at the Whitechapel Art Gallery in 1977, and Robert Storr, Curator in the Department of Painting and Sculpture at the Museum of Modern Art, New York.
In the past, the Tate Gallery has borrowed exhibitions which have been organised by MOMA's staff, including ‘de Chirico’(1982) and ‘Schwitters’(1985), but this occasion is a proper collaboration between the two institutions.
Although Ryman has been making art since 1954 and belongs to the generation of Jasper Johns, he did not exhibit his work until the later Sixties and was not given a solo museum exhibition until 1972.
As a result, his biography has been compressed into the chapter of Minimalism.
In fact, he has usually been regarded as the supreme Minimalist painter, but perceptions have been changing through a closer study of his earlier work which reveals him as an artist whose origins lie in painterly Abstraction.
This rediscovery has come through historical exhibitions held recently at New York's DIA Center for the Arts (1988–89), Claude Berri's RENN Espace d'Art Contemporain in Paris (1991–92) and at the Hallen für Neue Kunst, Schaffhausen, where Ryman's art has been prominently featured for several years and a fresh installation opens shortly (2 May-31 October).
The Tate Gallery's exhibition continues this process of reassessment through a selection of those earlier works dating before 1960 and including a rare coloured canvas, ‘Untitled (Orange Painting)’, which was created in 1955–59 and has never been shown, although it is known from illustrations in catalogues.
That those unexpected interests in colour are still valid has been confirmed by Ryman's ‘Versions’, a series of sixteen recent pictures employing a thin layer of white pigment washed over coloured grounds laid on fibreglass, which were seen in Shaffhausen and at Pace, the artist's New York gallery, in an exhibition which closed last month.
Three examples from that series mark the conclusion of the present exhibition.
The catalogue includes an essay by Storr and entries for the exhibited pictures prepared by Catherine Kinley of the Tate Gallery and MoMA's Lynn Zelevansky based upon interviews with the artist.
What it costs to appreciate Robert Ryman this month
With a major international touring survey of Robert Ryman's white paintings, the exacting connoisseur of Minimalism may wish to consider the following acquisitions, selected to suit both minimalist and maximalist wallets:
Catalogue for the exhibition, soft cover, £ 19.95
Ticket for lecture being given by the artist at the Tate Gallery on 18 February, £7.50
‘Songs of the Humpback Whale’, music cassette of white noise, from Tower Records, London, £7.99
Pair of king-size white cambric linen sheets from The White House, Bond Street, £768
‘Versions’(1991), sixteen original oil paintings by Robert Ryman of different sizes from Pace Gallery, New York, individually priced $100,000–250,000
Los Angeles County Museum of Art
Rival collections converge
Paley and Wertheim Impressionists on show this month
The contents of two great American collections, totalling more than 120 Impressionist, Post-Impressionist, and Modern works, converge at The Los Angeles County Museum of Art this Spring.
‘The William S. Paley Collection’(28 February-16 May) consists of eighty-four mainly intimate-scaled early modern works acquired by the late founder of CBS, and bequeathed to a foundation that in turn conveyed them to the Museum of Modern Art in New York, where Paley was chairman emeritus at the time of his death in 1990.
‘Degas to Matisse: The Maurice Wertheim Collection from the Harvard University Art Museums’(14 February-25 April) comprises forty-three representational works of consistent high quality, collected by New York investment banker Maurice Wertheim, and bequeathed in 1950 to his alma mater, where they have been on display since 1974.
The Fogg is circulating the show in celebration of the museum's imminent centennial.
Whether because of availability or his superior eye, Wertheim's are the better nineteenth-century pictures.
Degas' ‘Singer with a glove’(ca. 1878) and ‘The Rehearsal’(1873–78), Monet's ‘The Gare St. Lazare: the arrival of a train’(1877), Renoir's ‘Seated bather’(1883–84), and van Gogh's ‘Self-portrait dedicated to Paul Gauguin’(1888) are about as good as works by these artists get.
Paley's Polynesian Gauguins, ‘The seed of the Areoi’(1892) and ‘Washerwomen’(1888) are exceptional, as is Wertheim's ‘Poemes Barbares’(1896), and Paley's Lautrecs far outshine Wertheim's.
Paley's real strength lies in his early Modern works, including Matisse's ‘Odalisque with a tambourine’,(1926) and ‘Woman with a veil’(1927) and Picasso's rose-period ‘Boy leading a horse’(1905–06).
Wertheim again provides superb examples here, too, with Matisse's ‘Geraniums’(1915) and Picasso's blue-period ‘Mother and child’(1901).
Whereas Wertheim has Seurat charcoals and an oil ‘Study for La Grande Jatte’, Paley has important oils by Derain, as well as Cubist pictures by Picasso, Gris, and Braque that were sufficiently abstract not to appeal to the more traditional Wertheim.
Their tastes seem to merge however in Cezanne, whose work gets a mini-retrospective with Paley's ‘Milk can and apples’(1879–80), ‘Self-portrait in a straw hat’(1875–76), and landscape at ‘L'Estaque’(1882–83), and Wertheim's ‘Still life with commode’(ca. 1885).
And to coincide with the temporary exhibitions, LACMA is showing its own new Cezanne, ‘Sous-bois’(c. 1890), a large oil purchased last year for a multi-million-dollar sum believed to be the largest the museum has ever spent on an acquisition.
This is the first LACMA purchase with money from the Wallis Foundation Fund, established in late 1991 to settle a dispute between the museum and the charity formed by the late film producer Hal B. Wallis (responsible for ‘Casablanca’ and ‘The Maltese Falcon’).
When the foundation removed twelve paintings on long-term loan to the museum, and sold the eight Impressionist and Post-Impressionist works at Christie's, NY, in May 1989, for $39.6 million (including the 10% buyers' premium), the museum sued for the money, claiming they had been promised the paintings.
The case never went to trial and was settled out of court for an undisclosed amount now known as the Wallis Foundation Fund, with which the Cezanne was purchased.
The catalogue of ‘Degas to Matisse: The Maurice Wertheim Collection’ is written by Fogg curator John O'Brian, and published by the museum.
‘The William S. Paley Collection’ catalogue is written by MoMA curator emeritus William Rubin and curatorial consultant Matthew Armstrong.
Both books are distributed by Harry N. Abrams.
Following the LACMA showings, the Wertheim Collection, will travel to the Kimbell Art Museum, Fort Worth (5 June-22 August), and the Cleveland Museum of Art (5 October-8 December, 1993).
The Paley Collection will go to the San Diego Museum of Art (9 June-26 September), and the New Orleans Museum of Art (6 February-17 April, 1994), before returning to MoMA.
Paris
Elf art
Matisse, the Soviets and Rodin
Created in 1990 by Loik Le Floch-Prigent, President of the Societe Nationale Elf Aquitaine, the Fondation Elf is dedicating itself to research, education, poverty relief and general patronage worldwide (it achieved charity status in 1992).
A petro-chemical and pharmaceuticals company, Elf Aquitaine was founded in 1941 and is now among the ten largest oil, gas and chemical companies in the world, with an operating income in 1991 of FFr18.8 billion.
The first part of 1993 sees its name attached to three important exhibitions: ‘Henri Matisse 1904–17’ at the Centre Georges Pompidou (25 February to 21 June, see p. 4); ‘L'Avant Garde Russe (1905–1925); chef d'oeuvres des musées de Russie’(until 18 April) at le Musée de Beaux-Arts, Nantes; and ‘Rodin, sculptures, dessins, photographies’at the Palace of Fine Arts, Peking (15 February to 14 March) and the Exhibition Centre, Shanghai (27 March to 18 April).
Nantes will be showing about one hundred works, many never shown previously outside Russia, and will be the most significant survey of this subject in France since ‘Paris-Moscow’ at the Pompidou in 1979.
The exhibition's organisers have drawn deliberately on works from lesser known and inaccessible Russian collections lent by eleven cities including Saint Petersburg, Tula, Ivanovo, Astrakhan, Nizhniy Novgorod, Ufa, Nizhniy Tagil and Sloboda.
The majority of the works of art have been restored for the occasion of this exhibition, which has been coordinated by the Department of Museums in the Ministry of Culture of the Russian Federation under Vera Lebedeva.
The thirty-five artists represented include Goncharova, Kandinsky, Larionov, Malevich, Rodchenko, Rozanova, Popova, Stepanova, and Exter.
With operations in sixty-five countries, Elf have an interest in being represented culturally in as many as possible of these.
‘Rodin in China’, organised by the Musée Rodin, Paris, is something of a coup in that among the 113 works to be shown, the large version of ‘The thinker’ will leave Paris for the first time.
It will be installed in front of the Palace of Fine Arts, Peking.
The exhibition will be basically chronological in format with a concluding section of twenty-one drawings.
Royal Academy, London
British watercolours: the broader view
Major thematic exhibition 1750–1880 moves on to National Gallery, Washington
Some 300 watercolours by artists such as Cotman, Cox, Turner, Gainsborough, Girtin and Constable are at the Royal Academy until 11 April with the aim of providing a new overview of the medium in Britain during the years of its highest achievement.
After its London showing the exhibition will move to the National Gallery of Art, Washington (2 May to 25 July).
‘The Great Age of British Watercolours 1750–1880’ is the conception of Andrew Wilton, Keeper of the British Collection at the Tate Gallery, working with Anne Lyles, Assistant Keeper.
Speaking to The Art Newspaper Ms Lyles noted that while there have been major surveys of British watercolours in recent years (such as that held at the British Museum in 1985) these have tended to be in-house shows, with the emphasis on highlights from individual collections.
The present exhibition differs in that it takes a thematic approach, organising the material around six key subjects which are further examined in a series of essays in the accompanying catalogue.
The six rooms on the main floor of the Academy will be devoted to: innovations in composition in the second half of the eighteenth century, through to the early work of Cotman and Girtin, with an emphasis on the importance of Alexander Cozens; topography, spanning the entire chronological period from the Sandby brothers to Lear; naturalism, including watercolour sketches, observations of nature, still-lifes, animal studies etc.; later developments in composition; atmosphere, stressing the ‘proto-impressionist’ nature of works by artists such as Cox and Muller; and lastly the relationship between watercolours and oils and the role of the Old Water-Colour Society in the promotion of the medium as suitable to portray historical and literary subjects.
The hanging and design of the last room will be intended to reproduce to some extent the appearance of a Water-Colour Society's exhibition of around 1830 with red walls.
Around two-thirds of works on show have been drawn from British public collections but a number of other exhibits have not previously been published.
The criteria have been rigorously applied: fine condition, outstanding quality and preferably, period frame.
Questions of attribution have been deliberately avoided, as has the work of amateur artists, and there is little emphasis on issues of social or political background.
Andrew Wilton's conception of the show is designed to work on several levels, and should be ‘genuinely accessible’ to the non-specialist visitor in terms of the beauty and importance of the objects while offering a coherent reading to the specialist.
Henri Laurens: a retrospective
The Musem of Modern Art, Villeneuve, is holding a major retrospective of the work of Henri Laurens until 12 April.
The largest survey since that held at the Pompidou in 1951, it will include 164 works by Laurens dating from 1915 to 1954, drawn from public and private collections in Europe, the States and Israel.
The musée at Villeneuve is an appropriate setting for an exhibition on Laurens in that it is the permanent home of the Dutilleul-Masurel collection, donated by Jean Masurel in 1979 and containing works by Braque, Picasso and Laurens, Leger, Modigliani, Derain, Miró, Klee and others.
The exhibition has been structured around the relationship between sculpture and graphic art which preoccupied the artist throughout his career, with particular emphasis on his early, graphic work.
Attention is also devoted to his work in the fields of architecture and book illustration.
Particularly interesting is the influence of Kahnweiler who represented Laurens between 1920 and 1922 and who encouraged him to produce illustrations for publishers.
Curated by Joelle Pijaudier with Anne Nardin, the exhibition has been divided into six chronological sections, beginning with a display of the rare early work from 1915, with a final section of texts and photographs covering his work in architecture, the decorative arts and theatre (for example his sets for ‘Le Train Bleu’, the ballet choreographed by  Diaghilev for the Ballets Russes).
A 300-page catalogue accompanies the exhibition, co-produced with the Réunion des Musées Nationaux (price FFr420).
New York
Ultra-German Beuys hits MoMA
A growing interest in Joseph Beuys in the United States indicated by the Walker Art Center's major acquisition
A touring exhibition of 200 drawings covering the career of Joseph Beuys from 1936 until his death in 1986 opens at the Museum of Modern Art, New York, towards the end of this month (21 February-4 May).
Organised by Bernice Rose, the museum's senior curator of drawings, and Ann Temkin, curator of twentieth-century art at the Philadelphia Museum of Art, the exhibition is the most important selection of his drawings to have been assembled since the Victoria and Albert Museum's survey in 1983.
It includes six blackboards which are usually classified among his sculptures or objects.
The exhibition's centrepiece is, in fact, ‘Richtkrafte’, an installation of one hundred blackboards created by the artist in 1974–77.
This show fits into a wider reassessment of Beuys currently taking place in the United States, which, ironically, follows, rather than precedes, the considerable interest already shown in the work of other German artists including Gerhard Richter, Anselm Kiefer and Georg Baselitz.
In spite of Caroline Tisdall's marvellous study of his art which was held at the Guggenheim Museum in 1979, this complex man has never been widely known nor understood by an American audience.
A partial explanation for this state of affairs lies in his infrequent appearance in the salerooms, for Beuys was not a producer of easily collectible objects.
It must also be relevant that his social ideas and political goals were not sympathetic to American tastes.
The situation is, however, changing, and Anthony d'Offay, a leading dealer in Beuys material, reports greater interest and sales to American private collectors.
As this issue went to press the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis announced its acquisition of 437 multiples by Beuys, rivalling the collections of the artist's works in the Guggenheim Musem and Dia Center for the Arts in New York.
To be called the Alfred and Marie Greisinger Collection, the works range from 1965 to 1986, making it the most comprehensive array of Beuys multiples outside Germany.
A major installation of Beuys, ‘Arena (where I would have got if I had been intelligent)’, created in 1970–72 (see The Art Newspaper No.16, March 1992, p.6), remains on exhibition at the Dia Center for the Arts until mid-April, while the MoMA exhibition travels to the Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles (30 May-15 August), the Philadelphia Museum of Art (10 October-2 January 1994) and the Art Institute of Chicago (15 February-25 April 1994).
In Europe, the Milanese bank The Credito Valtellinese is showing a group of works including blackboards given by Beuys to the museum Satuki in Lodz, Poland, in its exhibition space Refettorio delle Stelline on Corso Magenta until 28 February.
Looks like
Left: Joseph Beuys, one of ‘Doppelgouache’, 1959–60.
Gouache and pencil.
Museum Ludwig, Cologne, on loan to MoMA, New York 21 February-4 May.
Right: Victor Hugo, ink blot, about 1855.
Private collection, Paris.
A curious family resemblance, a hundred years apart.
Another kinship will be seen next month when Surrealism meets Romanticism in Venice.
The Duchamp exhibition curated by Pontus Hulten opens at the Palazzo Grassi (21 March-4 July) and coincides intentionally with a show of drawings by Victor Hugo, better known for his novels such as Les Miserables and The Hunchback of Notre Dame, at the Ca Pesaro (15 March-13 May).
This ink blot, due to be exhibited, dates from Hugo's eighteen year-long political exile on the island of Jersey.
There, besides practising spiritism, and, indeed, allowing the planchette to draw for him, Hugo explored random artistic effects such as this.
These ‘drawings’ may well have influenced both Dada and Surrealism as they were first published at a time when André Breton was championing automatism and mediumism.
A brilliant essay by Mark Gisbourne in the catalogue to the exhibition says: ‘A confluence of natural effects and chance experiences was a particular trait of both Romantic thought and execution, since central to the aesthetic enterprise was a concern with affective boundaries’
The Peggy Guggenheim Collection stays open this winter and offers ‘Santomaso: Letters to Palladio’
The Peggy Guggenheim Collection is continuing its exhibitions programme with a show of the work of Venetian painter Giuseppe Santomaso (1907–90) curated by Fred Licht (with an accompanying essay by Carlo Bertelli).
Santomaso's links with Peggy Guggenheim date back to 1948 when the artist suggested to Rodolfo Pallucchini, General Secretary of the Venice Biennale, that Peggy Guggenheim's collection should be exhibited in the Greek Pavilion.
This proved a great success, not least because this was the first time that paintings by Jackson Pollock had been exhibited in Europe.
The current exhibition has brought together seven large canvases from the cycle ‘Letters to Palladio’ created in 1977–78, with loans from the artist's estate and the Gallerie Blu in Milan.
Under the directorship of Philip Rylands, the Peggy Guggenheim Collection has begun an extension programme into a neighbouring building leased from the Fondazione Ugo and Olga Levi, Venice.
The newly acquired space will be used for offices, a museum store and a small cafe, leaving the Ca' Venier dei Leoni free to exhibit the permanent collection.
It is hoped that new acquisitions of sculpture will be made for display in the garden, which will be increased in size.
The fact that the Collection will remain open this winter (as it did in 1991–92), and that the permanent collection, including paintings by Pegeen (the founder's daughter) and glass sculptures by Egidio Costantini will be on display, would seem to counter recent criticisms of the Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation made by Peggy Guggenheim's grandsons.
‘Giuseppe Santomaso: Letters to Palladio’ will be on view until 29 March.
Oxford shows fragrant LeWitt
The Museum of Modern Art, Oxford, is hosting two exhibitions devoted to the work of Sol LeWitt.
Until 18 March ‘Drawings 1958–1992’ surveys the artist's extensive output of bringing together 250 works.
The earliest sheets included are a group of twelve sketches from 1958 made after paintings by Velazquez, Goya and Piero della Francesca.
The influence of the early structures (examined in the accompanying exhibition) is evident in the series drawings of the 1970s which deploy layers of broken and unbroken lines and arcs in primary colour combinations.
The more recent gouaches use cubes, pyramids and parallelograms, forms also found in his more recent structures.
These structures form the subject of the second exhibition, ‘Sol LeWitt, Structures’(until 28 March).
LeWitt's use of geometrical structures dates to 1963 but this vital aspect of his work has rarely been examined in depth in Britain.
The influence of the Bauhaus, de Stijl and Josef Albers together with the relationship between LeWitt and fellow Americans Judd, Morris, André and Flavin and the contrasting preoccupations of British and European sculpture, are two important themes.
As well as a range of structures including examples of his rare black, modular pieces, the exhibition will show a number of large scale photographs of his outdoor cinderblock pieces, not previously shown in Britain.
An accompanying catalogue — designed by the artist — contains new essays by Rosalind Kraus and David Batchelor, together with a number of previously unpublished illustrations and texts.
After its Oxford showing, the exhibition moves to the Villa Stuck, Munich (30 April to 18 July) then to the Henry Moore Sculpture Trust Gallery, Leeds (10 August to 17 October).
The exhibition has been sponsored by Nina Ricci, the French fashion and cosmetic house, for whom, perhaps a little bizarrely, LeWitt has designed Ricci Club, a men's fragrance.
Dulwich focuses on Rembrandt
In January Dulwich picture gallery showed a selection of its finest paintings at Christie's in an effort to draw public attention to its urgent need to raise funds (a further £200,000 per annum is required; see p.7).
Back on its own territory the gallery is holding a small exhibition (3 February to 25 April) based around its celebrated Rembrandt ‘Girl at a Window’.
As a comparison Dulwich has borrowed Rembrandt's ‘Kitchen Maid’ from the Nationalmuseum, Stockholm, and other contemporary interpretations of the picture by his pupils using the same model under Rembrandt's supervision.
They are shown with copies and interpretations of the Dulwich picture by later artists like Jean Baptiste Santerre, Joshua Reynolds and John Opie.
The fourth in Dulwich's ‘Paintings and their Context’ series, the present accompanying catalogue contains essays by M. Roscam Abbing of the Rembrandthuis; Christopher Brown, National Gallery, London; Gorel Cavalli-Bjorkman, Keeper of paintings and drawings at the Nationalmuseum, Stockholm; and Sophie Plender, Consultant Conservator, Dulwich.
The exhibition has been organised by Ann Sumner, Keeper at Dulwich, who has written an essay on the influence of the picture on eighteenth- and nineteenth-century French and British artists.
The restoration of Rietveld's De Stijl villa
In tandem with the major exhibition on Rietveld's activities as an architect and furniture designer which has opened at the Centraal Museum of Utrecht (until 21 February), the City Council of Utrecht has pledged DFl.270,000 (£84,400; $146,800) for the restoration of ten early villas by the Dutch artist, furniture designer and architect.
Together with the painters Piet Mondrian and Theo van Doesburg, Gerrit Rietveld (1888–1964) formed the vanguard of the De Stijl group during the early decades of this century.
The architect responsible for the restoration of the villas, all of which were built between 1925 and 1935, is Bertus Mulder who worked with Rietveld before the latter's death in 1964.
The restoration has been further financed by a subsidy of DFl.130,000 (£40,625; $70,684) from the Ministry of Culture as well as by contributions from the owners of the villas who set up a foundation specifically for the purpose.
The exhibition will afterwards travel to the Centre Pompidou in Paris and the Guggenheim Museum in New York as well as another location either in the United States or Canada.
The projected costs of the exhibition, estimated at DFl.1 million (£312,500; $543,780) will be covered by the museums themselves.
New Yorkers to get a glimpse of Nazi cultural policies and their repercussions
The ‘Degenerate Art’ exhibition (1991), organised by Stephanie Barron for the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, travelled to Chicago, Washington, D.C., and Berlin, but never to New York.
That acclaimed show is now the model for ‘Assault on the Arts: Culture and Politics in Nazi Germany’, the New York Public Library's own examination of the Third Reich's cultural policies.
The NYPL paid LACMA for the right to make use of the earlier show's research, documentary photographs, videos, films, and other materials.
But rather than focus on entartete Kunst per se, the curators emphasise new areas, chief among which is literature, the library's obvious strength.
Near a video of archival footage showing the 1933 book burnings, are display cases containing such vile relics as an official register of blacklisted titles, an assortment of illustrated anti-semitic children's books, and a copy of Mein Kampf in the deluxe wedding edition distributed to all German couples.
The resistance is represented by anti-Nazi leaflets camouflaged as packets of tomato seeds or tea bags, and works by free-thinking Germans in exile.
In the visual arts, the exhibition seeks to codify the classicising social realism of Nazi-approved compositions, contrasting images by Brekker and his associates with prints by German Expressionists.
The exhibition further explores cinema, theatre, and music, the latter with vintage recordings of the scores on view.
‘Assault on the Arts: Culture and Politics in Nazi Germany’ is co-curated by Dr Gail Stavitsky, an independent art historian, and Anson Rabinach, professor of European history at Cooper Union in lower Manhattan.
The 300 items, culled mainly from the NYPL's own collections, will remain in Gottesman Hall from 27 February to 28 May.
Jeff Koons: the new Pompier
Reams of bad press certainly haven't hurt Jeff Koons.
While the Prince of Banality is going down as the embodiment of Eighties vulgarity and hype, the museum world and the academy are singing his praises.
The San Francisco Museum of Modern Art has on view sixty-five examples of Mr Koons's Neo-Dada wares — from the floating basketballs and stainless-steel bunny rabbits, to ceramic Michael Jackson sculptures and X-rated photographs of Mr Koons and his wife, Italian former porn-star Cicciolina, in saccharine flagrante.
Accompanying the retrospective a laudatory lecture series was mounted.
‘Jeff Koons: meeting the needs of the people’, featured the ‘appropriationist’ himself, followed by Artforum critic Jan Avgikos, magazine editor Glenn O'Brien, and the distinguished NYU professor and modern-art historian Robert Rosenblum.
While Ms Avgikos deconstructed Mr Koons's ‘collaboration’ with Cicciolina, and Mr O'Brien marvelled at his shameless self-promotion, Professor Rosenblum added a scholarly patina to the proceedings, authoritatively situating Mr Koons on ‘the cutting edge’.
‘I'm interested in the high kitsch and the R- and X-rated love pictures’, Professor Rosenblum told The Art Newspaper, explaining that his lecture was based on his preface to the Jeff Koons Handbook, a pocket-sized manual of the artist's aphorisms newly released by Thames and Hudson.
‘Few if any artists of his generation have so startled my eyes and mind,’ he continued.
‘He has jolted me into new experiences, obliging me to reconsider old questions about good and bad, beautiful and ugly, vulgar and elite,’ and ‘has been a major innovator in exploring new visual sources, new media, new thresholds of propriety’.
An endorsement like that may make Mr Koons forget all about losing his six-figure copyright infringement suit.
After San Francisco (until 7 February) the retrospective travels to the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis (10 July-3 October).
Meanwhile, the Koons retrospective at the Stedelijk, Amsterdam, has now moved to Aarhus Kunstmuseum in Denmark until 28 February.
Museums
The Cincinnati Art Museum
You too can own your local museum
Private sponsorship in the American tradition restores the ‘Art Palace of the West’
In times of economic hardship, private cultural institutions fare better than those dependent on government support.
The Cincinnati Art Museum is a case in point.
Of its $6.5 million annual budget, the CAM gets less than $175,000 from city and state government, yet has managed to operate in the black for the last nine years.
What's more, last month, the museum completed a $10.5 million, two-year renovation and reinstallation, all with private money.
Three trustees, a fourth Cincinnatian, and the Procter & Gamble Fund each contributed gifts in excess of $1 million toward the renewal of the museum, an eight-wing acropolis atop Mount Adams in the city's Eden Park.
This outpouring of private support for culture is a truly American tradition.
It is difficult to say, however, whether the real motivation is social responsibility or vanity.
According to director Millard F. Rogers, Jr., ‘We made a list of all our named galleries, figured out what else could be named, and attached a sum to each’.
The sales approach, one adopted by many American museums, worked like a charm.
Seduced by the promise of an appellation in perpetuity, donors quickly committed $17 million, staking claims to named galleries and lecture halls, named gardens, pools, plazas, and staircases, even to a restaurant entrance and loading dock.
(The parking lot is not spoken for.)
Trustee Bradford Eastman Phillips, retired president of Totes rain gear company and a member of the $1 million-plus club, took title to the Great Hall, which is henceforth known as the Phillips Hall.
To  gauge the effectiveness of the appeal of the plaque, consider that of the ten donors of $500,000 or more, only one has forgone the opportunity to take public credit for their magnanimity; and of the thirty-one contributors of $100,000 or more, all but six,(three have underwritten exhibition and outreach programs).
Interestingly, the titular allure does not extend to endowed curatorships, at least not in Cincinnati.
This plethora of publicly paraded private largesse enabled the museum to remove the bland post-War architectural veneer that masked columns, arches, mouldings, skylights and other elements of the Romanesque Revival building, dubbed the ‘Art Palace of the West’ when it opened in 1886.
The double staircase has been reconstructed providing a grand route to the new second-floor reception and sales area.
From the top of the stairs, one may enter either the temporary exhibition galleries, or the circuit of newly climate-controlled, track-lit, chronologically installed American and European picture galleries, containing masterworks such as Mantegna's so-called ‘Esther and Mordecai’ grisaille, Bronzino's ‘Portrait of Eleanor of Toledo and her Son’, Guercino's ‘Mars with Cupid’, Giambologna's small bronze ‘Rape of the Sabines’, Terborch's newly restored ‘The music party’, and Gainsborough's ‘Portrait of Mrs Philip Thicknesse’.
The cupula oculus illuminates the third-story loft, newly dedicated to contemporary art, and the reopened aperture in the loft floor admits light into the Phillips Hall below.
Wall treatments vary from red or green with wood wainscotting for the Renaissance and Baroque pictures, to pale shades with chair rails for the Rococo, to lighter colours for the Impressionists, and stark white for modern and contemporary.
Labels are the standard ‘tombstones’, but flyers map out slightly more informative self-guided introductory tours, and brochures offer trendy texts by art historians with divergent perspectives on CAM artworks.
For a breather, visitors can relax in the reading room, perusing books or an interactive video station that deals with nineteenth-century art.
American and European paintings, prints and sculptures, account for only a fraction of the museum's 100,000 objects which range from American Indian material, African art, and musical instruments, to Nabataen sculpture from Jordan, Egyptian and classical antiquities, Asian art, costumes, and 300 American, English and Continental portrait miniatures.
These collections, along with decorative arts and a number of period rooms, occupy the first floor, parts of which will not reopen until later this year.
All of the inaugural temporary exhibitions are drawn entirely from the museum's holdings.
The featured show assembles 150 sheets from the superb 850-piece six-century survey of master prints, bequeathed by former CAM curator and trustee Herbert Greer French (until 11 April, accompanied by a scholarly catalogue edited by CAM curator of prints and photographs, Kristin L. Spangenberg).
Also on view are more than seventy photographs (until 15 April); one hundred objects surveying the city's Japanese-inspired Rookwood art pottery (13 March-6 June, travelling to Clark Institute in Williamstown, Mass.); and a selection of Victorian fashions (23 May-5 September, travelling to the Chrysler Museum in Norfolk, Virginia, and the Dixon Gallery in Memphis, Tennessee).
With the renovation and installation paid for, the obvious satisfaction that Mr Rogers tells The Art Newspaper, ‘We're on very sound footing.
We're not suffering the devastating cutbacks other institutions have had to endure — institutions more dependent on government money.’
London
Poor Dulwich
Vivien Duffield keeps the wolves from the door — this year
Last month an exhibition of pictures from the Dulwich Gallery was held at Christie's.
The principal aim of this event — which features paintings by Poussin, Lely, Gainsborough, Canaletto, Dujardin, Murillo and Tiepolo — is to draw attention to the current financial plight of the Gallery, which houses one of London's finest collections of Old Master paintings.
Since its foundation in 1811 it has been linked to the nearby public school Alleyn's College of God's Gift.
As a beneficiary of this body it received £140,000 this financial year.
Its own fund-raising activities bring this up to around £200,000 per annum, a figure now insufficient to cover its present needs.
An additional £200,000 per annum is being sought but the Gallery needs £550,000 to cover its costs fully.
The Gallery is an independent trust but up to the present its trustees have been the College Governors of Dulwich College, acting as trustees of the Picture Gallery.
At the opening of the Christie's exhibition Dulwich's director Giles Waterfield announced a change to the Gallery's status: later this year the ownership of the Gallery and its collections will be vested in an independent body of trustees who will have the power to share ownership with, or transfer ownership completely to, a new sponsoring body.
This change will allow the Gallery to set itself up permanently on a proper funding basis, with the possibility of a number of options: it could move into public ownership, either national or local; alternatively, a private sponsor might come forward and take on the entire enterprise.
Either way, the new structure will allow for greater flexibility and remove one layer of unnecessary supervision from the management of the Gallery.
The present scheme must be viewed as more acceptable than the radical changes Mr Waterfield and his trustees have been forced to consider in recent months.
These include moving all the pictures to the National Gallery; storing the pictures in situ in a permanently closed Gallery; selling off some of the pictures (one such sale in 1971 caused public outcry); and launching another major public appeal as in 1984–85 and 1988 (unlikely to succeed again).
Dulwich inevitably suffers from its geographical situation four miles south of central London, and currently lacks any surplus funds to promote itself through increased advertising.
In a direct response to the considerable publicity generated by the launch of the Christie's exhibition, a one-off donation of £200,000 was pledged on 13 January by Ms Vivien Duffield, chairman of the Clore Foundation.
Ms Duffield has given money to Dulwich's education activities in the past; the present gift is intended to enable the gallery to survive for a year while it coordinates its long-term fundraising activities.
Dallas
Museum of Art director resigns after pleading ‘no contest’ to charge of public lewdness
Board ousts Rick Brettell only to rehire him privately
On the eve of the much anticipated ‘Pissarro's series paintings’ exhibition at the Dallas Museum of Art, director and co-organiser Richard R. Brettell was arrested for allegedly ‘fondling’an undercover policeman in a park.
Mr Brettell, who is married, pleaded ‘no contest’ to a public lewdness charge and was given one year probation, after which the misdemeanor will likely be dropped.
As news of the incident spread, the director felt increasingly uncomfortable, and opted for an administrative leave.
Then, in mid December, under pressure from the museum's board of trustees, he resigned, stating, ‘a resignation — no matter whose or for what — is always a sad event, but, in this case, the best interests of a great museum have been kept firmly in mind’.
The loss of Mr Brettell was compounded by the departure of former deputy director Emily Spano to become chief curator of the Asian Art Museum of San Francisco.
The unfortunate turn of events also threatened to disrupt plans for the Hamon Building, a 140,000-square-foot three storey annex slated for unveiling within less than a year.
The board hastily named as acting director Clay Johnson III, a mail-order executive hired only a few months earlier as chief operating officer.
Because Mr Johnson admits scant knowledge of fine art, his duties are expressly administrative.
Suzanne Barnes, the museum's senior curator of Western Art, is overseeing exhibitions and collections as the board seeks a permanent replacement for the director's spot.
But even before the trustees commenced their search, the looming rudderlessness of their ship led them back to none other than Mr Brettell himself.
While hastening to disassociate the institution from the former director's personal life, the board nonetheless found no reason to relinquish his professional skills.
So upon accepting his resignation, the museum retained him —‘privately’— as ‘consulting director’ for the new Hamon Building.
In his four years as DMA director, Mr Brettell had been instrumental in planning the facility, and helped raise the $55 million to build and endow it.
Why not permit him to consummate his ideas for the annex, which include a ‘Museum of the Americas’ combining North and South American native, colonial, and modern art?
Indeed, why not also have Mr Brettell complete The Treasures of the Dallas Museum of Art, scheduled for publication in a year?
And what's more, why not have him continue to work closely with the staff, maintaining an office at the museum, and receiving pay equivalent to his annual $150,000 salary?
The board elected to do just these things.
Why, one wonders, did they fire him in the first place?
Certainly not on moral grounds.
One might well conclude the dismissal was a feint, a hollow gesture to allay perceived public outrage.
The board has announced that Mr Brettell's assignment will end with the Hamon Building inauguration in October, but who can say?
The forty-five year-old, Yale-trained art historian has a strong record in the field, having spent eight years as curator at The Art Institute of Chicago where he co-organised ‘A Day in the Country: Impressionism and the French Landscape’ and ‘The Art of Paul Gauguin’.
He has written a three-volume catalogue of the Art Institute's nineteenth-century French paintings (Abrams, 1987) and most recently Pissarro and Pontoise (Yale, 1990).
When his consultancy is up, the DMA will probably offer him something else to do.
One final question seems pertinent: What would the response have been had Mr Brettell's offence involved instead an undercover policewoman?
I venture to guess he would still be director.
Flood in Stedelijk damages five paintings
A leak in the glass roof of the Stedelijk Museum in Amsterdam, discovered on 11 January, caused flood damage to several large paintings held in store in a depot on the top floor.
According to a spokesman in the museum, the leak was caused by a blockage of the drainage system which, despite regular checks, had become clogged up after strong winds the previous week.
The works affected, currently in the care of the museum's restorers, are ‘Blue, Green, Red I’(1964–65), ‘White triangle with black curve’(1972), and ‘Red curve II’(1972) by the American artist Ellsworth Kelly; the relief ‘R 75–6’(1987), the largest work by the Dutch artist Jan Schoonhoven; and ‘The unexpected death of Blinky Palermo’(1981) by the American Julian Schnabel.
London
New antagonism for New Displays?
Tate Gallery perseveres with rotating the collections in face of mounting criticism
When the Tate Gallery embarked upon its programme of annual reorganisation of the permanent collection in autumn 1989, it was hailed as a bold and novel decision through which the works of neglected artists buried in the museum's extensive storage facilities might be brought to the surface.
That part of the collection's rotation has worked surprisingly well but it has necessitated the temporary removal to storage, or to its branch in Liverpool, of masterpieces which visitors expect to find on permanent view.
A growing disenchantment with this policy, and with other developments at the museum, including the Turner Prize, reached a climax in an unsigned profile of director Nicholas Serota which was published in The Independent on 28 November 1992.
Titled ‘The Tate's continual revolutionary’, this unflattering portrait has been widely accepted as a fair criticism and is accompanied by a declining audience for the museum's collection and exhibitions.
Although attendance rose handsomely in Liverpool (from 550,734 visitors in 1991 to 597,258 in 1992) and at the Barbara Hepworth Museum in St Ives (from 16,457 to 22,691), there was a disappointingly sharp drop at the museum's Millbank headquarters last year (from 1,816,421 to 1,575,637), in spite of special exhibitions such as‘Otto Dix’ and ‘The Swagger Portrait’.
Against this rather uneasy background of changing critical perceptions, the museum opens ‘New Displays 1993’ on 3 February, although the new arrangement of several galleries, including an exhibition of nine works of contemporary British art given by Charles Saatchi, was completed in mid-December.
Those works include sculpture by Richard Deacon, Julian Opie, Grenville Davey and Richard Wentworth and a painting by Lisa Milroy and have been hung with recent purchases of contemporary art by Ashley Bickerton, Damien Hirst and other younger artists.
The most striking feature of ‘New Displays 1993’ is the replacement of Richard Serra's two iron sculptures with a new exhibition of sculpture in the Duveen Galleries.
In the front, or south, gallery, Rodin's popular marble sculpture, ‘The Kiss’, is retrieved from storage for the first time in four years and shown among nine bronze statues or studies loaned by the Victoria and Albert Museum, including casts of ‘The Age of Bronze’ and ‘St John the Baptist’.
Their foil in the north gallery is a selection of eight important Minimalist sculptures by Barnett Newman, Robert Morris, Donald Judd, Sol LeWitt and Carl André, represented by a magnesium floor sculpture and ‘Equivalent VIII’, the brick sculpture so much discussed by London's taxi drivers.
Epstein's powerful alabaster group of ‘Jacob and the Angel’, loaned by Granada Television, is moved to the centre of the Rotunda where it will be surrounded by the four bronze relief casts of ‘The Back’ by Matisse.
There are special rooms illustrating the activities of the New English Art Club, with paintings by Stanhope Forbes and other Newlyn artists, Sickert, Philip Wilson Steer and William Orpen; of Cubism, in which loans from the Berggruen Collection and another private collections are added to works already owned by the museum; and of recent or new works by the masters of The School of London, including Bacon, Freud, Auerbach, Kossoff, Hodgkin and Kitaj.
Beckmann's ‘Carnival’ is juxtaposed with Picasso's masterpiece of ‘The Three Dancers’, sharing a gallery with family or marriage portraits by Derain, Stanley Spencer and Cecil Collins.
Carel Weight, a surprising choice, Ivon Hitchens, in the centenary of his birth, Adrian Stokes and Barbara Hepworth are given their own rooms.
Two major contemporary art installations, gifts from The Patrons of New Art and the Cartier Foundation respectively, are ‘A Wartime Garden’, a stone sculpture by Ian Hamilton Finlay and ‘La Reserve des Suisses Morts’ by Christian Boltanski.
Fort Worth, Texas
What a difference a frame makes
Almost deaccessioned in 1990, saved by popular subscription, Eakins's masterpiece finds its original frame
In an unexpected coda to a recent art saga, the Amon Carter Museum in Fort Worth announced in December that the original frame to Thomas Eakins's ‘The Swimming Hole’ had been discovered at the Modern Art Museum of Fort Worth, which donated it to the museum.
Both frame and painting will go on permanent view this fall, after conservation work on the frame has been completed.
Dating from between 1875 and 1885, the gilt frame is considered an outstanding example of a type popular during the nineteenth century.
It has a flat central panel profile with a shallow cove and is embellished with several different decorative motifs — natural foliate patterns inspired by the Renaissance revival, stylised classical patterns and abstract ornament characteristic of the Aesthetic movement.
Crucial to the frame's identification was the presence in the Modern Art Museum's research files of a local newspaper article dating from 1928 showing the painting in its original frame.
Corroborating evidence was provided by an installation photograph of the Metropolitan Museum's 1917 Eakins memorial exhibition, in which ‘The Swimming Hole’ appears in the same frame.
The painting, which depicts a relaxed group of men at the edge of a riverbank, was bought from Eakins's widow in 1925 for the Fort Worth Museum of Art, later the Modern Art Museum of Fort Worth.
By 1990 the museum's concentration on twentieth-century art had made it an anomaly in the collection and the decision was made to deaccession the picture, valued at $10 million.
In an effort to keep it in Fort Worth the museum agreed to allow time for a public subscription rather than following the normal procedure of consigning it to an auction house.
Within a year the fundraising campaign, which included selling note cards and T-shirts, had been completed, much of the money having come from local businesses and foundations.
The discovery forms part of a renewed interest in original frames by museums here and in Europe.
Having spent decades replacing them with sleeker modern ones, they are now spending fortunes to buy back, and even exhibit them.
The painting will be the centrepiece of the postponed exhibition, ‘Thomas Eakins and ‘The Swimming Hole’’, to open at the Amon Carter in 1996.
London
Vanbrugh at the V&A
Newly bought albums on show
Timed to coincide with the opening of the adjacent Frank Lloyd Wright Gallery, the V&A has put together a new permanent display on the topic of ‘Plans and Elevations: architectural drawings at the V&A’.
Compiled from the 35,000 architectural drawings in the museum's collection, the selection will be changed every six to nine months, both for conservation reasons and to give visitors an idea of the scope of the holdings.
Alongside the drawings will be displayed examples of metalwork and silverwork by architect/designers such as Adam and Kent, while the project is intended to be seen as part of a conceptual whole with the recently-opened ornament and twentieth-century galleries, as well as with the Lloyd Wright display.
The arrangement of the works is chronological, from a late medieval mason's drawing on parchment from Ulm (c. 1470) to contemporary architect's designs including Peter Cook's ‘Plug in City’ to Nigel Coates's 1986 design for the Jasper Conran shop, London.
Framed designs, sketchbooks and bound volumes include sheets by Sansovino, Bertoia, Gibbs, Kent, Pugin, William Morris and Voysey.
Two of the most significant items are a recently-purchased Lutyens sketchbook — one of only four in existence — and a group of drawings by Vanbrugh and Sir Edward Lovett Pearce, known as the Elton Hall volumes.
The drawings were purchased by the museum from William Proby, whose family had owned them from an early date, for £310,000 with assistance from the National Heritage Memorial Fund, the National Art Collections Fund and other benefactors.
The sale of the drawings was without doubt the most important of its kind since 1951 when the Marquess of Bute offloaded drawings by architects including Wren, Vanbrugh and Hawksmoor, a number of which entered the V&A collections.
The Elton Hall volumes began in Stillorgan House near Dublin, home of one of one of Edward Lovett Pearce's patrons.
Pearce, who was related to Vanbrugh by marriage, acquired a substantial number of his drawings for buildings designed after about 1718.
The larger album includes designs for his house at Whitehall, known as Goose-Pie House, Vanbrugh Castle, Greenwich and his country house at Chargate, Esher.
Victoria & Albert Museum
Only complete Frank Lloyd Wright interior in Europe
After twenty years in boxes a friend of the patron's family funds its display
The only complete Frank Lloyd Wright interior in Europe opened at the Victoria and Albert Museum on 20 January after nearly twenty years in storage through lack of funds.
An entire office complete with walls, floor and ceiling forms the centrepiece of a new gallery devoted to the work of the American architect.
The room was originally designed for the Pennsylvanian department store owner Edgar J. Kaufmann from 1935.
Wax-finished cypress plywood was the basic material, including a large relief, unprecedented in his oeuvre, covering the entire wall above Kaufmann's desk.
Wright's yellow on white upholstery — wool carpet and mercerised cotton, rayon and cotton chenille — was made by Loja Saarinen, head of the weaving workshop at the Cranbrook Academy of Art, Detroit.
Following the death of Edgar Kaufmann the office was dismantled and moved to the headquarters of the family's charitable trust.
In the late1960s approaches were made to the Avery Library, Columbia University and to the Met.
In 1972 Edgar Kaufmann Jr formally offered the office as a gift to the V&A; it arrived in 1974.
After a brief showing that year (it proved extremely difficult to reassemble all the small pieces of plywood in the mural without a proper plan) it was packed away.
The decision to install it in the museum's new Henry Cole Wing in 1989 led to its restoration and trip to Japan for the Wright exhibition in 1990.
The funding for the present installation comes largely from Paul Mayen, a family friend of Edgar J. Kaufmann Jr.
Also on show in the new space will be furniture, metalwork, prints, books and graphic designs.
With the assistance of the National Art Collections Fund the museum has recently purchased a stained glass window made for the Avery Coonley Playhouse in Riverside, Illinois (1912), featuring a geometric design based on balloons, confetti and American flags.
The installation of the Kaufmann office is examined in detail in a new book by Christopher Wilk of the museum's woodwork department (88pp. 67 b/w 4 col. ills.
£14.95).
Drawing on the 100,000 letters and 21,000 drawings in the Frank Lloyd Wright Foundation, Mr Wilk provides a detailed history of the construction and later fortunes of the office, and sets it within the context of Wright's career.
German  millionaire Ludwig to open museum of contemporary art in Moscow
Peter Ludwig, the Cologne-based art collector and chocolate magnate whose collection of art is exhibited throughout Europe (see survey in The Art Newspaper No. 23, December 1992, p.12), is to open a further Ludwig Gallery in Moscow, on the premises of the Pushkin State Museum of Fine Arts.
Ludwig first proposed to the then Soviet authorities that a Museum of Modern Art should be set up in Moscow in 1987.
At the end of 1992, accompanied by Chancellor Helmut Kohl, Russian culture minister Yevgeniy Sidorov and Pushkin Museum director Irina Antonov, he finally signed an agreement on the establishment of the Ludwig Gallery within the Pushkin Museum.
One hundred and fifty pictures with a total value of more than $100 million, and including works by Picasso, are to be moved to Moscow.
The main issue — which locations within the Pushkin Museum complex can take the collection and when — remains as yet unresolved, but a number of alternatives are being examined: a former residential building currently under conversion to house the Pushkin's own exhibitions of modern art, and the site of the former Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels Museum.
This has occupied the site of what was formerly an early eighteenth-century nobleman's estate since 1962, but was closed after the collapse of the Soviet regime in August 1991.
A major obstacle to the earlier realisation of Ludwig's project was that the Soviets had not been used to calling galleries after private citizens, as in the West.
Are the National Galleries of Scotland growing diplomatic?
Shortly before the New Year, Tim Clifford, the ebullient and ambitious director of the National Galleries of Scotland, announced the shortlist of two potential sites for the location of their proposed National Gallery of Scottish Art.
One turns out to be the Greek Revival Sheriff Courthouse (1841) in the centre of Glasgow, which is an unprecedented gesture on the part of this Edinburgh-based institution towards is traditional rival, Glasgow, the rough-tough merchant city which has so improved its image over the last ten years through an enlightened cultural policy.
The other location is the 1831 orphanage in Edinburgh called the Dean Centre, close to the existing Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art.
The project, which is to create an unprecedented space for the products of Scottish artists up to the present day, needs all the friends it can get, as it has still to be sold to government and any private benefactors.
Another candidate for the National Lottery's largesse?
New York
Brooklyn's Master Plan on hold: budget cuts halt West wing project
More than two years after New York City cut 35% from its funding for the arts, The Brooklyn Museum continues to suffer the consequences.
Losing what amounted to more than 15% of its $16 million budget precipitated severity measures, all of which are still in effect.
Now the reductions in personnel and operating resources are beginning to take their toll on the fifty-year Master Plan to modernise the nineteenth-century Beaux-Arts landmark.
Despite the economic slump, private sponsors and the city (which owns the building) committed $31 million to complete the first phase.
This was to have concluded last November with the opening of the renovated 1893 West wing.
Arata Isozaki/James Stewart Polshek, consulting architects for the Master Plan, gutted the four-and-a-half-story wing, creating 30,000 square feet of new gallery space, but the museum has been unable to avail itself of its newfound riches.
The budget cutbacks eliminated funds that would have gone to reinstallation, maintenance, and security.
The November 1992 unveiling quickly became a pipe dream, and the museum now plans to finish the new wing incrementally.
The fourth floor, dedicated to temporary exhibitions, opened in the fall with the ‘Frederic Bazille’ show.
That exhibition has now moved on, and the floor will remain empty until an Isozaki travelling show opens in November 1993.
‘It's basically a question of budgets’, said director Robert T. Buck.
The third floor also remains closed until November, when it reopens with an enhanced display of the museum's highly regarded Egyptian collection.
Only the skylit fifth floor opens permanently on 19 February with an expanded sampling of the museum's contemporary collection, much of which has been in storage for years, and with a long-term installation of a promised gift of twenty-seven works by American abstract artist Leon Polk Smith (b. 1906).
The lower floors will house administrative offices and storage areas.
The impact of the West wing reopening has already been felt in the main building.
The new home for temporary shows allowed the European paintings and sculpture to reclaim their galleries, which had been emptied to make room for shows like ‘Bazille’.
Moving the Contemporary art to the fifth floor provided room adjacent to the American Painting and Sculpture galleries.
The expanded American chronology now incorporates the recent bequest of early Twentieth-century art from the Lowenthal Collection (see The Art Newspaper No.20, July-Sept. 1992, p.4).
Director Robert T. Buck told The Art Newspaper, ‘The Master Plan is on hold.
Our next plan is to go for endowment to stop the roller coaster ride we've gone on with the city’.
Decorative arts
The Veneto looks to its ceramics with new museum and displays in Venice and Padua
Mid-December last an important new museum of ceramics opened in Venice at the Ca' Duodo, an annex of the Ca' d'Oro, restored for the occasion.
The collection comprises 15,000 pieces of thirteenth- to eighteenth-century ceramic ware, built around a nucleus of three collections, and already in the process of being catalogued.
In 1978 the museum acquired the collection of Luigi Conton, followed by that of Giovanni Trentin in 1984 and more recently, that of Ernesto Canal and Lorenzo Lazzarini.
Under the supervision of Sandra Moschini of the Venice Soprintendenza ai Beni artistici e storici and designer Mario Semino, the most important pieces are now on show in two rooms, the first covering medieval work with scratched decoration, the second from the Renaissance to the eighteenth century including the collection's maiolica.
Among the most interesting exhibits are fragments in the first room taken from excavations at Malamocco and elsewhere on the lagoon which prove the existence of a local ceramics industry.
In the sixteenth century the prevalent Faentine  maiolica could not be imitated in Venice due to the nature of the local clay while the next century saw the rise of blue and grey-coloured ware from Benettino and red and white from the Padua region.
The city of Padua has also taken in hand its rich holdings of ceramics.
For lack of space these have previously been little shown to the public.
A decision to mount temporary, changing exhibitions should help resolve this problem.
The solution was found by Gianfranco Martinoni, director of Padua's museums, and Davide Banzato, curator at its Museo d'Art.
The entire collection will be shown in chronological order over a period of five years and each display will involve the restoration of the objects involved and their addition to a technical catalogue covering every object.
Accompanying each display will be a catalogue published by Zielo which will draw on the work of the overall catalogue.
The first display runs until 18 April at the sixteenth-century Oratorio di San Rocco and includes medieval ceramics from the thirteenth century to the middle of the fifteenth.
The majority of these are of the so-called ‘Veneto Ware’ type, derived from Byzantine prototypes, including a fine, large pot (albarello) which suggests the influence of Lombard work, and an outstanding series of dishes and jugs decorated with geometric, floral and figurative designs, glazed in shades of green, brown and black.
Much bent by museum fatigue
Most eager tourists have experienced it: the natural exhaustion that overcomes them in art galleries, caused by the over stimulation of the visual senses.
This is by no means a recent phenomenon: in a study called Museum Ideals published in 1918, the American museum curator Benjamin Ives Gilman investigated the plight of the interested museum visitor, coining the term ‘museum fatigue’.
Gilman employed ‘scientific’ experiments described by him as follows: ‘The observer, an intelligent man with good eyesight, and well accustomed to museums and their contents, was instructed to answer the questions with the least possible exertion and to hold the position he needed to assume for the purpose until he could be photographed.’
Museum visits then, appear to have been by no means a matter of Sunday entertainment and relaxation.
Overcrowded gallery walls and cluttered showcases demand significant ‘muscular effort to see objects well,’ as Gilman explained.
Christoph Grunenberg
Armstrong as new director of Andy Warhol Museum
Director of New York's Whitney Museum of American Art until his contentious dismissal in 1990, Thomas Armstrong has joined the Andy Warhol Museum as its director.
Denied the opportunity of supervising a major programme of construction in New York, where the Whitney Museum's trustees have been unable to agree Michael Graves's proposal for an extension, he is taking responsibility for the final stages of the conversion, now estimated to cost $35 million, of an ornamental warehouse located on Pittsburgh's North Side, which will accommodate the museum.
When the Andy Warhol Museum opens next year, it will be the largest institution dedicated to a single artist, eclipsing, in terms of wealth and quantity of works, both the Rodin Museum in Paris, and the Henry Moore Foundation.
Mark Francis, who had been acting as the museum's director, retains responsibility for the administration of the collection which comprises some 1,000 original paintings and drawings, including an important group of early works being given by the DIA Center for the Arts, one hundred sculptures, a complete collection of prints of Warhol's films, and an extensive archive of source material, audio and video tapes, correspondence and other papers.
San Diego Museum opens downtown location
Directly opposite the evocatively named Santa Fe Railroad Depot, the Museum of Contemporary Art, San Diego, opens its new building on 2 February.
The 10,000-square foot building is part of a new complex designed by Chicago architect Helmut Jahn, and originally intended as a retail space.
The interior spaces of the wedge-shaped building were converted to suit their new function by artists Robert Irwin and Richard Fleischner, with architect David Raphael Singer, whose particular brief was to retain the all-glass walls of the building while making it a suitable and secure venue for displaying works of art.
Their solution was to close off the central part of the building while leaving both ends open.
The downtown space is intended to allow for more diverse programming than the museum's main building in La Jolla, as well as increasing exhibition space.
The inaugural exhibition will be ‘Contemporary Art Downtown’, comprising painting, sculpture and mixed-media works from the museum's own holdings (until 21 February).
In the summer of 1993 the museum's main site at La Jolla will close for major renovation overseen by Robert Venturi.
The funding for this and the downtown programme comes from the fiftieth anniversary campaign, launched in 1988 by the museum's board of trustees.
To date, $7.3 million in gifts and pledges has been raised towards the $10.5 million goal.
The collection, begun in 1941, now numbers 3,800 works.
Portraits of the artist
One hundred and fourteen polaroid self-portraits by Greek-born American Lucas Samaras (b. 1936) were recently purchased from New York's Pace/MacGill Gallery by Gayle Greenhill.
The collector then donated them to three American museums: the Museum of Modern Art had first choice, and took forty-three; the Art Institute of Chicago then selected thirty-eight; and the rest went to the Denver Art Museum.
MoMA Photography Curator Peter Galassi told The Art Newspaper, ‘It's a very rare thing for a museum, after the fact, to assemble a comprehensive selection of an artist's work’.
The gifts range from 1969 to 1986, comprising the psychologically rich self-portraits the artist made in his one-room apartment on the upper West side of Manhattan.
In the hallucinatory ‘Photo-Transformations’(1973–76), Samaras manipulated the Polaroid's encased emulsion as it developed, warping his self-image into emotive phantasmagorias.
For the ‘Panoramas’(1983–86), he took multiple shots of a single motif, cut the prints into strips, then combined them to create intriguingly distorted images.
Mrs Greenhill, a long-term collector and personal friend of the artist, is a member of MoMA's committee on photography, and has contributed to the department's acquisitions fund.
Denver Art Museum, Gio Ponti's only US building
The Denver Art Museum holds the largest, most comprehensive art collection between Kansas City and Los Angeles.
That in itself may sound daunting, but on its centennial in 1993 the museum would prefer to see its situation as an asset.
This month, the museum reopens its renovated quarters, a two-towered structure finished in 1971 by the Italian architect Gio Ponti (the only building Ponti constructed in the United States).
Denver is known nationally for its collection of Native American art, one of the world's most extensive, which the museum has assembled over the years on aesthetic, rather than ethnographic, criteria.
Contemporary objects are a significant part of that collection.
Denver also contains one of the finest collections of Spanish Colonial and pre-Columbian art in the United States, rivalled only by the Brooklyn Museum.
But unlike the collections in Brooklyn, which have sat in storage while the museum awaits funds to build permanent galleries, much from the Denver collections will go on permanent display when the current renovations are completed.
Denver has also chosen to situate its Spanish Colonial and pre-Columbian installations on the same floor, with an emphasis on exploring continuities between periods before and after the Spanish Conquest, a politically delicate approach in the U.S. museum world.
Last year, the Stapleton collection (Washington, D.C.) was pledged to Denver, adding furniture, manuscripts, and paintings, mostly of Colombian and Ecuadorean origins, to Denver's holdings.
The Museum considers itself a pioneer in the creation of educational programmes, an important component of a museum's mission when it is the only major art collection within a thousand miles in almost any direction.
In fact, the new installations of the collections in Denver were the collaborative work of curators, designers and educators.
By major museum standards, the $9.3 million budget for the Denver renovations is minimal.
The museum receives an additional $2.7 million annually for public programmes from a metropolitan Scientific and Cultural Facilities District, which gives 1% of local sales taxes to cultural institutions.
Miró Foundation to get 300 more works
Dolors Miró, eighty-year old daughter of the artist, has announced that a large number of the 300 works belonging to the family currently on show at the Fondación (recently re-opened with a major new extension; see The Art Newspaper No. 21, October 1992, p.7) will probably remain with that institution.
Reasons of security lie behind the decision and only a few works will not be staying, including a handful of objects and paintings belonging to the artist himself and the painting ‘Montroig, the church and the people’(1919) which has been promised to the Fondació Joan Miró in Barcelona.
Rafael Moneo's expansion project in Palma has increased the gallery space by 3,000 square metres, financed by contributions from the artist's family at a final cost of Pta800 million, derived partly from the sale of works from the family collection at auction.
The Fondación already houses 134 paintings, around 1,000 works on paper, twenty-five sculptures, two ceramic murals by the artist, as well as 300 works by friends of the artist including Klee, Calder, Picasso, Tapies and Dubuffet.
Temporary exhibitions for 1993 will be devoted to Masson, Jasper Johns, John Cage, Jose Maria Sicilia, Chillida, Vedova and Kossuth.
A joint scholarship funded by the artist's widow Pilar and by Sotheby's worth Pta10 million will be awarded to artists and students whose work is seen to be close to that of Miró.
Creative accounting wins the Musée d'Orsay a Monet
Paris's Musée d'Orsay has acquired the loan of a virtually unknown painting by Monet entitled ‘Les villas a Bordighera’, formerly in private hands, thanks to the French insurance company G.A.N. (Groupe des Assurances Nationales) and adroit play with export regulations by the Musées de France.
French museums were alerted to the painting a little over a year ago when its owners contacted them after finding a foreign buyer.
After at first showing little interest in the work, museum authorities informed the owners of ‘Les villas a Bordighera’ in May 1992 that it could no longer leave the country.
Unable to afford the Monet themselves, the Musées de France initiated negotiations for purchase, not by the State but by the insurance company G.A.N. Under the terms of 1990 regulations such firms may acquire works of art considered of importance to France's national heritage and are not taxed on the purchase price.
The interdiction de sortie preventing ‘Les villas a Bordighera’ from going abroad had seriously affected its market value and G.A.N. were able to buy the painting for FFr24 million.
According to the agreement concluded between the Ministry of Culture and G.A.N., however, the Monet painting is to be retained in France and loaned to Musée d'Orsay for a ‘renewable’ period of ten years.
The insurance company will thus, in theory, be free to sell ‘Les villas a Bordighera’ on the open market in 2002.
It is also stated — but is highly unlikely — that the State may acquire the painting whenever it wants for FFr24 million (£2.8 million; $4.5 million) plus 8% interest per annum and, in the future, pre-empt a resale at the market price.
Rates of pay in Great Britain
Museum curators are the richest — so long as they are government-funded
An Art Newspaper survey of universities, national and regional museums, journalists and auctioneers
Rates of pay in the art world are generally below those commanded by business and professional people with comparable experience and responsibility.
It is often assumed that employers take advantage of the demand for positions where interesting work, pleasant conditions and a high degree of job satisfaction are reckoned to make up for low pay.
In fact, pay-scales are mostly fixed by reference to other jobs in their sector rather than the rest of the art world, let alone in industry or the professions.
The salary of a newspaper's art critic for instance is fixed by reference to the pay of the theatre critic, political editor and so on.
A curator of a Local Authority museum by reference to heads of other departments such as highways and sewage.
Salaries in the U.K.'s public museums and galleries are set by two bodies.
First, the Treasury fixes the salaries of those employed in the National Museums and Galleries in London, Cardiff, Liverpool and Edinburgh.
There are seven so-called ‘Unified Grades’ covering the fast-stream of the museum world.
The lowest is Grade 7 and would include Assistant Keepers starting on £24,379 rising by annual increments to £29,073.
But the government is pushing the entire Civil Service towards a more performance-related system of remuneration.
At present, once an employee has reached the top band of his grade, performance points can take a Unified Grade 7 employee's pay up to £34,667.
Employees on Unified Grade 3 such as the Curator of the Tate Gallery, the National Portrait Gallery and the National Galleries of Scotland receive salaries of between £49,000 and £57,000.
Only Grades 7 to 4 are eligible for performance-related earnings and a London Weighting Allowance of £1750 is payable on top.
Director of the Tate Gallery
Nicholas Serota, forty-six, is on Unified Grade 3, with a salary in the £49,000 to £57,000 range.
‘Along with the pay of other Civil Servants’, he says, ‘mine has fallen behind inflation over the last few years.
The 17% recently recommended by the Top Salaries Review Body to make a start towards catching up with inflation and moving towards parity with comparable jobs in the private sector was cut back to 4%.
Furthermore, I don't think the pay differentials in Grades 4 and above properly reflect the job's responsibilities.
Tim Clifford, for example, with responsibility for the National Galleries of Scotland and therefore on Grade 4 deserves more than many of the middle-range Keepers on Grade 5.’
Serota was pleased that the public sector at least had the benefit of a system that ensured reasonable levels of pay; no such system protected employees in the independent sector, while the pay and status of employees working for local authorities had increasingly been eroded, with the Director of Museums and Galleries often downgraded and answerable to a Director of Leisure Services.
Asked to name the worst aspect of being Curator of the Tate, Serota had no answer.
‘I just like the job too much’, he said.
On the question of job satisfaction making up for low pay relative to other sectors, Serota said he had not found highly paid individuals in the City were markedly unsatisfied in their work.
He recognised though that the situation might be different if they were on his salary.
Keeper of Art Galleries for the National Museums and Art Galleries on Merseyside
The responsibilities of Julian Treuherz, forty-five, take in the Lady Lever Art Gallery, the Walker Art Gallery and the Sudley Gallery.
His job is rated Grade B on the Civil Service Scale, so he is on £31,747 a year — a figure that has risen dramatically from the £21,000 he started on in February 1989.
Before 1986, and with the exception of the Lady Lever Art Gallery, all the Liverpool museums were run by the Merseyside Metropolitan Council.
With the Council's abolition in that year the Liverpool museums were given the statue of national museums and funded as such.
Apart from an element of prestige, Treuherz recognises it is the interest and satisfaction of the job that compensates for pay that seems modest compared to that of other professional people.
A major problem, according to Treuherz is career opportunities.
‘Too many people are trained in art history for the available jobs’, he says, ‘and most don't want to work outside London.
The career ladder is congested; prospects are generally poor and it's easy to get stuck.
I was lucky to move on from Manchester City Art Galleries where after seventeen years I ended up as Senior Keeper of Fine Art.
Perhaps only a few applied for this job.
After all, most people don't think much of Liverpool as a place to work and live in, though I think it's fantastic and I live in greater style — in the wing of a large Victorian house — than I could in the South.
Moreover, I don't think things are likely to get better.
A few imaginative local authorities such as Glasgow and Birmingham are expanding their arts activities, but most are cutting back, or at least not replacing those who leave.
And the same is happening in universities and art colleges.’
The pay of other National Museums and Galleries staff — the so-called Curatorial Grades D, E, F and G comprising posts ranging from Museum Assistant (G) to Senior Research Assistant (D)— is also determined by the Treasury in consultation with the various Civil Service Unions.
The salary of Staff on Grade G ranges from £8,222 to £11,743 with maximum performance points taking the total to £15,928.
For those in Grade D the salaries range from £15,928 to £21,797, with maximum performance points taking the possible total to £26,523.
All Curatorial Grades are also eligible for performance-related earnings.
Local Authority Curators and Exhibition Officers' salaries are well below those working in the National Museums and Galleries.
The rates are ultimately set by the individual authority, but usually within the bands laid down by the National Joint Council for Local Authorities' Administrative, Professional, Technical and Clerical Services (LAAPTAC).
The National Joint Council has established a total of forty-nine Grades.
Assistant Keepers are usually being appointed within grades 18 to 28 (also known as Scales 4 to 6) on salaries ranging from £10,422 to £14,484.
Principal Officers' Grades run from 33 to 49 covering salaries running from £17,040 to £25,539.
The highest salaries paid to local authority officers involved with the arts are for Directors and Assistant Directors of Museums and Gallery Services.
These are arrived at using criteria set down by the Joint Negotiating Committee for Chief Officers of Local Authorities.
The salary-ranges reflect the increased responsibilities involved in their managerial and policy-making functions and are in turn set according to the size of the local authority and its population base.
In 1991 the top salary range for a Senior Chief Officer of a Shire District with a population of over 460,000 was £38,769 to £55,230; for a County with a population of over 1,700,001, £45,723 to £64,536, and for a London Borough or Metropolitan District with a population over 1,080,001 it was £43,647 to £66,417.
Curator of Ipswich Museums and Galleries
The salary of Sarah Muldoon, forty-four, is set by Ipswich Borough Council after reference to the Salary Scales of the National Joint Council for Local Authorities' Administrative, Professional, Technical and Clerical Services.
With a salary of £24,300 she has the highest paid curatorial job in Suffolk, a county of 622,000 people and, incidentally, the birthplace of Constable and Gainsborough.
After five years in the job, she finds her salary has roughly kept pace with inflation.
The most unsatisfactory aspect of her work has been the 6% budget cut in 1991, which in 1992 after adding inflation, was at least 10% down on 1990.
Performance targets are set in terms of numbers of exhibitions and attendances, although Mrs Muldoon insists that these do not influence the choice of exhibitions which include some demanding contemporary work.
‘I believe there should be a national review and grading structure for those working in museums.
The defining of duties and responsibilities is not impossible, but I can't see local authorities committing themselves to such a survey now.
Pay would almost certainly rise and there would be redundancies on a significant and unacceptable scale.
East Anglia is expensive to live and be housed in.
I happen to be married but things would be tough on a single income’.
The salerooms
For understandable reasons, salerooms are reluctant to discuss, or even let their employees discuss, individual salaries.
Employees working alongside each other in apparently comparable jobs may be quite differently rewarded depending on effort, performance, volume of business generated and other factors.
The revelation of these differentials could well produce ill-feeling.
Christie's and Sotheby's both run graduate training programmes.
Those accepted for the course need technical knowledge of at least one art-form, interpersonal skills and commercial awareness.
In Sotheby's case, their one year worm's-eye view of the company will be spent in three or more departments and they will be paid £9,500.
The next year spent as a Junior Cataloguer in an art-form department will carry a salary of £11,000; senior cataloguers start at £15,000.
A senior cataloguer who has brought in significant new business through proven negotiating skills may be offered a Deputy Directorship at £20–25,000.
Junior and Senior cataloguers participate in a profit-sharing scheme that could give a salary uplift of up to 12%.
Deputy Directors share in a different profit-sharing scheme which can uplift salaries by between 10% and 30%.
The secrecy surrounding pay extends to boardroom level, though the accounts reveal that the highest paid directors of Christie's and Sotheby's (Europe) last year each received £155,000.
Quite apart from the spate of redundancies that began in 1990, turnover in saleroom experts is fairly high at the lower levels.
Everyone recognises that handling such a volume and variety of art-objects provides the perfect training to become a dealer, and when the art market prospers, some are tempted by the financial opportunities of dealing.
The academic world
The latest bombshell to hit the academic world was the government's veto of the ‘agreed’ 6% pay increase for university teachers.
The Association of University Teachers settled for 4.2% this autumn, with retrospective effect from 1 April 1992.
The pay range for Lecturers now runs from £12,638 to £31,726.
The minimum for Professors is £29,949, with each individual's remuneration being privately negotiated with the university authorities.
Last year it was thought to average around £33,500.
Michael Kauffmann, sixty-one, is Professor of the History of Art and Director of the Courtauld Institute.
He believes the government has generally down-graded people working in the public services sector over the last ten years, with university teachers having fared particularly badly as far as pay is concerned.
Pay for leading art-historians has always been lower in Britain than in the United States, but the brain drain has got worse.
‘The government clearly counts on the pleasure and prestige the jobs afford to keep them filled at fairly low cost, but this won't help if the best scholars are constantly tempted to go abroad’, says Kauffmann, ‘and now, new appointments or those who change jobs by moving or by promotion no longer have the same job security’.
At thirty-six Tamar Garb is a Lecturer in History of Art at University College, London, and after twelve years teaching experience — three in her present job — she receives £22,000 a year.
She feels the union has been ineffectual and even the so-called industrial action four years ago when members refused to set or mark exam papers seemed, quite unjustifiably, to be taking things out on the students.
‘I am deeply committed to my work but tired of being asked to accept ‘job satisfaction’ in lieu of proper pay.
There is a culture of amateurism that survives from the days when scholarly gentlemen with private incomes were glad to have their articles published without payment.
Even now most scholarly journals pay nothing and you are lucky to get a fee if you talk at a conference.
The remuneration for a lecture at the National Gallery that might take two weeks to prepare stands at £50 and in many cases you pay for your own slides.
The Association of Art Historians really should take a stand and publish minimum fees for one-off lectures.’
For all that, Garb feels that Britain has an unparalleled intellectual community which makes these hardships easier to bear.
Meanwhile the performance-related pay proposals are destructive and divisive.
An art department is to a great extent a collective endeavour; certain people are doing crucial, if low-profile, work and to punish some and reward others is likely to be demoralising and counter-productive.
Art criticism
Until recently art critic of The Sunday Times, Marina Vaizey was paid just over £30,000 a year with free BUPA cover.
Travel in the UK was unlimited though a case had to be made for every European exhibition other than the Venice Biennale and the Kassel Documenta, and most trips to the United States had to be funded privately or tied in with a conference or some other event that would cover the cost of the trip.
Vaizey began writing art criticism for the Financial Times in 1970 and was delighted with the rate of 5 guineas an article; in 1974 she signed a contract with the Sunday Times to produce forty-six articles a year for £4,500 and in 1980 became a staff member with pay pegged to NUJ rates.
‘Now, of course, the unions count for nothing’, says Vaizey.
‘Most specialist writers are now contracted.
That's the way Fleet Street, or rather Wapping, is going.
There used to be plenty of job security though now even those on contracts can be pressurised to leave.
For most of the time there was no editorial pressure, though extrinsic factors, such as last minute ads, could suddenly, and annoyingly, reduce my space.
For all that it was a truly wonderful job.’
Moscow
Korolev, Tretyakov State Gallery Director, dies
Yuriy Korolev, Director of the Tretyakov State Gallery since 1980, has died, aged sixty-four.
At the time, the appointment of a practising artist rather than an academic to the Tretyakov evoked a great deal of criticism.
Korolev was known as the creator of monumental panels and mosaics on display in prestigious public buildings such as Moscow's metro stations and scientific institutes.
He was formerly a professor at the Surikov Institute, Russia's foremost art college, as well as one of the leaders of the former USSR Union of Artists.
Korolev achieved notoriety at a seminar held in Moscow in October 1990 at which he supported a suggestion that Russian museums might sell lesser works of art in order to buy back items sold under Lenin and Stalin.
In an interview with The Art Newspaper published in May 1991 (no.8, p.6) Korolev explained: ‘I anticipate that we must play an active role in the international art market; it is not a question of looting the country, but of a normal integration into the world-wide process of cultural development’.
Korolev's role as head of the gallery was subject to further scrutiny following the highly  embarrassing theft of eighteen of its pictures from a loan exhibition at the Villa Croce, Genoa, in 1991.
After the theft a number of the Tretyakov's curators condemned the gallery's exhibition policy, calling it ‘unworthy of a prestige gallery’, leading the Ministry of Culture to audit the foreign exhibition activities of all Soviet museums.
In the early 1980s Korolev showed considerable determination in embarking on the total restoration of the Tretyakov building complex in Lavrushinsky Pereulok.
Work on a number of buildings is now completed, including a new modern storage facility for paintings.
Archaeology
Zurich and St Petersburg
George Ortiz: a gut relationship to ancient art
Two major exchange exhibitions to boost the growing public interest in antiquities
A major exchange of exhibitions of antiquities starts this month when the George Ortiz Collection travels to the Hermitage in return for a pick of objects from museums in the former USSR, the latter showing initially at the Kunsthaus Zurich.
Ortiz, a respected connoisseur and collector of art from ancient civilisations was approached in 1986 by Mikhail Treister, then acting secretary of the State Pushkin Museum of Fine Arts, with an invitation to exhibit his collection in Moscow.
Two years later, at a meeting at the Soviet Ministry of Culture, Ortiz asked that in return he should be allowed to select an exchange exhibition to be shown in the West.
Works were initially chosen from the Pushkin and Hermitage but Ortiz then widened his horizons to include regional museums, an unprecedented step which was then complicated by the collapse of the Soviet regime.
Despite the fact that the contribution from the Ukraine is far smaller than originally envisaged, fifteen institutions in all agreed to lend pieces from eighteen ancient cultures ranging from the Neolithic to the Byzantine.
The criterion governing the choice has been that which has directed Ortiz's own collecting: aesthetic quality, with the additional requirement that the works of art should be representative of the best of their culture.
Both exhibitions are primarily to do with art, with scholarship playing a subservient role.
The majority of works in ‘From the Treasuries of Eurasia: Masterpieces of Ancient Art’ have never been shown in the West before.
The greater part come from the area around the Black Sea, concentrating especially on the Urartian Empire; relations  between the Greeks and the Thracians and Scythians; and the art of Sarmatia.
An exceptional example of Urartian art is the eighth- to sixth-century BC winged lion with a human bust from the Hermitage, who have also loaned (among a list of 121 objects) the twisted Graeco-Scythian bracelet with sphinx terminals made of gold, bronze and enamel from the fourth century BC.
In addition to the objects found on Eurasian territory, Ortiz has selected antiquities originally acquired by the Czars or that entered museums through private donation or confiscation — the basis of the Greek and Roman collections of the Hermitage and Pushkin, their Etruscan and Byzantine collections and the Egyptian sections of both museums and elsewhere.
Although the Pushkin ruled some of its Egyptian objects too fragile to lend, the twelfth-dynasty Egyptian basalt bust of Amenemhat III, of around 2000 BC, considered the most important Egyptian work in Russia, is in the exhibition.
Despite the fact that the museums in the former USSR were unable to meet their share of the costs after August 1991, the exhibition has gone ahead with the support of the Kunsthaus in Zurich, in particular its director Felix Baumann, and with most of the financial risk underwritten by George Ortiz himself.
The exhibition continues at the Kunsthaus until 2 May and then travels to the City Gallery in Kyoto, Japan, from 6 June to 4 July.
George Ortiz's own collection of antiquities has been built up over the past forty-three years.
It can be characterised by high quality art on a small scale: there are no painted vases or large-scale pieces of sculpture but instead outstanding small bronzes, objects in precious metal and heads and figurines in marble and stone.
A Bolivian, born in Paris into the Ortiz-Patino family who made their fortune in tin mining in South America after World War I, Ortiz has been resident in Geneva for the last twenty-five years.
Although not formally trained as a historian of ancient art, Ortiz's scholarship is widely respected.
The special and attractive character of the Ortiz collection is that it is not just an assemblage of objects but the coherent vision of a man who believes that the whole is more than the sum of its parts and that the collector is as creative as the artist.
Ortiz describes his collection as a ‘harmonious whole’, with a range that is as representative as possible but within which individual objects have been chosen for their aesthetic, scholarly and didactic qualities.
The main body of the collection is Greek art from the Neolithic to the Byzantine, with examples from Sumer, Egypt and China.
Around 280 of the best pieces comprise the exhibition ‘The George Ortiz Collection.
Antiquities: Ur to Byzantium’ which goes on show at the State Hermitage Museum, St Petersburg, from 17 February to 11 April.
One of the earliest objects in the show is the alabaster figure of a Sumerian bull-man dating from the third millennium BC, one of the rarest examples of sculpture from this period.
The copper alloy bust of Amenemhat III (1843–1798 BC) comes from an important group found in the Faiyum.
An early fourth-century BC silver rhyton from the Black Sea, partially gilt, in the form of a stag's head, is one of the most beautiful examples of its kind, and unique for the frieze of warriors in relief around its neck.
The Roman bronze figure of Ajax seated in meditation from the first century BC is the only three-dimensional representation of the Greek hero to have survived; it is thought by Ortiz to be the clue to the subject of the Belvedere torso in the Vatican Collection.
The most recent acquisition is the baroque Graeco-Gandharan head of prince Siddhartha, dated to the second century AD, portrayed with curling locks and luxuriant moustache.
The exhibition travels to the Pushkin Museum in Moscow (6 May to 27 June); possibly Copenhagen (dates not yet finalised) and probably to the Royal Academy in London and to a museum in Japan.
Other venues for the exhibition have yet to be finalised.
Rome
Sacked by the Saracens 10 October 881 AD, huge abbey church found by British School
An Anglo-Italian collaboration
The newly published Annual Report on last season's excavations by the British School at Rome at San Vincenzo al Volturno, Molise, in Central Italy, gives details of the remains of the apse of the ninth-century Carolingian abbey church of San Vincenzo Maggiore, proving the church to be the largest of its date south of the Alps.
Only Cologne cathedral, with which San Vincenzo has some architectural features in common, and the great imperial abbey-church at Fulda in Saxony were larger.
San Prassede and SS.
Quattro Coronati, the largest churches built in Rome in the ninth century (a great age of papal building), were a little more than half the size of San Vincenzo Maggiore.
The excavations, a joint venture between British and Italian authorities (Provincia d'Isernia) and directed for the last twelve years by the School's director, Dr Richard Hodges, have shown that for a brief period in the early ninth century San Vincenzo was an exceptional place with far-flung connections.
Only with the establishment of the position of the apse last year however was it possible to calculate the length of the basilica at 101 metres (28 metres wide).
Work has so far concentrated on the east end.
Remains of glass working, bell making and bronze working have been found in the layers immediately preceding the building of the church, while the foundations appear to have been laid directly on top of a demolished Roman monumental building.
Both the Dark Age Benedictine monastery and the church were sacked by the Saracens on 10 October 881 AD, as recorded in the twelfth-century Chronicon Vulturnense.
As graphic corroboration of this account, heavy arrowheads from this destruction have been found in the excavations, as well as evidence of gutting of the workshops by ferocious fire.
The excavations were intended, in part, to provide a prominent tourist attraction at the heart of a new extension of the Abruzzi national park into the upper Volturno valley.
The thousands of visitors to the excavations have shown there is an urgent need to make the site into an archaeological park.
The British School has presented a project to the Assessore della Cultura for the regione of Molise and, if accepted, work will start this year.
A full report on the excavation will be published in the School's Archaeological Monograph series following the final season of excavations this August.
Information on BSR publications is available from Dr Gill Clark, The British School at Rome, c/o The Institute of Classical Studies, 31–34 Gordon Square, London WC1H OPY.
Further museum robbery in Greece
Another provincial Greek museum has fallen victim to museum robbers.
The recent spate of such thefts (see The Art Newspaper No. 21, October 1992, p.16) continued when one marble and sixteen classical terracotta figurines were taken from the Schimatari Museum in Boeotia, central Greece, on the night of 24 December.
The thieves entered by smashing the lock on the door; the museum, like so many in Greece, was unguarded at night.
The stolen objects, from the nearby site of Tanagra, had not yet been studied and photographed by the Greek Archaeological Service, thus making their recovery less likely.
As yet the police have no leads as to the identity of the gang.
Robert Arnott
Chance discovery of new pyramid at Giza
Egyptian archaeologists have uncovered a new pyramid at Giza, several feet to the southeast of the Great Pyramid of Cheops.
Its small size suggests that it was a so-called ‘satellite’ pyramid which probably played a part in the ritual entombment of the  pharaoh , although the lack of remains found in satellite pyramids have made it difficult to determine their function.
From the ruins of the pyramid's 23 metres-square base, some slabs and the pyramid's peak, the height of the structure has been estimated at thirteen metres.
The discovery, made while cleaning the area, came as a surprise to Zahi Hawass, General Director of Antiquities for the pyramids and Sphinx, who was recorded as saying, ‘What a shock!
If anybody had told me this time last year that we'd find another pyramid at Giza, I'd have said they were crazy’.
Conservation
National Gallery, London
All together now for the relaunched Technical Bulletin
After a gap of three years, during which the Scientific and Conservation Departments were involved in conceiving and mounting the three successful ‘Art in the Making’ exhibitions, the National Gallery has relaunched its Technical Bulletin as an annual series.
The bulletin is unique among national galleries of art and is highly regarded, drawing as it does on the long standing interdisciplinary tradition of London's National Gallery.
Articles written by the gallery's curatorial, scientific and conservation staff in the latest volume (number 14) include an analysis of the underdrawing found in Raphael's ‘Garvagh Madonna’ during a study by infra-red reflectography, prompted by the examination of the recently identified ‘Madonna dei Garofani’by Raphael; an account of the history, conservation and painting technique of two of Canaletto's Venetian scenes in the Gallery's Collection, ‘The stonemason's yard’and ‘The upper reaches of the Grand Canal with San Simeone Piccolo’; the results of the investigation and treatment of Laurent de la Hyre's ‘Allegorical Figure of Grammar’, relating it to a second version in the Walters Art Gallery, Baltimore; and a discussion of the technique and perspective scheme in Bramantino's recently restored ‘Adoration of the Magi’.
A list of all National Gallery paintings cleaned and restored since the last issue of the Technical Bulletin in 1989 is presented in table form with analyses of pigments.
A description of the computerised image-processing system created by the VASARI project, housed in the Gallery, is followed by an article on the fading of the pigment Prussian blue and the ability of VASARI to detect changes in the surface colour of paintings.
Funding for VASARI (Visual Arts: System for Archiving and Retrieval of Images) commenced in 1989.
Although recently wound up, one spin-off has been the in-house desk-top publication of the Technical Bulletin itself — the excellent colour illustrations have been printed from computer digitised colour images taken from high quality transparencies.
The Bulletin's new series editor is Ashok Roy, head of the Scientific Department; the publication was sponsored by Mr and Mrs Frank Richardson of New York.
Volume14 is available at £14 (back issues at £12 each) from the National Gallery shops or by mail order from National Gallery Publications Ltd., 5/6 Pall Mall East, London SW1Y 5BA (tel: 071–839 8544).
Wallace Collection, London
‘Dance to the music of time’ revived thumb prints and all
Nicolas Poussin's ‘A dance to the music of time’(1639–40) which gave its name to the famous series of novels by Anthony Powell, was recently returned to its place in the Great Gallery following restoration by Herbert Lank, Simon Bobak and Nonie Tasker.
Although the picture had been cleaned in 1975, it was discovered that the eighteenth- or early nineteenth-century repair to a large L-shaped tear in the canvas was beginning to fail.
The old double lining canvas has now been replaced and the tear secured and correctly aligned.
The restoration also involved removal around the damage of old repaint which obscured some of the thumb prints which, uniquely in Poussin's work, texture the whole picture surface.
The prints, which the Fingerprint Branch of Scotland Yard found to have been made with a left thumb pressed into the painting while still wet, have been minutely replicated in the damaged areas.
The Wallace Collection attracted a record 198,225 visitors in 1992, an increase of 41% over the previous year
Florence
Piazza report
The chief officers of the Florentine Soprintendenza, Antonio Paolucci and Paolo Mazzoni, together with Emma Micheletti and Angelo Calvani, Paolo Cappelletti and Paolo D'Elia, charged last February with causing criminal damage to the national heritage by laying new paving in the Piazza della Signoria, have now been cleared on appeal (see The Art Newspaper no.17, April 1992, p.15).
The Piazza, of which critics of the new paving say that the flat grey expanse is looking increasingly like linoleum, and its monuments, are now emerging from their lengthy cleaning and restoration campaign.
Giambologna's equestrian statue of Cosimo I has been cleaned under the auspices of the Pegasus consortium.
Treatment has concentrated on the removal of dirt accumulated over the centuries and conservation of areas of the bronze affected by acid rain and pigeon droppings.
Work on the statue was prolonged by the discovery of a fracture between the tail and the body of the horse, but the robust internal crossbar inserted by Giambologna has proved to be sufficient support to ensure its survival.
Moving round the Piazza, the Loggia dei Lanzi has been freed from its casing of scaffolding, the L600 million of government funding having proved sufficient to finish the job.
Scandal of Albert Memorial, to remain in plastic
The now familiar, if still poignant, sight of the Albert Memorial swathed in scaffolding and plastic, is set to remain a London eyesore until at least 1996.
The recent Autumn Statement from the National Heritage Ministry included the announcement that none of the proposed restoration options will be taken up, and that the monument will remain under wraps for the  foreseeable future.
The saga began in 1985 when a report by the Property Services Agency (which maintains Crown property) highlighted the serious corrosion of the spire.
In 1988 the then Secretary for the Arts Mrs Virginia Bottomley announced a two-stage renovation project, the first part of which comprised a detailed survey of the monument's structural problems.
This was recently completed and three proposals for restoration were put forward ranging in cost from £8 million ($12.8 million) to £15 million ($24 million), the difference between a cosmetic shoring-up and a full-scale renovation to include regilding of the statues and the construction of a visitor centre on the site.
Peter Brooke's ministry has now rejected all of these.
The monument will be kept in its plastic wrapping and regularly inspected, but no further action will take place.
Save the Peterhof cascade from the Russian winter
For more than a year now, that masterpiece of engineering and sculpture, the great Peterhof cascade (1714–21) consisting of 279 sculptures and sixty-five fountains, has been in a critical condition.
It was restored in the middle of the nineteenth century, again in 1947, and in 1989 contracts were signed for yet another restoration, with a completion date in 1992.
However, unrestricted price rises have sharply changed the estimates, which already exceed $5 million.
The monument is currently half dismantled and unprotected even though work on it has been stopped; grottos, galleries and buildings could be ruined.
Appeals from the mayor of St Petersburg to the Russian government for financing the work, or at least for preservation of the monument, have had no reply.
Getty gives Courtauld $350,000
The Courtauld Institute of Art, University of London, has been awarded $350,000 by the Getty Grant Program for its Conservation of Wall Paintings Department.
The grant will establish an endowed faculty position for the department's three-year diploma course.
The Courtauld now needs to raise $300,000 in matching funds.
It accepts only a small number of students onto its course (nine last year) which was established in 1985 as a joint venture with the Getty Conservation Institute.
It is now collaborating formally with the Opificio delle Pietre Dure in Florence as well as conducting a nationwide survey of medieval wall paintings in Britain in partnership with the Royal Commission on the Historical Monuments of England.
Tourists wear down Canterbury
The 200 year-old nave floor of Canterbury Cathedral is to be replaced at a cost of £850,000.
Years of wear and the installation of electrical heating and lighting systems has made the Portland stone floor very uneven and potentially hazardous for tourists and pilgrims.
Work on the floor has commenced and will last for six months, during which time it is hoped that archaeological evidence of the original Norman cathedral will emerge.
Visitors to the cathedral numbered more than 2.25 million last year.
Saving sea shells at Schoonbeek
A rare example of a shell grotto in northern Europe is to receive financial assistance from the independent European heritage body Europa Nostra (EN).
At EN's general meeting in Istanbul last September, $20,000 was allocated to the folly at Schoonbeek, whose surrounding garden is already on the International Council of Monuments and Sites and International Federation of Landscape Architects list of protected gardens.
Of this sum, $10,000 was donated by Christie's International pending a matching sum from EN.
The two-storey, nineteenth-century Gothic, red brick building is currently buried in undergrowth.
Gozzoli's Adoration of the Magi restored
Funded by the Banca di Toscana, the restoration of the so-called ‘Chapel of the Kings’ in the Palazzo Medici-Riccardi, Florence, is now complete and the chapel reopened to the public in December.
Work has been overseen and undertaken by the three Florentine Soprintendenze, the Opificio delle Pietre Dure and the Pegasus consortium.
The chapel, designed by Michelozzo, contains Benozzo Gozzoli's famous ‘Adoration of the Magi’ processional fresco, as well as a marble and hardstone floor, a painted and gilded wooden ceiling, inlaid wooden furniture designed by Giuliano da Sangallo and a contemporary copy of Filippo Lippi's ‘Adoration of the Infant Christ’, attributed to the pseudo-Pier Francesco Fiorentino.
Cleaning of the fresco has revealed considerable use of gold and lapis lazuli pigment, as well as a pair of blue cherubim, heightened with white in a technique similar to contemporary coloured drawings.
Details of clothing and of the landscape have emerged as brilliantly coloured and enriched with miniaturist detail and gold.
Books
Museum catalogues
Witty, omnivorous Penny
The newly published catalogue of European sculpture post-1540 in the Ashmolean Museum includes 785 works — even door handles and furniture mounts
Nicholas Penny, now Clore Curator of Renaissance Art at the National Gallery, is one of the most productive and wide-ranging scholars today.
Not for him the limited intellectual life of some academics, who spend their careers developing minor lines of enquiry from their doctoral theses and seldom move far from the safety of their chosen subject.
In all his writings there is a huge curiosity for the larger issues of art history; he writes quickly and what comes from his pen is rarely dry.
He was Keeper of Western Art at the Ashmolean for only five years, between 1984 and 1989, but besides organising a number of exhibitions and doing all the other things that Keepers do, he managed — quite extraordinarily — to produce this massive three-volume catalogue of the 785 later sculptures then under his care.
In scale (if not in the overall quality of the collection), it can only be compared with John Pope-Hennessy's great Catalogue of Italian Sculpture in the Victoria and Albert Museum of 1964.
The volumes are divided by country, Italian material in volume I, French and other European sculpture in volume II, and English in volume III.
Apart from the entries, there are fascinating and often amusing essays on the Fortnum Collection (fundamental reading for anyone interested in the collecting of small bronzes), ‘Sculpture in the Department of Fine Art’, the architectural and sculptural decoration of the University Galleries and the Taylor Institute, ‘Chantrey, Westmacott, and the casts after the Antique’(this with some rather damning things to say about the standards of curatorship in the past), and the Brocklebank Bronzes and Gilbert's ‘Circe’.
Penny's range is very impressive, and there can be few scholars who could cover the same material with such authority.
Almost inevitably there are entries where others will find it hard to agree with his conclusions, and on a number of occasions he leaves the questions of date and attribution open.
He also seems to this reviewer to accept too readily the authenticity of certain pieces (most notably no. 27, Imitator of Desiderio da Settignano, Virgin and Child), and a maddening feature is his habit of quoting inventory numbers rather than published sources for comparable pieces in other museums, which gives the impression that these comparanda have not been published.
But one is constantly struck by the author's insatiable interest in the whole range of sculptural production, which refused to allow him to ignore the ceramics made under the influence of sculptors, the bronze door handles of the Hill Music Room or even the four terminal busts attached to the bookcase in the office of the Keeper of Antiquities.
There are, of course, masterpieces in the collection, by Pierino da Vinci (no.72), Giovanni Francesco Susini (no.94), Georg Petel (no. 361), Edward Pierce (no.559) and Louis-François Roubiliac (no.565), but it is likely that the greatest nuggets of information will be found in the entries on the more modest sculptures, which are so often difficult to find out about.
Every piece is well illustrated, and many are shown from more than one angle.
The price is enough to make one weep.
In the flyer produced by Oxford University Press, Peter Fusco, Curator of European Sculpture and Works of Art at the J. Paul Getty Museum, writes that the catalogue is ‘a work which every art library and student of sculpture will need to own’.
Perhaps, at £325, he should have written ‘will want to own’.
Despite the fact that this is a work of reference aimed unashamedly at the scholar and the collector, given the reputation of the author and the status of the museum it could surely have been subsidised (possibly by the Getty Grant Program or, dare one say it, by the University itself).
Those interested in Gothic and early Renaissance sculpture can take comfort in the fact that the presumably single volume covering the sculpture of the period before 1540, currently being worked on by Jeremy Warren, is bound to be cheaper.
The standard has been set by Penny's monumental work, and he is to be heartily congratulated for his achievement.
Left: Lion, by Sbordini, mid-nineteenth-century, bronze, 33cm high (cat.
no. 87).
Bequeathed by C.D.E. Fortnum in 1899.
Fortnum had this lion made as a companion for the bronze bull also now in the Ashmolean, basing this odd-sounding pairing on the celebrated marble bull and lion in the Vatican.
Fortnum recorded that the foundry which cast his lion was that of Sbordoni in Rome, who still engage in metalwork there today.
Another version of the bronze lion, from the collection of Dr Simon in Berlin, is illustrated in Bode's 1908 book on Italian Renaissance bronzes where it is considered to be sixteenth-century.
This bronze is now in the National Gallery, Washington (Kress Collection) currently displayed as late eighteenth-century.
In John Pope-Hennessey's 1965 catalogue of the Kress Collection it is assigned to the second quarter of the sixteenth century
Right: Bust portrait of a Cardinal, ‘perhaps by Pierre Legros II’.
Carrara marble, 43.5cm high (cat.
no. 53).
Purchased for £550 by the National Art Collections Fund, 1959, and presented to the Ashmolean.
Offered to the museum for £800 by Hans Calmann, who subsequently lowered the price to £550 as the Committee ‘felt a little uncertain about the Bust — or rather, I should say whether we should pay up’ because a bust of the same period ‘more certainly by Foggini’had been purchased by the V&A for £80 a few years before.
On acquisition the bust was attributed to Giovanni-Battista Foggini but Sir Karl Parker also suggested Giuseppe Mazzuoli.
A few years later Klaus Lankheit and Hugh Honour proposed Lorenzo Merlini.
Nicholas Penny has proposed the attribution to Pierre Legros II.
Anthologies
All you ever needed to know about twentieth-century art theory
There was a joke doing the rounds in art history faculties about the archetypal New Art Historian: invited to give a lecture, s/he turns up with only one slide.
The point was not so much that impoverished art historians could no longer afford to make slides, but that in these post-formalist times, visuals get in the way of the real McCoy — abstruse and tendentious theorising.
Some will see Charles Harrison and Paul Wood's monumental Art in Theory 1900–1990: An Anthology of Changing Ideas as the apogee of this tendency.
After all, in 1,189 densely-printed pages, space has not been found for a single illustration.
Even so, one can almost forgive such visual austerity when one realises what the book represents: it is the most comprehensive and stimulating anthology of twentieth-century ideas about art that has yet appeared.
At the outset, Harrison and Wood acknowledge their dept to Herschel B. Chipp's Theories of Modern Art.
This was first published in 1968, is still in print — and has over a hundred illustrations.
Chipp's book primarily dealt in terms of movements — Post-Impressionism to Surrealism — and although there was a section on ‘Art and Politics’, contemporary art was bundled together in a section entitled ‘The Autonomy of the Work of Art’.
Harrison and Wood claim to be writing in a period during which there has been ‘growth of a critical self-consciousness about the history of Modernism itself’.
Modernism is seen not as autonomous, but as part of a wider culture.
Though the anthology is broadly chronological, texts are not all directly about art movements.
Thus their second section, ‘The Idea of Modernity’, includes two sub-sections entitled ‘Modernity’ and ‘Cubism’.
The former has fourteen texts ranging from manifestoes by Malevich and Marinetti to extracts from Bergson, Simmel, Weber and Karl Kraus; the latter has twelve more familiar texts on Cubism.
Later on, issues surrounding Pop Art and post-war abstraction are bracketed together in a section called ‘Modernization and Modernism’.
For the most part, these co-habitations enrich our understanding of modern art.
My main gripe is the surfeit of turgid waffle by Art & Language included in the latter stages — a group with which Harrison and Wood have been intimately involved.
Clearly, there are limits to critical self-consciousness: it makes the book limp home.
Art in Modern Culture: An Anthology of Critical Texts, edited by Francis Frascina and Jonathan Harris, is a set book for the Open University's new Modern Art course.
It is an unchronological romp, structured wholly around big issues.
‘Capitalism and Culture’ ranges from T.J. Clark's ‘The Painting of Modern Life’to Brecht's ‘On Non-Objective Painting’; ‘Aesthetic Theory and Social Critique’ranges from Benjamin's ‘Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction’to Greenberg's ‘Modernist Painting’.
They've got some important, inaccessible texts; but the range is too big; the art is allowed to get out of focus.
Old Master drawings
The rising star of Central Europe
New Getty Museum catalogue shows rapid expansion of the German, Swiss and Prague Schools
The second volume of drawings in the J. Paul Getty Museum comes out four years after the first and is equally welcome.
It covers the years of acquisition from 1986 to 1989 and almost doubles the size of the collection.
Once again the Italian School is represented by the largest number, fifty-one; there are no additional Spanish drawings; the British School has increased by two, the Flemish by eight, the Dutch by twenty-three, the French by twenty-nine, but the surprise is the rapid expansion of what is now called the Central European School, comprising German, Swiss and Prague Schools, of which there are twenty-nine compared with the fifteen published in the first volume.
One drawing has been de-accessioned (Vol.
I no. 83 as Nicolas Poussin) but with the acquisition of no less than six new drawings by Poussin, all from the Anthony Blunt collection, the representation of his work now covers most types of his draughtsmanship except landscape.
The drawings in large part complement those in the first catalogue with more examples by Andrea del Sarto, Bernini, Castiglione, Correggio, Giulio Romano, Guercino, Leonardo, Nicolo dell'Abbate, Parmigianino, Peruzzi, Pontormo, Primaticcio, G.C. Procaccini, Raphael, Guido Reni, Savoldo, Titian and Veronese, Ingres, Poussin, Watteau, Jordaens, Rubens, Bloemaert, Goltzius, Rembrandt, C. Saftleven, Cranach, Dürer and Pencz.
Almost all of these show different aspects of the draughtsmanship of each artist from the drawings already published by the Getty and several are superior to what has already been acquired, notably the Bernini, Leonardo, Pontormo, Primaticcio, Savoldo, Veronese and above all the three Watteaus, which are superb contrasting examples of that great artist's style.
Of the drawings by artists new to the collection, it is quite remarkable how well the Getty, under the eagle eye of Mr Goldner, has bought.
Not only are there examples of extreme rarity, a large ‘Christ driving the money changers from the temple’ in coloured chalk by Jacopo Bassano, two handsome brush drawings by Carpaccio, a ‘Thebaid’by Costa, the only drawing which can be attributed with any reason to Desiderio da Settignano, Pordenone's superb red chalk ‘Martyrdom of Saint Peter Martyr’, drawn in competition with Titian and Palma Vecchio, which comes from Chatsworth and should never have been allowed an export licence from Britain, Albert Cuyp's delightful ‘Milkmaid’, Saenredam's ‘Choir and north ambulatory of the Church of Saint Bavo, Haarlem’, Altdorfer's ‘Christ carrying the cross’, but also many of great beauty, Turner's finished watercolour ‘Long Ship lighthouse, Land's End’, the anonymous Swiss (Bernese?)
Master's black chalk ‘Portrait of a young man’, Pencz's ‘Allegory of Justice’, Muller's erotic ‘Embracing couple’— a superb complement to the brilliant Cornelis van Haarlem published in volume 1 — Ferdinand Bol's breathtaking ‘Messenger of God appearing to Joshua’ and Rubens's brilliant ‘Anatomical studies’.
Each of these would make an impact in any collection.
The four drawings by Gericault, the rare pastel by Delacroix of the ‘Education of Achilles’ and the handsome Daumier are all significant additions, as are the fine Coypel and the ravishing ‘Music party’by Portail.
In short, the acquisition policy of the Getty continues coherent and very strong.
In the light of what has been available on the market between 1986 and 1989, it is fascinating to see what was not acquired as well as what has been bought.
From this it is clear that Goldner and Hendrix are acutely aware not just of quality but also of rarity and of what will not be available again.
To have as much money to spend as the Trustees of the Getty Museum have in their care is a grave responsibility.
This second volume of drawings vindicates their reliance on the individuals to whom they have entrusted the expansion of this area of their collections.
New and old architectural history confronted
Semi-deconstruction of Italy's halls of state
In all but the very best books a gap exists between the author's intentions and his or her actual work, but in many cases in the past the reader was not privy to those intentions.
Now it has become customary (especially in books seeking theoretical constructs upon which to hang their arguments) to have an introduction which both explains the preconceptions of the project and foresees its conclusions.
The disparity between the premises and promises of the Stern/Partridge introduction and the substance of this study is stark.
In essence, this book is a detailed, synthetic study of the fourteenth-century Sala dei Nove in Siena, the fifteenth-century Camera Picta in Mantua and the mid sixteenth-century Sala Grande in the Palazzo Vecchio of Florence.
These spaces were commissioned by their respective rulers and were chosen by the authors to illustrate the art produced and the ideology disseminated by three distinctive types of regime: civic republic, princely court and ‘triumphalist’ state.
So far so good, but is like being compared to like?
Precisely what is a ‘hall of state’?
Stern and Partridge admit that monographs and specialised studies already exist on all these rooms, and make no claim to have discovered new material, but justify their extended reconsideration of the ‘halls of state’ on the grounds that they have never been analysed together as monuments of public art.
However, expectations of three-cornered comparisons are dashed because the work is arranged in a straightforwardly linear and chronological fashion, and the same issues are not necessarily addressed in each of the three separate discussions on the three rooms.
If these spaces are not to be compared one to another, and no original research has been carried out, what exactly is the purpose of this well-prepared book?
Interested parties will find in it an array of (other people's) opinion that can be dazzling, for postmodern methodology has ensured that a little bit of everything (from a quartermaster's appraisal of the value of art to a consideration of Santa Barbara's peacocks) is included.
Theories and information appear not to have been subjected to prior sorting and tumble forth from the pages, while the opinions of the authors remain submerged.
Strangest of all is the fact that the art itself suffers by this treatment, as the circumstances surrounding the paintings and what they signify are examined perhaps at the expense of the technical representations.
On a more positive note, often the plundering carried out in good synthetic studies can lead, as here, to an enrichment of material presented to the reader.
Assuming that a path can be found through the sometimes difficult terrain of the language, this book should show students the advantages to be gained from a collapse of boundaries between the disciplines of art and politics, and from a policy of inclusion rather than exclusion.
Finally, the book is to be recommended to specialists for its clear diagrams and useful appendices.
A classic on the Baroque
The new edition of Norbert Lieb's Barock Kirchen — the sixth — confirms its status as a modern classic on German Baroque architecture.
The book first appeared in 1953 and was produced under the difficult conditions of a country still emerging from the ruins of World War II.
One of its remarkable features was the degree of integration between text and illustrations, for the survey of southern German churches was a collaborative effort between Norbert Lieb and the publisher-photographer Max Hirmer.
This same process has continued down to the present, now with the next generation of Hirmers, Albert and Irmgard, supplying many new plates, especially of the recently restored churches at Wies and Dießen.
The book concentrates on the great period of Bavarian and Schwabian baroque architecture from 1680 to 1780, a span marked by the beginnings of the Premonstratensian abbey of Obermachtal and the conclusion of the Benedictine abbey at Wiblingen.
The exuberant rush of ecclesiastical building was a byproduct of the Thirty Years' War, which interrupted the German Renaissance and delayed the arrival of the Baroque until two generations after its origins in Italy.
The pent-up energy of religious orders and craftsmen was soon channelled into new convents and pilgrimage churches, initially indebted to Italian models but gradually evolving away from them.
Within a generation or so, a complex network of major and minor centres across southern Germany was established by families of artisans and the bonds between religious orders.
The fusion of painting, sculpture, and architecture, first articulated by Bernini in the 1640s, reached a new synthesis in the work of the Asam brothers and Dominikus Zimmermann eighty years later.
Both the intricate decorative programme and its execution at churches like Weltenburg and Ottobeuren can stand comparison with the Italian Baroque.
The concept of the church as heaven on earth was as old as Byzantium, but it was given new impetus in these confections of the Holy Roman Empire's last century.
As with the old eastern empire, the inspiration was a mixture of piety and politics.
Lieb puts it well when he observes that the facade inscription on St Michael Berg am Laim —‘This is the Lord's doing; it is marvellous to our eyes’— paid homage not only to the King of kings, but also to the all powerful Josef Clemens, prince-bishop of Cologne.
Lieb's text is structured almost like a guide book with lengthy discussions on individual churches supplemented by a useful chronological digest.
The author's clear and concise prose encompasses stylistic analysis and iconographic programmes, and the collaborative nature of the book is demonstrated by the extremely fine corpus of photographs.
Though the account remains essentially the same as in earlier editions, the bibliography has been revised to take account of scholarship down to 1990.
The Lieb-Hirmer collaboration has produced one of the finest accounts of Southern German Baroque available, and an English translation would bring it to an even wider public.
National Gallery host to Walter Neurath lectures
The Walter Neurath Memorial Lecture series, begun in honour of the founder of Thames and Hudson publishers, is twenty-five years old this year.
Past speakers have included Kenneth Clarke, Ernst Gombrich, Nikolaus Pevsner, Roy Strong, John Pope-Hennessy and Richard Rogers.
From this year onwards, the lecture will take place at the National Gallery.
It begins at 6.30 on 11 March and will be given by Neil MacGregor, director of the National Gallery.
His subject will be ‘A Victim of Anonymity: the Master of the Saint Bartholomew Altarpiece’.
Admission is free.
Braille Picasso
The Réunion des Musées Nationaux is publishing a beautiful and enterprising book intended for the blind.
Based on a series of works by Picasso collectively known as the Antipolis cycle, made in 1946 to 1947, the images have been engraved on to metal plates by Claude Rodrigues and printed uninked (a technique known as gaufrage).
The lines of the images stand out from the high quality Montval paper and are accompanied by a braille text.
The twenty illustrations include a gaufrage of Picasso's highly distinctive signature and include depictions of nymphs, animals and a portrait of Françoise.
The idea behind the book is that of Daniel Giraudy, director of the Musée des Arts Decoratifs, Paris, and formerly chief curator of the Picasso Museum at Antibes.
Giraudy has contributed the text to the present volume which has an introduction by Jack Lang, France's Minister of Culture.
The only slight quibble about this book is the price, a stiff FFr950.
This year the Musée des Arts Decoratifs aims to produce a catalogue of its collection in braille with images in relief, as well as a tactile itinerary of the collection.
Zwemmer buys St George's bookshop
Less than four years into new ownership, St George's Gallery Books in Duke Street has been taken over yet again.
After a brief spell as a specialist oriental bookshop following its purchase by Christer von der Burg, it has now been bought by the book-sellers and publishers A. Zwemmer Ltd.
Mr von der Burg was, its seems, unable to establish the shop on a firm financial footing.
The shop will now be under the management of Charles Vernon-Hunt, previously responsible for second-hand books at Zwemmer's Charing Cross branch.
Mr Philip Wilson, chairman of Zwemmer, commented, ‘this is the first time that Zwemmer's have had a location that is suitable and indeed at the centre of the art trade.
We are certain that St George's will rapidly regain its former reputation’.
The shop will continue to trade under its old name.
Duke Street is now set to house a formidable trio of book dealers: moving into the former Omell Galleries on the third corner of the street, opposite both St George's and Thomas Heneage Books, will be Simms Reed, the antiquarian and art book dealers.
Additional competition comes in the form of the recently-opened Atrium Bookshop in nearby Cork Street, partly staffed and run by former St George's personnel from its pre-oriental days.
Anglo-German collaboration at the Bodleian
German funding from the Kulturstiftung der Lander (Germany 's equivalent to the British National Heritage Fund, funded by the country's regions or Lander) and the Fritz Thyssen Stiftung, together with German expertise, is contributing to the great cataloguing project of the Bodleian Library's incunabula (books printed before 1500).
The collection, begun by Sir Thomas Bodley in the late sixteenth century, comprises nearly 7,000 items, mainly printed in Italy or the German speaking areas of fifteenth-century Europe.
The Kulturstiftung der Lander has produced an attractive and interesting booklet, Incunabula in the Bodleian Library, on the subject of the library's early book holdings and the work of the current catalogue project.
At the present level of staffing the project should be complete within ten years, with the German funding providing for two members of staff for three years.
This European collaboration has been a key feature of the major fundraising operation undertaken by Oxford University since 1988.
‘Campaign for Oxford’ initially aimed to raise £220 million in five years, extending this after initial success to a six-year campaign totalling £340 million.
Attracting support for the Bodleian, one of Europe's oldest libraries and the second largest in Britain after the British Library, was one of the campaign's goals, which the present publication aims to support.
It contains introductions and explanations of the project in English and German with a clearly written account of the history of the Bodleian Library and its incunabula by Dr Kristian Jensen, head of the project (32pp. 6 col. ills.
available from The Bodleian Library shop).
The latest on Renaissance painting
Clare Robertson ‘Il Gran Cardinale’ Alessandro Farnese, Patron of the Arts (Yale University Press, London, 1992) 323pp. 13 col. 199 b/w ills.
£35.00/$50.00
Alessandro Farnese (1520–89) was one of the greatest patrons of the Italian Renaissance.
Both his father and grandfather (Pope Paul III) were major art patrons, a conditioning factor in the young Alessandro's taste.
His preferences were always for medals and engraved gems, and miniatures by artists such as Giulio Clovio, who painted the celebrated ‘Farnese Hours’ for him.
The major works connected with him include the Farnese Casket, the decoration of the Cancelleria Palace (notably by Vasari), Titian's Naples ‘Danae’, the Villa Farnese at Caprarola and the Church of Il Gesù — an impressive array by any standards.
Robertson's text offers an analytical if dry survey of the main trends of the Cardinal's interests, but there is little revelation of his character: surely Haskell's great example in Patrons and Painters proved the need for obeisance at the shrine of personality.
Alessandro was particularly fortunate in his artistic advisers, who included Paolo Giovio, Annibale Caro and Fulvio Orsini, and the section devoted to their influence on the Cardinal is possibly the best in the book.
The author seems most at ease when dealing with Farnese iconography, highly relevant particularly to an understanding of Caprarola's interiors: conspicuously lacking is any enthusiasm for the aesthetic appeal of the art discussed.
How is this possible in such a period?
Jack M. Greenstein Mantegna and Painting as Historical Narrative (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1992) 316pp. 61 ills.
£27.95/$40.25
Much wordy delving into the super-minutiae of fifteenth century iconography, particularly obsessive although informative about the Circumcision, sometimes taking several pages to reach an obvious conclusion, occasionally illuminating, often maddeningly obfuscating.
Can too much knowledge be a dangerous thing?
Bram Kempers Painting, Power and Patronage, The Rise of the Professional Artist in the Italian Renaissance (Allen Lane, The Penguin Press, London, 1992) 401pp. 74ills. £25
It is difficult to reconcile this book's title with its content, since there is no consecutive, focused discussion anywhere of this ‘rise’.
A generalised picture emerges of Italian society and the arts — interesting enough, but nothing new.
Why is Siena spelled throughout with two ‘n's?
Marcia B. Hall Color and Meaning, Practice and Theory in Renaissance Painting (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1992) 274pp. 83ills. £40
Less concentrated than this author's other books, this text contains much insight.
With the exception of Mona Lisa, it examines in depth only recently cleaned paintings, analysing changes in colour thinking from fifteenth to sixteenth century, from the Cennini system to that of the post-Leonardo artists.
That old-fashioned, risky art-historical game of influences makes more sense than usual here.
Could we have had more information on colour symbolism?
One problem not tackled is, what influence did the increasing sophistication of formal language after the High Renaissance have on colour usage?
Ironically, as the first question asked in this book is ‘Can we know what Renaissance colour was?’, the colour plates are distinctly variable in quality.
For the record
Twentieth-century Old Masters
Joni, deliberate counterfeiter or creative artist?
Icilio Federico Joni's ability to reproduce Quattrocento painting was so complete that his works entered many famous collections, including the London National Gallery.
Where are the missing works illustrated here and do their owners know they are fake?
An exclusive article by the authors of the book due from Pitti Arte e Libri, Florence, this April on this master-faker, with new attributions to the artist
The circumstances of Icilio Federico Joni's birth were not promising.
His father, a soldier stationed in Siena, chose to commit suicide before his son was born, not being in a position to acknowledge him.
In January 1866, his young mother entrusted him to the hospital of Sta.
Maria della Scala in Siena as a foundling.
Not until after he was weaned was Joni reclaimed by his maternal grandmother, put in the care of an aunt, and finally placed with a family friend of very limited means.
While still a child, Joni was put to work with a gilder, and this experience proved decisive.
His natural talent and readiness to learn, together with irregular but extremely fruitful attendance at the Istituto di Belle Arti, were to make of him the amazing so-called ‘painter of Old Masters’.
Most of the information we have regarding Joni's training and achievements is derived from his autobiography, Le memorie di un pittore di quadri antichi, published in 1932 (and reprinted by Sansoni in 1984).
The work was translated into English as early as 1936, by Faber and Faber of London, with the title Affairs of a Painter.
Attributed to great painters, from Duccio to Francesco di Giorgio, pride of private collections and museums, the re-creations of Old Masters for which Joni is famous have been the subject of careful critical analysis by the best qualified scholars of Italian Trecento and Quattrocento art.
When news of Joni's book got out, efforts were made in some quarters to postpone its publication, in the hope that certain pages might be cut or toned down.
The author resisted pressures of this kind, however disguised.
The English edition sold out very quickly, and rumour had it that interested parties had bought up large numbers of copies in order to minimise its impact.
The man most concerned to limit the publicity given to the Memorie was said to be Bernard Berenson.
Joni's first meetings with Berenson took place at the end of the last century and continued, with varying intensity, for several decades.
Rarely, according to Joni, did they end without friction.
Berenson appears many times in the book — thinly disguised as ‘Somberen’, when Joni has a particularly barbed comment to make about him.
On one occasion, the critic is reported to have said: ‘Take care not to imitate any Old Master too closely; otherwise, on comparison, your work will be easily recognised’.
At their first meeting, Berenson is described as ‘a gentleman with a reddish beard’; apologising for turning up at the artist's studio unannounced, he offered the excuse that he was ‘the person who bought all your pictures from Torrini’(an antique dealer with whom Joni placed his first works for sale).
This was the beginning of an interesting and complex relationship, which can now be evaluated in a better informed, more balanced way.
Joni records that, at their first meeting, ‘after an endless stream of compliments on the execution of my work’, Berenson, who had purchased from Torrini an ‘Alberto Aringhieri in prayer’(fig.2) inspired by Pinturicchio's celebrated fresco in Siena cathedral, ‘singled out the Aringhieri for special praise, saying that he found it more skilfully done even than the original, which he had been to see and examined just before coming to my studio’.
The Berenson Foundation at I Tatti still has two works by Joni purchased in those early days.
The ‘Alberto Aringhieri’, on the other hand, was later sold by Berenson at a Christie's sale in London.
Apart from anything else, there is no doubt that Joni's meeting with Berenson gave him access to a circle of wealthy collectors, like Dan Fellows Platt, and scholars and researchers, such as Frederic Mason Perkins.
These connections, combined with the intrinsic quality of the works, ensured that Joni's paintings found their way into milieux where they were appreciated and sought after.
If we compare the copy of the Pinturicchio — excellent though it may be — with the paintings owned by American collector Philip Lehman, we have to admit that Joni's abilities, over a period of ten years developed to a remarkable extent.
Lehman's fine collection of Sienese paintings is well documented by  Ferderic Mason Perkins, the American whose own collection of primitives now belongs to the Franciscan friary at Assisi, who published articles on the subject in Art in America in 1920 and ‘21.
The magazine featured Lehman's two panel paintings  attributed to Neroccio di Bartolomeo Landi (including the ‘Madonna and Child with two angels’(fig.3) auctioned by Franco Semenzato in Rome on 17 March 1992 as ‘a rare work by one of the greatest Quattrocento Sienese masters’) and at least six other works owned by Lehman.
As well as the famous ‘Saint Anthony tempted by a heap of gold’, now attributed to the Maestro dell'Osservanza, a diptych by Paolo di Giovanni Fei and an ‘Expulsion from Eden’ by Giovanni di Paolo (now in the Metropolitan Museum, New York), Perkins mentions a ‘Madonna of humilty’in the style of Sassetta and two paintings ascribed to Matteo di Giovanni: a ‘Virgin martyr’and a ‘Madonna and Child’.
It is worth examining certain aspects of Joni's art, in order to understand this leap in skill.
The Neroccio recently sold in Rome has to be regarded as a forgery, if only because it bears a spurious signature and date.
However, the ‘Madonna and Child with Saints Mary Magdalen and Sebastian’ housed at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, also painted in the second decade of the century, raises questions of a quite different kind.
In this case, Joni's identification with fifteenth-century Sienese painting is complete.
Although certain details of the painting do coincide almost exactly with features of other works by Neroccio, the work as a whole cannot be regarded as a copy.
Nor can it be classed as an imitation.
It is true that Joni interprets and executes his subject in a style derived from Neroccio di Bartolomeo, but he has made his master's teaching his own and developed it, as is the case with any independent work of art.
The finished painting can stand alongside works by Neroccio or other artists of the period, because it is born of a whole-hearted adoption of the canons of the Sienese school.
It is easy to understand how the Lehman ‘Madonna’ continued to astonish even the restorers Mario Modestini and Pico Cellini, and the art historian Federico Zeri, who were the first to say it was modern, and correctly guessed its authorship.
Another of Joni's masterpieces, the ‘Madonna and Child’(fig.4) in the style of Matteo di Giovanni, which Perkins also listed as belonging to Lehman, is a similar case.
The composition of Joni's painting derives mainly from Matteo's ‘Madonna and Child’, n.283 in the Pinacoteca Nazionale of Siena, but while keeping to the internal rhythms of Matteo's composition, Joni incorporates his own variations.
He has dispensed with Matteo's landscape, and set the figure against a gold background, which with an exact copy of the gilded frame makes for an authoritative, splendid work.
Joni has reversed the attitude of Matteo's ‘Madonna’, making her face to the right, with the child on the right-hand side of the picture.
But their faces are by no means the same as Matteo's: features and expressions, though consonant with the half-tender, half-dreamy look of Matteo's Madonnas, are not based on any particular model.
Joni is also exceptional in his capacity to make an object look convincingly old.
A painting until now attributed to Matteo di Giovanni (fig.5) is a good example.
The work, in tempera on a convex wooden panel (51 x 35 cm), was sold in Milan in the 1930s by the writer Bruna Guarducci and brought to public attention by Peleo Bacci in 1944, when it was part of a private collection in Varese.
Though dating from some fifteen years later, this ‘Madonna’ bears a relationship to Lehman's Matteo.
The photo reproduced here shows how perfectly the painting was aged by the artist.
In this picture, Joni has not just imitated or interpreted a style, but has been able to create an object with all the patina, or aura, of an ancient work of art.
Once his paintings were finished, Joni applied a treatment designed to replicate the effects of the passage of time: loss of pigment, cracks, scratches.
He was a genius as a craftsman: in his preparation and handling of materials — pigments, gold leaf, wood and stucco.
He would ‘age’ the wooden panels and painted surfaces on which he had lavished so much skill and care by exposing them to extremes of dryness and humidity, direct heat and cold; and he used controlled violence to inflict scratches and abrasions.
Much of the impact of Joni's major works lies in the delicate balance achieved between what appears worn with age and what has remained intact.
This explains how badly his works react to cleaning or restoration.
A painting ruined in this way was his ‘Madonna of humility’, now on display at the Allen Art Museum at Oberlin, Ohio.
The exquisite workmanship is reminiscent of Sassetta or artists associated with him.
The judgements of Bernard Berenson (‘probably by Pellegrino di Mariano’), Giacomo De Nicola (‘pupil of Sassetta’), Richard Offner (‘Sassettesque’) and Raimund Van Marle (‘Sassetta’) were confirmed in 1939 by John Pope-Hennessy in his study of Quattrocento Sienese painting.
It should be said that, even at that time, the panel had been subjected to a mild cleaning operation, as shown by a still earlier photograph taken when the work was in pristine condition.
Nevertheless, it was the subsequent interference and attempts to retouch it that damaged Joni's work beyond repair.
Much medieval painting has come down to us in a fragmentary condition, and often in a very poor state of conservation.
An exception are altar-pieces which, because they played an important role in Catholic worship, were kept in their original settings.
Yet, even venerable images, which today are recognised as outstanding masterpieces, were often broken up and dispersed as tastes and liturgies changed.
In Joni's time, ancient panels by great masters were rediscovered in the dwellings of common people or in country farm-houses, where traditional forms of devotion persisted.
Counterfeiting fragments of old works was tempting because they were easier to sell, though they were by no means easy to produce.
At a time when many authentic works were being rediscovered and marketed, Joni conceived and painted a large number of fragmentary works.
Three of these, all very fine examples, have not been ascribed to him before.
The ‘Angel of Annunciation’ and ‘Virgin Annunciate’(fig.6), which in 1926 were owned by Philip Lehman in New York, appear to be segments of the same panel of a broken-up predella.
The simplicity of the bare interiors, the view of the landscape, the columns of the portico where the scene is set are reminiscent of Fra Angelico: tiny details in the hair-style, the hands and the folds of the angel's garments are derived from some of his most famous creations, such as the Cortona ‘Annunciation’, the Montecarlo ‘Annunciation’ and, for the Virgin's face and attitude and the embroidery of her cloak, the ‘Adoration of the Magi’at the Museo di San Marco, Florence.
Highly detailed works, like that of an illuminator, they have affinities with the ‘Miracle of St Nicolas’ formerly attributed to the young Benozzo Gozzoli, and recently challenged by Federico Zeri, who considers it the work of ‘a faker who displays uncommon ability’.
These two panels are in fact yet another achievement of Federico Joni's.
Federico Joni's output also included a large amount of far less brilliant work, done in the normal course of his activity as restorer and expert creator of artefacts in the Renaissance style, and designed to satisfy the demands of a wide market.
But, over a period of more than thirty years in the early part of the century, he produced a significant number of works of the highest quality, possibly without equal in their field.
Joni's greatest achievements invite one to examine more closely the boundary — often too confidently defined — between forgery and original creation.
How to fake a Quattrocento painting — or detect the result
Joni would have been able to recreate the materials and technique of a fifteenth-century gold-ground painter by reading Cennino Cennini's treatise on painting (known as The craftsman's handbook in English).
Although written around 1390, very little changed until the arrival of oil in the late 1400s: technical analysis of Sassetta's paintings shows that he used methods very close to those described by Cennini.
To give the appearance of aging Joni could have mixed extra glue with the pigments which, when exposed to heat (as in an oven) would crack in a convincing way.
Poplar panels, gypsum for the ground and rabbit skin glue would all have been available to Joni.
Although the outward appearance of a Joni painting is convincing, and analysis of the materials is not an indicator of his authorship, on further examination there are numerous give-aways.
The gold leaf used by Joni would have been slightly thinner than that used in the 1400s.
Dirt found in the craquelure and in the wood beneath in genuine fifteenth-century paintings would be hard to reproduce in a recent version.
X-ray analysis reveals the type of modelling used for the flesh tones and highlights, an area in which Joni diverges from fifteenth-century practice.
Genuine gold-ground paintings have a warm brown or terracotta green for the half tones, applied very thinly in the half shadows and shadows with pronounced lead white  highlights on the cheeks, bridge of nose and upper lip.
This creates a pronounced visual luminosity and shows up on the X-ray as strong white.
Joni used much more solid underpainting on which the flesh tones would be laid — convincing proof of a recent attempt at fifteenth-century painting.
We are grateful to conservation experts Ashok Roy and David Bomford of the National Gallery, London, and to Alan Phenix at the Courtauld Institute for their opinions.
Both institutions have a Joni in their collection.
That of the National Gallery was acquired as a portrait of Federigo da Montefeltro (acc. no. 3831) and hangs in the Reserve Collection.
The Courtauld Institute's is a triptych titled ‘Virgin and Child enthroned with unidentified male saints’ and was exhibited in Minneapolis in 1973 in the exhibition ‘Fakes and Forgeries’.
The Art Market
Sotheby's, New York
The rising market for trouble-free antiquities
Schimmel collection makes $4 million with 90% sold
The remnants of Norbert Schimmel's collection was dispersed at Sotheby's New York on 16 December.
As the late collector stated, the antiquities market can be treacherous going, as many collectors can be put off by unanswered questions of authenticity and provenance.
Unlike many other aspects of the art market, antiquities still have a haze of uncertainty about exact provenance — the Sevso Treasure, currently in a bank vault in New York awaiting legal judgement over its  provenance is one example,(see p. 1).
The Schimmel sale was a perfect opening for the nervous novice, as the works were fresh, having been off the market for decades, familiar from exhibitions and publications, and generally trouble-free.
The sale totalled $4,221,250 with premium, with 90% sold by value and 94% by lot.
Various in scope, the Schimmel collection (mostly donated to the Metropolitan Museum, with smaller gifts and bequests to the Israel Museum and the Sackler Museum at Harvard) resists simple classification as he did not specialise in one particular field or medium.
Although most of his collection consisted of relatively small objects scholars differ on exactly what characterised a ‘Schimmel’ piece.
According to Joan Mertens, curator of Greek and Roman art at the Met, ‘The pieces that Norbert Schimmel chose…tend to be complete rather than fragmentary’, yet Dr Jurgen Settgast, former Director of the Ägyptisches Museum Berlin, characterises Schimmel as preferring fragments.
Such a fragment was the Egyptian eighteenth dynasty crystalline limestone head of a queen or goddess,(possibly Queen Mutnodjmet, according to Sotheby's Dick Keresey).
It sold to the London dealer Robin Symes for $410,000 (est. $250–350,000).
The evening's highest price was the $440,000 paid by Geneva-based dealer Ali Abu Taam for a late eighteenth/early nineteenth dynasty blue faience inlay head of a king or god, a price far exceeding the upper estimate of $150,000.
Similar results were expected from the three polychrome wood statuettes from the twelfth dynasty (1938–1759 BC) of a clothed lady, nude concubine and robed portrait of the scribe Seneb, but only the lady sold, for $430,000 (est. $200,000–300,000) to an American collector.
Schimmel's Greek and Roman material sold equally well: a Greek moulded terracotta head of the smiling goddess Demeter (est. $30–40,000) appealed to many, selling to a New York private collector for $160,000.
Schimmel was not an enthusiast of the classic, Attic black-figure pots, but favoured more eccentric pottery, typically the large Italo-geometric buffware askos (last eighth or early seventh century BC) in the form of a stylised bird decorated all over with abstract patterns amid a hunter and stag, sold to a Swiss dealer for $85,000 (est. $30–50,000) and the merry group of three terracotta satyrs (early fifth century) characterised by expressive poses and gigantic erections, bought by the Cleveland Museum for $70,000 (est. $15–25,000).
Most impressive of Schimmel's Iranian material was the fifth-century bronze mirror-back with two rampant lions (est. $100–150,000), sold to a New York collector for $145,000.
Sotheby's followed the Schimmel collection with a very strong mixed-owner sale that featured an unusually high percentage of Roman marbles — word from the trade was that many of them were Basia Johnson's.
The sale total was $4,095,520 with premium, 73% sold by value and 70% by lot.
Most impressive perhaps, was a Roman Imperial dancing Pan of unusual vitality.
Though dated to around mid second century AD by Sotheby's, several dealers wondered if it could not be a Roman baroque forgery (one attributed it to Pietro Bernini).
Previously sold by Sotheby's for $48,400 in 1982, it was bought by the Metropolitan Museum for $160,000 (est. $100–150,000).
Of the bronze statuary, most beautiful was the 5½ inch high Hellenistic figure of a nude youth (around late second or early first century BC), which sold to the European trade for $170,000 (est. $40–60,000), though nothing excited the crowd quite so much as the Roman porphyry.
One of a pair of massive bath supports (the other in the Palazzo Capponi, Florence) boldly carved with lions heads and paws, and scrolling vines, was bought by an American museum for $190,000 (est. $100–150,000) and a pair of simple, but grand, columns, brought a remarkable $230,000 (est. $20–30,000), sold again to Robin Symes.
New York
Sackler maiolica off — for now
Collector's widow overturns court decision
‘I'm sorry’, said the Christie's receptionist, ‘but the Sackler sale has been cancelled for the time being…
’ She hung up the phone.
‘It hasn't stopped you know’, she said wearily.
Despite all of Christie's best efforts to smooth the situation and make the best out of it, the last minute 6 January ruling that caused the cancellation of the eagerly awaited sale of Italian maiolica from the Arthur M. Sackler collection, scheduled for 13 January, gave headaches to all.
Fifteenth- and sixteenth-century maiolica has in the last few years returned to popularity (the recent exhibition of the maiolica collections of the Metropolitan Museum was regularly crowded, to the amazement of Met officials), though most of its present day collectors are Italian.
There is never enough good maiolica to supply the demand, and Christie's had anticipated strong prices.
Dealers who had flown in just for the sale were bitterly disappointed (though they could privately view the works at Christie's nonetheless), and the lavish, hard-bound catalogue became unobtainable overnight.
The sale was appealed by the collector's widow, Gillian Sackler, who, overturning a lower court decision authorising the sale at Christie's, argued that the Sackler children had acted in conflict of interest with the estate's wishes, and that the collection should have been kept together, on long term loan at the National Gallery, Washington, in compliance with what she believed to be the collector's intent.
Reportedly, the Sackler maiolica was only the initial offering, which would have been followed by the collector's bronzes and terra-cottas.
Cyril Humphries, the dealer who supplied Dr Sackler with most of his maiolica, backs up Mrs Sackler's claim, noting that ‘Dr Sackler always told me he would like to keep the collection intact…he wanted eventually to collect the entire spectrum of ceramic arts, and the maiolica was only the first part of it.’
Christie's is hopeful that the children's appeal, scheduled for 1 March, will be successful, and that the sale will take place, perhaps sometime in the late spring.
Two Hulsdoncks classed as monuments historiques, yet sell
Two still lifes by the seventeenth-century Antwerp artist Jacob Van Hulsdonck, found in the attic of a hospital at Melun, near Paris, were sold for FFr2.5 million on 20 December by auctioneer Jean-Pierre Osenat after a year-long legal battle with museum authorities who had the works classed monuments historiques to prevent them leaving France.
The two canvases were discovered in June 1991 by one of Mr Osenat's colleagues.
The paintings were at first estimated at FFr4–5 million by Paris expert Eric Turquin and their sale was planned to help purchase a scanner for the hospital.
After French Museums proved unable to agree over the price at which the paintings should go to the Museum of Melun, however, France's Monuments Historiques moved in and declared the two still lifes the first paintings, after van Gogh's ‘Jardin a Auvers’, to be historic monuments and thus unable to leave France.
The estimate was immediately reduced to FFr2.5 million.
On 17 December, only three days before the auction.
Mr Osenat received a fax from the Ministry of Culture quoting a law of 1913 and informing him that no classified object belonging to a public establishment — the hospital — could be sold to a private buyer.
Mr Osenat nevertheless put the paintings up for sale at their estimate, FFr2.5 million and sold them in the space of a few seconds to the town's Mayor (who is also, ironically, Chairman of the Board of the Hospital), who then donated them to the museum on behalf of the town.
The auction, which raised questions about the compensation of owners in the case of classification by the Monuments Historiques came after only two weeks after ‘Corbeille de fleurs et fruits’ by the same artist was sold at Drouot salerooms in Paris for the record sum of FFr7.5 million, far in excess of the £230,000 raised by Sotheby's London for ‘Still Life of Plums and Peaches’on 4 July, 1990.
Old Master sales, New York
The Croce Collection — a moral tale
Philadelphia doctor's speculative purchases perform poorly second time around
Those who fecklessly pay huge sums for grimy canvases would be wise to study the results of the Dr Carlo Croce collection at Christie's on 14 January.
Croce, a noted Philadelphia cancer  researcher , has only been collecting for the past ten years, specialising in Italian seventeenth-century paintings and drawings.
Rather than buying fewer pictures of greater quality, Croce has squandered his considerable funds in speculations, favouring the ‘bargains’, i.e. the mis-catalogued ‘workshop’ pictures that would (hopefully) improve dramatically with cleaning, or pictures that were authentic, but not particularly fine or interesting.
Typical were two canvases bought, in a grime-covered state, at Sotheby's New York: a ‘Roman School, circa 1650’ of ‘Hercules wrestling with the Nemean Lion’, for which Croce had paid £31,000 in 1988, was bought in this time at $17,000 (£10,625; est. $30,000–50,000), and a ‘Sacrifice of Isaac’, bought as ‘Roman circa 1620’for $66,000, failed at $48,000 (est. $60,000–80,000).
Most unfortunate was the fate of Pietro Testa's strange ‘Birth and infancy of Achilles’(est. $50,000–80,000), bought by Croce at Sotheby's in 1989 for $37,720.
Initially knocked down for $160,000, a bidding dispute led to its immediate reappearance where it sold for $50,000 (£31,250).
Still-lifes fared better.
A pair of canvases attributed to Pedro de Camprobin, a follower of Zurbaran, of spartan repasts of plums, cheese, bread and wine, strangely deaccessioned by the North Carolina Museum of Art, sold to a private collector for $200,000 (£125,000; $60,000–80,000), and an unusually fine and silvery Pieter Claesz monochrome banketje with the typical roemer, peeled lemon, overturned pewter jug et al sold over the phone against Johnny van Haeften, for $700,000 (£437,500; est. $400,000–600,000).
At Sotheby's the following day, the most debated and perplexing lot was an anonymous portrait of a praying cleric on a blue ground, inscribed with the sitter's name, the composer Jacob Obrecht.
In superb condition and in its original frame, it defied attribution.
While Dirk de Vos, curator of the Stedelijke Museum, Bruges, has asked for it to be included in his forthcoming Memling exhibition, the date of 1496 on the frame (two year's after Memling's death) led Sotheby's to stick to ‘School of Bruges, late fifteenth century’, suggesting a Franco-Flemish or Burgundian artist, close to the Master of the Moulins.
A French authorship was also proposed while some believed the inscription with the sitter's name to be a later addition.
Estimated at $400,000–600,000, bidding was brisk till it was knocked down at $2.2 million (£1.375 million) on the phone to New York dealer Wheelock Whitney, acting on behalf of his cousin Ted Pillsbury for the Kimbell Art Museum, underbid by Herman Shickman.
As before, still-lifes offered the greatest surprises.
An unusually delicate Jan Davidsz. de Heem, of fruits, oysters, and wine glasses on a ledge, had been sold by Joseph Widener of Philadelphia in 1912 as part of a cleaning out of lesser pictures from his already famous holdings: the lovely reject brought $1.4 million (£875,000; est. $350,000–450,000), sold to a private collector against Johnny van Haeften.
Picard sale of Charles X Restoration furniture
Paris auctioneer Jean-Louis Picard is selling the most important collection of French Charles X Restoration furniture and art objects to be seen on the market since the Castille Collection sold two years ago.
The sale, in Drouot saleroom's Montaigne premises on 6 and 7 February comprises 455 lots.
The 400 art objects range from carnets de bal in tortoiseshell and galuchat to dressing table mirrors, boxes in opalescent glass and tortoiseshell, which were particularly fashionable during the Restoration, opaline glassware, porcelain and candelabras.
Furniture includes two curvaceous meridiennes (backed chaise-longues), six chairs stamped Jeanselme (est.
FFr30–40,000), two armchairs and twelve chairs stamped Jean-Jaques Werner (est.
FFr150–200,000), a rare bronze gueridon table (est.
FFr150–200,000) and a rare pair of Louis XVI armchairs, stamped Georges Jacob (est.
FFr120–150,000).
Disastrous sale of ancient mirrors adds to Tajan's problems
Jacques Tajan's much heralded sale of the largest collection of ancient mirrors in the world on 8 December in the Hotel George V, proved a notable if little publicised failure.
In terms of value, less than 40% of the items belonging to Polish-born French industrialist Leon Anlen were sold according to Tajan, who took the unprecedented step of ordering a blackout on all information about the sale both to journalists and even to the central press service of Drouot salerooms.
Comprising 250 lots and with a global estimation of around FFr4 million, the mirror collection was started by Anlen shortly after he arrived in France in 1958, a virtually penniless refugee.
It contained mirrors from Ancient Greece, Pharaonic Egypt, Rome, Etruria, Persia, Byzantium and China (Warring Kingdoms, Han, Tang, Sung, Yuan, Ming Quing) from the third century BC to the late nineteenth century AD.
It seems that the market was simply unable to cope with such a large quantity of these objects, for which there are few private collectors.
Ader Tajan, the company in which Jacques Tajan is a partner along with auctioneers, brothers Remi and Antoine Ader, is expected to record business of FFr319 million for 1992 as against a target of FFr350 million and nearly three times as much when the market peaked in 1989.
In an interview in Liberation in January Jacques Tajan blamed the French Government and its ‘blind authoritarianism’ for aggravating his financial difficulties by failing to streamline the country's auction profession.
Bonhams and Phillips annual figures
Contrasting profitability was evident in the turnover figures for 1992 issued by Bonhams and Phillips in December.
Bonhams announced a £25.2 million turnover, an increase of 22% on 1991, the highest total in the company's 200-year history.
Deputy Chairman Paul Whitfield further pointed to an encouraging improvement in sales performance in the last three months of the year.
Phillips, meanwhile, turned around £80.8 million for the year ending December, representing an 11% decline on last year.
The highlight of the autumn season was the sale of the Belgian Coppee Collection of Old Master pictures which yielded £2.3 million.
Christie's and Sotheby's yield similar sales figures
Christie's issued a reasonably confident statement to accompany its 1992 autumn season sale figures, which were, however, notable for the impact of the poor pound/dollar exchange rate on the company's dollar profitability.
The period August to December saw sales of £312 million ($488 million), representing a 17% rise measured in sterling on the same period last year, but only 4% in dollars.
Overall, sales in 1992 totalled £631 million ($1.054 million) against £583 million ($1.032 million) in the particularly difficult preceding year.
An upturn in the strength of the Impressionist and Modern market, together with strong performances in the fields of jewellery, Old Master pictures and books were noted in the report.
This reasonably bullish statement was, however, accompanied by the announcement that Christie's will be raising its buyer's premium in line with Sotheby's recent increase.
Lots up to £30,000 ($50,000) will now be subject to a 15% buyer's premium.
In Switzerland 15% will be levied on the first SFr70,000 and in Hong Kong 15% on the first HK$400,000.
The premium will not be raised at Christie's South Kensington or in Scotland.
Had the new charges applied last year, two out of every five lots sold worldwide would have been affected.
Sotheby's figures for the same period were close to Christie's but registered a drop in dollar terms on last year's autumn period: worldwide auction sales for 1992 of $1.125 billion (£674 million) with September to December sales at $495.4 million (£318 million).
Comparable figures for the same periods last year were $1.104 billion (£638.7 million) and $512.9 million (£289.5 million) In 1992 the company sold seventy lots for over $1 million, compared to Christie's sixty-nine.
President Michael Ainslie noted ‘a greater level of consignment activity than we have seen for some time.
Nevertheless our outlook for 1993 remains cautious’.
New York
Touched by the sun
Drawings sales produce bizarre results
The often surprising results of the January Old Master drawing sales in New York revealed that it is just as easy to overspend on a drawing as it is on a painting, and conversely, that despite high prices for a few grand names, drawings still remain a little understood and modestly priced field.
Christie's sale totalled $1,119,943 (with premium), 75% sold by lot, 89% by value; Sotheby's totalled $1,572,283 (with premium), 75% by lot and 86% by value.
On the morning of 13 January Sotheby's offered Fragonard's delicate brown wash drawing of ‘The Garden of a Italian Villa’ which, despite being featured in several exhibitions in the 1940s and 1950s, had remained unpublished and largely unknown.
Unfortunately, as the artist's brown wash is notoriously subtle and fugitive, even the slightest fading alters such works.
Sotheby's sheet had seen too much of the sun and was also considered to have a high estimate of $150,000–200,000.
It was, however, knocked down to Florida collector Jeffrey Horovitz for $310,000 (£194,000).
By contrast, Jean-Baptiste Greuze's marvellous black and grey ink and wash and black chalk ‘Departure for the Wet Nurse’ had been brought from the artist by an emissary of Catherine II and had remained in the Hermitage collection until its sale in the 1930s.
In pristine condition, it sold to a phone dealer for $135,000 (£84,400; est. $80–120,000).
Of the Italian drawings, a newly discovered Perino del Vaga pen and wash study of ‘Psyche borne on a litter to her marriage festivities’, a study for a fresco at the Castel Sant' Angelo, Rome, sold for $34,000 (£21,250; est. $20,000–25,000); a rare Guercino oiled charcoal academie of a male nude was sold under estimate for $100,000 (£62,500; est. $120,000–150,000); and the badly-faded Domenico Tiepolo ‘Scene of Execution’ made a remarkable $72,500 (£45,300; est. $40,000–60,000).
At Christie's later that afternoon, the vagaries of taste were even more dramatically illustrated.
An exceedingly rare fourteenth-century silverpoint on tinted paper study of a standing draped figure holding a book, by an anonymous Umbrian artist (est. $15,000–25,000) was bought by Morton Morris against Luca Baroni of Colnaghi's for $40,000 (£25,000), and will probably go to the Getty.
Several good pen Guercinos were featured.
The most dramatic, of a swaggering Mars with drawn sword (lot 33), had suffered from the deterioration of the iron gall ink used by the artist.
The condition was offputting and it sold below estimate for $48,000 (£30,000; est. $60,000–80,000).
Drawings by the Gandolfi, father and son, brought very strong prices, perhaps in anticipation of the forthcoming Gandolfi show for the National Gallery, Canada.
Gaetano's black chalk ‘Pluto and Proserpine with Charon’ sold to Colnaghi for $24,000 (£15,000), and an unusually delicate ‘Three Girls, bust-length’by Mauro in black and red chalk, sold at Sotheby's, London in 1987 for $6,800, now made $36,000 (£22,500).
A similar taste undoubtedly drove the price of Carmontelle's black and red chalk mannikin of ‘Mademoiselle Grimperel with a Viola’(est. $10,000–15,000) to a phone bidder for an absurdly high $55,000 (£34,000).
Her not notably inferior companion, Mlle de la Perrière, by comparison, made a more sensible $8,000 (£5,000; est. $10,000–15,000).
Dealers & Galleries
Agnew's
Gentile da Fabriano sleeper may fetch over £ 1 million
Italian museum in the running
Sold for £110,000 at Phillips in 1991 with an attribution to the workshop of Ugolino di Nerio and an estimate of less than £20,000, Gentile da Fabriano's ‘Crucifixion’ is now on sale at Agnew's.
The attribution was made by Everett Fahy of the Metropolitan and the 64 x 40.5 cm panel has been included in Andrea de Marchi's recent catalogue raisonné of the artist's work.
De Marchi has suggested that the picture forms part of the Valle Romita polyptych, an early work by the artist, now in the Brera, Milan, and probably executed for the Convento dei Minori Osservanti in Val di Sasso during the artist's time in Venice.
The five main panels of the altarpiece entered the Brera in 1811 while four of the five upper panels were reunited with the main structure in 1901.
Pietro Petraroia, soprintendente of the Brera, has arranged for the painting to be temporarily transferred to Milan for a detailed technical and stylistic comparison to be undertaken.
In addition, two figures of saints from the Berenson collection will be brought into the study as Carlo Volpe has also connected them with the Valle Romita altarpiece.
It seems that the Brera are now keen to acquire the picture for the collection and have indicated that they have L 2.5 billion (£1.25 million) available.
Agnew's are not so far in receipt of any offer for it.
London
Bluetts go down after 109 years
Property group backer pulls out
Bluetts, one of London's top Chinese art dealers, has announced its closure and gone into receivership.
The gallery's two directors, Anthony Carter and Dominic Jellinek, closed down the operation after the company's financial backers, property group Chesfield plc, pulled out.
The stock from the Mayfair gallery will be offered at Sotheby's later this year.
In the late 1980s Bluetts agreed to a mangement buyout and capital investment but the firm's inability to meet the cost of the rent on its new premises opposite Claridge's Hotel, and the slackness of trade as perceived by Chesfield, has meant that they are no longer willing to go on supporting the company.
Mr Elliot Bernerd, head of Chesfield commented, ‘We are one of a group of shareholders and have never agreed to make capital available over a period of years.
We are, however, in discussion with the Receiver on the formation of a new group, including us, which will look at the possibility of purchase back and the resurrection of the business’.
A highly respected gallery with a reputation for scholarship and a relatively specialised area of stock, Bluetts have, according to some, failed to adapt to recent changes in taste within the market.
High prices and a determination to stick to plain, some say ‘dull’ pieces, meant that they have missed out on a growing market for decorative items in the lower price range, while the move to new premises essentially changed their image from a shop to a ‘view by appointment’private gallery.
The choice of Mr Bernerd (who recently hit the headlines in connection with the case of ex-Heritage Minister David Mellor and Ms Antonia de Sancha) as the company's financial backer, seems to have been an uneasy choice and has not resulted in a long-term commitment to the gallery at a difficult time for the art market.
On the state of the oriental market in London at present, Roger Keverne, director of the recently-opened New Oriental Gallery in Davies Street commented that, ‘there are people out there who will pay for quality’ while noting that his opening exhibition in December carried a wide range of objects priced from £500 to £55,000.
Crane Gallery supports the Royal Academy
Three of the Royal Academy Schools' 1992 postgraduates will be showing at the Crane Gallery, Sloane Street, and donating part of the proceeds of any sales to their former institution.
Ten per cent of all sales (five per cent from the artists and five per cent from the gallery) will be set aside; in addition all works will be offered at reduced prices, starting at around £50.
Alan Parker and Jonathan Huxley were awarded the Spero Prize at the Schools' summer show, awarded to students who had ‘sought to create an innovative yet marketable style which reflects art in the nineties’.
The judges for the prize were Sir Roger de Grey, Norman Adams, Keeper of the RA Schools, Stewart Steven, editor of the Mail on Sunday, Chris Lycett, head of Radio One music, Andrew Kalman, director of the Crane Gallery and Ian Spero, managing director of Spero Communications.
Also showing with Parker and Huxley will be Henrietta Dubrey, a fellow RA graduate.
The exhibition runs from 12 February to 26 March.
Wildenstein celebrates St Valentine's day
Following their madame de Pompadour exhibition, Wildenstein are now holding ‘The allure of women in eighteenth-century France’ for their traditional St Valentine's day exhibition.
Two particularly charming works are ‘Le jaloux dort’ by Antoine Borel in which a scantily-clad woman slips out of the bed where her husband is sleeping soundly and into the arms of her lover, and ‘Les Baigneuses’by Etienne Leguay, depicting an all-female bathing party spied upon by three men with telescopes.
According to James Faber of Wildenstein, the Valentine's Day exhibitions attract the occasional amorous purchaser but are mainly supported by the gallery's usual patrons.
From 8  February to 19 March.
Madrid
Crucial days for ARCO
The contemporary art fair is short of major international dealers this year
In a late decision, ARCO, Madrid's annual contemporary art fair founded in 1982, is returning to the Crystal Pavilion of the Casa de Campo, the hall where it enjoyed its greatest successes until it relocated to the new Juan Carlos I exhibition park near the airport north of the city a year ago.
In many respects a superb centre, even if it was poorly served by public transport and lacked the atmosphere of the Casa de Campo, the new complex would have been too large and expensive for a leaner fair with a thinner list of participating galleries.
At the peak of its popularity in 1990, ARCO  accommodated nearly 220 dealers but has sold or reserved only 133 booths for this year's fair (12–17 February).
Sadly, those galleries which have withdrawn from ARCO are the leading international businesses which helped to create such an exciting atmosphere and established the fair as one of the most prestigious events in the contemporary art calendar.
Missing names include Anthony d'Offay, Lisson, Mayor, Victoria Miro and Karsten Schubert (London); Lucio Amelio (Naples); Jean Bernier (Athens); Durand-Dessert, Claude Bernard, Galerie de France, Ghislaine Hussenott, Lelong and Yvon Lambert (Paris); Eric Franck and Jan Krugier (Geneva); Konrad Fischer and Neuendorf (Dusseldorf); Leo Castelli, Kent, Sperone Westwater and Steingladstone (New York); Burnett Miller (Los Angeles); and Donald Young (Seattle).
Losing these international galleries has converted ARCO into a local fair with exactly one half of the exhibitors being drawn from Madrid, Barcelona, Valencia, Palma de Mallorca and other Spanish cities.
But even among the Spanish dealers there are several notable defections, the most serious of which are Theo, La Maquina Espanola, Oliva Arauna and Pepe Cobo's gallery of collaboration with Brooke Alexander and John Weber.
Weber was one of ARCO's committee members and his withdrawal suggests a disenchantment with IFEMA, the fair's organiser, which runs beyond financial considerations alone.
A slimmer ARCO with a more heavily weighted local flavour is a pattern reflected in art fairs all over the world.
It has happened in London and Los Angeles, even in Chicago and now in Paris and Cologne.
Only Basel can claim to have maintained a strong international list of exhibitors.
The reasons are, of course, entirely predictable.
New fairs have crowded the calendar at a time in the market cycle when there has been a sharp decline in the volume of business and in the enthusiasm of American collectors, in particular, to travel long distances to look at art which they do not want to buy.
ARCO invented an imaginative solution to that challenge and, for five successive years from 1988, bought results by paying for leading collectors and senior museum officials to visit the fair and a city which was becoming one of the most fashionable capitals in Europe.
That image was enhanced by the perception that there were exciting new developments taking place in the field of Spanish contemporary art with a new generation of painters led by Jose Maria Sicilia and Miguel Barceló.
But now, as an economy measure, those all-expenses-paid tickets have been withdrawn.
Instead, IFEMA have plunged down the desperate road of offering ten complimentary booths to leading galleries, which had not committed to attend the fair, in an attempt to bolster ARCO's international image.
But, as several dealers told The Art Newspaper, waiving exhibition fees is a concession which makes little difference if a gallery cannot make sufficient sales to recoup costs estimated at £10,000–40,000 for taking stock and staff to Madrid.
Here is the crux of the problem which ARCO faces.
Even at the market's peak, Spanish collectors were not buying international art and the elevated expectations of the foreign dealers were usually frustrated.
But there are exceptions and one is Leslie Waddington who has enjoyed a good volume of business at ARCO where he will be exhibiting for the third successive year.
Waddington's formula is a large stock of modern and contemporary art picked to satisfy a broad range of tastes and pockets and at this year's fair he will show works by Lichtenstein, Warhol, Sean Scully, Julian Schnabel, Michael Craig Martin, Barry Flanagan, Fiona Rae and Ian Davenport.
Gimpel Fils, Annely Juda and the New Art Centre are the other galleries from London.
Senior European dealers include Crousel-Robelin Bama, one of only three galleries from Paris, and Bruno Bischofberger, the only Swiss participant, who is Barceló's dealer.
Marlborough, which opened a branch in Madrid last autumn, is the leading gallery among just eight exhibitors from North America.
Although it will show paintings by Larry Rivers, Alex Katz, Red Grooms, Frank Auerbach and RB Kitaj, it is featuring those Spanish and South American artists whom it represents.
They include Antonio Lopez Garcia, Juan Genoves, Lucio Munoz, Luis Gordillo, Claudio Bravo and Fernando Botero.
Juana de Aizpuru, ARCO's founder, Soledad Lorenzo, Gamarra e Garrigues, Fucares and Juana Mordo are the leaders among sixty-four participating Spanish galleries.
ARCO may have lost some of its glamour, but with the Museo Nacional Centro de Arte Reina Sofia performing an important task in educating a local market in international art, it is difficult to believe that the leading galleries will not return in a future year.
London
Artemis records second fall in profits
Prints, drawings and antiquities hold up well
For the second year running the Artemis Group recorded lower profits, down 35% on the previous year.
As announced in the company's report, the net consolidated profits for the year to 30 September 1992 amount to $1,475,927.
The company's most profitable year was 1990 when it made $7,246,667, compared to $4,058,160 in 1989.
The fall in profitability in 1991 was the first since 1982, and this trend is clearly set to continue.
In a sober introduction to the report a number of factors are adduced to explain the drop in earnings: the stagnation of many of the world's economies; ‘the slow and painful process of forging a European union’; the poor results of the two major auction houses; and the closure of a number of commercial galleries.
On a more positive note the report noted the success of the policy announced in the previous year of concentrating on sales at lower unit prices (under $300,000), resulting in a strong showing for antiquities, prints and drawings.
The fourteen works of art illustrated in the report, include the Chatsworth impression of Rembrandt's ‘Christ presented to the People’(ii/viii), a Greek, late Hellenistic silver-gilt bowl, a Roman silver-inlaid bronze of the bull-god Apis, sold to the Virginia Museum, and a Roman portrait bust of Marcus Aurelius, bought by the North Carolina Museum of Art.
The successful sale to the Dallas Museum of Art in 1991 of a group of Greek and Etruscan jewellery by Robert Haber in partnership with Artemis has led the company to invite Mr Haber onto the Board of Directors, indicating their continued commitment to this field.
Two recent rights issues have generated sufficient liquidity to increase the value in the art stock by 13%.
While acknowledging that the ‘realisable value of works of art involves subjective judgement’ the current book value of the stock is given at $35,593,953 (compared to $13,257,970 in 1988).
The Artemis group is formed from Artemis SA which includes three subsidiary companies: Arhold Inc.; David Carritt Ltd; and Modart NV.
It also engages with joint ventures with two other dealers who are directors in the firm, Eugene Victor Thaw (the New York paintings and drawings dealer) and the Hon. Michael Tollemache (the London Old Master paintings dealer).
New York
Lucian Freud joins Acquavella
Exclusive, world-wide deal
Six months ago, Lucian Freud surprised the art market by parting company from James Kirkman, his agent for twenty years.
Following interest expressed by several London galleries which, according to market sources, will have included Lefevre, Thomas Gibson and Marlborough Fine Art, where Freud had showed his work until 1972, the senior British figure painter reached an agreement with New York dealer, Bill Acquavella, shortly before Christmas.
Although no details of the agreement have been released, Acquavella told The Art Newspaper that it was an exclusive, world-wide deal covering all of the artist's oil paintings.
He has purchased Freud's production from the last eighteen months, perhaps a dozen canvases, including several pictures of considerable scale, the subjects of which are nude female figures and portraits of performance artist, Leigh Bowery.
They will be unveiled in an exhibition which opens at London's Whitechapel Art Gallery in the autumn (10 September-21 November) and will be seen at the Metropolitan Museum, New York, before the end of this year (13 December-13 March 1994).
Acquavella's agreement does not cover Freud's drawings, nor his etchings which will be published by Matthew Marks in New York.
In recent years, Freud has become, through Kirkman's astute management, one of the most fashionable and expensive contemporary artists.
Charles Saatchi is reported to have paid $2 million for a large standing male nude portrait, ‘Two Men in the Studio’(1987–89), and a decent domestic scale picture might have cost £500,000 at the peak of the market.
Ironically, those high prices resulted in the unexpected rift with Kirkman who had paid cash on delivery before placing the new work among a waiting list of eager clients.
With the market's retrenchment at the end of 1990, that list evaporated, but Freud was not willing to renegotiate terms and consign rather than sell his pictures to his agent.
Kirkman remains, however, a major force in the market, the owner of a large collection of pictures from all periods of Freud's career, including masterpieces such as‘Large Interior W11 (After Watteau)’(1981–83) and ‘The painter's mother’(1982–84), as well as a portfolio of his etchings.
Acquavella offers a relationship which is, in some respects, even more prestigious than Kirkman.
His gallery is a grand townhouse on East 79th Street where he trades modern masters, including art from the estate of Pierre Matisse, which he purchased in partnership with Sotheby's, and blue-chip post-war American and European paintings by Jackson Pollock, Rothko, de Kooning and Francis Bacon.
Freud is the first, and only, contemporary artist whom he has represented.
Paris modern art dealers' organisation in cash crisis
Michel Dauberville, Chairman of Paris's Comite des galeries d'art, a body which represents 160 modern and contemporary art dealers, has resigned along with vice chairman Daniel Gervis and treasurer Jean-Pierre Benezit because the art market crisis has left the organisation seriously short of money.
The Comite, which now has no full time employees, is leaving its offices in rue Quentin-Bauchart near the Champs Elysees for fifth-floor premises loaned free of charge by Galerie Bernheim Jeune, of which Dauberville is a director, at 83 faubourg Saint Honoré.
According to Dauberville, members' subscriptions dropped by over 50% in 1992, leaving the Comite with a budget of FFr250,000 as compared to FFr1.3 million several years ago.
Exports handled by the galleries in the Comite dropped by 30% last year and business in 1992 was more than 50% down by comparison with 1988–89.
An increase in subscriptions and a merger with the Syndicat des Antiquaires of antique dealers are both being considered.
Culture Minister Jack Lang, meanwhile, is thinking of increasing Government spending on contemporary art by FFr18 million to help galleries.
President Mitterrand's adviser on culture, Bernard Latarjet, who is also studying measures, may propose a system of loans to ease financial strain between dealers and their banks.
Peter Tillou expands into former Leggatt premises
This month the Peter Tillou gallery (which opened at 39 Duke Street in 1989 and exhibited at the Grosvenor House Fair in 1992) inaugurates an additional gallery in the former premises of Leggatt Bros. (17 Duke Street).
The new premises will be open by appointment and will allow the gallery to display its Old Master and nineteenth-century paintings to their full advantage, according to director Steven Rich.
Their 39 Duke Street premises will continue to feature works of art, arms and armour, American art and Old Master paintings.
The Armory Art Show opens this month
The Art Dealers Association of America holds its fifth annual show, The Art Show, at the Armory from 25 February to 1 March.
This year sixty-four dealers (the same number as last year) including many of the top names in pictures and works on paper will be exhibiting, showing a range of works from Old Masters to contemporary.
Exhibitors include: Acquavella Galleries; Agnew's; John Berggruen Gallery; Leo Castelli; André Emmerich; Richard Feigen; Nancy Hoffman; Galerie Lelong; Barbara Mathes; Jason McCoy; Pace Gallery; Salander-O'Reilly Galleries; and David Tunick.
Last year sales showed some recovery after a difficult 1991 fair, while attendance figures were 11,000.
It was estimated that about 70–80% of  participators did ‘some business’, with top sales of $850,000 for ‘The Illustrious Dream Maker’ by Max Ernst sold by Jeffrey Loria, and $800,000 for a 1935 Rufina Tamayo ‘Still Life with Watermelons’sold by Mary-Anne Martin to a Mexican collector.
Hotspur and Jeremy light up
Two of London's leading furniture and antique dealers, Hotspur Ltd and Jeremy Ltd, are holding a joint exhibition entitled ‘Antique Lighting’ from 7 to 21 February with an open day on Sunday 7 February from 11 to 5.
A wide variety of eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century lighting will be on show, including hall lanterns, wall lights, candelabra and candlesticks in glass, bronze, ormolu and crystal.
Hotspur and Jeremy, both situated in Lowndes Street, SW1, are planning to hold  further joint exhibitions, timed to coincide with the major London furniture sales.
Eye-witness
‘So I returned to Sotheby, Wilkinson and Hodge, whom I had joined in 1911…‘
F.L. Wilder celebrated his one hundredth birthday last month and remembers eighty years of the art trade
I was born on 2 January 1893, the third son of Frederick Louis Wilder, F.C.S., M.I.M.M., who, at the time, was an assayer in the City.
During World War I, I was in the army, but contracted rheumatic fever, which had a very crippling effect on my legs.
This was at the time the government introduced conscription, when the travelling medical boards had instructions to discharge unfit men, to take the place of those called up.
So I returned to Sotheby, Wilkinson & Hodge, whom I had joined in 1911, and took the place of Mr Lambert, the chief sales clerk.
I even auctioned sales, but my ambition was to become an expert and, on the return of Mr Lambert after the war, I was befriended by Herbert Breun, who came in from his shop in Soho to catalogue the prints.
I acted as his assistant and learned that he was really the comte de l'Hopital, a descendant of the duc de Vitré, a refugee from the French Revolution, still occupying the shop opened by his ancestor when Soho was a fashionable and literary centre.
In 1911 Mr Tom Hodge still presided over the firm bearing his name: a handsome, white-haired gentleman of fifty and the most conservative imaginable.
Circumstances had obliged him to sell out to three younger partners, but until they came he never had a telephone or typewriter.
When the first girl was engaged their first encounter was in a narrow passage.
Mr Tom stood in front of her, pulled out his pincenez on the spring in his lapel, eyed her from her feet upwards, turning away without a word and marching, practically, straight out of the building.
One of his new partners was Mr Barlow, M.P., for whom I first worked.
He was an ex-barrister, a very live wire, who could justly claim to be the founder of the present vastly expanded business.
Prior to his arrival Sotheby's (still specialising heavily in books at this date) had an unwritten agreement with Christie's that they sent them any pictures brought to their offices and in return Christie's sent them any books they received for sale.
Mr (later Sir) Montague Barlow was astonished to hear Tom Hodge say that, of course, a fine Frans Hals must be sent to Christie's: that was the end of the unwritten agreement.
Later, in 1916, it was he who supervised the move to 34 New Bond Street, the former Dore Gallery, with a wine merchant below.
The second of the new partners engaged in 1909 was Geoffrey Hobson, a brilliant scholar, who had gone deaf after passing exams both to the Bar and the Foreign Office.
The third of the new partners was Felix Warre, a son of the Head Master of Eton.
He won the Military Cross and rose to Major in the first world war.
When Addison, one of the porters, was called up and posted to Flanders, he was digging a trench beside the road.
Hearing the tramp of marching feet, he looked up to see Captain Warre riding at the head of his company.
Climbing out of the trench he jumped about and waved his arms, shouting ‘aye, aye, sir!’
To his disappointment his old guv'nor took no notice at all, but, when the war was over, he was seen and overheard to draw Addison aside in the saleroom, saying: ‘By the way, Addison, when you are in the army and you see an officer approaching on his horse, the correct thing is to stand to attention and salute, not jump about shouting ‘aye, aye, sir!’
No more was said.
In the meantime, my evenings were spent at art and etching classes and Saturday afternoons in the Print Room at the British Museum, in the days of Campbell Dodgson, Professor Hind and Laurence Binyon.
Running concurrently with my studies was the publication of Print Prices Current, started in 1918 with Edward de Courville, a half-brother of the famous revue producer Albert de Courville.
For some years we prospered, until the slump of 1930, followed by another setback in 1933, when the Nazis first appeared, and the final blow when the World War II commenced.
An earlier attempt at a Picture Prices Current had already folded some years before.
As in World War I, Sotheby's managed to survive; business even improving toward the end.
My duties included fire-watching the premises once a week.
The heads of the Valuation Department guaranteed me enough work to justify my continued employment, one of my many visits taking me to the Channel Islands during the ‘phoney war’, while the enemy were occupied with Russia.
Afterwards I was asked to write my first book, How to Identify Old Prints, intended to be a history and explanation of the various printing processes and a replacement for the Print Collector's Handbook.
Included in it were a description and illustrations of the old and deceptive copies of Dürer, Rembrandt and some others, very necessary knowledge to a student, and I can only think these are the cause of its rise in value since going out of print.
My next effort was a ‘coffee table’ book on English Sporting Prints, also out of print, and, in my hundredth year I am trying to complete a Catalogue of English Sporting Prints c.1750–1880, promised twenty years ago.
I have been making notes on these for more than seventy years in the interest of my work as a cataloguer and expert at the Print Department.
The meteoric rise in the popularity of Modern Art left my position at Sotheby's much undermined.
I could never hope to keep pace with or understand it.
I found myself superseded by much younger men, and so resigned and was duly pensioned off.
It has been said that old age comes as a surprise: I was then eighty but had yet to realise it.
My next move was to persuade Miss Hildegard Fritz-Denneville to be finally independent and join her in partnership as an art dealer, starting a new career.
We opened a small gallery overlooking the roof tops of Sotheby's in 1976.
Advising and buying on commission for major private collectors and museums, we followed our motto: small profits, quick returns, dealing mainly in fine paintings, prints and drawings and specialising in German Art.
The climax of our dealing activities, finally acknowledging our efforts to bring to the fore German art and culture in this country, was the acquisition of our unusual vista of the ‘Friedrichsgracht in Berlin’ by Eduard von Gärtner, only the second painting after Caspar David Friedrich's ‘Winter Landscape with Church’by a German nineteenth-century artist to grace the walls of the National Gallery.
Last summer we initiated the loan exhibition at the Fitzwilliam Museum in Cambridge of the finest private German collection of Romantic and Nazarene Drawings which we advised and helped build up over the years, having bought for the collection on commission here at the London auctions major drawings like Koch's ‘The Schmadribachfall’, and Overbeck's important preparatory study for his fresco at the Villa Massimo in Rome.
F. L. Wilder
Mr Wilder, who for the last seventy years has been working on an exhaustive catalogue of English sporting prints 1750–1880.
His name is particularly associated with the art of Constable and he is responsible for a number of outstanding purchases and discoveries of that artist's work.
In recent years he has been closely associated with Hildegard Fritz-Denneville Fine Arts Ltd in Bond Street where his knowledge and connoisseurship are greatly valued and he is still to be found on weekdays in the gallery's offices.
We here reproduce passages from Mr Wilder's own recollections 
Paris
Jack Lang, ‘La Celestine’ and ‘Les Noces de Pierette’
Controversy over two Picassos from the Frederick Roos estate continues in the French Cour de Cassation
A six-year-old row between two Paris dealers over a FFr70 million profit made from the sale of Picasso's 1903 masterpiece ‘La Celestine’ has gone to the highest legal resort after the appeal court in France, the Cour de Cassation, and looks set to last at least another twelve months.
The battle, between Diana de Moutis of Art Expertise and Didier Imbert of Didier Fine Art (organiser of the recent exhibition of Botero sculptures on the Champs-Elysees) has already been through a first hearing which was won by de Moutis, and an appeal, won last November by Imbert.
The picture of a one-eyed bordello Madam, meanwhile, has been prize exhibit in the Blue Period room of Paris's Musée Picasso ever since its acquisition in 1989.
Controversy erupted at the time over alleged juggling with export restrictions by Culture Minister Jack Lang and allegations were made about collusion between private art dealing and the State.
Diana de Moutis, entrusted with the sale of ‘La Celestine’ by its owner Georges Pellequer, contacted Didier Imbert in 1986 in the hope he could help her obtain an export licence.
The two dealers signed two contracts formalising their agreement and agreeing to split profits above Pellequer's asking price of FFr 28.5 million.
Just before expiry of the agreement in March 1987 Paris dealer Didier Imbert negotiated a promise of sale direct with Georges Pellequer for FFr23 million and paid Diana de Moutis FFr 730,000 in fees.
‘La Celestine’ was resold in November 1989 to Swedish collector Fredrick Roos for FFr100 million, prompting Diana de Moutis to claim her share.
A Paris court ordered Didier Imbert's hotel particulier and belongings to be seized in April 1990 — he was ordered to pay Art Expertise FFr1.9 million the following December.
Didier Imbert won an appeal last November, and recuperated the money from Diana de Moutis.
Roos's donation of ‘La Celestine’ to the French State and the undertaking he received afterwards from Culture Minister Jack Lang that another rare Picasso he owned, ‘Les Noces de Pierrette’, would be allowed to leave the country, thus greatly increasing its value, is an aspect of the Celestine affair which has not featured in the court case.
‘Les Noces de Pierrette’, which Roos reportedly bought in 1987 for FFr25 million, was auctioned in Paris in November 1989, shortly after the Celestine deal, for FFr300 million to Japanese businessman Tomonori Tsurumaki.
Roos has since died and Tsurumaki has gone out of business.
Diana de Moutis says she still wants to know why Roos obtained an export licence, which normally takes a year, within two months and whether Didier Imbert had a buyer ready when he bought ‘La Celestine’.
Didier Imbert on the other hand says he is confident of winning the affair in cassation and that he owes Diana de Moutis nothing.
London
Proof of success: the Original Print Fair
An outstanding loan to complement the dealers
The successful and popular London Original Print Fair runs from 25 to 28 February and will be held in the left-hand principal rooms of the Royal Academy.
Twenty-eight dealers will be taking part including a number of influential names who have not previously attended.
This year sees a strong European attendance, with André Candillier from Paris showing for the first time while in the field of Old Masters.
Nick Stogdon is making a first appearance, as is Bob Light from Santa Barbara.
Not showing this year are Agnew's and the Redfern, both of whose galleries are in extremely close proximity to the Royal Academy.
Making a return will be Charles Booth-Clibborn's Paragon Press which publishes limited edition livres d'artiste.
As last year, the fair is sponsored by Nordstern Art Insurance Ltd.
For the first time the fair will include a loan exhibition, drawing on the outstanding print collection donated to Plymouth City Art Gallery in the nineteenth-century.
The collection includes eight out of nine of Altdorfer's landscape engravings (a holding comparable only with the Albertina), as well as a rare impression of the Royal Academy Rooms by Earlom after Zoffany with contemporary hand colouring.
The Old Master section will be particularly strong this year.
Tying in with the loan exhibition, Nick Stogdon will be showing sixteenth-century German prints by Altdorfer, Lautensack and Hirschvogel, among others.
Helmut Rumbler has a private German collection of Rembrandt prints, while Hill-Stone are bringing a ‘superb’ impression of Dürer's ‘Nativity’(Meder 2b), which they describe as one of the finest on the market for many years.
Concentrating on the modern and contemporary prints: Lumley Cazalet will be showing prints by Frink, Marini, Picasso (from the ‘156’ series), and works by contemporary printmakers; Paul McCarron's stand includes an impression of Whistler's ‘Weary’at $20,000; Lott and Gerrish are showing 200 British woodcuts as well as wood-engravings by Gibbings and Edward Calvert; Marlborough Graphics have Paula Rego's latest ‘Peter Pan’suite, Bill Jacklin's ‘Coney Island Suite’and new work by Ken Kiff; Jeffrey Kaplow of Proofs Ltd is showing ‘Luce Myres de Face’by Lautrec (W.121), a rare proof printed in sanguine, priced at £20,000, together with works by Redon, Munch and others; Waddington Graphics are devoting most of their space to their own publications — Dine, Motherwell, Hamilton, Blake and Hodgkin — but will have some prints by Picasso and Goya; Pratt Contemporary Art will again be showing works by Ana Maria Pacheco whose prints have attracted much attention at past fairs, together with new etchings and monotypes by Susan Adams, Denise Walker and Julian Grater.
Dutch Minister restricts number of galleries receiving loans for art
The Dutch Minister for the Department of Culture, Mrs D'Ancona, has reduced the number of galleries allowed to participate in the art rent-subsidy scheme from 180 to 62.
This scheme allowed individuals to arrange for an interest-free loan of up to DFl.12,500 (£4,460; $7,140) to finance the purchase of a work of art.
The interest due was paid by the Dutch government who had reserved an annual budget of DFl.3 million to cover the costs of the project.
The idea proved such a success that the Government ran up a considerable deficit on the scheme.
Apart from rumours of fraudulent practices and the dubious quality of the works involved, the scheme's success caused its own downfall.
The Dutch government has now asked the Arts Council to allocate funds and the 300 or so galleries are now grouped into two categories.
The first category contains sixty-two galleries who show avant-garde art at some commercial risk to themselves who are still allowed to make unrestricted use of the scheme.
The second category, to which the rest of the original 180 belong, can only apply for loans for their clients if the budget still allows it.
Both categories can make use of a new scheme whereby the gallery-holder and the purchaser can share the interest on a loan up to a maximum of DFl.50,000 (£17,850; $28,570) between them.
Needless to say a considerable number of indignant gallery owners have protested, not only because they have been demoted, but because the list which contains the details about which gallery is in which category has been widely circulated.
Paris drawings and multiples fairs
Two major fairs take place in Paris at the Grand Palais from 3 to 8 March.
The third edition of the Salon du Dessin has moved location from the Hotel George V and will include around thirty dealers showing drawings from the sixteenth century to the present.
Neatly complementing the drawings event is the seventh Fiac Saga (Salon des Arts Graphiques Actuels).
Limited editions, not just of prints, but of sculptures, objects and furniture are covered.
Turin
New Art and Antiques Fair on the map
Emphasis on vetting in Fiat factory masterpiece
The rich North Italian industrial city of Turin has decided to put itself on the international map with a biennial art and antiques fair to be held at the Lingotto, the spectacular former Fiat car factory, from 27 February to 7 March.
Organised by Lingotto Fiere, this exhibition has invested a great deal of its hopes in a rigorous vetting system which is intended to bring the level of buyer reassurance up to that, for example, of the Grosvenor House Fair.
A committee of independent experts from inside and outside Italy, chaired by the scholar Federico Zeri, has carefully vetted the objects submitted: Old Master paintings, sculpture, maiolica, furniture, silver, tapestries, carpets and oriental works of art are among the categories included.
And while the recession has deterred all but a handful of non-Italian dealers from participating this year, the organisers are hoping that by aiming high in all senses, the event will rapidly establish itself as a rival to the Florence fair.
The Old Masters section opens chronologically with a panel by an anonymous Florentine painter depicting the Annunciation (exhibited by Antichi Maestri Pittori).
It has recently been confirmed as being by the artist now generally known as the Master of the Spinola Annunciation, a close collaborator of Giotto.
The high Renaissance is exemplified by a Giovanni Santi's ‘Ecce homo’(Altomani), which shows the combined influence of the Flemish School, Piero della Francesca and Venetian painting.
The early sixteenth century is well represented by Northern Italian painters: a ‘Penitent St Jerome’ by Andrea Previtali; the ‘Coronation of Darius’by the Veronese Nicolo Giolfino; a ‘Madonna and Child with St Catherine’by Ortolano (all exhibited by Voena), and a tenebrous ‘St Jerome’by Bernardino Campi (Benappi).
For many of these artists, acquaintance with Flemish painting was a cardinal experience, a fact well illustrated by a 1516 illuminated codex by Guillaume de Bracque (Librairie Thomas-Scheler).
Works by followers of Caravaggio lead in to the seventeenth-century section: a ‘Salome’ by Cecco del Caravaggio (Scardeoni); ‘Christ among the Elders’by Louis Finson (Governale), and an ‘Archimedes’by Dirk Van Baburen (Visconteum).
Then, after the dense brush strokes of the Ligurian painters Assereto (‘Figure of a Bishop’ on show by Scardeoni) and Orazio De Ferrari (‘Focion refuses the gifts of Alexander’on show by Altomani), comes the high theatrical style of ‘The pool of Bethesda’by Gregorio De Ferrari (Bencini).
Other Schools are represented by a ‘Death of Lucretia’ by Carlo Francesco Nuvolone (Governale), two previously unknown paintings of saints signed by Palma il Giovane (Brisigotti), a well-known ‘Allegory of Faith’signed by Bernardino Mei and dated 1652 (Benappi), and an ‘Adoration of the Shepherds’by Luca Giordano (Newhouse).
Hayez's ‘Pietro Rossi’, considered to be a key work in Romantic painting (Bottega di San Luca) sets the tone for the nineteenth-century section.
Works range from Canella's ‘Sailing boats in harbour’ of 1835 (Il Prisma) to paintings influenced by international developments: ‘Lady in Drawing-room with Parrot’by De Nittis (Bottega d'arte) and ‘Girl with Cat’by Boldini (Silbernagl).
So far as sculpture is concerned, the very few fourteenth-century works are followed by a polychrome terracotta ‘Madonna and Child’ by Nanni di Bartolo (Corsini), while the Pavian sculptor Baldino di Surso gives a sense of volume and solidity to his essentially late Gothic carving of ‘Saint James’(Pozzallo).
Late fifteenth-century works include two wooden altars of uncertain origin.
One, featuring a dramatic ‘Lamentation of Christ’(Gallo), could be Ferrarese, while the other, a triptych, is in the Lombard style (Pozzallo).
Other fine examples of Central Italian terracotta include several ‘Baskets with flowers, fruit and insects’ by Giovanni della Robbia (Altomani) and a ‘Saint Catherine of Siena’by Lorenzo di Mariano, known as il Marrina (Il Cartiglio).
To the Napoleonic era belong a ‘Portrait of General Suvarov’ carved in wood by Bonzanigo and a terracotta maquette by Canova for the portrait of Elisa Baciocchi Bonaparte in the guise of ‘The Muse Polymnia’, now in Vienna (both exhibited by Antichi Maestri Pittori).
Of more recent origin is a ‘Via Crucis’ decorating a vase by Leonardo Bistolfi (Liberty & Deco).
The furniture section includes a few fifteenth-century pieces, including a small intarsia chair (Botticelli), and a painted cassone bearing the arms of the Strozzi-Sacrati family (Altomani).
The eighteenth-century pieces enable one to compare the fabled high quality of French cabinet-making with the sometimes creditable products of Italian craftsmanship.
The former include a small Mondon chest of drawers, a chest by P. Dafriche (both exhibited by Copellotti) and a piece by E. Lavasseur reusing Japanese lacquer panels of the early eighteenth century (Steinitz).
A series of charity fund-raising parties under the patronage of Marella Agnelli are taking place in the fair around the opening date and will guarantee a glitzy clientele.
A non-selling exhibition, ‘Roma, Torino, Parigi, 1770–1830’ is taking place simultaneously in the Lingotto, organised by a prominent art historian from the University of Turin, Giovanni Romano.
It presents a selection of pieces from the period when Turin was particularly open to exchanges with other European capitals: sculptures by Ignazio and Filippo Collino, intagli by Bonzanigo, water-colours by Bagetti and oils by Giuseppe Mazzola illustrate the high standards achieved by local artists during the late eighteenth century and the Restoration period as new developments in Rome and Paris were taken to heart.
Initiative by new gallery to sell contemporary Dutch art abroad
The sculptor Rob Blote has set up a gallery in his home in Wassenaar with the specific purpose of selling works of art which the Dutch government had purchased through the BKR Scheme.
The scheme was created just after the war to help artists bridge a financially insecure period.
During the last phase of the scheme's existence, when storage problems became increasingly pressing and the scheme's abolition imminent, artists were encouraged to keep at home the works of art they had officially sold to the government.
After publication of an article in the New York Times last summer about the ‘art mountain’ in Holland elicited numerous inquiries, Blote concluded there was a considerable market for these works of art.
He has dismissed warnings from the Office of Fine Arts that it is forbidden to deal in State property, quoting the former assistant secretary of state L. de Graaff, who in 1984 stated that the artists were free to do with these works as they wished.
Blote himself made use of the BKR scheme for twenty-five years; during the last phase of the scheme's existence he sold works to the value of DFl.150,000 to the government, most of which he kept at home.
‘This means that the state spent something in the region of DFl.100 million on the roughly 2000 artists covered by the scheme between 1984 and 1987, and most of these works are still with the artists’ estimates Blote.
Travellers in South-east Asia at Yu-Chee Chong
An exhibition featuring views executed by European and Asian travellers and artists active in South-east Asia from the 1750s to the 1930s will be held at Yu-Chee Chong Fine Art (by appointment, 18 Kensington Court Place, London W8, tel. 071 938 5497) from 8 to13 February.
Yu-Chee Chong first held a sell-out exhibition of South-east Asia views in 1987 and has since painstakingly searched for comparable material, which, unlike the more readily accessible views of China, Hong Kong or India, are difficult to find.
Among the more intriguing works is a rare watercolour by Jose Honorato Lozano executed around 1860 in his characteristic style combining figures and letters.
The work was probably commissioned by the Forbes family, prominent American merchants active in China during the nineteenth century.
Three watercolours depicting Kora-kora from Gebe, North Moluccas by Alphonse Pellion, a warrior from Gebe by Jaques, and a cuscus by A. Prevost were executed for the Louise de Saulces de Freycinet 1817 voyage of discovery and were subsequently published as illustrations to the official account Voyage autour du monde entrepris par ordre du Roi execute sur les corvettes de l'Uranie et la Physicienne (Paris, 1824–44).
Another rare work of note, an oil on linen view of Malacca (circa 1880), was executed by an anonymous Chinese artist working in the tradition of Chinese port views intended for export to the West.
The exhibition also includes a charming watercolour and gouache depiction of a bamboo rat (which is native to Malaysia, Thailand) executed by another anonymous Chinese artist around 1807.
Illustrated catalogue available.
Asprey buy into Mallett
The London jewellers and silversmith Asprey have acquired a 6.8% stake (950,000 ordinary shares) in the prestigious London antique firm Mallett, purchased from investment bank Robert Fleming on 21 December 1992.
Asprey have said that they view the purchase as an investment; in the short term their purchase had a beneficial effect on Mallett's shares which leaped from 45p to 74p on 21–22 December.
Hit by the effects of world recession, turnover in 1991 was 42% down on the previous year from £14.59 million to £8.3 million while interim figures were down 39% from £4.9 million in June ‘91 to £3 million in June ‘92, resulting in a loss per share of 3.51p.
The current breakdown of Mallett's shareholders is: Peter Maitland, Bond Street's managing director, 7.25%; David Nickerson, director, 6.55%; Lanto Synge, director, 3.25%, others in-house 1.83%; House of Fraser Holdings, 29.93%; Framlington Group 7.39%; Asprey Plc, 6.88%; T.R. Smaller Companies Investment Trust Plc, 4.34%; Lloyds Investment Managers Ltd 3.01%.
The El Fayed (House of Fraser) stake was purchased from the Sears group in February 1989 for $5.37 million.
While it is now thought that they are interested in offloading part or all of this holding, it seems that they are not prepared to sell for less than the purchasing price of £1.20.
In the meantime, Mallett have cut costs and are looking to turnover of £1.2 million per month to haul themselves back towards profitability.
The Furniture History Society looks for labels
In 1986 the FHS published its Dictionary of English Furniture Makers 1660–1840, an important book which was followed by a comprehensive index volume.
The Society now wishes to produce another companion volume in the form of illustrations of labelled and name-stamped London furniture.
It will be drawing on sale catalogues, periodicals and modern books on English furniture.
In addition the editors very much hope to enlist the support of antique dealers and others who may have photographic files recording items of labelled furniture.
Any photographs lent to the Society will be returned in due course.
Material may be sent to either editor: Dr Geoffrey Beard, Earlsmere, Weston Lane, Bath, Avon BA1 4AA, or Mr Christopher Gilbert, Temple Newsam House, Leeds LS15 OAE.
BADA fair on, Silver and Jewellery fair off
This year's British Antique Dealers’ Fair will be held at the Duke of York's Headquarters on the King's Road from 5 to 11 May.
Only BADA members are allowed to exhibit, but prices are pitched at the ‘affordable’ range.
Exhibitors this year will include: Summers Davis and Son, Oxfordshire; Norman Adams, Knightbridge; William Tillman, St James's; John A. Pearson, Berkshire; Clifford Wright, Fulham Road; W.R. Harvey, Old Bond Street; Alistair Sampson, Brompton Road; Christopher Clark, Stow-on-the-Wold; Witney Antiques, Witney; J.H. Bourdon-Smith, Duke Street; Rafael Valls, Duke Street.
In the light of the extremely poor showing at the Park Lane Hotel Silver and Jewellery Fair over the last two years, the event will not take place this February.
Around the galleries
LONDON
Minimal and Conceptual art at large 
Lisson's historical show unites major international artists
Designed to complement ‘Gravity and Grace: the changing condition of sculpture 1965–1975’ which opened at the Hayward Gallery last month (The Art Newspaper, p.24, Jan 1993, p. 5), Lisson has mounted a survey of the art of the first generation of minimal and conceptual artists.
Its title is ‘Out of Sight Out of Mind’(14 February-20 March), and director Nicholas Logsdail has selected fifty artists to illustrate his theme.
They include Robert Ryman, Donald Judd, Sol LeWitt, Robert Mangold, Dan Graham, Lawrence Weiner (who has created a new work for Dean Clough, Halifax), John Baldessari, Art and Language, Richard Long, Barry Flanagan, Mario Merz, Gerhard Richter and On Kawara, as well as other artists who enjoyed some popularity and recognition twenty-five years ago but whose careers have been ignored in recent times.
It will be interesting to see whether current opinion confirms that historical evaluation or throws up masters due for a fuller reassessment.
Relevant, too, to the theme of the Hayward Gallery's survey, although they are not included in it, are exhibitions of recent or new work by Hamish Fulton at Annely Juda (to 6 March) and by Gilbert and George at the Tate Gallery's Liverpool branch (to 14 March).
There are two important historical installations by Mario Merz at Anthony d'Offay (4 February-6 March).
They are ‘Accelarazione’(1972) which incorporates an East German MZ motorcycle with waterbuck horns and a blue neon tube, and ‘Pres de la Table’(1980), an arrangement of tables with branches and other attachments.
D'Offay is also showing twenty-two recent charcoal drawings, including a new railway subject, by leading British figure painter Leon Kossoff (4 February-6 March), whose previous exhibition of oil paintings at the gallery in 1988 was such a powerful demonstration of his talents.
Kossoff prefers to segregate his drawings from his paintings in his exhibitions.
In and near Cork Street, Victoria Miro is showing eleven prints by Robert Ryman (16 February-26 March) drawn from two untitled portfolios published in 1976 and 1991.
Best studied as loose sheets in a box wearing a pair of white gloves rather than as framed and glazed images, they explore different shades of white and frequently incorporate the artist's name.
Her exhibition coincides, of course, with the Tate Gallery's survey of Ryman's paintings.
RAAB shows etchings and silkscreen prints by Rainer Fetting (to 27 February).
William Jackson is exhibiting new abstract paintings created in Portugal and Spain by John Beard (9–27 February).
Waddington is drawing upon its gallery stock (to 27 February) in an extension of last month's exhibition and is featuring modern masters including Picasso, Miró, Dubuffet and Ivon Hitchens whose centenary exhibition opens at Bernard Jacobson at the end of this month (23 February-1 April).
In the last two years, Waddington Graphics have published, in collaboration with Pace in New York, some twenty new graphic works by Jim Dine.
They include new woodcuts on the theme of Venus, accompanied in one image by Neptune, and etchings of the Four Continents, the title of this exhibition (3 February-14 March).
In Soho, Karsten Schubert's exhibition of Keith Coventry's ten Suprematist paintings, which were previewed at the Cologne Art Fair and superimpose the colours of the leading racist football clubs as identified in a Fascist magazine over a recreation of Malevich's white Suprematist painting, ends shortly (to 6 February), and is followed by a new series of sculptures designed by Michael Landy (10 February-6 March).
They are the ‘Warning Signs’, each of which reinterprets a familiar traffic sign or public notice to make a political or economic point.
On the gallery's upper floor, the exhibition of drawings and small sculptures by Meg Cranston, the Californian artist who will be participating in the Aperto section of the Venice Biennale, continues (to 6 March), and Schubert is screening a compilation of video works created by Californian artists in his basement (programme details from the gallery).
There are works on paper by Tim Head at the Frith Street Gallery (to 27 February).
In Millbank, RAAB is showing works on paper and prints by Ken Currie (who has created seven new heads in oil, charcoal and beeswax), Keith McIntyre, Ian Hughes and Richard Gilbert (to 27 February), while Long and Ryle exhibit ‘Dreams’, twelve small but intense gouaches by Argentinian painter, Ricardo Cinalli.
They are displayed with a large fresco and the exhibition coincides with a survey of Cinalli's recent work, emphasising his large pastel drawings on tissue paper, which is taking place at the Accademia Italiana (16 February-14 March) and will then be shown in Argentina, Spain, Sweden and Russia.
In London's East End, Purdy Hicks, renamed to reflect the appointment of Rebecca Hicks as director, is exhibiting ten new paintings and a portfolio of ten etchings, published in collaboration with the Print Centre, by Arturo di Stefano (5 February-6 March).
Recently preoccupied with historical portraiture and a monochrome palette, the new subjects include classical mythology and pictures of the interior of the artist's studio executed in a brighter range of colours.
Since di Stefano comes from Liverpool, it is appropriate that there should be a survey of his art, thirty-four paintings, seven large woodcuts and other graphic works, spanning the last ten years and taking place at the Walker Art Gallery (29 January-14 March), which has been curated by Alex Kidson.
At Bipasha Ghosh, there are new abstract paintings by Michael Stubbs (to 20 February, for appointment call 071–231–6598), who exhibited his small canvases created with cake icing syringes at Nicola Jacobs in 1991.
His new pictures, presented as diptychs, use paint squeezed from tubes in grids which are based upon plaid, tartan and check cloth designs.
The following exhibitions were mentioned in last month's column and should be noted: interpretations of ‘The Lake of Innisfree’ by
William Tillyer, Maggi Hambling, Maurice Cockrill and Wendy Connolly at Bernard Jacobson (to 20 February), large sculptures by Phillip King and William Tucker at MAAK (to 9 February) and new sand paintings by Michael Young at Turske-Hue-Williams (to 13 March), the gallery's final exhibition at its space in Old Bond Street before Michael Hue-Williams reverts to being a private dealer.
New York
What the wives did
Significant other halves at Kraushaar
Significant other: no wonder the phrase has such a popular current usage, combining as it does two all-time favourites of late philosophical jargon — the semiotic sign and the mysterious alien.
In reality, of course, it stands for something a whole lot less fierce-sounding — simply one's partner in life.
But the Kraushaar Gallery couldn't very well in our day of political correctness call its show ‘Artists’ Wives Who Were Also Artists’, so it neatly solved the problem by trotting out ‘Significant Others’.
In the show — on until the 13th — you can discover works, rarely seen, by Rebecca James (Mrs Paul Strand), Gwendolyn Knight (Mrs Jacob Lawrence), Katherine Schmidt (Mrs William Glackens), Helen Farr (Mrs John Sloan), Marjorie Organ (Mrs Robert Henri), Esphyr Slobodkina (Mrs Ilya Bolotowsky), Sally Michel (Mrs Milton Avery), Bernarda Bryson (Mrs Ben Shahn) and Dorothy Dehner (Mrs David Smith)— among ten Others.
Pastels, watercolours and charcoals by Arthur Dove — whose significant other was the painter Helen Torr (she's in the Kraushaar show, by the way)— are on view right now at Terry Dintenfass.
Dove, the early American Modernist, met everyone worth meeting in Paris at the beginning of the century through the ministrations of his good friend Alfred Maurer and then returned to New York where, during the 1920s, he lived on a houseboat moored on the Harlem River.
Allusion to nature was never completely abandoned in his abstractions and his pioneering works in collage influenced a couple of generations of American artists (Joseph Cornell, for instance, must have looked long and hard at some of his glass-fronted box constructions).
From 2 February until 13 March.
Catherine Lee is an artist who has surely not exhibited so extensively nor is so well known as her painter-husband, Sean Scully.
New abstractions by Ms Lee are featured at Galerie Lelong this month.
The show opens on the 11th and continues through 6 March.
Alex Katz's shows often have the aspect of a cocktail party.
This is especially the case in his newest show at Robert Miller, ‘Cut-Out Sculptures, 1990–1992’, which adds new personalities to his long-continuing series of painted-on-both-sides silhouette sculptures.
This time there are mostly couples — significant or otherwise — in full-length upper bohemia regalia and a gaggle of single, face-only cut-outs mounted atop head-high poles.
The show is on from 2 February to the 27th.
Robert Colescott has a reputation for cracking wise in his work.
Ever since his ‘Eat Dem ‘Taters’ spoof of Van Gogh's devout miserables he has been busy chiding the foibles not only of white folks but of his own brothers and sisters as well.
Mr Colescott's latest work, including a painting called ‘Europe, Africa: a Fool there was’, is at Phyllis Kind beginning on the 6th and continuing through 20 March.
Yet if a poll were taken tomorrow morning on the corner of West Broadway and Prince St to determine who was the most politically incorrect artist in town, Steve Gianakos's name would surely zoom to the top of the list.
He'd also appear near the top of a list of the funniest.
Ever since 1969, when he had his first show, his cartoonish black-and-white paintings have managed to comment without mercy or a smidgen of socially redeeming tact on, among other things, men's — and women's — looks (Warhol's nosejob painting must be an important icon in his private gallery); issues of health (a hilarious series of men in the throes of having heart attacks); bestiality (pert Fifties housewife on her knees doing something unspeakable to a poodle with her arm) and religion (famous Biblical figure on the cross getting a pie in the face).
Outrageous you say?
Offensive?
You bet!
In his fourth show at Barbara Toll (13 February to 27 March).
Gianakos takes on, in a series of drawings, Nazis, bimbos and birds — as well as other equally unmentionable subjects.
Julian Schnabel, never exactly known for his sense of humour (at least in his work), shows drawings this month at Matthew Marks (4 February to 6 March) and ‘The Seven Deadly Sins’— a series of paintings on paper by William Burroughs (yes, the author)— are at Gagosian uptown until 11 February.
John Lees, who often joins variously shaped pieces of paper to create the fields on which he applies his artfully-smudged and flickering drawings, shows new pencil and ink works (along with new oil paintings) at Hirschl & Adler, opening 18 February and continuing through 20 March.
Carolyn Brady's meticulously illusionistic, large-scale watercolours are at Nancy Hoffman (13 February to 13 March) and Max Protech has covered his walls with drawings of every medium and artistic persuasion by the artists of his gallery through the last Saturday of the month.
Also through that date 303 Gallery spotlights the raucous drawings of the ever-so-hot Suzanne McClelland.
Collages by Nicol Allan are at Davis & Langdale from 2 February until the 27th and ‘Modern — Post Modern Collage’ has been devised by Lennon-Weinberg to survey achievements by Schwitters, Cornell, John Chamberlain, Donald Lipski, Richard Kalina and about fifteen other artists.
It opens 18 February and continues through 27 March.
Robert Motherwell, who died last year, refined, over a period of years, a succession of related paintings he called ‘The Open Series’.
Works from the series, mostly done in the 1970s, are at Knoedler this month, opening on the 13th and running until 11 March.
Helen Frankenthaler, once significantly ‘otherised’ with Mr Motherwell, shows works from the Sixties (‘The Classic Years’) more or less concurrently at Emmerich (18 February to 20 March).
Opening the same day at Emmerich are the geometric abstractions of Robert Caracciolo, a painter based in New York and Rome who was motivated to make the almost seven-foot-square works in this show after becoming intensely involved with the poetry of the sixteenth-century Spanish mystic St John of the Cross and with a young Spanish theologian of similar bent.
They may be seen through 13 March and there is a catalogue with colour reproductions and an essay by Maurice Poirier.
Geometries have long dominated the work of Harvey Quaytman, who often mixed unusual additives in his paint (rust, for instance).
New works of his are at McKee from 5 February to 3 March.
In his first show at Auchincloss David Lasry shows recent abstractions from 6 February to 10 March and two abstract painters from Los Angeles, Roy Dowell and Nancy Evans open at Fawbush on 13 February and close on 11 March.
Carroll Dunham's ever-loosening, ever more colourful anthropomorphisms are at Sonnabend (6 to 27 February) and uptown at Pace Douglass Baxter has curated a show of new, thickly-impastoed paintings by Antoni Tapies, the veteran Barcelona artist.
The accompanying catalogue has an essay by Robert Lubar (12 February to 13 March).
The decidedly ungeometric abstractions of Melissa Meyer are at Holly Solomon until 13 February as are those of Jenifer Kobylarz in her second one-person show at Thorp until the end of the month.
If you are desperate for a splash of hard-core realism this month you won't want to miss Martha Mayer Erlebacher's Old-Masterish allegorical figure paintings at Fischbach (her first show in New York since the demise of Robert Schoelkopf) or the recent narrative works of Vincent Desiderio at Marlborough (both from 6 to 27 February).
‘Romance and Reunion’ is the title of a large triptych in the show.
For those whose thirst is still not quenched, ACA is celebrating its new association with Andrew Wyeth by mounting a retrospective of the artist's work in all mediums, spanning fifty years.
The show continues until 27 February.
Figurative sculpture is the theme of a large group show at Marlborough (3 to 27 February).
Included are works by Magdalena Abakonowicz, Red Grooms, Raymond Mason, James Surls and Manolo Valdez.
The catch is that all the works are in media other than bronze.
The figure is perhaps the only reference that Alice Aycock keeps consciously out of her sculpture.
Aycock has not shown for some years and so fans of her precisely-crafted contraptions have a great treat in store when her show opens at John Weber on 13 February.
New sculptures and drawings of hers will be on view until 13 March.
Richard Artschwager's references are altogether more prosaic, more often than not pointing back to basic architectural elements or pieces of furniture.
Long intrigued by the notion of this door, for instance, he elicits yet one more variation on the theme this month by placing a faux-bois door-sculpture in the corner of a room chez Mary Boone.
Other new pieces, including some cellotex-and-formica paintings, continue at the gallery until 27 February.
Architecture fascinates Richard Serra, too: likely as not he will claim the whole of an interior space as part of his work.
In the huge (35 x 77 foot) Gagosian downtown garage, he will install four immense curved steel plates, thereby radically transforming our experience of what is essentially just a big white box.
The show opens on 13 February.
George Bacon
PARIS
Four artists from Senegal
African myths at Monde de l'Art
Two American artist are showing at Montenay.
Miark Innerst  juxtaposes panoramic landscapes of a modernist inclination with still lifes executed with trompe l'oeuil detail.
Richard Pettibone, in contrast, uses quotation and reproduction/appropriation from the field of art history; his last works are inspired by the writings of Ezra Pound and Shaker craftwork.
Until 27 February.
Actor, author and director of multi-media events over the last ten years, Ricardo Mosner has concentrated mainly on painting, sculpture and graphic art.
This month the Argentinian artist is presenting ‘Cabinet Mosner’ at Lara Vincy: huge cut-out figures, folded and painted in steel sheets, gesso and clay prints, various objects made of wood, iron, paper and pieces of piping, in addition to a few display cases with accompanying documentation.
Yvon Lambert continues to show the group show ‘Le monde en eclats — l'oeuvre en effraction’ which brings together Robert Barry, Peter Downsbrough, Dan Graham, On Kawara, Agnes Martin, Giulio Paolini, Niele Toroni, Felice Varini, Michel Verjux and Lawrence Weiner (until 23 February).
François Morellet continues at Durand Dessert until 20 February.
Max Neumann is at Vidal Saint Phalle until the 11th, to be followed by Emmanuella Renard, while Erich Weiss's installation ‘A Poet with Machine Gun’ remains at Nikki Diana Marquardt until 1 March.
Monde de L'Art welcomes four artists from Senegal: Amadou cloaks the everyday in the light of legend, applying considerable sophistication to the use of voids and subtle colouring; Souleymane Keita paints abstract scenes influenced by local mythology and European stylistic developments; the sculptor Ousmane Sow looks to Rodin, Bourdelle and Giacometti but employs local colours and rhythms; Serigne Mbaye Camara carves  geometric forms and applies them to two-colour backgrounds.
Until end of March.
Janis Kounellis is still to be seen at Lelong, showing early lithographs in small editions of twenty-one impressions.
At Laage Salomon Axel Hutte show a series of photographs of Berlin tube stations while a group show of Spanish artists at Farideh Cadot includes Patricio Cabrera, Juan Usle and Garardo Delgado.
Maeght have prints by Bram van Velde until 27 February while Nancy Sulmont, Daniel Nadaud and Pierre Tilman are at Claude Samuel until the end of the month.
Anne de Villepoix presents Catherine Bay, Peter Fond, Heather Jansson, Nile Cymio, Carolee Schneemann, Eve Vateriaus and Sophie Vieille, brought together around the theme of bodily architecture.
At Renn, Espace d'Art Contemporain (which belongs to cinema producer Claude Berri) the Yves Klein show continues.
Late Glen Baxter at Samia Saouma; the sculptures of Jean-François Briant at Di Meo until 3 April.
Finally, not showing in a gallery but in the Roumanian Cultural Centre, Ion Nicodim who was first promoted in Italy by Giulio Carlo Argan in the late sixties, here brings together a series of variations on the theme of clay as a material of memory.