

News
Unpopular populism
The Victoria and Albert Museum is still trying to disassociate itself from the ignominious failure of the exhibition of sporting trophies through the ages.
‘Nothing to do with us’, says the Press Office, ‘we were just renting out the space’.
But of course, the public saw the strident banners hung  throughout the galleries.
The lenders, whose objects were left in  embarrassing limbo when the show made museum history and went bankrupt a month early, may have asked themselves whether they would have been prepared to lend had it not been held at the V&A, and, in fact, it was the V&A which was left with the unbudgeted task of getting the exhibits back to the owners.
So the commercial managers of the museum, who hoped this show would be a money-spinner, are wrong: this exhibition has everything to do with the V&A, its good name, its morale, its duty to the public — and its money.
What happened?
Intended to reach the parts of the population museums do not easily reach, this show in fact attracted a derisory 9000 or so paying visitors in the two months that it was open from 16 November last, despite more coverage on TV than most exhibitions.
It was not fun enough for the fans, nor artistic enough for the art loving public (or so it seemed from the vulgar poster and catalogue; actually, it contained some wonderful and rarely seen pieces of silver).
Compare that attendance figure with the 248,000 visitors over two and a half months to the ‘Masterworks from Lille’ exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum, an only averagely successful exhibition by their standards; the 204,000 to ‘Sisley’at the Royal Academy over two and a half months, and even the 52,000 to ‘Royal Treasures of Sweden’over three months, considered a flop by the R.A.
The commercial company created by Lord Burghersh to run ‘Sporting Glory’ and rent the facility went bankrupt, owing money to printers, the V&A (it has only seen part of its £100,000 rental fee) and, of course, the backers.
In fact, the V&A is in danger of getting a reputation for being a peculiarly bad bet; Pearson's lost £600,000 when the equally populist ‘Sovereign’ exhibition earlier last year also failed to bring in the crowds.
This is ironical, because the V&A is the only one of London's big museums with the profit motive at the basis of its exhibition policy.
Even the Royal Academy, which has to earn every penny of its keep, does not think that way, and yet it manages to make money.
The lesson is that art and objects from the past can never be a rival to mass entertainment; put art in close proximity to wax works, videos, sound effects, smellies, wenches in costume, recreations of ye olden days, and it pales, becomes invisible and irrelevant.
Isolate art in a discrete setting, explain it, present it with style and dignity, and people will come in large numbers to be educated, inspired, uplifted.
A crass hybrid of the profit-motive and art has been shown not to work for anyone.
The Master of the Armouries, curator of Britain's historic arms and armour collection, who is hell-bent on creating just such a hybrid and abandoning the ancient Tower of London where it has been housed for centuries for a purpose-built, speculative complex in Leeds, is risking a gargantuan version of the ‘Sporting Glory’ fiasco, with the extra twist that if his project fails, his objects will have no home to go back to.
Venice
Proposal to ban tankers from Venice at last 
These are the projects for which Giuliano Amato, Italy's Prime Minister, has promised a further $1.2 billion funding
With a firm promise of funding from Giuliano Amato, and the current loosening up of Italy's political system as the previous paralysis is broken by resignations in the wake of corruption scandals, the outlook for solving Venice's problems looks brighter.
Carlo Ripa di Meana, Italy's Minister for the Environment, reasserted the government's intention to ban oil tankers from entering the Venetian Lagoon at a meeting of the interministerial committee with special responsibility for Venice on 26 January.
No policy decision can be made however until the next meeting on 30 March.
The announcement was in response to the enormous oil spill off the southern tip of the Shetland Islands: eleven million tons of oil destined for western European countries passes through the Venetian Lagoon each year, bound for the port of Marghera.
A spill would be especially damaging since equipment normally used for containment could not operate in such shallow waters.
A tanker ban is only one of a package of measures which may be in place by the year 2000.
The timetable, which equally importantly includes finding the solution to Venice's problem of flooding, was reconfirmed recently by Luigi Zanda, president of the Consorzio Venezia Nuova.
The Consorzio is comprised of twenty-six private and public firms including companies such as FIAT.
Active since 1987, it has spent the intervening years seeking solutions that combine an adequate defence of the city against flooding with reestablishment and conservation of the environmental characteristics peculiar to the Lagoon and the safeguarding of economic interests on the surrounding hinterland.
At the moment there is nothing to prevent another flood of 1966 proportions or worse, as was demonstrated by the exceptionally high tide of 8 December last.
Acqua alta (the chance combination of high tide and strong winds) therefore remains an emergency for at least the next seven years.
Fifteen years were lost after the 1966 flood in sterile discussion, while the first special law for Venice (no. 171, 16 April 1973) proved completely unworkable.
A second special law, to remedy the defects of the first, was passed in 1984 (no. 798, 29 November), setting up the Consorzio Venezia Nuova to study and deal with problems connected with the physical protection of Venice.
The suggested projects are:
The banning of petrol tankers and ships transporting chemical products from the lagoon to remove the risk of the ecological disaster an accident might cause and to allow additional measures to be taken to restore the hydrogeological balance.
When tankers were first allowed into the Lagoon channels had to be deepened for them, bringing more water into the Lagoon.
To exclude petrol tankers from the lagoon will however virtually halve traffic through the port, throwing into serious crisis the industrial zone of Porto Marghera, already badly hit by the current economic crisis in Italy.
Strong  resistance by the industrial lobby to the implementation of this latter measure has been compounded by the enormous cost, estimated at L700 billion (£318 million; $445 million).
In fact L180 billion would be enough, in the first instance, to install an oil pipeline from Trieste to Marghera, thus avoiding the primary danger of a major oil spill.
This sum is already available and the work could be completed by 1998.
Defence against acqua alta concentrates on the restructuring of the Lido, Malamocco and Chioggia entrances to the Lagoon, and the positioning of mobile barriers across them which would normally lie flat on the sea bed.
A prototype module of the barrier, known by the apt acronym M.O.S.E., was in position for tests up to a few months ago.
When activated by being pumped full of air these modules will be able to prevent water from entering the Lagoon and also from leaving.
(Estimated budget, including project below: L3,702 billion, £1,682 million, $2,355 million)
Defence against medium high tides: A project is already underway to limit the damage to Venice itself, acting on the fact that a high water level of 80 cm. above mean Sea Level occurs on average fifty times per year, while a 100 cm. high (almost half that of 1966, when the water reached 194 cm) occurs six to seven times.
The plan centres on the so-called insulae (the natural islands of which the whole of Venice is made up) and involves raising the ground level in certain places to a height that will prevent the less severe but more frequent flooding.
This technique was carried out in Piazza San Marco centuries ago under the Republic and has recently been successfully implemented at the village of Malamocco on the Lido.
Sea defences: Breakwaters to be constructed and beaches consolidated (by replacing and compacting the sand that has been washed away) in order to reduce the effect of the waves.
(Estimated budget L533 billion, £242 million, $339 million, including the project below)
Sea defences: To reinforce the shorelines of the coastal strips separating the Lagoon from the Adriatic (including reconstruction of the sea walls or murazzi built in the eighteenth century by the Venetian Republic along the seaward edge of the Lido and the island of Pellestrina and badly damaged by heavy seas in 1966).
Remodelling of the lagoon and the stabilising of its hydrodynamic balance.
The Consorzio Venezia Nuova has already been active for some time in redesigning the network of channels in the lagoon, consolidating the barene (patches of mud flat just above the surface of the water) and other similar measures.
(Estimated budget L475 billion, £216 million, $302 million)
Restoring the hydrogeological balance includes the reopening of sections of the Lagoon enclosed for fish farming (‘valli di pesca’), if possible in a controlled way that would take some account of the commercial interests involved.
(Estimated budget, research only, L7 billion, £3 million, $4.5 million).
Sex and violence in Prague
The Dorotheum's 9/10 March sale of Old Master pictures in Vienna will include ‘Tarquin and Lucretia’ by Rudolf II's court painter Hans von Aachen, recently rediscovered by the auction house's paintings expert Peter Wolf in a private collection.
The title of the work is recorded in the inventory of Rudolf's collection but the canvas had long been thought lost.
Rudolph II was the greatest patron in Europe around 1600.
Dr Eliska Fucikova of the National Gallery in Prague describes the painting as one of the artist's finest works, comparable with the ‘Bacchus, Ceres and Amor’ in the Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna.
Until 1623 the picture hung in the Kunstkammer of Prague Castle, when it was sold to the art dealer Daniel de Bries for the exceptionally high price of 400 talers.
It then vanished.
The current estimate is a low ASch2–3 million (£113,000–169,500)
The French elections 21 and 28 March
Is this the end of Jack Lang as France's Minister of Culture?
Our short list of possible successors
On 21 and 28 March France is holding a general election which, it is widely believed, will oust the present Socialist government.
Jack Lang, Minister of Culture and Education — energetic and imaginative, say his admirers; populist and trendy, say his detractors — will obviously campaign on his record, which even the said detractors and the opposition regard as impressive.
In the last few months he has been especially active; for instance, in response to the criticism that art education is much neglected, he announced in January the renovation or rehousing of four art schools, including the Ecole nationale supérieure des Beaux Arts of Paris.
He is also addressing the criticism that the Fonds régionaux d'art contemporain (FRAC), funds to enable the regions to acquire contemporary works of art, represent more intervention of the centre by encouraging the funds' association with local structures.
The main opposition parties, the Union pour la democratie française (UDF), a coalition of groups led by the  former Prime Minister Giscard d'Estaing, and the Rassemblement pour la République (RPR), the Gaullist party led by Chirac, have very similar and, in comparison with British party-political programmes, not very detailed, manifestos.
The RPR wants to increase decentralisation, which, it claims, has hitherto largely been a matter of spending more on the regions, rather than of devolving decision-making power.
In particular, it would like to reform the FRACs, which are perceived as being an instrument of central government and not sufficiently integrated into local structures.
It also wants to give higher priority to art in education in order to reach a wider audience.
Within the same priorities — access through education and further decentralisation — the UDF wishes to give higher priority to the built heritage than the visual arts.
Both Parties appear to wish to maintain the current level of spending in relation to other government expenditure and possibly to sever Education from the Ministry of Culture.
The elections are likely to return a Centre Right majority in the National Assembly, and France would therefore begin a new period of ‘cohabitation’, that is, a President and a Prime Minister from different parties.
Mitterrand may try to appoint as Prime Minister a politician who will make it particularly difficult for the new majority formed by UDF and RPR to work together.
What party and which politician will win the prize of Ministry of Culture and Education depends therefore on Mitterrand's choice of Prime Minister; on the negotiations among the coalition partners within the new majority, in particular on how the major ministries are shared out; on the relative strength of the various groups within the UDF, and on whether Education is hived off.
Further factors in any attempt to second-guess the result are that last time round the UDF won this portfolio and that François Léotard, the incumbent at that time, is now aiming higher in ministerial rank.
LIKELY CONTENDERS
Alain Carignon, forty-four, mayor of Grenoble since 1983, and President of the Department of Isère, is said to be very keen on the post and possible the strongest candidate.
The Isère is currently spending around 24% of its budget on culture.
During his tenure in Grenoble, a new building was begun for the Musée des Beaux-Arts, which since 1986 had expanded considerably.
Jacques Toubon, forty-one, is another possible RPR candidate.
Through his wife, Lisa Weiler, he is well connected in the world of contemporary art and they are both collectors.
He has expressed an interest in becoming Minister of Culture, but would prefer the Ministry of Justice.
Bernard Stasi, sixty-three, is one of the leaders of the Centre Democrats Sociaux.
He replied to Lang during the debate on the 1993 budget for the opposition and drafted the cultural policy chapter for his Party's manifesto.
Because of his age and of coalition games of musical-chairs, he may nonetheless not win this post for which he has both the expertise and the gravitas.
Several other names are mentioned, including Andre Rossinot, a radical mayor of Nancy since1983, and Dominique Perben, assistant general secretary of the RPR.
Nor can the appointment of an outsider be excluded: the names of Bernard-Henri Levy, one of the nouveaux philosophes, and of François Weyergans, the writer, have also come up.
It is also difficult to say whether a change at the top would affect the Direction des Musées de France at the heart of the Ministry of Culture.
Opinions on the matter are divided.
The head of the Direction is a civil servant and a ministerial appointment, but he does not have to leave when the Minister changes.
Indeed Hubert Landais, the last Directeur but one, was appointed during the Giscard years but stayed on with Jack Lang.
His successor Olivier Chevrillon was appointed in 1987 by Léotard and stayed until 1990, although the government changed in 1988.
It remains to be seen whether in the context of ‘cohabitation’ Jacques Sallois, the current incumbent, will be perceived as too close to Lang — he was head of his private office 1981–84 — to serve under a Minister of the Centre Right.
Even if Bernard Stasi may be right in describing Jack Lang's cultural policy as a ‘spectacular performance played behind closed doors for the amusement of the prince and his obliging friends’, it will be a challenge to succeed him, the longest serving Minister of Culture of the Fifth Republic.
Only time will tell whether his work will have had as long-lasting an impact as that of Andre Malraux, de Gaulle's Minister of Culture between 1959 and 1969.
Madrid
Spain to buy Thyssen paintings
Bargain price of $259–420 million to immortalise the collection
Baron Hans-Heinrich Thyssen-Bornemisza officially confirmed on 12 February that within one or two months he will agree to the permanent disposition of his 800 paintings now leased to the Spanish government and housed in the Palace of Villahermosa, Madrid (just across the road from the Prado) and at the Monastery of Pedralbes, Barcelona.
A spokesman for the Villahermosa told The Art Newspaper that negotiations had been on the basis of a price of Pta35 billion (£185 million; $259 million) for the whole collection, although the Baron and the Ministry of Culture last month mentioned a figure of Pta50 billion (£300 million; $420 million).
It is not yet clear whether this will take into account the index-linked charge of $5 million per annum which the State is currently paying to house the paintings in Madrid, an agreement due to expire in nine years' time.
The agreement of all the Baron's children to the sale of the bulk of their family collection has been obtained and the deal will ensure the integrity of the collection in perpetuity.
Started by the present Baron's father, who purchased most of the finest Old Master pictures, the present Baron has brought it back into single ownership by buying inherited paintings from his siblings.
He is strongly motivated by a desire for the collection never to be split up again.
The current valuation of the collection, made by a team of Spanish experts over the past six years, is considered to be well below the market value of the works.
A small shadow cast on the general enthusiasm surrounding the deal is the disappointingly low attendance figures at the Villahermosa, around 2,400 a day according to Tomas Llorens, director of the Fundación Thyssen.
A projected total of around 700,000 for the year is now expected, rather than the one million or so originally hoped for.
Berlin
Critical days for Christo's ‘Wrapped Reichstag’
Will the Bundestag's president gain support for the project from her parliamentary colleagues?
Christo's proposal to wrap the Reichstag, under consideration for more than twenty years, reaches a critical phase as the Bundestag, Germany's parliament, prepares to vote on the issue.
Formerly the country's Chancellery, the great, blackened neo-classical structure continues to exert a powerful and emotive force in Berlin and throughout the nation.
Having been burned in 1933 and nearly destroyed in 1945, it became a symbol of Democracy in a divided city, standing empty beside the Wall and prevented, by the threat of Soviet veto, from serving any purpose.
Now, as the capital returns to Berlin, there are plans to restore the Reichstag and use it as the new German parliament.
Christo has cherished a vision of wrapping the Reichstag in military silver, flame-retardant fabric since 1971, when he created his first studies for the project.
On three previous occasions, in 1977, 1981 and 1987, his requests were denied, but new hopes have been raised by the support and encouragement which he has received from Dr Rita Suessmuth, President of the Bundestag, who must carry a majority among 640 members of the legislative body for ‘Wrapped Reichstag’ to be realised.
Never before, in all the years of his work upon the project, has Christo been championed by the Bundestag's president, but, paradoxically, Dr Suessmuth's position of authority may be as much a hindrance as an advantage to his cause.
Her tenacity, particularly in forcing the liberalisation of the country's abortion laws last summer, has earned opposition from within her own Christian Democratic Union Party and she cannot count on any support from Chancellor Kohl and his conservative faction.
The project's progress now rests with a series of meetings being scheduled to take place between Christo and politicians of various parties in Bonn this month, when he will be marshalling his legendary powers of persuasion and hoping to win new friends.
Parliament will vote on the proposal in April or May.
Berlin, and the division of a city by an artificial wall, has haunted Christo's imagination since the beginning of his career.
As a young artist recently arrived in Paris from Bulgaria by way of Vienna, he closed rue Visconti for one day in 1962 with a wall of oil drums, a work which he poignantly titled ‘Iron Curtain’.
Other installations, including most notably ‘Running Fence’(1976), have explored the surprising division of property by an artificial barrier.
It is now too late for ‘Wrapped Reichstag’ to challenge the Wall itself, but it will give focus to the new political challenges which the country is facing, as it struggles with domestic discontent, recession and the enormous cost of unification.
Should the artist win approval for his project this April or May, it is conceivable that ‘Wrapped Reichstag’ might be realised in August or September 1994.
Otherwise, it is likely to be delayed until summer 1995.
Christo told The Art Newspaper that he estimated an operating budget of $5–6 million, to be raised, as is his usual practice, from the sale of his original works of art.
To date, Christo has produced more than eighty drawings of various sizes related to ‘Wrapped Reichstag’, over one hundred collages, and three models, the earliest of which dates from 1977 and was acquired by Teheran's Museum of Modern Art.
Damaged by customs when it arrived in Iran, it has remained unrestored and in storage since the Revolution.
A second model belongs to Swedish collector, Torsten Lilja, and the third and largest model, still owned by the artist, forms the centrepiece of the exhibition of Christo's urban projects which took place in Berlin in January and is expected to open in Bonn this month.
Spain has no official record of Islamic collector
Negotiations between the Iranian Jewish businessman David Nasser Khalili and the British Department of National Heritage over his offer to lend his collection of Islamic art and antiquities to the nation at the expense of the British are still ongoing (The Art Newspaper No.21, Oct 1992, p.1).
In an article in the New York Times published last month Mr Khalili said that Spain had already indicated a readiness to accept his terms.
The Art Newspaper has made enquiries at a high level in Spanish central government, museum and ayuntamiento circles, and no one has heard of Mr Khalili's offer.
Page three
Our art historian pin-up of the month is the Italian Vittorio Sgarbi, specialist in the late fifteenth-century Bolognese artist Antonio di Crevalcore, but happy to give his opinion on anything and anyone, so long as he reaches a public of millions (as on last month's cover of L'Espresso magazine).
Sgarbi was elected to the Italian Parliament last year on a Liberal ticket.
Will Jeff Koons do for Sgarbi what he did for that other member of the Italian Parliament, the even nuder Cicciolina?
Nudity and the Italian art world seem to go together: Achille Bonito Oliva, commissioner of this year's Biennale also appeared naked on the cover of a magazine, but he is more of a man than Sgarbi and is not coyly covering his private parts.
We invite art historians and critics of equivalent standing in other countries to send in photos of themselves — naked, of course 
College Art Association Conference
A return to works of art
Venturi the keynote speaker, de Kooning rewarded for life-time  achievement 
During the first week of February 3,000 students, professional art historians, artists, curators, and critics gathered to listen to lectures, socialise, and beg for jobs at the College Art Association's 81st Annual Conference.
The several hundred studio-art and art-history talks ostensibly related to characteristically all-inclusive themes: ‘The Artist as World Citizen’ and ‘The Evolution of Art History as Cultural Practice’.
While a survey of the published abstracts reveals a veritable potpourri of academic inquiry the general impression is of renewed interest in traditional art historical pursuits.
One participant reported half empty rooms in sessions dealing with the ‘new art history’ of semiotics, gender, and dialogue, and unexpected demand for more traditional object-related sessions, crowding out the smaller rooms in which they were scheduled.
Colin Eisler of NYU's Institute of Fine Arts explored why Durer associated Mary and Jesus with the animal kingdom in ‘Our Lady of the animals’; Peter Dreyer of the Morgan Library deattributed that repository's ‘Alpine landscape’ drawing, generally ascribed to Pieter Breugel the Elder; and Laurie Fusco and Gino Corti of the Getty Museum reappraised Lorenzo de' Medici as a collector, quoting 187 of the patron's letters they recently discovered in the Archivio di Stato and Biblioteca Nazionale, Florence.
This is not to say that tradition was the rule.
One session dealt with the paralinguistic character of the body in Pre-Columbian imagery, another pointed out that critics and historians tend to neglect artists' books, and several confronted the aesthetic implications of ‘virtual reality’ technology.
The highly topical session dealing with legal issues surrounding Christo's fatal Umbrella Project was cancelled.
The keynote address was by architect Robert Venturi, winner of the 1991 Pritzker Prize, who availed himself of the opportunity to trumpet his firm's recent commissions, which include the Sainsbury Wing and the Seattle Art Museum.
Then the association presented its annual awards for distinction in art history, art, and criticism.
Carol Armstrong's Odd Man Out: Readings of the Work and Reputation of Edgar Degas won the award for an art history book (1991) and Stephanie Barron's Degenerate Art that for a distinguished exhibition catalogue (1991).
Willem de Kooning received in absentia an award for lifetime achievement, and Martin Puryear for sculpture ‘that evokes the human struggle to balance the needs for both the comfort of stability and the excitement of freedom’.
The laurels for criticism went to Thomas McEvilley ‘for his reasoned way of dealing with such issues as quality, multiculturalism, and modernism/postmodernism’.
Arthur Wheelock, curator of Northern baroque art at the National Gallery, got the C.A.A./National Institute for Conservation award for his work combining the library and the laboratory.
And Professors Richard Carlyon and James Holderbaum won teaching citations.
Myriad receptions and reunions could not disguise the bleak prospects for job hunters.
The C.A.A.
careers listings for the 1991–92 academic year posted 1,082 openings for artists and art historians — 28% fewer positions than two years earlier.
The unofficial theme for next year's event in New York City (17 to 19 February, 1994) may well be ‘Art History and Unemployment’.
Aid for Eastern Europe
Speculator gives away $150 million
George Soros, millionaire who made $2 billion out of collapse of the pound, funds aid to ex-communist countries
Last September the Hungarian-born American financier George Soros executed a financial coup that has made his humanitarian cup run over.
Before the European Exchange Rate Mechanism failed, the Quantum Fund, which Mr Soros manages, bet massively against the British pound.
According to reports, Quantum converted pounds to Deutschmarks, waited for the pound's devaluation, then paid off their sterling and cleared a rumoured $2 billion in Deutschmarks although he admits to only $1 billion.
Since then, Mr Soros has committed $100 million to bolster the collapsing science community in the former Soviet Union, provided $50 million for relief efforts in Bosnia, and loaned Yugoslav Macedonia $25 million.
Mr Soros founded his Open Society Fund in 1979 to foster pluralism in former communist societies.
The network of Soros foundations currently extends into seventeen countries, supporting activities in education, economics, health and the environment, and culture.
The most recent addition to the network is the Soros Centre for Contemporary Arts in Prague which opened in December last year, joining Soros centres in Prague and Warsaw.
Planned for this year are centres in Bratislava, Bucharest, Moscow, Riga, Sofia, Talinn, Vilnius and Zagreb, with one in the Albanian capital of Tirana scheduled for 1994.
The primary function of the centres is the documentation of modern and contemporary artists who work or have worked in the former Eastern-bloc countries and the promotion of living artists previously unknown to the West.
Each centre has a catalogue library, holds an annual exhibition, provides grants for working artists, arranges international touring exhibitions, promotes artist and student exchanges, gives out information on grants, and administers the Soros Visiting Senior Research Fellowship program at the National Gallery of Art, Washington which funds two people per term to study art history.
Mr Soros's organisation is one of three, private, non-profit East-West agencies which have formed a partnership with the National Endowment for the Arts (NEA) to support arts collaboration between the United States and the former Soviet Union, the others being the Citizen Exchange Council and the Trust for Mutual Understanding.
Known as ArtsLink, the programme has two components: its Collaborative Projects support American individuals or groups of up to five people seeking to collaborate with counterparts in Eastern Europe on projects in the visual, performing and media arts, architecture and design or literature.
ArtsLink Fellowships enable US charitable arts organisations to host artists and arts managers from the former Soviet Union for five-week residencies.
At a time when Western governments have proved slow to inject cash into the countries of the former Eastern block, the activities of cultural organisations and foundations such as the Getty Grant Program and the Soros projects are providing a lifeline for the artists and academics of the region.
News in brief 
Ivan the Terrible's treasure/ Loch Ness monster
Failing to live up to its name, the Russian newspaper Pravda announced in February that the library and treasures of the sixteenth-century tsar Ivan the Terrible had been discovered in an underground city north of Moscow.
This was widely reported in the British press.
The Art Newspaper's sources in Russia have, however, confirmed that Ivan's treasure has been found to the same extent as the Loch Ness monster.
No tax-evasion art trust for Her Majesty
Another canard launched by the press last month was that the Queen was putting the Royal Collection of works of art in a trust to avoid tax.
In fact, the Royal Collection is Crown property, not her personal property, and as such there is no question of levying tax on it.
What Lord Airlie, the Lord Chamberlain, actually said on 11 February when announcing the areas on which the Queen was now going to pay tax, was that the income-raising activities relating to the collection — sales of tickets, catalogues, souvenirs etc — are to be put into a trust to reflect the fact that these activities are used exclusively to maintain the Collection.
At the moment there is no reason to suppose that this will lead to the Collection being either more or less accessible.
The writing on the wall
Alberto Ronchey, Italy's Minister responsible for culture and the heritage, has proposed swingeing new  penalties for vandalism with spray paint.
‘Anti-spray’ as the new bill will be known, hinges on three conditions: the producers of aerosols must manufacture only soluble sprays and solvents capable of removing paint; heavy penalties will be introduced for those caught, and there will be higher taxes on aerosol paints sold for non-commercial reasons.
No sell-off for the Government Art Collection
The leak of a memorandum from the British Treasury in early February suggesting that the Government Art Collection might in some sense be ‘privatised’ unleashed a storm of protest in the national press.
The form of privatisation, normally held to be conversion into a limited company with sale of shares and promise of profits generated from the company's activities was unclear, but most took it to mean sale at auction.
The greater part of the British paintings and sculptures that make up the collection are distributed among Embassies overseas and government departments.
The proposal, subsequently explained away as part of the Treasury's continual reassessment of revenue sources, was immediately squashed by the Department of National Heritage.
Major Guido Reni accepted by Britain in lieu of tax
The Treasury has finally accepted the Holkham Hall Guido Reni, ‘Joseph and Potiphar's wife’ in lieu of tax.
Negotiations have been going on since October 1990 and it seems that the Treasury was querying its £4 million valuation.
The painting will remain, under the in lieu in situ provision of British law, in the state rooms of the great eighteenth-century Norfolk house where it has hung since 1769.
The house is regularly open to the public.
Recently the Treasury has become very slow to approve in lieu deals, which has led to this useful fiscal provision being underused; in 1991–92, works of art worth £3.4 million were accepted in lieu of tax, when the provision (although this does not represent a ceiling) is for £11 million p.a.
Still under negotiation is Lord Cholmondeley's Gainsborough ‘Self-portrait with wife and daughters’ at Houghton Hall.
Schinkel's Prussian military shrine to become war memorial
Chancellor Helmut Kohl has announced that the Neue Wache (New Watch) by neo-classical architect Schinkel on Unter den Linden in former East Berlin, where goose-stepping soldiers used to stand guard, is to become a monument to the war dead, inscribed ‘For the victims of war and the rule of violence’.
It will house an enlarged  version of a ‘Mother and Child’ by the Berlin sculptress Kathe Kollwitz.
European Parliament approves the Directive on the Restitution of Cultural Goods
In its February session, the European Parliament gave a second reading to the Directive on the Restitution of Cultural Goods and passed it without further amendments.
It has now to be adopted by the Council of Ministers to bring automatically into force three days later the Regulation of the Export of Cultural Goods to outside the European Community.
The Southern member states are pushing for this to happen straightaway without having thought through the format of the export document required by the Regulation.
Unless this export form is well devised, ‘member states may be unable to put it into practice accurately and with the  efficiency that the art trade rightly expects’, as Patricia Rawlings, a British Member of the European Parliament, said during the debate.
The U.K. government is hoping that the Directive will not be adopted by the Council of Ministers before 5 April, when the next Internal Market Council meets.
This should give enough time to devise a workable document.
Celebrations for 2500 years of Bukhara
Following a resolution taken at a conference of the Council of Museums, celebrations will take place in 1995 marking the 2,500th anniversary of one of the oldest Eastern cities in the world, Bukhara in Uzbekistan.
This proposal was made in an official letter from the Council to the General Director of UNESCO, Mr Federico Mayor.
Bukhara was one of the principal centres along the Great Silk Road from China and India to Rome and the cities of Europe.
As part of the anniversary celebrations it is proposed to mount an international archaeological expedition to Bukhara and to hold a symposium with leading scholars in the field.
New York
$40 million needed to save 190 year-old Historical Society
Sotheby's lend $1.5 million against surety of the collections
Early last month, the New-York Historical Society announced that it would close its library and cease all other operations to concentrate its efforts on resolving the grave financial crisis that threatens America's oldest historical society with extinction.
The announcement that the society lacked the cash to fund its operating costs surprised few who had followed that institution's relatively quiet descent into insolvency.
Word of total closure came just one week after the society had revealed that it had taken a controversial first step toward meeting its operating costs with a loan of $1.5 million from Sotheby's secured by $3.5 million worth of works from its vast collections.
The society refused to identify any of the works offered as collateral.
On 1 January, the society shut its galleries and cancelled all public programmes in its 1909 limestone building just south of the American Museum of Natural History.
Its officials blamed perennial financial woes as the reason, adding that the society was pursuing negotiations for a potentially life-saving merger with another institution — the New York Public Library.
The society's difficulties today reflect a struggle of more than a decade to operate a museum and research library at a time when the costs of doing so rose dramatically.
To make matters worse, the institution, founded in 1804 by New York's merchant elite, had remained a clubby enclave for its descendants.
Until recently, the society has guarded its isolation.
In 1974, it turned down an offer to join New York City's Cultural Institutions Group, comprising those institutions receiving city funds for their operations.
One veteran observer of the New York museum scene summarised the insular society's predicament: ‘During the 60s, 70s and 80s when all other institutions realised that there was no way that they could build up an endowment without catering to the masses and without appealing to the federal government, museums went with cap in hand; they saw this was now the game.
The New-York Historical Society couldn't bring itself to do that.
It was run like a club.
It closed its eyes to what was going on’.
Still, critics wonder how an institution next to the Museum of Natural History and a block away from New York's Columbus Avenue could attract less than a third of the number of visitors who go every year to Norman Rockwell's home in Stockbridge, Massachusetts.
In the early 1980s, the society began operating deficits, paying for its expenses by either liquidating chunks of its endowment or selling securities that had been donated in trust.
This cash haemorrhage intensified after 1982, when the society hired as its director James Bell, a genealogist now demonised as the administrator most responsible for the institution's demise.
Expenses multiplied under Bell's efforts to seize control from the society's members.
Consultants were paid lavishly for advice and Bell even paid himself for overtime, taboo in American curatorial practice.
While Bell's management style did tremendous damage to the society's finances, a number of his bizarre gambits had an even worse effect on the venerable institution's reputation.
In 1988, paintings on loan from the New York Public Library were found to have mildewed and rotted in one of the society's warehouses.
In that same year, another lender, Robert Mapplethorpe, accused this historical society of fraud and forgery.
Mapplethorpe had lent a set of nineteenth-century silver belonging to the collector and patron Samuel Wagstaff, Jr., to the society, with the intention of selling the silver after the loan period had ended.
When Mapplethorpe asked for the objects to be returned, Bell and his staff presented him with a letter purported to be in Wagstaff's hand, extending the loan period an additional five years.
(the document was particularly bizarre, since Wagstaff was near death from AIDS when the original loan was made).
After the press got hold of this story, the society was forced to capitulate and settle the case, returning the silver, which brought a high price at auction thanks to all the publicity.
By that time, the tarnish on its once-genteel image was murky.
New York State's attorney general investigated the society and required it to make quarterly reports, an obligation that still applies today.
The National Endowment for the Humanities rejected the society for a $1-million grant in 1988, citing mismanagement and neglect.
After Bell was dismissed in 1988, the society's once somnolent board hired a new director and began to change the institution's orientation toward exhibitions and ‘museum education’.
Fundraising began in earnest, with the first of such projects intended to fund restoration and the modernisation of storage spaces.
For the last two years, the Jewish Museum has been a tenant at the society's building, and new visitors were introduced to its collection.
Since 1988, the Society has raised $24 million, $5 million of which the board provided, but that cash hasn't stopped the society's downward spiral.
Julianna Sciolla, the society's chief operating officer, says its predicament reflects a crucial financial dilemma facing all U.S. museums, that funds can be raised for construction and exhibition projects, but not for the ordinary task of operating an institution.
The society's woes are compounded by its inability to get federal, state, or city funds.
Recently, the society offered to give its building to New York City in exchange for a revision of status entitling it to city-provided operating funds.
As of early February, society officials say they had received no response to their request from the New York City Department of Cultural Affairs.
Ms Sciolla says the society's situation reflects the need for a ‘cultural policy’ for the city at State level to allow for rapid flexible action to keep places such as the society from disappearing.
In the absence of such a policy, the society had sought to merge with at least eight institutions — universities, museums and libraries — before initiating talks with the New York Public Library.
The library was to lend the society the $1.5 million that Sotheby's eventually provided.
Other museum officials have condemned that arrangement, citing ethical bans on deaccessioning works of art for any purpose other than the acquisition of similar works for a collection.
Society officials stand by the Sotheby's deal, saying it abides by their institution's own deaccessioning rules.
Sotheby's was selected because the auction house could move faster than the Public Library, the original lender-to-be, and because it could offer a ‘very favourable’ interest rate, which neither of the parties will disclose.
David Redden, the senior vice president at Sotheby's who arranged the loan said that Sotheby's approached the society with the idea of giving ‘them the breathing space they so desperately needed while they were trying to determine what they were going to do next for themselves…with the hope that other institutions will join in’.
Critics suspect that Sotheby's has sought early access to the spoils of a collection whose dispersal on the block is considered inevitable by many.
The society still needs $1 million just to meet bare-bones expenses until June, the end of the fiscal year.
Its longterm needs are even more troubling.
The institution requires a $40 million endowment to resume all its routine operations on a permanent basis, says Julianna Sciolla, and urgent building repairs will take another $20 million.
The society's vision of the sort of institution it would like to be in the future — if it has a future — is another problem.
Since 1988, the society's exhibitions have stressed education and an historical approach to the faddish theme of multiculturalism.
In the research library, however, scholars are still working with nineteenth-century card catalogue entries.
One indication of the extent to which fundraising has superseded any curatorial concern at the museum is that the society asked Thomas Armstrong, Jr., to become its director last year.
Armstrong, dismissed from the directorship of the Whitney Museum of American Art several years ago, presided over what many considered to be a collapse of curatorial standards of that institution.
Armstrong thought the society's problems were too intractable even for his prodigious public relations skills, and turned down the offer.
Many in the art world believe these hardships have already sent the society over the edge and that opportunists are poised to loot it at discount prices.
Julianna Sciolla admits that ‘the sharks are in the water.
There are a lot of institutions that would love our collections.
Our goal is to save this institution intact.
Getty buys huge Futurist archive
The Getty Center for the History of Art and the Humanities has acquired, almost certainly from the artist's daughter Vittoria, a large part of the personal archive of the Italian Futurist Filippo Tommaso Marinetti and his wife Benedetta.
The archive covers the artist's entire career from his beginnings in 1905 as editor of La Poesia to his death in 1944.
It contains over 120 manuscripts of essays, manifestos, poems and lectures as well as personal correspondence including much unpublished material, plus 20,000 slides of Marinetti's scrapbooks for the years 1904–1944.
Among the papers are more than one hundred manuscripts and letters by members of the Futurist movement such as Balla, Boccioni, Severini, Corrado, Depero and Prampolini, while more than 1,000 photographs record Futurist exhibitions, demonstrations, political events and theatrical performances.
Original works include posters and handwritten music as well as a recording of the artist reading a poem in 1937.
Why has this extraordinary assemblage not been secured by Italy?
The New York Historical Society
From apple-corers to Sardanapalus's palace and much, much more
When the New-York Historical Society was founded by a small group of gentlemen in 1804, its goals and aims were simple.
According to the founding minutes of 20 November 1804, its principal design….’ should be to collect and preserve whatever may relate to the natural, civil or ecclesiastical History of the United States in general and this state in particular’.
For the first half of the nineteenth century, these goals were admirably adhered to, as the society assembled mostly printed and written matter: books, letters, manuscripts, diaries, letters and newspapers, making it one of the most distinguished libraries in the country.
Whatever paintings or works of art it possessed were mostly unexceptional portraits of Presidents or notable New Yorkers by Gilbert Stuart, Ezra Ames or John Trumbull.
In the 1950s, the flourishing Society decided to add the acquisition of art and antiquities to its activities, and began an omnivorous phase, accepting and pursuing works that had virtually no connection with its founders' goals.
In 1857, its first important Old Master paintings were donated by Thomas W.C. Moore: a large Gerrit Willemsz.
Horst ‘Tobias and the Angel’(then given to Ferdinand Boll) and Theodor Rombouts and Adriaen van Utrecht ‘Still life with figures, fruit, vegetables and game’ attributed to Rubens and Frans Snyders).
One of the Society's greatest strengths is its holdings of the Hudson River School, with numerous fine works by Thomas Cole, Asher B. Durand (over 300 paintings and drawings) and Frederick Church.
In 1858, the Society received the collection of the bankrupt New York Gallery of Fine Arts, founded in 1844 by wealthy grocer Luman Reed, who let the public visit his private house for a fee.
As the first great art patron of Manhattan, Reed had commissioned works from leading American painters of the day.
His most notable purchase was the five-canvas series by Cole of ‘The course of Empire’, large landscapes depicting the rise of ancient society from primeval times, to the development of agricultural and artistic skills, to blissful arcadia, to over-prosperous decadence, to final ruins and desolation.
The same year, the society received thirteen massive Assyrian bas-reliefs from the palace of Sardanapalus in Nineveh c.650 B.C. from James Lenox (one of the founders of the New York Public Library) and in 1859–60, the Society purchased a large collection of Egyptian art (featuring several mummified bulls) from British physician Dr Henry Abbott for $60,000 (since 1937, these have been at the Brooklyn Museum, which purchased them from Flemish the Historical Society in 1978).
In 1862, the Historical Society acquired what many believe to be its greatest treasure: the 433 original watercolours by John James Audubon for his Birds of America (regularly misdescribed by the New York Times as Audubon prints) purchased from Audubon's widow (against competition from the British Museum) for $4,000.
The two last important painting collections acquired by the Historical Society were the Thomas J. Bryan collection of European and American paintings in 1867, and the Louis Durr Dutch and collection in 1882.
Bryan's best pictures include the desco da parto commissioned for the birth of Lorenzo de' Medici and the Society's finest eighteenth-century American painting, and one of the greatest pictures in American art, Charles Wilson Peale's ‘Group portrait of the Peale Family’.
Museums
MASSMoCA
Governor makes State backing contingent on private participation
Foundering plan to make a depressed mill town into a Guggenheim satellite for contemporary art has until 31 July to raise $12 million
The Massachusetts Museum of Contemporary Art (MASSMoCA) may be just a red-brick castle in the western New England sky, but locals hope the grand initiative will one day bring prosperity to this economically depressed mill town.
That day may be a long way off.
The plan is to convert a twenty-eight-building factory compound into the world's largest museum of post-1960 international art.
Sceptics doubt, however, whether this scenic region hundreds of miles from a major city can sustain a sprawling 13.5-acre showcase for Minimal, Pop, and Conceptual art.
Sprague Electric, which vacated in 1985, will donate the abandoned complex if state funds are secured.
But, with projected costs approaching $100 million (£71.4 million) and the Massachusetts budget seriously overburdened, Republican governor William F. Weld is not prepared to gamble on less than a sure bet.
In 1991 when he took office, Mr Weld froze a $35 million bond issue earmarked for the project by his Democratic predecessor Michael Dukakis who, before entering the Presidential race, had doled out $1.75 million for a rosy feasibility study.
Swayed by the prospects for economic revitalisation, governor Weld gave MASSMoCA another $688,000 and until the end of 1992 to raise $12 million as proof of private-sector support.
The campaign fell $8 million short.
Rather than scrap the scheme, however, Mr Weld has now extended the deadline until 31 July, 1993.
North Adams mayor John Barrett, who chairs MASSMoCA's Cultural Development Commission, interprets this as license to take as much time as he needs to find the additional funds.
The governor would not speculate on another extension, but Republican senator Jane Swift, a MASSMoCA advocate from North Adams, does not think there is ‘an unlimited time frame’.
Moreover, the governor stipulates that before he will allocate the remaining $33 million, MASSMoCA must form a partnership with an established museum to ensure continuous access to art and to provide management and technical support.
The commission solicited proposals from North American museums and received three positive responses: the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in New York reaffirmed interest in becoming a full collaborator (it was the Guggenheim's current director, Thomas Krens, who conceived of MASSMoCA in the mid-1980s while director of the nearby Williams College Art Museum; he has since dissociated himself to avoid conflict of interest); the ICA Boston proposed developing shared programs, mainly exhibitions; and the Art Gallery of Ontario in Toronto offered to place a single large installation on long-term loan.
MASSMoCA Director Joseph C. Thompson told The Art Newspaper, ‘The one we're focusing on making binding is the Guggenheim…
If that doesn't come through, the others would not be sufficient’.
The Guggenheim, which is developing satellites around the world, is unwilling to make an early commitment to MASSMoCA.
Deputy director Michael Govan told The Art Newspaper, ‘We're very enthusiastic about the project.
We think it's viable if there's an investment’.
The MASSMoCA and Guggenheim boards will draft an agreement before the 31 July deadline, but the remaining $8 million probably will not materialise, especially with the Guggenheim's own program suffering from inadequate funds.
What does seem likely is that MASSMoCA's commissioners will petition the governor to release funds incrementally to allow construction to begin.
But since the State is unwilling to go the distance alone, rest assured his answer will be no.
Moscow
The dissidents come home
‘The way into Russian museums lies through the West.
It is there that they make classics out of our modern art’
Russia has been showing former dissidents and émigrés in Moscow's and St Petersburg's best museums but almost all the exhibitions have had Western sponsors.
In the tormented conditions of Russia today, this series of exhibitions has not caused much of a stir.
Rather, there has been feeling of surprise at just how much energy the ideologists of the Soviet regime expended in the fight against what was then known as ‘anti-Soviet’ art.
The Marble Palace, a section of the Russian Museum, has seen an exhibition of works by Vladimir Nekrasov, who since 1976 has been living in America.
In the Russian Museum itself, Oskar Rabin and Valentina Kropivnitskaya, two artists who once worked in Moscow but now live in Paris, have their work on display at present.
Oskar Rabin took part in the famous ‘Bulldozer Exhibition’ in Moscow in 1974, when the authorities used bulldozers to break up a street exhibition by modern artists.
The Pushkin Museum is holding an exhibition by Mikhail Kulakov, who has been living in Italy since 1976.
It has also held an exhibition of work by Grisha Bruskin entitled ‘General Instructions — Other Name’, financed by the Marlborough Gallery, New York.
This is the first exhibition of Bruskin's work in Moscow since his ‘Fundamental Lexicon’ was top lot at the 1987 Sotheby's Moscow sale and since his emigration in 1988.
Bruskin and the poet-conceptualist Lev Rubinshteyn have displayed a collaborative work, a manuscript book of almost 200 pages with text and illustrations on separate leaves.
Russian critics consider this work to be an important stage in the development of the Russian avant-garde book, the origins of which lie with artists such as Malevich.
Commenting on this series of nostalgic exhibitions, one sceptical Moscow critic says: ‘The way into Russian museums lies through the West.
It is there that they make classics out of our modern art’.
London
National Gallery: new loans, new acquisitions
The Buccleuch Leonardo, the Halifax Titian plus two fine Danish purchases
Last year the National Gallery of Scotland subjected the Duke of Buccleuch's celebrated ‘Madonna of the Yarnwinder’ to close comparative scrutiny, using other versions of the picture as well as related drawings by Leonardo and other artists (see The Art Newspaper, No. 13, December 1991, p.2).
Now the National Gallery, London, is borrowing the picture, minus the rest of the exhibition, but with the intention of comparing it with other works by Leonardo in their collection.
The painting is hung next to‘The Virgin of the Rocks’ and the cartoon of the Virgin and Child with St Anne and will be on show throughout the early part of the year.
One of Titian's most celebrated portraits, the ‘Portrait of a Young Man’ from the collection of the Earl of Halifax and the Trustees of the Halifax Collection has been lent to the Gallery for at least two years.
Datable to around 1510–20, it complements the Gallery's two early portraits by the artist, the ‘Portrait of a Man’ and the ‘Portrait of a Woman’(La Schiavona).
The Halifax portrait will be on temporary loan to the Grand Palais for the major exhibition of Venetian sixteenth-century painting (‘The century of Titian: from Giorgione to Veronese’, 13 March 14 June; see The Art Newspaper No. 25, February 1993, p.4) and will be on show in London after the exhibition closes.
Now considered the finest portrait remaining in private hands in Britain, it is among a very few first rank works by the artist in any genre remaining in private hands in Britain.
Continuing its policy of purchasing early nineteenth-century European pictures, the National Gallery has acquired two important new works by Danish artists.
‘The Forum in Rome’ by C.W. Eckersberg was painted in 1814 and is one of a group of works executed en plein air in Rome during the artist's three year stay in that city.
It was purchased at auction in Copenhagen for £167,360 by London dealers Hazlitt, Gooden and Fox, bidding on behalf of the Gallery.
The second work is by Christen Kobke who studied under Eckersberg in the 1820s.
It depicts one of his fellow pupils, Wilhelm Bendz, shown holding a painter's maulstick and painted around 1830.
In 1984 the National Gallery mounted an exhibition of nineteenth-century Danish painting and subsequently purchased a major work by Kobke, ‘The Northern drawbridge to the Citadel, Copenhagen’.
The cost of this welcome new addition was £60,000.
Artists' bequests
The Midlands' Epstein collection revealed
In 1973 the the Midlands town of Walsall was the recipient of an outstandingly generous donation.
The collection of paintings, drawings, sculpture and works of art assembled between 1959 and 1973 by Lady Epstein, widow of the sculptor, and the American sculptress Sally Ryan, was bequeathed to the town's art gallery and named the Garman Ryan collection.
It has recently reopened to the public in newly-furnished galleries in the Walsall Museum and Art Gallery, while a new, illustrated catalogue has been produced.
Funding for both of these has been provided by the borough council, drawing on the government's ‘Regional Challenge Initiative’ under which Walsall is one of twelve boroughs in the country to receive funding for urban renewal.
It has also been helped with funding from the Museums and Galleries Commission, together with a number of foundations including the Henry Moore Foundation, The Pilgrim Trust and the J. Paul Getty Charitable Trust.
The collection totals 360 items and is exceptionally diverse, ranging from forty-two works by Epstein himself to a number of  outstanding paintings and drawings: William Blake ‘The Humility of the Saviour’; van Gogh ‘Sorrow’, a drawing of 1882; Monet ‘Le chemin creux dans la falaise a Varangeville’, oil on canvas; Degas, ‘Portrait de Marguerite, soeur de l'artiste’, oil on canvas, circa 1860–65; Lucien Freud ‘Portrait of Kitty’, oil on board, 1948–49 and three other works by Freud; Gericault, a nude figure study; Constable, a cloud study; Turner, watercolour of Carlisle, as well as Egyptian, Greek, Roman, Middle Eastern and gothic works of art.
Naturally the quality of the objects is not entirely consistent (some of the prints seem pretty standard, for example), but the sheer range of artists makes it an impressive resource.
Walsall Museum and Art Gallery has developed an energetic and lively educational programme around the collection, encouraging primary school teachers to use it as a teaching aid for the national curriculum, starting up a printmaking course inspired by the works in the collection and offering prizes for the best short description of one of the works.
The biggest museum in the world for the blind
The Organización Nacional de Ciegos (Once) has opened the largest museum in the world of art by and for the visually impaired.
The two floors, with a total of 1500 square metres, have been divided into three sections: sculpture, casts and models of works of art accompanied by acoustic and braille information; works by the blind; mechanical means used by the blind to gain access to the world of art during the last 200 years.
The address of the new museum is Calle de la Coruna 18, Madrid.
Picasso Museum to grow by 30%
The Picasso Museum has announced its intention to increase its floor space by 1,500 square metres in 1996–97.
The new area will be created by extending into the adjacent palaces of Mauri and Finestres on the Calle de Montcada.
The increase in space (by thirty per cent) will allow more of the collection's 3,000 works to be shown at any one time, particularly relating to the holdings of theatrical designs, ceramics and the forty-four canvases of the 1957 ‘Meninas’ cycle.
The Picasso Museum opened in 1963 and during the artist's lifetime the collection rapidly expanded to around 2,000 works, largely donated by the artist.
Lugano
Francesca Thyssen-Bornemisza-Habsburg makes her debut as curator
Following the departure of the Old Master paintings to Madrid the Villa Favorita reopens in June with a permanent collection of American and European nineteenth- and twentieth-century paintings
April 2 sees the reopening of the Villa Favorita after a transformation masterminded by Francesca Thyssen-Bornemisza, daughter of Baron Hans-Heinrich.
The Villa Favorita gallery has been closed since October 1992 when the Thyssen-Bornemisza collection of Old Master paintings transferred to the Villahermosa Palace in Madrid on a ten year loan to the Spanish Government (see p. 2 and The Art Newspaper No. 21, October 1992, p.1).
Francesca Thyssen, who married Karl Habsburg, the son of Otto von Habsburg, the last Crown Prince of the Austro-Hungarian empire, at the end of January, is attempting to maintain the position of the Villa Favorita in the international art scene.
Thirteen of the twenty rooms have been given over to a new permanent exhibition ‘Europe and America: nineteenth- and twentieth-century paintings and watercolours from the Thyssen-Bornemisza Collection’.
Around 150 works, many of which previously hung in the bedrooms and bathrooms of the Thyssen homes, and have not been exhibited previously, will be hung in galleries whose pre-war Germanic museum style has been replaced by modern tones of grey.
American nineteenth-century and Impressionist landscapes comprise the opening section in the first two rooms.
Painters of the West and of the Luminist and Hudson River Schools such as Alfred T. Bricher, Frederick Church, Thomas Cole and Sanford Gifford are joined by American Impressionists Theodore Robinson, John Twachtman, Childe Hassam and Charles Hawthorne.
The exhibition continues into twentieth-century painting with works of Futurism, the Cubist-Futurist Russians, American Cubism, Precisionism represented by Charles Demuth and Charles Sheeler and thence on through the various transformations that the art of this century has seen.
For further acquisitions Francesca Thyssen-Bornemisza intends to draw on the so-called third rank of paintings in the Thyssen Collection, bought in order to be sold on or exchanged for better works.
A catalogue of the newly-displayed permanent collection by Elisabeth Storm-Nagy has  been published by Electa in Italian, German and English (price SFr20).
While the permanent collections in the revamped galleries may not merit a vaut le detour in the guide book, this summer's temporary exhibition definitely does.
Also organised by Francesca Thyssen-Bornemisza, it is ‘Khara Khoto: Treasures of the Buddhist civilisation of the Tangut Kingdom, between China and Tibet’.
Seventy early Buddhist paintings from the twelfth to thirteenth centuries, found at the turn of the century by the Russian Imperial Geographical Society in the burial stupa of Khara Khoto on the silk route, have been loaned by the Hermitage Museum.
This is the first time that the paintings will be shown as a group outside the Hermitage.
The exhibition runs from 25 June to 31 October, the period during which the Villa Favorita is open to the public.
Happy Birthday dear Denver!
Claes Oldenburg's design for a greetings card, celebrating one hundred years of the Denver Museum of Art.
The artist has transformed a photo of the museum's hexagonal window into a birthday candle.
Four hundred artists represented in the museum's collection have responded to the idea of producing a greetings image on an 8.5 x 11 inch sheet of paper.
Participants include Native American weavers, Chinese painters, Richard Diebenkorn, Alex Katz, Sol LeWitt, and Tom Wesselman.
Oldenburg's design will be reproduced as a centennial image
Toronto
Government of Ontario rethinks punitive policy towards major museum
When the newly renovated and expanded Art Gallery of Ontario (AGO) finally reopened its doors in late January, it found nearly C$7 million ($5.4 million; £3.9 million) on the stoop.
The bundle included C$4 million from trustee Joey Tanenbaum's family, C$2 million from the province, and C$900,000 more from Ottawa.
The Tanenbaums, whose fortune derives from real estate and hydroelectric power, had already contributed C$2.65 million to the gallery's C$58 million expansion before adding C$1 million, and pledging another C$3 million to launch an endowment drive.
Prominent figures in the city's cultural life and longstanding patrons of the AGO, Mr and Mrs Tanenbaum collect nineteenth-century French academic art, and have presented a number of works to the gallery, including bronze casts of two figures from Rodin's Burgers of Calais.
In recognition of their magnanimity, the original Beaux-Arts portion of the museum has been christened the Tanenbaum Centre of European Art.
The philanthropic family's largesse was echoed by surprise announcements from both the Federal and provincial governments.
The Federal Communications Ministry found C$900,000 to further reduce the C$9 million debt outstanding on the expansion, and the Ontario Ministry of Culture and Communications promised to add C$2 million to the gallery's 1993–94 budget, bringing the annual base grant from the province to C$11.5 million ($8.8 million; £6.4 million).
The boost from the province represents a complete about-face by the New Democratic Party, whose Culture and Communications Minister Karen Haslam had chided the gallery for its ‘elitism’ and imposed devastating cutbacks that forced the museum to lay off 244 employees and close for seven months last year (see The Art Newspaper No.22, November 1992, p.7 and No.24, January 1993, p.8).
She was however obliged to heed the advice of a task force she appointed to examine the AGO's operations, and which recommended increased support.
Within weeks of Ms Haslam's turnaround, Ontario premier Bob Rae reassigned her to a lesser role in the Ministry of Health and appointed Anne Swarbrick, formerly minister-without-portfolio responsible for Women's Issues, to head Ontario's newly recombined ministries of Culture, Tourism and Recreation.
A spokesman for the premier told The Art Newspaper these changes will not affect government policy.
In any event, it appears the AGO is emerging from the financial forest.
Introducing institutions
Geneva's contemporary art centre
Exhibition hall reopens in a city very slowly warming to contemporary art
Following the completion of an eight-month programme of renovations and improvements, Geneva's Centre d'art contemporain has reopened with a new entrance and stairwell, a lecture theatre, a ‘Projects’ room to be used by younger Swiss artists, a workshop for children and two new exhibitions: an installation of 2400 sheets from Allan McCollum's ‘Drawings’series (to 12 September) and drawings and photographs by Dutch artist, Pieter Laurens Moll (to 16 May).
Both exhibitions are curated by the Centre's director, Paolo Colombo, who previously held curatorial posts at North Illinois University Art Gallery and at Philadelphia's Tyler School of Art.
The Centre d'art contemporain has led an itinerant existence since it was founded in 1974 by Adelina von Fürstenberg, now director of Le Magasin, Grenoble's contemporary art centre.
Launched with private funds in a room on the university's campus, it has been forced to relocate on several occasions.
In 1985, its rooms in the Ancien Palais d'Expositions, which had been provided by the city, were damaged by a hailstorm and the Centre was evacuated.
Two years later, the Palais Wilson, the former League of Nations building in which it had taken space, was destroyed by fire.
Then, within a week of his appointment in September 1989, Colombo's own offices in the old city were flooded.
As a result, he accelerated the Centre's latest move into the SIP building, a former scientific instruments factory on the fringe of industrial Geneva and near to the opera house, which the city had acquired for an arts and exhibition complex.
The Centre, which occupies three upper floors providing a total of 12,000 square feet of exhibition space, shares the building with the Musée de l'Automobile, l'Autocyclette et du Velo, a private collection of motor vehicles dating from 1890–1945.
A proposed museum of modern art may move into an empty wing of the building if a consortium of local bankers are able to raise the necessary finance.
Since 1981, the Centre has received some funding from the city which now provides an annual budget of SFr390,000 (£177,250; $248,000), covering almost exactly one half of its operating costs of SFr 800,000.
The balance is derived from the usual sources of membership, donations and sponsors.
A series of short history of art courses contributes nearly SFr20,000, but there are no book or coffee shop concessions as yet, although the Centre publishes its own catalogues.
From these exceedingly modest sums, the Centre has succeeded in presenting a worthy programme of exhibitions and other events over its twenty years of activity, including Sol LeWitt (1976), performances by Dan Graham (1976) and John Cage (1978), Francesco Clemente (1978), Cindy Sherman (1983), Kiki Smith (1990), and Juan Munoz and Genevieve Cadieux (1991).
Colombo's forthcoming programme, which divides into conventional exhibitions and invitations to leading artists to make special installations of longer duration, includes Giovanni Anselmo, Boyd Webb, Louise Lawler (1993) and Rosemarie Trockel and Greek artist Nicos Baikas (1994).
Although it is a Kunsthalle rather than a collection, Hamish Fulton's wall text ‘Rock Fall Echo Dust’ decorates the entrance hall and Richard Wentworth and Swiss artist, Anne Sauser-Hall, are making small sculptures to be installed discreetly on the stairwell.
Frank Stella forced to withdraw his plans for the Groningen Museum
The pavilion for modern art for the new Groningen museum, will not be designed by Frank Stella as previously announced.
Stella's design, shaped like a leaf, would have exceeded the available budget of DFl.7.5 million (£2.8 million; $3.9 million) by at least DFl.1–1.5 million, partly because the artist had intended to cover the walls and the roof with 5mm thick teflon.
Stella, unwilling to change his design and substitute a different and cheaper material, was working for the museum on a ‘sale or return’ basis and has agreed not to charge the museum.
His design for a museum in Dresden is still under consideration.
For the record
Government policy on museums in France: Part I
Spreading the gloire around
In view of the elections this month, what has Socialist policy been since 1981?
The impressive energy with which France has been building and renovating museums as well as adding to their collections since 1981 — the year François  Mitterrand became President and Jack Lang his Minister of Culture — actually began in the last years of the previous Centre Right administration.
It started in the 1970s as a substantial catching-up exercise, mainly centred on Paris.
The more conspicuous results of this were the Centre Pompidou and the Musée d'Orsay; a law of 1978 earmarked FFr363 million over 1978–82 for the the latter out of a total FFr1.407 billion to all museums, representing a five-fold increase relative to the previous five years and 64% of the total budget for culture.
When the Socialists came to power in 1981 their priorities were creativity and decentralisation without neglecting the work on the major construction projects.
Throughout the Eighties, museum-building spread like a fever from the centre to the provinces, not on the same scale as in Germany (see The Art Newspaper survey No. 13, Dec. 1991, pp.6–7) but with schemes of similar grandeur.
The Socialist government was attacked by the opposition for too much intervention and still too little decentralisation.
The Centre Right interregnum of 1986–88 saw a dip in expenditure and a greater emphasis on the heritage and teaching of art.
François Léotard, Culture Minister to Jack Chirac, the Gaullist Prime Minister, established a programme for the restoration of cathedrals, monuments, historic parks and archaeological sites.
When returned to power in1988, Jack Lang took some of the opposition's criticism to heart and also switched his priorities to the heritage, especially the cathedrals and historic gardens, to restoration and to education, although today he is still attacked by the opposition for neglecting these fields.
Beneath the political rhetoric and differences of nuance, however, there is considerable similarity in the approaches of the Centre Right and the Left.
THE STRUCTURES
The Ministry of Culture has greatly increased its areas of activity in the last decade, and last year Education was added to its remit.
At the centre of its responsibilities relating to museums is the Direction des Musées de France, and Réunion des Musées Nationaux (see opposite).
These two bodies exercise various functions, mainly in relation to the thirty-four national museums under the Ministry of Culture and all over France, which include the Louvre and the Musée d'Orsay.
The Direction des Musées de France funds the running and collection-management costs and controls the buildings, conservation and personnel.
It subsidises the Réunion to the tune of around 7% per year, which otherwise finances itself mainly through entrance charges to museums and temporary exhibitions and through publishing activities.
The Réunion funds acquisitions, administers exhibitions, and is responsible for setting and collecting charges, and publishing.
The Direction also oversees and assists the so-called classes and controlés museums, that is the 1200 or so provincial museums either directly linked into the Ministry through their director or supervised in order to ensure that they comply with certain requirements (see chart).
Further museums are the responsibility of other divisions of the same Ministry, for example, the Musée National d'Histoire Naturel, which comes under the Education department.
Six other government departments support museums; for instance, the Ministry of Industry and Research runs the Cité des Sciences et Industrie at la Villette on the outskirts of Paris.
There has been a delegation of powers downwards to the Réunion and individual museums, and in 1991 the Réunion changed its statute to operate more like a private enterprise.
The link between the Ministry and the Réunion is assured by the fact that the head of the Direction and the chairman of the Réunion, ministerial appointments, are one and the same person.
At the beginning of this year the Louvre became an établissement public administratif, which means that henceforth the director of the museum will also be solely responsible for the whole establishment, which will also have greater financial autonomy.
The budgetary procedures and the administration of the buildings will also be unified, although the Direction and the Réunion will maintain their roles in shaping the museum's budget and in acquisitions.
A similar but more limited process of delegation (centre de responsabilité) started in 1991 at the Musée d'Orsay and will be introduced in a further five national museums.
The process is also being extended to the provincial museums.
In particular, the Council of Ministers is currently examining a Bill abolishing the musées classes et controlés categories.
A museum will be able to register as a ‘museum of France’ if it respects certain rules concerning the management of its collections and the level of service given to the public.
Although the Bill intends to allow the transfer of items in the collections from one public body to another and the disposal of objects under certain conditions, it reaffirms the principle of inalienability.
It would also allows local authorities to set up établissements publics for cultural purposes.
THE SPENDING
Other government departments besides the Ministry of Culture, in particular the Foreign Ministry, finance substantial cultural programmes.
Furthermore, central government provides only the smaller portion of public spending on culture: in 1990, the Départements, Régions and Communes between them spent FFr24 billion and the Ministry of Culture, FFr 11.5 billion.
The Direction des Musées de France's figures do not include the central government contribution to the Fonds Nationals d'Art Contemporain and Fonds Régionaux d'Art Contemporain, which derive from the Delegation aux arts plastiques, another department of the Ministry, responsible for the visual arts.
Between 1981 and 1990 the yearly average spending by the Ministry of Culture increased by 4% in real terms.
The very significant leap of 1982, an increase of 73%, was partly to offset the dip in the previous three years and was in turn offset by another dip during the Léotard years (1986–88).
This year, to great fanfares, the Ministry's spending has attained the symbolic figure of 1% of the central government budget.
In nominal terms, overall budgeted expenditure on museums for the 1981–90 period was FFr13.529 billion, growing in real terms at a yearly average of 10%.
This rate has dipped significantly in the last two years reflecting the shift in priorities of the government's cultural policy.
Around a third of expenditure was absorbed by the projects of the Musée d'Orsay (opened 1986) and the Louvre (the Pei Pyramid opened 1989) with the Richelieu Wing opening later this year.
The Orangerie des Tuileries has been refurbished (1983); the Musée Picasso created in the hotel Sale (1985) and other thirty major museums in and around the capital have been modernised and renovated.
Funds earmarked for the building and renovation of museums in the provinces increased in real terms by 16% per year 1981–92.
During the early 1980s, expenditure on the grands projets in Paris was so large that from 1980 to 1983 less than one-fifth of central government funds was going to the provinces.
This proportion crept up to around one-quarter in the late 1980s.
What has significantly grown is expenditure by the Régions, Départements and Communes on culture in general and museum-building in particular.
Central government funding represents 20% to 40% of the total costs of about 400 projects, eighty of which are major.
There has been considerable and overdue renovation work on important museums such as Grenoble, Orleans, Amiens, Rouen and Nantes.
In the field of the fine arts, after the exemplary renovation of the Nantes museums, FFr314.9 million, of which FFr155 million are central government funds, are being invested in the Lyon museum.
FFr180.5 million (FFr80 million are from central government) are flowing into the Grenoble museum.
Two other sectors have been especially fostered: environment museums and contemporary art museums, like the CACP in Bordeaux, the Musée d'Art Moderne et Contemporaine of Nice and Saint-Etienne.
The Ministry of Culture is also cooperating with the Delegation aux arts plastiques on various regional projects, including the creation of a modern art museum in Toulouse.
Exhibitions
Villa Malpensata, Lugano
Bacon exhibition includes work he tried to destroy
Lugano makes attempt to compensate for losing best of the Thyssen collection
A new exhibition of paintings by Francis Bacon, who died in Madrid in April 1992, opens at the Villa Malpensata at the beginning of this month (7 March-30 May).
Comprising four large and seven small triptychs and fifty other works, it has been curated by Dr Rudy Chiappini, director of the Dicastero Musei e Cultura della Citta di Lugano, and private dealer Massimo Martino, and is the most important, in addition to being the only really international, exhibition ever to have been organised by the Lugano Municipal Arts Museum.
Last year, the museum showed works by Thomas Hart Benton from the Kansas City Art Gallery but, otherwise, has restricted itself to exhibitions of local Swiss and Italian artists.
For two years until autumn 1991 and Dr Chiappini's appointment, it did not even have a director.
The new effort is a clear signal that the city means to win back tourism which evaporated when Baron Thyssen removed his collection of Old Master and modern paintings from the Villa Favorita.
Hotels, restaurants and other local businesses are known to have been deeply disappointed that the city failed to make a suitable offer which might have persuaded the Baron to forestall or reconsider his new arrangements in Madrid.
To that end, the organisers have opted for a less familiar face of Francis Bacon and tracked down rare and unusual material as well as pictures of great significance.
Nearly two-thirds of the works which they have selected did not feature in the major retrospective surveys organised by the Tate Gallery in 1985 and by the Hirshhorn Museum, Washington, and the Metropolitan Museum, New York, in 1989–90, and will not, as a result, be particularly well known outside the circles of scholarship and Bacon's dealers.
They include two early landscape paintings, ‘Dog’(1952) and ‘Landscape, South of France’(1952), two versions of ‘Sphinx’(1954), a sinister self-portrait (1956), ‘Triptych 1976’ and ‘Triptych 1986–87’(Marlborough Fine Art), that haunting work which represents, on its two wings, Woodrow Wilson at the Peace Conference and Trotsky's blood-splattered lectern.
The exhibition closes with ‘Study from the Human Body’(1991), Bacon's last completed painting which has not yet been shown in a museum context.
But the nearly complete reconstruction of the artist's only polyptych, ‘Study for a Pope I-VI’(1961), is expected to arouse the greatest interest.
Shown as a single work of art at the Tate Gallery and three other European museums in 1962–63, those six canvases were subsequently divided and sold separately, and none of them has been included in any recent exhibition of Bacon's art.
Martino's ambition to reunite the series for the first time in thirty years has, however, been thwarted by the refusal of Sophia Loren to loan ‘Study for a Pope V’, but the exhibition reassembles the remaining five canvases, including the version owned by the Musei Vaticani.
Miss Loren's picture was one of thirteen canvases by Bacon which, with a collection of works by Picasso, Morandi, Henry Moore and other artists, were confiscated by the Italian government as the actress and her husband, Carlo Ponti, attempted to take them to Paris in 1977.
It was shown at the Brera, Milan, in 1984.
Intriguingly, the exhibition features several pictures and objects which date from the beginning of Bacon's career, when he was employed as a decorator and influenced by Picasso.
They belong to the work which he disowned and attempted to destroy when he relaunched himself with ‘Three Studies for Figures at the base of a Crucifixion’(1944), the triptych which opens all conventional accounts of Bacon's art.
Less than a dozen works have survived from this period and, on the artist's instructions, they were never exhibited with his other work during his lifetime.
Chiappini and Martino are showing a carpet and a painted screen (about 1929), a gouache (about 1929) and ‘Interior of a Room’(about 1933), a fascinating composition rich with hints of the artist's later development, which private dealer James Kirkman bought in auction in London in 1989.
A second exhibition of Bacon's paintings, carrying the official stamp of the British Council and curated by David Sylvester for the Comune of Venice and the Biennale, opens at the Museo Correr in June.
Young British artists at Saatchi
Marc Quinn, Mark Wallinger, Sarah Lucas and Rose Finn-Kelsey are the four artists featured in ‘Young British Artists II’ at the Saatchi Collection galleries (until 28 August).
A previous exhibition of younger British art, which is Saatchi's current preoccupation, attracted enormous attention and over 40,000 visitors for a room of sculptures by Damien Hirst (see The Art Newspaper No. 16, March 1992, p.7).
Quinn is represented by several heads of historical figures, modelled in bread and cast in bronze or lead; ‘Self’, the celebrated self-portrait created from eight pints of the artist's own blood and displayed in a refrigeration unit; and ‘You take my breath away’, an empty latex cast of the artist's body suspended from the ceiling like the skin of St Bartholomew.
Finn-Kelsey's two installations are an untitled steam sculpture, seen at the Chisenhale Gallery last summer, and ‘Royal Box’, a walk-in refrigerator in the centre of which is a block of ice.
Richard Wilson's oil room, ‘20.50’, created in the gallery at the beginning of 1991, remains on permanent view.
The wonders of Bakelite
Invented in the United States by one Leo Baekland in 1907, Bakelite became ‘the material of a thousand uses’.
The first totally synthetic plastic, it was successful due to the fact that it hardens on heating and can therefore be used for items such as hairdryers and heaters.
The huge range of products made from Bakelite in the 1930s-1950s include ashtrays, jewellery, radios and vacuum cleaners.
Now the object of keen collectors (a Bakelite collectors club exists and Sotheby's devoted a sale to it in Amsterdam).
Galerie KB, Grand-Place, Brussels are holding an exhibition, ‘Bakelite, Beauté et formes’(10 March to 18 April) based on one of the largest private collections of this material, that of Monsieur et Madame Frits Becht from Naarden, Holland.
The exhibition has been prepared in collaboration with the Stichting Cadre, Amsterdam, and the accompanying catalogue has been written by Rob Perree of the foundation.
Bonnard: the joy of painting
The pivotal role of Bonnard in the art of the twentieth century, the role of nature and observation in his work, and the use of traditional themes such as landscape, the nude, the self-portrait, the view from the window and the still life, are all examined in an exhibition at the Kunstsammlung Nordrhein-Westfalen, Dusseldorf (to 12 April).
Sixty-four paintings, twenty-six works on paper and a selection of photographs have been drawn from public and private collections including the Metropolitan, the Art Institute of Chicago, the Fondation Maeght, the Musée de Grenoble, and a number of private collectors and dealers.
The exhibition is the result of a joint collaboration with the Louisiana Museum, Humblebaek, Denmark who held a more comprehensive retrospective last year, and has been curated by Joachim Kaak and Ulrich Krempel.
The present exhibition is based on that show but is not aiming to provide a complete overview of the artist's work, rather more a reflection on discrete themes and motifs.
This has resulted in a coherent and satisfying structure, with groups of works treating the same subjects from different decades juxtaposed to great effect — the sequence of fifteen landscapes, for example, is particularly impressive.
The accompanying catalogue (Richter Verlag, 64 colour and 70 black and white illustrations, DM39) contains essays by Anette Kruszynski on ‘Pierre Bonnard: a painter for the Isle of the Blessed’; by Joachim Kaak ‘On painters’ promises: a few remarks on ‘La Terrasse de Vernon’of 1928’; and Jens-Peter Munk on ‘The round table — the open door: a motif in the work of Bonnard’.
Russians to see Matisse show after all
On, then off, now on again, the Russian Matisse exhibition is to take place after all.
It will be at the Pushkin, Moscow, 16 July-15 September and the Hermitage, St Petersburg, 25 September-8 November.
Compared to the recent show in New York, and the restricted show currently in Paris, the Moscow version will be yet more abridged.
It will include almost all the Matisses in the Pushkin Museum and the Hermitage; twenty-two pieces from the Pompidou Centre in Paris, and one each from the USA and from Holland.
Of special interest are the 130 Matisses from Russian collections.
There will be a full catalogue and major French firms sponsoring the show.
Lille at the National Gallery, London
A bas les Goncourt!
French art 1700–1880
‘Tradition and Revolution’ rejects frou-frou and looks to history, religion and landscape
The first major survey of French art of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries to be shown in London for many years will open at the Sainsbury Wing of the National Gallery on 24 March (to 11 July).
‘Tradition and Revolution in French Art 1700–1880’ will include 104 paintings and drawings from the Musée des Beaux-Arts, Lille, France's greatest collection after the Louvre.
Lille is currently undergoing major renovation, creating an ideal opportunity for its works to be better known outside its native country.
Founded in 1801, it was one of the network of regional museums set up by Napoleon.
The collections formed from the spoils of the Revolution were then augmented by bequests such as that of Jean-Baptiste Wicar, disciple of David and curator of the museum, whose collections included an outstanding group of 800 Old Master drawings, among them a number of superb sheets by Raphael, and by the bold purchasing of modern French art by the municipality in the second half of the nineteenth century.
The Lille collection has recently been the focus of attention in New York, where ‘Masterworks from the Musée des Beaux-Arts’ was at the Metropolitan.
This was in essence a large survey show of highlights from all areas of the Lille collection.
Despite the quality of the exhibits and the rigorous and scholarly catalogue (containing, among much else, an essay on ‘The Birth of the Modern Museum’ by Marc Fumaroli and a reflection on ‘What does the Future hold for Museums?’by the same author), the show was only averagely well attended with 248,000 visitors.
‘Ours is not a ‘Masterworks’ exhibition’, explained Humphrey Wine, curator of eighteenth-century painting at the National Gallery, London, and co-curator of the present show with Nicholas Penny.
The intention in London is to create a focused display, designed to show aspects of French art not widely represented in British collections.
Only around 20% of the French paintings and drawings seen in New York will be used for the London exhibition.
The aim is partly to shift perception of eighteenth-century French art away from the traditional and popular notion promoted by authors such as the Goncourt brothers towards an appreciation of other genres such as history, landscape and religious works.
The broad date span, 1700–1880 will be used to emphasise the continuity of development, with little or no emphasis on labels such as‘Neo-classicism’ or ‘Realism’.
The hanging of the pictures will be broadly chronological, with some inner divisions: a whole room will be devoted to the work of Louis-Leopold Boilly, painter of portraits, genre scenes and exquisite trompe-l'oeil works (objects as well as canvases), an artist little represented in Britain.
Thirteen works by the artist, including ‘The Triumph of Marat’ of 1794 will be on show.
Drawings will be displayed separately, with a particularly strong group of Neo-classical works and another of drawings and watercolours by Delacroix and Gericault.
Elsewhere in the exhibition, history painting will be represented by David's ‘Belisarius begging for Alms’, one of the masterpieces of the collection, by Delacroix's ‘Medea’, and Lethière's ‘The Death of Virginia’, as well as later medievalist and classicising works by Merson, Lecomte du Nouy and Amaury-Duval, while religious pictures will include Restout's ‘The Supper at Emmaus’.
Mid- to late nineteenth-century works include Courbet's ‘Après-dinée à Ornans’ and paintings by Millet, Bonnat, Puvis de Chavannes and Jules Breton.
Landscapes will range from Valenciennes to Sisley with a particularly fine selection of Barbizon works.
The exhibition will provide an interesting comparison with the works in the Gallery's own French collection.
Humphrey Wine expressed his personal enthusiasm for acquiring more history and religious works but noted that one major difficulty was the paucity of such paintings in British private collections, which have traditionally been an important source of acquisition for the National Gallery.
These are rich in genre and portraiture but less so in other areas — a straightforward reflection of British taste in French art.
The gallery's catalogues of its French collections are currently undergoing thorough revision: that for the seventeenth to eighteenth centuries currently dates from 1957 and for the nineteenth from 1970.
The present exhibition will be accompanied by a full length catalogue with introductory essays by Humphrey Wine (on history painting), Jon and Linda Whiteley (the institutions of French painting) and Alain Gerard (the development of the Lille Museum).
In addition there will be full catalogue entries for each exhibit by a team of scholars.
A study day devoted to the exhibition takes place at the Gallery on 8 May.
New York, MoMA
Ernst encore
Only two years since the last show
An exhibition of Max Ernst's most important period, covering his work as a Dada artist in Cologne after 1912 and in Paris in the years following the end of World War I, opens at the Museum of Modern Art, New York, in the middle of this month (14 March-2 May).
Curated by Walter Hopps, founding director of the Menil Collection, and his associate curator, Susan Davidson, ‘Max Ernst: Dada and the Dawn of Surrealism’ travels to the Menil Collection, Houston (27 May-29 August) and to Chicago's Art Institute (15 September-30 November).
Since a more widely ranging survey of Ernst's art, selected by leading authority, Werner Spies, and attempting, not entirely convincingly, to rehabilitate the artist's later work, took place at the Tate Gallery in 1991 and was shown in Stuttgart and Dusseldorf, this exhibition will not be presented in any European museum.
The new exhibition is large and comprehensive, but narrow in its focus.
It concentrates upon fifteen years of fertile activity until 1927, by which date Ernst had created his major technical innovations and themes such as his forest and horde compositions.
In addition to paintings, there are collages, drawings, prints and relief sculptures tracking Ernst's development in these crucial years.
William Camfield, professor of art history at Houston's Rice University is the author of an accompanying publication (Prestel p/b $37.50).
The exhibition's wider context is an informal series of other surveys which have investigated the leading masters of Dada and Surrealism, movements which continue to exercise considerable influence upon the direction of contemporary art in New York.
That series has included Marcel Duchamp (MoMA 1973), Joseph Cornell (MoMA 1980), de Chirico (MoMA 1982), Kurt Schwitters (MoMA 1985) and Magritte (Metropolitan Museum 1992), with a major survey of the art of Joan Miró following at MoMA in the autumn.
Rouault: a French Expressionist?
The first exhibition to be devoted to the early work of Georges Rouault will open in London at the Royal Academy on 11 March (to 6 June).
Originally shown at the Centre Pompidou, Paris (curated by Fabrice Hergott), it will include around eighty paintings and ceramics from 1903 to 1920 drawn from major public and private collections.
Rouault trained at the Ecole des Arts Décoratifs before entering the studio of Gustave Moreau in 1892.
Although subsequently closely associated with the work of Matisse and the Fauves (he founded the Salon d'Automne with Matisse and Marquet) his work was seen by contemporaries as unique.
In the catalogue accompanying the exhibition Sarah Whitfield argues that Goya provided ‘a prime example of art as a form of moral protest’ and gave him a subject-matter which lay outside the conventional iconography of Christian art.
The exhibition looks at Rouault in terms of Expressionism, the heritage of French Gothic art, and the relationship of his work to that of other great contemporaries including Matisse, Cezanne, Derain, Vlaminck and the German artists.
The last exhibition in Britain to be devoted to the work of Rouault was held at the Tate Gallery in 1966.
Whitney Biennial
Engaging with the guilt complex
The now traditional political agenda: race, identity, sexuality and gender
Every other spring, New York's social climbers battle each other for tickets to one of the season's most desirable parties: the opening of the Whitney Biennial.
This year, those who succeed in clawing their way inside may find a surprising exhibition, a forum for creators intent on using the museum as an instrument of social change for gays, lesbians, blacks and other aggrieved minorities.
Given the sheer volume of works created by people calling themselves artists in the United States during any two-year period, it is unrealistic to think that a museum exhibition devoted to two years of art can give a visitor a sense of the breadth of what is being produced.
What one can take from the 1993 Biennial exhibition at the Whitney Museum of American Art is a sense of what certain critics consider important and a sense of the direction in which the Whitney is headed.
That direction this year is political.
In listing the objectives that shape the exhibition, Whitney museum curator Elizabeth Sussman said her team of curators searched for ‘the best new work that speaks to us in a compelling manner and in some cases challenges conventional ideas about artmaking.
The ways in which today's artists confront such dominant current issues as class, race, gender, sexuality, and the family provide a vital dimension to the 1993 Biennial’.
The range of artists represented from 4 March to 13 June suggests that diversity may be one of the chief criteria for assembling the show.
Spike Lee, director of the $50-million film ‘Malcolm X’, is among them, offering a music video, as is the photographer Cindy Sherman, who this time substitutes various parts of a doll's body for her characteristic self-portrait.
Since the political issues of choice for many of the artists are abortion rights and the oppression of women, various imagings of the female body recur throughout the show.
Proceedings around the Biennial this year give a new prominence to performing arts.
Not surprisingly, the organisers of the performance series are focusing on ‘race, identity, sexuality, gender, and the post-industrial state’.
In one such performance, James Luna promises to combine ‘Indian mythology, Christian evangelism, and psychoanalysis to create a double-edged interpretation that has ‘something for everyone who has ever believed in the romantic vision of the American Indian and bought into the guilt-complex of American history’’’.
In another work, a lesbian, Marga Gomez, ‘rewrites the Bible, battles extortionists, and reads from the lost journals of Anais Nin, on the eve of her appearance on a television talk show as an ‘adult female homosexual’’’.
The touchstone of the exhibition, its organisers say, is an object by the artist Robert Gober consisting of bundled-up newspapers showing headlines written by Gober referring to news events.
Presenting art that reflects or comments on news events or, more broadly, on history, seems to be the new orientation of the Whitney Museum, which only a few years ago was more likely to devote Biennial space to the rising stars of New York's booming gallery scene.
Visitors saw that same orientation in the recent retrospective of the work of Biennial-alumnus Jean-Michel Basquiat, for which seven catalogue essays sought to transform the profligate drug addict from a middle-class home into a spokesman for the oppressed.
So far, that spin control does not seem to have succeeded.
The Basquiat show was turned down by other major US museums, although attendance at the Whitney rose 20% while the exhibition was up.
Whereas personal style and success seem to dictate what the Whitney showed in its previous era, now the Whitney's theoreticians — eight in the Biennial catalogue — chronicle oppression in the United States in a preachy, sterile tone that borrows its vocabulary and its unreadability from translations of French academic criticism.
‘Many of the artists in the 1993 Biennial exhibition work consciously to deconstruct and de-center the politically constructed site of whiteness and its relation to the ever-changing direction of Americanness’, writes one newly appointed curator, who is said to be already organising an exhibition scheduled for 1995 on the deconstruction of the African-American male, ‘the body provides an immediate site for discussions of culture, gender, class, and sexual specificity.
It allows traditional practice to be infected with transgressive ideals’.
The show's organisers bristle at the charge that political engagement, the current fad in US contemporary art museums, is just another nod towards a new decade's fashion.
Lisa Philips, a curator who helped mount the trendy Biennials of the 1980s, decried ‘Eighties-bashing’ while announcing the trend of the '90s: ‘Today everybody's talking about gender, identity and power the way they talked about the grid in the late Sixties and early Seventies’.
Veteran Whitney observers wonder how long it will be before the millionaires on the Whitney board of trustees tire of this trend.
The Biennial is the work of a new curatorial team that director David A. Ross has assembled as he enters his third year at the head of the museum.
In the past year, Ross has fired the two curators most closely associated with the Whitney of the 1980s.
Richard Armstrong has left to become Curator of Contemporary Art at the Carnegie Museum in Pittsburgh, and Richard Marshall has cut a deal that allows him to remain only until he finds another job.
Ross has also hired Adam D. Weinberg as new curator to organise exhibitions drawn from the Whitney's permanent collection.
(Weinberg directed the Whitney's branch at the Equitable Center in Manhattan, closed by the museum last year, from 1989 to 1990.)
Ross's own directorship has become an endowed position, thanks to a wealthy donor.
All mention of the director in museum press material is now made in the oddly italicised construct ‘Alice Pratt Brown director David A. Ross’, presumably a stipulation accompanying the $2 million gift.
Decade-long plans for the museum's controversial and costly expansion program are on hold, Ross says, until better economic times, but he does expect any enlarged Whitney to remain on its current Madison Avenue site.
While the Whitney waits for its own space to show works from its permanent collection, 97% of which is usually in storage, the museum has initiated a novel arrangement with the San Jose Museum in California.
Over the next five years San Jose will present a series of eighteen-month long exhibitions of works from the Whitney's permanent collection, in exchange for a fee of $3 million — a high price for an art rental, but a fraction of what acquiring significant works costs these days.
Archaeology and Conservation
Montreal
Keep your Slavic hands off our Aristotle
Macedonia (ex-Yugoslav) accuses Macedonia (Greek) of propagandising with Philip of Macedon exhibition
A new conflict over Balkan culture threatens to arise, over an art exhibition in Montreal.
At issue is ‘Greek civilization: Macedonia, the kingdom of Alexander the Great’, scheduled to open on 7 May at the Palais de la Civilisation (until 19 September).
The loan show is sponsored in part by the Greek Cultural Ministry and in part by the city of Montreal.
Among the 360 objects coming to Canada are the remarkably preserved gold, pottery and armour from the tomb of Philip of Macedon, usually displayed in the Archaeological Museum of Thessaloniki, the capital of the northern-most region of Greece, Macedonia, and the city scheduled to be the European Cultural Capital in 1997.
These objects are extremely fragile and rarely travel.
The show's organisers and officials of the Canadian Hellenic Congress, an organisation of Greeks in Canada, say the exhibition has been five years in the making and that it reflects the excellent cultural ties between Greeks and Canadians.
Emigrés from the region in former Yugoslavia with, confusingly, the same name say that a show of such fragile works sends a strongly political message from Athens, which has hitherto not been a generous international lender of art.
They call it an attempt to emphasise that Macedonia is an historically and culturally Greek region just when the ex-Yugoslav Macedonia, invented and so-named after World War II by Tito, is seeking international support for its own claim to independence, so far without much success: in part because of the problem of its name, in part because of fear that it is looking with greedy eyes at Greek Macedonia.
The exhibition examines the period from the fourteenth century to the third century BC.
Objects brought from Greece will be ‘artistically integrated into a thematic decor and setting’ so that visitors will journey ‘to the very dawn of the Macedonian civilisation’.
The installation will also examine the influence of Aristotle, ‘the Macedonian philosopher’, over Alexander the Great, who, according to the show's press release, ‘was driven by a need to develop the spiritual, cultural, and social institutions of ancient Greece’.
That national focus of the show seems unambiguous.
‘A relief map of Macedonia helps visitors identify the major towns, villages, and dig sites whose archaeological finds clearly illustrate the Greek makeup of Macedonia’, the press materials reads.
‘Indeed these digs reveal that Macedonians worshipped the same gods and  practise the same rites as the Greeks’.
That unequivocal approach to the presentation of early Macedonian culture is in line with signs now displayed at the counters of Olympic Airways at Athens Airport: ‘Macedonia is Greek.
Macedonia was Greek.
Macedonia will always be Greek.
Read history’.
In fact, the Greek region of Macedonia is almost one hundred per cent ethnically Greek now, the Slavs having been progressively squeezed out earlier so far century.
The ex-Yugoslav Macedonians, who are ethnically a combination of Albanians with Bulgarians and Serbs, take issue with only part of the Greek version of their region's history.
While they acknowledge that Alexander's Macedonia was indeed an Hellenic culture which in turn extended Hellenic influence to much of Europe and Asia, they maintain that after the seventh century AD, what came to be known as Macedonia had an important Slavic component.
They argue that if the Greeks can demonstrate with exhibitions such as this that there is no such thing as a Macedonian culture in the former Yugoslavia, Serbian claims to cultural domination of the region are strengthened and Macedonia is more likely to suffer the kind of atrocities that Croatia and Bosnia have endured.
The ex-Yugoslav Macedonians also charge the Greeks with helping to supply Serbia in violation of international sanctions.
‘Nonsense’, says Andre Gerolymates, Secretary-General of the Canadian Hellenic Congress in Montreal.
‘Ten years ago they were Bulgarians, but now they've become Macedonians’.
Gerolymates says the ex-Yugoslav Macedonians have initiated a huge lobbying effort in Canada bankrolled by wealthy expatriates and represented by highly paid public-relations firms.
‘We suspect there's some Turkish input in all this.
They're making threats.
They're saying, ‘Recognise us or there will be war, as there's been in the rest of the former Yugoslavia.’
We don't have any objection to this place becoming an independent country.
It's the issue of the name which conjures up the problems.’
For Thomas Dimove, a spokesman for the ex-Yugoslav Macedonians, it is a matter simply of acknowledging that Macedonia is an entirely different entity in the twentieth century than it was in the period shown in the exhibition.
‘Macedonia has no territorial aspirations’, Dimove says.
‘It has completely dissociated itself from the ancient Macedonians’.
The Getty Kouros plus debate over its authenticity goes on show
As promised during the conference on the Getty Kouros held in Athens last May, the J. Paul Getty Museum is now mounting an exhibition on the Kouros and the debate over its authenticity, until 5 September.
The presentation of the scholarly debate and results of scientific tests will allow members of the public to make up their own minds as to whether the early Greek sculpture of a standing youth is a forgery or not.
The results of the Museum's study of the Archaic statue undertaken in 1990 will be presented, comprising studies of the marble used, the weathering of its surface, the traces of tool marks and the remains of encrustation, together with analysis of the figure's proportions and the indications of torsion in the head and feet.
The conclusions of the Athens conference of 130 art historians, archaeologists, conservators and scientists will be a part of the display (see The Art Newspaper No. 20, July-September 1992, p.14), as will casts of two life-size ancient kouroi believed by most scholars to be closest in style to the Getty example: the Tenea Kouros from Munich and the Anavysos Kouros from Athens.
A smaller kouros, a modern forgery similar in style to the Getty Kouros and acquired by the Museum in 1990 for study purposes will also be included.
Israel to return Sinai finds to Egypt's archaeologists
In a political agreement between the governments of Israel and Egypt, artefacts from the Sinai desert excavated during the 1967–82 Israeli occupation are to be handed back to Egypt.
Under the terms of the agreement Israeli archaeologists are allowed two years to complete the photographing, carbon-14 dating and cataloguing of the pottery sherds, tomb fragments and other objects.
Yaakov Meshorer, Curator of Archaeology at the Israel Museum, where finds from the most important sites are on display, explained to The Art Newspaper that the greater number are from a Nabatean city at Qasrawet, twenty-five miles east of the Suez Canal, an Israelite city at Qadesh Barnea (occupied until the end of the Judean Kingdom in 586 BC) and an Israelite garrison of the ninth century BC at Kuntilet a-Jrud.
‘We hope it may be possible to get these objects back on loan.
They are not of real interest to the Egyptian archaeologists, with whom we have a good professional relationship’.
Other pieces, scattered over Israel in various universities and research institutes, date from 1300 BC to the eighteenth century, shedding light on Egyptian, Roman and early Christian history.
Nothing was found relating to the Jewish Exodus roughly 5000 years ago, which probably took place further south.
New Mexican gallery to open at the BM in 1994
With the anticipated departure of the British Library from the British Museum in 1996, space will become available for new museum galleries.
Among those projected are galleries housing ethnographic material currently in the Museum of Mankind, including material from the Americas to be displayed in four rooms carved out of a large space at the end of the  existing North Library.
An agreement between the government of Mexico and officials of the British Museum, signed on 15 February, secured funding for one of those rooms to be a new permanent gallery of Mexican antiquity.
To be designed by leading Mexican architect Teodoro Gonzales de Leon; this should open in autumn 1994.
Together with Berlin, the British Museum has the foremost collection of Mexican antiquities outside Mexico City.
The new gallery will allow many more of the roughly 6,000 items owned by the museum to be shown.
Among them are outstanding objects from the Olmec, Aztec and Maya civilisations including a turquoise Aztec mosaic mask in the form of two intertwined rattlesnakes, painted codices from pre-Hispanic times, among them the Codex Zouche, stone architectural fragments from Mayan sites and jades from the Olmec period.
A bronze Bacchus restored at Pompeii
The bronze bust on a marble pedestal, found last autumn in excavations to extend the Roman site of Herculaneum towards the sea and thought to depict the young Bacchus, has been taken to Pompeii for restoration.
The statue is a fine example of early Imperial art but in a poor state of conservation; the surface was not only covered in earth and partly oxidised but badly corroded.
The Etruscan exhibition, extended in Paris, moves to Berlin
The Etruscans and Europe’, the major exhibition on both the Etruscan culture and its later influence on European art, was visited by over 330,000 people while at the Grand Palais from 19 September to 4 January.
It was programmed to close on 14 December but its success was such that the organisers (the Réunion des Musées Nationaux in Paris, the Staatliche Museen Preußischer Kulturbesitz in Berlin and the FIAT group in Venice) decided to extend the showing.
The exhibition is now at the Altes Museum in Berlin until 31 May.
Dresden reconstructs the Frauenkirche
In preparation for the complete reconstruction of the Frauenkirche, the Landesamt fur Denkmalpflege has made an appeal for any documents, photographs, letters or  memoirs that could help in their task.
The aim is to use the rubble in as accurate a way as possible, avoiding recourse to modern materials.
Eye witness accounts of the destruction of the church on 13 February 1945, during Sir Arthur ‘Bomber’ Harris's fire bomb raid on the city, are also asked for, as these might help in identifying blocks of masonry and their original location.
The church has lain in ruins since its destruction, a potent reminder of the virtual razing of Dresden during World War II.
Over the past two years the debate has veered between consolidating the remains as a war memorial and reconstructing the church (see The Art Newspaper No. 9, June 1991, p.14).
Now the reconstruction of Georg Bähr's great eighteenth-century Protestant church has become part of a DM1 billion (£416 million; $583 million) campaign to restore the city centre to its appearance as recorded in Canaletto's paintings.
It is hoped that the church at least will be ready in time for the celebrations of the 800th anniversary of Dresden's foundation in 2006.
Anyone with any information about the Frauenkirche should contact Dr Magirius, Landesamt fur Denkmalpflege, Augustusstr. 2, Dresden 8012 (tel: 010 49 351 495 2290).
There really were penguins in the Mediterranean
Following the stylistic and archaeological debate over whether paintings in the prehistoric cave found by Henri Cosquer at Sormiou, near Marseilles, in September 1991 were fakes or not (see The Art Newspaper No. 21, October 1992, p.17), scientific analysis of pollen and carbon-14 remains have confirmed a palaeolithic date.
Pollen analysis from samples taken on the spot have proved to be of prehistoric vegetation, while carbon dating of fragments of burnt wood have suggested a date of roughly 16,500 BC.
The quality of paintings in the cave, whose tunnel entrance was submerged by the rising sea level as the last Ice Age ended, are of such exceptional quality that their authenticity was originally doubted.
The inclusion of penguins among the animals depicted can now be seen as the first indication that prehistorians have had that these birds were present in the Mediterranean during the palaeolithic era, and not proof, as was recently suggested, that the paintings are modern forgeries.
The Romano-British Icklingham hoard smuggled out of Britain to be returned — eventually
The Icklingham Treasure, a hoard of Romano-British bronzes including a bronze leopard inlaid with silver spots, was removed illegally from the site of its burial in Suffolk and smuggled abroad in 1981–82.
John Browning, the farmer on whose land the twelve statuettes were found, has spent the past ten years and £100,000 in pursuit of the bronzes.
His efforts to recover them have been hampered by the fact that Britain is not a subscriber to the 1970 UNESCO convention for the return of cultural property to its country of origin.
Browning traced the works to the collection owned jointly by Leon Levy, a New York financier, and Shelby White, who had purchased the pieces from the Ariadne Galleries in New York who, in their turn, had acquired them in good faith.
The collectors have now agreed a bequest that leaves the Icklingham bronzes in their will to the British Museum as part of an out-of-court settlement, dependent on their acceptance by the museum's trustees.
Appeal for Iona
In the year 563 AD St Columba founded his monastery on Iona, the tiny island off the west coast of Scotland.
For the last hundred years the picturesque ruins of the Augustinian nunnery (founded around 1200) have been cared for by the Iona Cathedrals Trust.
The Trust has no endowment and relies on donations and grants to undertake its conservation work on the nunnery, the most complete medieval example of its kind in Scotland and Britain.
Since the last appeal in 1985 the trustees have spent more than £1 million on the restoration of the fabric of the buildings as well as on restoring the high cross of St John, now on display in the Abbey Museum.
Many other sculptures need to be surveyed and conserved, while some form of identification of smaller early Christian stones is under discussion, as is better display and interpretation.
This year will see the refurbishment of St Ronan's Church, the medieval parish church beside the nunnery, but the outstanding needs are: nunnery, £200,000; St Matthew's Cross, £20,000; other memorials, £30,000; interpretation, £40,000; grounds and gardens, £60,000.
Donations to Iona Cathedral Trust, Freepost, Edinburgh EH8 0LL.
Donations of £25 or more are recorded in a book of honour kept inside the West door of the abbey church.
Europa Nostra make their awards
Europa Nostra, the non-governmental conservation organisation, has announced its annual prizes for 1992, made in association with the International Castles Institute.
Awards are given for outstanding achievement in the protection and enhancement of the architectural and natural heritage, the improvement of the environment and the encouragement of high standards of architecture in town and country planning throughout Europe.
The award scheme was launched in 1978 and is sponsored for the seventh consecutive year by American Express.
Entries were judged in four categories: the restoration of old buildings; the adaptation of old buildings to new use; the conservation of natural or historic landscapes; and new construction in conservation areas.
1992 Medals of Honour were awarded to: Great Britain, for the restoration of the landscape and ornamental buildings of Fountains Abbey and Studley Royal Estate, Ripon; Poland, for the restoration of the eighteenth-century wooden church of the Birth of Our Lady, Bralin; Hungary, for the restoration and renewal of the old village of Magyarpolany; Germany, for the restoration of the House of the Templars, Amorbach, with particular reference to its sixteenth-century interior decoration; Finland, for the restoration of the House of Estates, Helsinki; and Belgium, for the restoration and conversion into a cartoon museum of the Waucquez warehouse, originally designed by Victor Horta.
A number of Diplomas of Merit were also awarded, including thirteen to Great Britain (three in Scotland) and seven to Spain.
The closing date for 1993 entries is 1 June.
For more information contact Europa Nostra/IBI, 35 Lange Voorhout, 2514 EC The Hague, The Netherlands.
Books
At home with Havel
The ultra-refined Gothic of the Knight's Staircase (above), and President Havel's office, both in Prague Castle.
In January, as expected, Vaclav Havel moved back into this office when he was confirmed as President of the new Czech Republic.
He had occupied it from the creation of the new Czechoslovakia in 1990 until his resignation last year over the sheering off of Slovakia.
No group of historic buildings symbolises a nation's history more than this old royal castle.
Written by a team of authors including Charles, Fürst von Schwarzenberg, one of President Havel's closest advisers since 1990, this book is a thorough pictorial survey of the castle which is not just a palace but a complex containing the Library, the basilica of St George, the cathedral of St Guy, the church of St Nicholas, the chapel of St Wenceslas and the National Gallery of Prague.
There is a clearly written text with an illustrated chronology of the country's history taking it up to 1992.
A topical book.
Schwarzenberg, Hlobil, Kesner, et al.
Le Château de Prague et ses trésors d'art (La Bibliothèque des Arts, Paris, 1992) 272pp. 250 col. ills.
FFr 499
The Royal Collection
Queen Victoria's choice
Let us suppose one were selecting an exhibition of Victorian painting, an exhibition one hoped would contain the most beautiful and important works of art painted in Britain during Queen Victoria's reign, 1837–1901.
How many of those pictures would Queen Victoria herself have owned?
With a passionate love of the visual arts, an intelligent partner to guide her purchases, and a large income to spend on pretty much any picture she fancied, Queen Victoria ought to have been one of the most distinguished of all royal collectors.
But alas, she wasn't.
In the light of art history she will be remembered for her patronage of Edwin Landseer and Franz Xavier Winterhalter, both still underrated.
Of her forty-one Landseers, his group portrait ‘Windsor Castle in modern times’ and ‘Isaac Van Amburgh and his animals’are the two I would pick for my imaginary show.
Of the 121 Winterhalters the bevy of bathing beauties in ‘Florinda’ is a must, and I suppose ‘The First of May 1851’, the most touching of the many splendid family portraits.
Otherwise, there is the enchanting Thomas Sully of the young Queen, and Heinrich von Angeli is a surprisingly strong painter when the aging Empress is his subject.
Apart from portraits, arguably the two greatest pictures that Queen Victoria purchased were Frith's ‘Ramsgate Sands’, an endearing masterpiece which for all I know may still hang in the waiting room at Buckingham Palace for the amusement of visitors, and Leighton's ‘Cimabue's Madonna carried in procession’, acquired from the Royal Academy in 1855 and now on permanent loan to the National Gallery.
Neither, it would appear, are favourites of HM the Queen.
What else?
Judging from the photograph, Joseph Noel Paton's Crimean War weepie ‘Home’ is one of the very few narrative pictures which might be up to the standard of this ideal exhibition.
And though I am not sure I would be able to stand looking at it for the run of the show, William Holman Hunt's hideous, hard-core Pre-Raphaelite head of Christ ‘The Beloved’ has the punch of a Gilbert and George.
I've been able to select my salon imaginaire because of the publication of Sir Oliver Millar's magnificent two-volume catalogue The Victorian Pictures in the Collection of Her Majesty the Queen.
The pictures Sir Oliver has so meticulously measured and recorded may not be the most distinguished in the Royal Collection, but this volume is every bit as informative as the others in the series.
And not just for art historians.
With so many royal portraits and closely argued catalogue entries based on unpublished material in the Royal archives, the text is a diamond mine of information for biographers and historians.
Sir Oliver's concise and even-handed introduction is simply the best thing ever written on the Queen and Prince Albert as collectors.
Facsimile editions
Non pauperibus
Priced at a chunky £2,600 per copy (£3,800 from April), a new facsimile edition of a Biblia pauperum in the British Library (Kings MS5), has just been published.
Generally intended for the poor and illiterate, the Biblia pauperum acted as a sort of pictorial amalgam of bible stories with comparable Old and New Testmant events placed on the same page.
Fine Art Facsimile Publishers of Lucerne have produced a high quality reproduction of the late fourteenth to early fifteenth-century manuscript illuminated in The Hague during the reign of Albrecht of Bavaria whose court was based in that city.
The elaborate and costly manner of illustration (gold backgrounds and a preponderance of blue and red pigments) suggests a royal provenance and is unusual for this type of book.
It was almost certainly acquired by George III who had it bound in the present red morocco, gilt tooled binding which has been reproduced for the facsimile.
The extreme fragility of the original volume means that the present version will be of considerable use to scholars and researchers.
It has been produced in an edition of 980.
An accompanying commentary volume has been prepared by Janet Backhouse of the British Museum, James Marrow of the University of Berkeley, California, and Gerhard Schmidt of the University of Vienna, and is due to appear early this year.
Fine Art Facsimile Publishers have a number of weighty manuscripts under their belts, including the Book of Kells and the duc de Berry's Book of Hours.
Small journals
The fight for survival
Small specialists journals are the backbone of serious art historical writing: in many cases they are the only forum in which a lengthy article based on primary research can appear.
For many young academics they provide the first step in the ladder of publications, now an essential requisite for career advancement.
Print Quarterly, based in London, has been publishing for ten years.
The only journal devoted to academic writing on the history and techniques of printmaking, it has quickly established a high reputation under the editorship of David Landau and with an editorial board including Antony Griffiths, Craig Hartley, Jean-Michel Massing and Michael Snodin.
Initially supported in its early stages by a grant from the J. Paul Getty Trust (the first Getty grant to be awarded to an art journal), Print Quarterly has relied on generous benefactors and advertising revenue since that date.
The journal has now changed its status to that of a charity which will give tax advantages and will enable it to set up an endowment fund.
The target is to raise £500,000 and the journal is appealing for sponsors as well as planning fund-raising events such as charity auctions in London and New York.
February saw the launch of a new bi-monthly journal based in Exeter.
Studio Pottery will aim to present an informative picture of the current state of studio pottery/ceramics in the UK (a field which has witnessed a rise in interest and consequently prices at auction in recent years).
Edited by potter Paul Vincent with associate editor Victor Margrie (professional potter and director of the Crafts Council from its beginnings until 1984).
The first issue contains articles on: recent exhibitions; profiles of Richard Slee and Jason Wason; the  contemporary ceramics market; ceramics collections in public museums; news and previews; and a brief listing of current exhibitions.
Subscription is £21 for six issues from 15 Magdalen Road, Exeter, Devon EX2 4.
Book thief caught red handed
Police sources in Amsterdam have recently disclosed that a forty-three year old man from the city, whom they arrested last October for stealing rare editions from the university library of Amsterdam, has removed books, title-pages and maps from several other libraries in Holland.
The books, which included Waghenaer's Tresoor der Zeevaart (1592) worth approximately DFl. 300,000 (£111,700; $155,600), a first edition of Pelsert's seventeenth-century De onge-lukkige voyagie van het schip Batavia worth DFl. 180,000 (£66,700; $93,300) and a 1581 copy of Palladio's I Quattro Libri (DFl. 10,000 (£3,700; $5,200)) were all replaced by extremely good fakes.
The man, whose name has not been released, was a well known visitor to the libraries in question and was not suspected until the police were able to catch him red-handed lifting a title-page from a book.
It has now emerged that he removed a total of six books from the Maritime Museum in Amsterdam.
The director of the museum, Mr H. Bakker, visibly relieved to have all the originals safely returned to their shelves, told The Art Newspaper that each one of them would have provided enough money to buy a comfortable family home.
The man is similarly known to have stolen a total of nine maps from the Royal Library of the Hague worth ‘tens of thousands of guilders’ which he subsequently cleaned and carefully restored.
The man is still helping the police to track down the whereabouts of an undisclosed number of missing objects.
The Art Market
American silver: New York sales
Silver linings
A market slow to collapse seems to be on the rebound
The American silver sales at Christie's, on 22 January, and at Sotheby's on 28 January, seemed to confirm that the last area of the market to give way in the recession was the first to rebound.
The Christie's sale began with the 125 lot, separate catalogue collection of the late attorney James II Halpin, and was followed by a mixed owner sale of 217 lots, included in the Americana sale.
The Halpin sale totalled $667,865 (with premium); the mixed owner sale $938,135 (with premium).
Most of the collection pieces dated from 1820 and earlier, and were distinguished as much by the number of unusual forms, as by quality.
Only three lots were bought in.
Most interesting in the gold section was a set of twelve, Lexington, Kentucky teaspoons of around 1850 (lot 29).
Far surpassing their $4–6,000 estimate, they went to Lexington dealer Clifton Anderson for $18,000 (£12,857).
There was keen interest in lot 63 (est. $12–18,000) an early A.E.Warner, Baltimore tea tray, one of the handsomest early American examples of the form from any city, with applied grapevine border and flat-chased interior, eventually bought by the Maryland Historical Society for $28,000 (£20,000).
Fiercest bidding was for lot 83, the beautifully ornamented Fletcher & Gardiner cake basket with spilling cornucopia handles, estimated at only $5–8,000.
With bids all over the room, as well as on phones, the Baltimore Museum's $28,000 (£20,000) bid took it beyond the grasp of New York painting dealer Stuart Feld (who really didn't need it, having nine others).
American silver of the 1880s was the subject of speculative buying in the late 1980s.
When the art bubble burst, prices not only fell in this area, they stopped.
In the January 1992 Christie's American silver sale, the first to feel the rout, even great things were bought in without a bid.
The situation has moderated, but prices are down.
Lot 179 at Christie's, a pair of whimsical mixed metals candlesticks, with ‘dripping wax’ on the stems (est. $20–30,000) sold for $22,000 (£15,714) to a collector who was underbidder on the duplicate pair, which brought $45,000 in June 1989.
Even silver for the major World Fairs, which did extremely well a couple of years ago, was weak.
Lot 144, a large copper and niello inlaid Tiffany two-handled cup, for the 1893 World's Columbian Exposition, bore an extremely low $8,000–12,000 estimate, and was sold to a New York dealer for $8,500 (£6,000).
The greatest surprise, however, was lot 187, the 3½ foot, 784-ounce Tiffany presentation piece, made for a builder of a South American railroad, and modelled in the round, with figures of peons and an allegory of America, parcel-gilt in three different colours of gold.
Three years ago, it would have easily surpassed its $50–80,000 estimate but there was not a bid in the room, and it was sold afterward for a paltry $25,000 (£17,850).
Early wares were mixed.
Undoubtedly the most important piece in sale was lot 241, the Edward Webb chocolate pot of around 1710, one of only four known examples of the form in American silver.
Found in a country sale, jet black and mistaken for pewter, the pot had its detractors because of a later applied cartouche (which probably covered an erased weak spot) and an odd screw on, rather than slip on finial.
When all was said and done, the pot was deemed ‘right’ and the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston got one of the rarest pieces of early American silver for only $100,000 (£71,400).
The 28 January Sotheby's sale was thinner in size and substance.
Of the 149 lots offered in this session of the Americana sale (not counting miniatures), only 120 sold, and some of the buy-ins were significant.
There were, however a couple of extremely good pieces and prices.
Lot 135, a wonderful late seventeenth-century New York two-handled panelled bowl, by Cornelius Vander Burgh with a conservative estimate of $100,000–150,000, still did impressively well, selling to New York dealer Eric Shrubsole, bidding for a private client for $210,000 (£150,000).
Though not quite as grand as the Met, or the New York Historical Society examples of the form, which are more elaborately decorated in the panels, it was in very good condition, and, as noted in the catalogue, may be the earliest example of the form in this country.
Another impressive early piece was lot 106 (est. $7–9,000) an unusual square Federal coffee pot by Baltimore maker Charles Louis Boehme.
Most Boehme works that come up are later than this circa 1804 pot (though, oddly enough, with one sold in Delaware, and one at Christie's, this was the third sold in a month), are generally sort of‘provincial Philadelphia’ in style, and lack the soaring and presence of this one, which went to an Eastern private collector for $20,000 (£14,285).
Victorian silver fared a bit better.
Middling to good Japonsime, again, did not sell, but very good or unusual pieces did.
Lot 45 (est. $20–25,000) a Tiffany mixed-metals pitcher, with copper and mokume gourds, brought a strong $37,000, eleven thousand more than the same model brought at Christie's last January.
The real surprise, though, was lot 64 (est. $10–15,000) a somewhat overpowering Tiffany silverplated tilt-top table, made for the World's Columbian Exposition, and decorated over every square inch with ferns and flowers.
When the four-way shoot-out was over, New York dealer Margot Johnson was $26,000 (£18,571) poorer.
As Johnson noted, however, ‘It may be flamboyant, but some museum is going to have to have it!’
Drouot
International sales down 85% last year
Van Gogh is top lot in 1992 results
Drouot auctioneers recorded a drop in business of a little over 6% in 1992, recording sales of FFr3.2 billion (£400 million; $560 million) compared to FFr3.3 billion the previous year.
Hammer price figures net of buyers' premiums, however, were similar to those of 1988 with a 9% drop from FFr3.1 billion in 1991 to FFr2.8 billion in 1992.
As in other countries, the recession inhibited collectors from putting exceptional items on the market.
Drouot's prestige sales at their avenue Montaigne premises were down one-third on 1991 (FFr211 million compared to FFr314 million).
International sales slumped by 85% to FFr37 million.
Modern paintings accounted for only 15% of Drouot's business in 1992 and only twenty-five paintings, old or new, sold for more than FFr1 million.
Nine of those featured in the auction of fifty-four works from the collection of Paris dealer Alain Lesieutre held in November last year.
The most expensive painting of the year was van Gogh's ‘Jardin a Auvers’ of July 1890 sold by Jean-Claude Binoche to French businessman Jean-Marc Vernes.
It reached FFr55 million (£6.5 million; $10.5 million)(The Art Newspaper No.24, January 1993, p.20)— a French record — despite being classified a monument historique and thus unable to leave the country.
Other French auction records were broken by the FFr5.8 million paid for Ambrosius Bosschaert's oil on copper still life ‘Vase de fleurs dans une niche’ in December and the FFr5.7 million for Gericault's ‘L'officier de chasseurs a cheval chargeant’in April.
World records meanwhile were set by Jacob Van Hulsdonck's ‘Corbeille de fleurs et fruits’ which sold for FFr7.5 million last December and two canvases by Anne Valleyer Coster, ‘Vase de fleurs et fruits’and ‘Fleurs dans un vase’, auctioned in July for FFr4 million.
The original handwritten manuscript of Maurice Ravel's ‘Bolero’ was sold at Drouot in April and a first Latin edition of Christopher Columbus's letter announcing the discovery of America in March — both for FFr1.8 million.
Madrid
Big attendance and some sales at ARCO
25,000 visitors on one day, but few from Northern Europe or the U.S.
Although it was a leaner fair than in previous years, attracting just 133 exhibitors, one-half of which were drawn from Madrid and other Spanish cities, ARCO (11–17 February), Spain's top contemporary art fair, retained its renowned sense of style.
Larger booths and wider corridors skilfully masked absent galleries and a genuinely enthusiastic audience thronged the Casa de Campo over the weekend, with 25,000 visitors attending on Saturday alone.
But very few collectors from Northern Europe or the United States made the journey.
As a result, business was dictated by local tastes and tended to be conducted in the closing stages of the fair rather than at the private view, which used to be marked by dealers trading among themselves.
It is a trend which has been noted at other fairs.
Bruno Bischofberger sold paintings and drawings by Miguel Barceló and hoped to conclude deals for Andy Warhol's ‘Double Elvis’(1963) and a picture by Julian Schnabel.
Waddington, one of four London galleries making an impressive contribution to the fair, brought works by Sean Scully, Patrick Caulfield, Ian Davenport and Barry Flanagan, but did better with more classic drawings, selling sheets by Matisse and Picabia, and expecting to place a canvas by Leger.
Annely Juda, whose booth contained a fine ‘Reclining Figure’(1959) by Francis Bacon, sold Anthony Caro's ‘Sea Symphony’(1989) and works by Eduardo Chillida; the ARCO Foundation bought a new painting by Victor Pasmore from Marlborough which also sold a small canvas by Botero and works by Kurt Schwitters, Larry Rivers, Paula Rego and John Alexander.
A recent cityscape by Kitaj was bought by one of a party of twenty-five members of the Tate Gallery's Patrons of New Art, virtually the only British visitors to come to the fair.
Americana
The return of the native
General enthusiasm for the national heritage
The year's biggest Americana sales were held at Christie's and Sotheby's during the last week of January, coinciding with the Winter Antiques show in New York.
Christie's sale totalled $4.2 million with premium (including $667,865 from the Halpin silver).
Sotheby's made $6.23 million with premium.
Like the silver offered the day before (see p. 25), the James Halpin furniture, sold on 23 January at Christie's, was predominantly early nineteenth century.
This may have been the collection that has finally established medium to good pieces of this period as part of the mainstream of serious American furniture collecting.
Lot 471 (est. $7,000–10,000), a brass inlaid rosewood desk and bookcase topped the group at $32,000 (£22,857).
A Gothic mahogany bookcase (lot 478, est. $6,000–9,000) was a beautiful piece of transitional classical/Gothic Revival furniture, though it was obviously missing something at the top, either an  additional moulding or added tracery.
It still attracted considerable interest and made $20,000 (£14,285).
Two important Chippendale lots brought $100,000 each, one a happy result the other a disappointment.
Lot 534, the drop-leaf mahogany dining table with the distinctive Newport pierced talon feet (est. $70,000–100,000) was a beautiful example of the form, going to a private phone buyer, underbid by C.L. Prichett & Sons.
On the other hand, the John Goddard block and shell desk, the cover lot (lot 568, est. $150,000–250,000) was, financially, the proverbial compounded felony.
One of the only four known examples of the form by Newport's major maker, even restoration to its feet would not have prevented a far higher price in the boom of the late 1980s.
A potential consignment was purportedly held back in the hope of a higher price.
The consignors then shopped the piece around, and Washington dealer Guy Bush got a very good buy indeed as a consequence.
At Sotheby's, 84% of the 248 lots in the furniture session sold, a strong total but results for some of the higher-estimated lots were not outstanding.
The famous New York Queen Anne ‘Apthorp Chairs’ from the Britton collection (lots 1279 and 1280) were estimated at $150,000–200,000 each, and at $170,000 and $150,000 seemed fine, were it not for the fact that the $320,000 pair brought $430,000 in 1983 (although bought in at Christie's in 1990).
Other interesting lots included a very unusual Boston pierced skirt card table (lot 1080, est. $80,000–120,000) in fine, seemingly original condition.
Its $120,000 final bid by dealer Leigh Keno actually seemed modest.
Perhaps more unusual, because it was in the wrong sale, was the Egyptian Revival library table (lot 1117, est. $40,000–60,000), attributed to Pottier & Stymus.
The $30,000 (£21,428) that New York dealer Meg Caldwell paid for it was one of the most impressive prices in the sale.
The Sotheby's sale had a large Chinese Export section but only 192 of the 250 lots offered sold, many for well below their conservative estimates.
Many of the items were trade lots sent over by English dealers in the hopes that the stronger dollar and different market would sell goods that did not move in London.
Unfortunately the tactic largely failed.
One notable lot was the Brooklyn-made Union Porcelain Works white biscuit mythological group that started the session (lot 154, est. a steep $15,000–20,000).
Deaccessioned last year by the Chrysler Museum, this rare group was signed with both the factory and modeller's monograms on the side.
It was sent by the museum to Skinner's where it slipped through and was bought by a dealer who also failed to recognise its quality and sold it to a young couple for $550.
Finally appreciated by Sotheby's it was bought by the High Museum, Atlanta for $13,000.
The thirty-eight prints at Christie's were noteworthy for a couple of great rarities.
Perry's ‘Opening of Japan’, the rare set of six views of his expedition (lot 31, est. $15,000–20,000), brought $28,000, while the twenty-four print George Caitlin Indian portfolio (lot 309, est. $30,000–50,000) brought $70,000 (£50,000) from a private buyer.
Sotheby's had a couple of rare Currier and Ives lithographs: bidding by phone for the very rare ‘The life of a hunter.
‘A tight fix’’’(lot 485, est. $60,000–80,000), dealer Paul Richards paid a world record price for a print by these publishers, with a $55,000 (£39,285) bid.
Lot 480 (est $30,000–40,000), ‘The road — winter’, depicting Currier and his wife, brought $30,000 (£21,428), 8,000 more than another impression of the same print, in slightly poorer condition, made at Christie's (more pictures and results on page 31).
Robert Mehlman
New York
Vigee Le Brun sleeper
Sotheby's slips
An eighteenth-century black-chalk drawing of a woman looking at a portrait miniature, annotated with extensive notes about fabrics and colours, catalogued by Sotheby's New York as by the ‘Circle of Marie Louise Elizabeth Vigee LeBrun’ in their Old Master drawings sale of 13 January, has turned out to be an exceedingly rare study by this artist.
It is for (or after) a 1790 portrait of the Countess Skavronsky, painted in Naples, and now in the Musée Jacquemart-Andre, Paris.
The sitter seems to have been one of the more vapid society cocottes who sat for Vigee-Lebrun.
The artist noted her favourite activity was ‘stretching out on a couch without a corset, wrapped in a black pelisse’.
The drawing had been published in 1935 in connection with the painting, yet both consignor and Sotheby's had been ignorant of this.
Drawings by Vigee-Lebrun are exceptionally rare, and the drawing was purchased by an unknown buyer (against Wildenstein) for $4,500 (est. $500–700).
British unfair! on VAT, say French
The national body representing France's 450 auctioneers, La Chambre Nationale des Commissaires-Priseurs français, is hoping for a response this month or early April to charges of unfair competition which they and Belgian colleagues brought against Britain with the EC Commission last December.
The Chambre Nationale claims the 0% rate of tax imposed on art works acquired before 1973 by Britain unfairly distorts competition within Europe since frontier controls were abolished on 1 January.
French auctioneers say the contrast between British and French rates of VAT (5.5% sales tax on original works, books and certain signed pieces of furniture and 18.6% on the rest) will cause art works to be drained towards London to the detriment of the Paris art market.
The French art world is already handicapped by the droit de suite of 3% which also exists in seven other European countries but not in Britain, payable to an artist and his relatives for up to fifty years after his death.
The Chairman of the Chambre Nationale, Yannick Guilloux, said the charges brought against Britain must not be seen as the stand of one European country against another but a bid to harmonise tax regulation, at as low a rate as possible, in order to protect the art market within the EC as a whole.
The Commission normally takes two months to investigate charges, after which it could either instruct Britain to set its VAT rates in conformity with European legislation or proceed to put into effect the long awaited 7th Directive on fiscal matters.
A meeting of Ministers last month was once again unable to reach agreement on VAT.
Manchester hosts a new British art fair
A new art fair will take place at the G-Mex Centre, Manchester from 18 to 21 March.
Paintings, drawings and sculpture from every period of art during the last 350 years will be on display ranging from a Tudor portrait to contemporary British art.
Forty-five dealers will be present with objects priced from £150 to £250,000.
These include Nicholas Bowlby, Jonathan Clark, Connaught Brown, Jill George, Julian Hartnoll, Anthony Hepworth, Rebecca Hossack, David Messum, MacConnal-Mason, Peter Nahum, the Polak Gallery, the Portland Gallery and the Sue Rankin Gallery.
According to the organiser Peter Evans, there will be a vetting committee but it will be vetting for ‘quality rather than authenticity’.
Dealers and Galleries
Salon du Dessin
French drawings: a family affair
No prints, no foreign dealers
For its third year Paris's Salon du Dessin de Collection has moved from its intimate setting in basement rooms of the Hotel George V to the altogether grander Grand Palais.
The number of exhibitors has grown from seventeen to twenty-three, and the range of works, previously top heavy with French eighteenth-century and Flemish drawings, is now dominated by modern and contemporary.
This year's Salon, from 3 to 8 March, still remains an all-French event, despite the eagerness of several foreign dealers to get into what is still the only fair showing drawings to the exclusion of prints.
The Salon's founding team, which remained virtually the same for the first two years, has changed significantly.
Galerie Bellier and Marc Villette have dropped out, along with Dutch and Flemish specialists Bob Haboldt and Michel Segoura.
Nineteenth-century specialist François Perreau-Saussine of Galerie du Carrousel has dropped in, together with Nicolas Joly from Galerie Yves Mikaeloff who is presenting ten pre-cubist and cubist drawings by Andre Mare alongside seventeenth- and eighteenth-century works, including an early La Hyre and one of the few Nicolas Mignards still to be found outside the Louvre.
Another Salon newcomer is Jean-François Baroni, exhibiting seventeenth-century French and Italian works.
The other seven new dealers are modern and contemporary specialists.
Galerie Pierre Brulle which opens this summer on rue Tournon on the Left Bank is showing works by Jean Helion and 1930s German artist Karl Hubbuch, while Galerie Claude Bernard is staging a one man show of pastels, drawings and watercolours by French artist Jacques Truphemus.
Galerie Di Meo is presenting work by ten artists from Brauner to Fautrier and Picasso while Galerie Durand-Dessert is showing recent gouaches by Gerard Garouste.
Galerie Guillon-Laffaille is exhibiting drawings by Matisse and watercolours by Dufy from the 1930s and 1940s.
Galerie Yvon Lambert has chosen works on paper by seven of his European and US artists including Richard Tuttle, Miguel Barcelo and Robert Combas, while Galerie Louis Carré is showing early twentieth-century drawings by Jacques Villon and works by Gaston Chaissac, Bazaine and Maurice Esteve.
Contemporary dealer Marwan Hoss, absent from last year's show, is returning with a mixed bag comprising drawings by Torres-Garcia, Helion and Gonzalez and charcoal works by Riopelle.
New York
C&M Arts aims high
Top names plus investment fund
A new art gallery, a partnership between California dealer James Corcoran and Robert Mnuchin, a leading collector and partner at Goldman Sachs, where he was in charge of equity trading until November 1990, is opening in Mnuchin's townhouse on East 78th Street.
Rumour of the partnership, to be known as C&M Arts, spread through the art market last autumn, when it purchased Mark Rothko's ‘Brown, Black and Blue’(1958) for $1 million at Sotheby's evening sale on 17 November.
Corcoran is winding down his business in Santa Monica and relocating to New York, while the team is completed with the appointment of Jennifer Vorbach, lured from Citibank's Art Advisory Services, as gallery director.
This month, C&M Arts opens for business with an exhibition of fifteen major oil paintings created by leading Abstract Expressionist master, Willem de Kooning, between 1975 and 1979 and loaned from museums and private sources including Mnuchin's own collection (5 March-30 April).
It is not a selling exhibition, although the gallery has other work by de Kooning in stock, but sets the standard for an agenda which will concentrate upon important and established American painters of the senior generation.
Arshile Gorky, Jasper Johns, Robert Rauschenberg, Cy Twombly, Brice Marden and Roy Lichtenstein were names which Mnuchin mentioned to The Art Newspaper, a list which supports the view of those observers who believe that the contemporary art market's revival will be led by renewed interest in the leading post-War American masters.
It places the gallery firmly in the mould of Acquavella, Pace or Gagosian, but has a more exclusive focus and will neither represent nor deal in the work of younger contemporary artists.
Believing that the market has already made its correction and that the present level for works of quality by the leading artists looks attractive, C&M Arts has launched an investment fund.
Mnuchin declined to comment upon the size of the fund but told The Art Newspaper that it would be a substantial eight-figure sum (more than $10 million) raised from a small group of investors and that it would have a life of just four years.
Art market sources aware of Mnuchin's track record in the stock market and the potentially enormous purchasing power of C&M Arts believe that his fund could comfortably approach $100 million.
Salon de Mars
Scheduled to avoid
France's pre-election jitters
This year's fifth annual Salon de Mars arts and antiques fair, held as ever under several acres of white tenting on the Champ de Mars near the Eiffel Tower from 31 March to 5 April, is a smaller edition than last year's.
There are ninety exhibitors including eleven from abroad, as compared to 110 in 1992.
Worldwide recession is obviously to blame for poorer attendance, as is unwillingness on the part of dealers to exhibit major pieces when clients are hesitant about buying.
Fearing pre-election jitters would make things worse for French collectors this year, organisers Daniel Gervis and Florence Benhaim also changed the dates of the Salon to put it on after France's two-round General Election on 21 and 28 March.
Despite prevailing economic gloom, the Salon also turned down requests from several US dealers wanting to take part.
Organisers are adamant that the quality of objects and paintings on show will be as high, and as efficiently vetted, as ever.
The mixture of styles and periods, from Ancient Greek to contemporary art, very much the trademark of the Salon de Mars since it opened in 1989, is as striking as ever this year, although there are fewer major furniture dealers.
The discreet field of African art, which escaped art market speculation and has always been a strong point at the fair, will be better represented than ever this year by six dealers, two of them newcomers — Meyer and Ratton, both from Paris.
Art Deco, another Salon de Mars strong point, will also be on show on six stands, including that of first-timers Couvrat-Desvergnes from Paris.
Six of the foreign dealers attending are British — including modern painting specialists Stoppenbach & Delestre and Chinese art expert Michael Goedhuis.
There are notable absences, however, including Belgian Chinese art specialist Gisele Croes and leading eighteenth-century French furniture experts from Paris, Jacques Perrin and Segoura.
Last year's Salon de Mars drew the criticism that the average quality of art, despite the presence of many outstanding dealers, was disappointingly low.
Agnew's and the art of the watercolour
Neatly coinciding with the current outstanding exhibition of British watercolours at the Royal Academy, nearby Bond Street dealers Agnew's are holding their annual and much respected watercolour exhibition, the one hundred and twentieth of its kind (8 March to 2 April).
The highlight of this year's show is the group of works by Samuel Palmer, apparently the largest to be offered by any gallery for twenty-five years.
Seven out of the nine are listed in Lister's catalogue raisonné as being untraceable, and the exhibition as a whole includes a high proportion of works not seen on the market for some years.
Offered for the third time in its history by Agnew's is Turner's ‘Sunset: a mackerel shoal’.
Other views by the artist include ‘Schaffhausen’ and ‘Berncastle’.
Three works by Gainsborough include the ‘Watering place’ and ‘Wooded landscape with travellers’, both late works.
Other artists include Francis Towne, Paul Sandby, John Varley and Edward Lear.
From the present century are works by Henry Moore, Wyndham Lewis, Charles Ginner and John Piper.
Around the galleries
A selection of the commercial shows on this March
NEW YORK
Artists show artists
Castelli, Marlborough and Forum
Is there a new generosity of spirit at large among artists?
When Nam June Paik recently unveiled a gigantic assemblage of over 400 television monitors — commissioned by the Chase Manhattan bank for the lobby of its latest branch office in Brooklyn — he left space within its 200 foot wall of dancing images for video works, to be changed periodically, by ‘guest artists’.
Now comes Sophie Calle, the French conceptualist late of the Museum of Modern Art's ‘Dislocations’, with a show called ‘Blind Color’ in which she incorporates a mini-exhibition of work by six other artists — monochromatic paintings by Gerhard Richter, Alan Charlton, Robert Rauschenberg, Ad Reinhart, Yves Klein and Piero Manzoni.
Included as well are statements, mounted on the wall, by these artists on the subject of colour.
Next to these are hung canvases — uncoloured — printed with texts about colour taken from interviews Calle has done with blind people.
To see what insights might be gained from such juxtapositions, go to Castelli before 13 March.
(Calle's show also includes, in the gallery's smaller room, the piece she did for the Carnegie International about the theft of Old Master paintings from Boston's Gardner Museum.)
Stephen Prina — another conceptual artist — includes three Dan Flavin fluorescent sculptures in his show at Luhring Augustine (until 20 March).
But he is using them as light fixtures (there's a switch!) to illuminate an installation of photographs of previous shows at the gallery.
Also shown is the latest in a continuing project (shown at last year's Documenta) which consists of the making of blank, all-over wash drawings in the precise measurements of all of Edouard Manet's documented paintings (he's up to No. 160 out of a total of 556).
There is also a huge clock-like construction taking Billboard magazine's ‘Hot 100 Singles’ chart for the week ending 20 February 1993, as inspiration.
A few weeks ago Roberta Smith of the New York Times wrote an article expressing a certain degree of ennui over the new decade's proliferation of ‘installation art’— but it doesn't seem to have done much to stem the tide.
Until 27 March at Ronald Feldman, a gallery that seems to specialise in the genre, Todd Siler (who holds a combined doctoral degree in neuroscience and art and who has written a book called Breaking the Mind Barrier) has devised a tableau he calls ‘Radical Futures’.
No, it's not about taking chances in the commodities market but rather a kind of theatre of concern about human potential in our era of heightened environmental concern.
There Is a vast backdrop-like painting — 200 feet long by twelve feet high — against which is set up an array of further paintings, drawings and sculptures, some of which incorporate scientific writing.
Bio-technological concerns are also on Laurel Katz's mind in her show at Postmasters (19 March to17 April).
In it she has provided a life-size cast of a cow with a kind of knitted suit and populated a wheat field with mannequins sporting space suits.
And Carter Kustera, at Josh Baer, presents ‘Based on a True Story’, an installation examining distortive media responses to real-life incidents (until the 27th).
If Laurel Katz at twenty-three represents youth among the installationists then Vito Acconci might be said to represent if not old age then at least significant maturity.
Mature enough, in any case, to be recreating works from past decades for those who might have missed them.
Two such are at Gladstone (until the 27th): ‘The Voice of America’ from 1975, featuring a grid of ropes across the floor of the gallery which must be negotiated in order to approach two huge floor-to-ceiling chairs, and ‘The Object of It All’, a sound and video installation from 1977.
Concurrently at 303 Gallery Acconci is showing two pieces from 1991: ‘Home Entertainment Centers’, which features life-sized inflatable dolls with media implants and ‘Pleasure Heads’, which are probably better off not being described.
As an artist Robin Winters has left a riotous trail across America and Europe in the past two decades, a path strewn with paintings, sculptures, drawings in all media, writing, installations, performances and events which appear to have combined all of the above.
In recent years Winters has interested himself in making objects of glass and ceramics.
Perhaps it is true that everything points back to one's youth: as a teenager Winters began a bottle collection after discovering a drugstore basement full of abandoned glass containers.
‘Vitro Vivo: Paintings, Glass and Ceramics’ is how Winters styles his newest exhibition, on until 20 March at Brooke Alexander.
During his European peregrinations in the 1970s, Winters at one point met up with Marcel Broodthaers in Paris.
There he assisted him in the preparation of an installation called ‘La Salle Blanche’.
Broodthaers, who was an installationist in the days when such work was still rather uncommon, became a guru to a select handful of French and later American artists — but his work remains, oddly, little known in New York.
Michael Werner attempts a correction of this situation — from 4 March to 17 April — with a show called ‘Marcel Broodthaers: A Few Major Works’.
In it are examples of his installation work and some object sculptures, among them ‘Bureau Couvert de Mules’ of 1966 and another work from the Sixties which consists of a stuffed parrot in a glass case with an accompanying text and a tape-loop of sound.
Texts and objects combine in a new installation by Marlene McCarthy at Metro Pictures until 27 March and new paintings featuring over-sized calligraphic texts figure in Linda Daniel's new work at Jose Freire Fine Arts, until 21 March.
Mr  Friere , who used to call his gallery fiction/non-fiction, decided to change its name when the gallery recently moved to more spacious quarters on Prince St.
Angular shapes that are letter-like march determinedly across the large fields of the paintings of Paul Pagk, a thirty-one year old Englishman.
They seem desperately to want to form words but can't quite do so.
They are rendered with a reduced palette and a monumentality that makes them seem emblematic, but of what?
Pagk, whose work is better known in France than in America, is having his second show at Thread Waxing Space from 5 to 27 March.
Other British artists currently on in New York include James Nares (who probably qualifies as a New Yorker by now, having lived here for the past fifteen years) at Kasmin; Tony Bevan, a figurative painter who often does self-portraits at Louver (both shows until 20 March); and Eric Snell, a Londoner, at Esman (until 27 March).
Snell's work is conceptual and process-oriented.
For instance, he will take a wooden bowl, burn it and then, using the pieces of charred wood which result as a medium, make a drawing of a bowl.
His show at Esman will include a large wall drawing.
Something of the same quality can be detected in Jane Rosen's work.
Her new sculpture and works on paper are at Borgenicht until the 13th.
Her materials consist of marble dust, gypsum cement, resins and rhoplex, but the ways in which she works with them are based on a kind of body language, using gestures that are related to her subject matter.
An image of a horse's head, for instance, is made by employing motions suggesting those used when grooming a horse.
Is there something in the English soul that wants to bond with land?
Richard Long has been doing it for years in his site-related stone works — three of which, based on materials gathered in the states of New York and New Jersey — can be seen until 13 March at 65 Thompson St. And surely there is a kind of nostalgie de la boue in the drawings he makes using ordinary mud as the medium.
Seven of these figure are in the current show, two done directly onto the gallery's walls.
Robert Grosvenor is one of those artists who give new meaning to the term ‘raw material’, using as he has over the years wooden beams — stacked, splintered, split and variously arrayed over the floor.
New works by him are at Paula Cooper.
Wood is also the medium this time round for Judith Shea at Protech.
In her case, of course, it is the figure which provides the impetus, although it is usually evoked in absentia only by the clothes it supports (both shows until 27 March).
The body is also the basis for Orshi Drosdik's new works in glass at Cugliani (6 March until the end of April).
Bodies, in the form of George Segal's newest bronzes, fill Janis this month and most of next.
In his most ambitious piece to date, called ‘Street Crossing’, white-patinated urbanities confront one another in midtown (have they got Giacometti's 1948 ‘City Square’ on their minds?).
Single figures, black in all-black environments, occupy Janis's two smaller rooms (6 March to 24 April).
Joel Perlman's new bronzes at Emmerich (18 March to 17 April) feature subtleties of patination from dark to palest green-grey.
He is also showing medium-sized welded steel pieces whose curved, crisp-edged planes evoke the spirit of Futurism.
At Goodman there are bronze, wood, plaster and cast iron sculptures by the Spaniard Juan Munoz (until 20 March) while at Hoffman, Ilan Averbuch's new sculptures combining carved stone with water are on view from 20 March until 17 April.
Although he was born seventy-one years ago in New York, not Greece, Theodoros Stamos feels the pull of his Greek heritage with the force of the tides in the wine-dark sea.
During the past twenty years he has spent more and more time in Greece — and the paintings in the current exhibition of this veteran Abstract Expressionist at the ACA Galleries are the result of extended periods spent in Greece during the past two years (4 to 27 March).
Recent abstractions by Cora Cohen are at McCoy until 20 March and, until the same date, the ever brighter, ever quirkier biomorphisms of Carroll Dunham are on at Sonnabend.
Donald Powley rides herd on the splash and the drip in his new works at Rubinstein/Diacono (13 March until 10 April) while Charles Cowles features new work by two veteran abstractionists, Tom Holland and Charles Arnoldi, from 6 March until the end of the month.
Clifford Ross began his career as an Abstract Expressionist but has, over the years, found notions of landscape surfacing in his work.
In his show at Salander O'Reilly from 3 March to 3 April, for instance, there is a large painting in three parts: the centre is very much a landscape with trees and a horizon but the side panels continue the motif in a decidedly abstract way.
Judy Ledgerwood, at Germana van Eck until 13 March, makes abstractions very different from Mr Ross's but suffused as are his with notions of the landscape.
Julie Wachtel made her name painting blown-up and juxtaposed images from serious and popular art (the Venus of Willendorf meets Wilma Flintstone, for instance) and cartoon images remain close to her heart.
New works by her are on at American Fine Arts from 6 to 27 March) while Michael St John, also smitten with folks from ‘toon town, paints cartoon characters in the act of doing double takes against vast white backgrounds (at Amy Lipton until the end of the month).
At Forum, until the 13th, there is a group show with work in a vast variety of media called ‘Artists by Artists’.
In it you may find, among other goodies, a Chuck Close of Alex Katz, and Alex Katz of Philip Pearlstein, a Philip Pearlstein of Raphael Sawyer; a Robert Mapplethorpe of Alice Neel and an Alice Neel of Duane Hansen; and a William Beckman of Gregory Gillespie and vice versa.
And at Marlborough Larry Rivers — he of the recently published memories — takes a steely look at ‘Art and the Artist’.
Working with his unique combination of paint on canvas and carved foam board, he gives us portraits of Picasso, Leger, Matisse, Balthus, Max Ernst and Jean Helion, among others.
His old friend John Ashbery has provided an essay for the catalogue (3 to 27 March).
George Bacon
Thomas Struth, ‘Erich Ferl Strasse, Leipzig 1991’.
One of the images by this German photographer of the desolation and decay of the cities in former East Germany.
A politically charged, German image which meets the currently relevant agenda.
At Marian Goodman Gallery, New York, until 20 March
PARIS
Boltanski and Alberto Giacometti
Assemblages by Lallemand at Gilles Peyroulet
Jean-François Briant cuts sheets of steel into more or less identifiable natural forms, leaves with veins incised into openings, ears of corn, vegetable silhouettes which slide imperceptibly towards representations of objects as if at every fold and cut the metal allowed one to read into it fragments of history, of a previous life.
The young French artist's sculptures have a seeming fragility.
They are to be seen at Di Meo until mid-March and until 20 March together with the paintings of Christian Henry in the Salle Saint-Jean of the Hotel de Ville.
Also on until 20 March is sculpture at Gilles Peyroulet.
These are the latest assemblages of Bernard Lallemand who continues to use objects and materials taken from the world of industry, with a particular preference for effects of milky transparency juxtaposed with steel.
Research into colour has led Marthe Wery towards an interest in the effects of light and the role of architecture in an exhibition space.
Her monochromes, obtained through the superimposition of differing and at times contradictory tonalities, take on their full significance when they are placed, either hung up or leaning on the ground, in a pre-chosen space with controlled lighting.
The Belgian artist is at Claire Burrus until 17 April.
The trading ports of Europe photographed by Emmanuelle Danoy in sepia remain at Isabelle Bongard until mid-April.
The four Senegalese artists on show at le Monde de l'Art (mentioned last month) continue until 24 March.
At Piece Unique Christian Boltanski presents a pile of cassettes bearing labels of powerful intensity.
Drawings by Alberto Giacometti mainly from the Fondation Giacometti and the New York gallery Pierre Matisse are on show at Lelong until 20 March.
Closing on the same day is the confrontation between the work of Carmelo Arden and Roger Desserprit made during the years of the association with the Madi group in the 1950s.
Anne-Marie Jugnet's neon sentences remain at Froment and Putman until 24 April.
At Samia Saouma the chilly irony of Glen Baxter makes way for the recent disconcerting images of Pierre and Gilles, on until the end of the month.
Recent pictures by Jorg Immendorf are at Templon; Jean-Jacques Rullier and Nina Childress are at Jennifer Flay; Philippe Cognee is on show until mid-month at Laage Salomon, landscapes in oil on canvas and panel as well as large monochrome and charcoal drawings.
Reproducing his own handwriting, Bernard Faucon makes large words of wood placed alongside each other then coats the sentences with a reflecting substance and places them in landscapes, from the island of Elba to Vietnam.
His photographs of these installations reconstitute the memory of a place.
At Yvon Lambert until 6 April.
Patrick Corillon tells absurd stories using drawing or objects drawn from the city: a street sign, a shop window, museum tickets, placed next to short texts which guide the visitor in the footsteps of the imaginary adventurer Oscar Serti, at Galerie des Archives from 13 March to 24 April.
At galerie Beaubourg Dado examines the illustrious figure of the Cardinal de Retz (until 20 March) while at Leif Stahle Pierre Lafoucrière presents oils and watercolours until the 27th, and Delsol-Innocenzi welcomes Jean-Michel Othonial, David Renaud and Matthew Weinstein during March and April.
Five plinths, the bed, the Murano glass parapet, the bookshop, a chimney, the floor and the decorated walls made in 1985 by the architect Gaetano Pesce for the ‘Maison Hubin’ are on show with Catherine and Stephane de Beyrie until 30 April.
At Darthea Speyer until the end of next month the recent drawings of Lionel Guibout are on show.
In collaboration with the Museum of Modern Art at Saint-Etienne, Vidal-Saint Phalle have brought together some recent works by Vincent Bioules.
Sculpture by Peter Briggs and drawings and watercolours by Martin Barré are on until mid-April at Barbier-Beltz.
Patrick Everaert presents his latest pieces at Meteo until 13 March, followed for the rest of the month by ‘Une Zone de sensibilite’, an exhibition dedicated to Yves Klein at Renn.
Finally Anne de Villepoix continues her wander round the human body: after last month's corsets hung in the air, John Coplans has fragmented self-portraits: ten busts, arms and black and white photographs laid out like architectural structures.
Luciana Mottola Colban
LONDON
Hitchens centenary: two shows
Clemente and Catherine Lee in Dering Street
A new exhibition of Catherine Lee's unique bronze wall reliefs opens at Annely Juda (11 March-17 April), each a mosaic of several parts distinguished by different patinas.
There are three large works which stand upon the floor, three works which comprise a number of smaller reliefs arranged in rows, ten single reliefs and, in a new development, works made of coloured glass, and fibreglass and lead.
Lee, who is the subject of Sean Scully's ‘Catherine’ series of paintings to be collected by the Fort Worth Museum of Modern Art in May, showed at the gallery in 1989, her first solo exhibition in this country, and was included in a couple of mixed exhibitions in 1992, but her reputation is more firmly established on the Continent, where an acclaimed survey exhibition took place recently at Munich's Lenbachhaus and at the Neue Galerie der Stadt Linz in Austria.
There is a concurrent exhibition at Lelong in New York (to 27 March).
Downstairs in Dering Street, there is a large exhibition of works by
Francesco Clemente at Anthony d'Offay (12 March-30 April).
Filling three galleries, it comprises a new series of small paintings on board which illustrate, in thirteen variations, a man praying in a landscape; a set of four sculptures of a head cast in copper, brass, tin and lead; a series of ten large gouaches painted on folding panels of Pondicherry paper; and six groups of miniatures executed by Indian craftsmen under his supervision and illustrating subjects of his choice.
These latter creations will be recognisable to a London audience from ‘Three Worlds’, the exhibition of Clemente's works on paper which was organised by the Philadelphia Museum of Art and seen at the Royal Academy last summer.
The centenary of Ivon Hitchens' birth is commemorated by several exhibitions of his work.
A room of his paintings is a feature of the Tate Gallery's ‘New Displays 1993’ and there are two gallery exhibitions being organised by the two dealers now most closely associated with his art.
Bernard Jacobson is showing ten landscape paintings dating from 1940–60 (to 1 April) as part of his series of exhibitions devoted to modern and contemporary landscape art, and there is a more widely ranging survey of his long and prolific career at Waddington (3 March-3 April).
Drawn from stock and private sources, including the artist's family, it comprises landscapes, nudes and flower pictures, and features both a view of a village church painted as early as 1924 and the final picture completed by Hitchens shortly before his death in 1979.
In Albemarle Street, Marlborough is showing new sculpture by John Davies (12 March-30 April), who exhibited at the Sainsbury Centre for the Visual Arts in 1985, and at the gallery's New York branch in 1989.
With the exception of a series of drawings seen last year, Davies has not shown in London since 1984, when he transformed the gallery into a circus of trapeze artists and other gymnasts.
His new exhibition comprises forty figure and head sculptures, including works of diminutive and huge scales and bronze editions, a new material for his art.
At Connaught Brown there are fourteen new abstract paintings by William MacIlraith (24 March-20 April) who is known for the picture surfaces which he achieves with a special wax and pigment technique.
Belonging to a generation of British artists who make biomorphic compositions, MacIlraith has not made paintings for six years, although he exhibited his drawings with Anthony Brown in 1991.
Other galleries in Bond Street's vicinity are not making any special exhibition plans this month but there is plenty of activity beyond London's West End.
Anthony Wilkinson, formerly Nigel Greenwood's sales assistant, has curated ‘Strictly Painting’ for Cubitt Street Gallery (to 20 March), a new exhibition space located near King's Cross railway station.
His selection of seven artists includes Nicholas May, Paul Winstanley and Simon Callery who is also exhibiting his abstract canvases at Anderson O'Day (4–27 March).
A small survey exhibition of Victor Willing's work is taking place at Karsten Schubert and at Richard Salmon's studio in South Edwardes Square, having been postponed from last November (11 March-17 April).
Comprising five large paintings, fifteen drawings and several early works, it is the first exhibition of Willing's art since his death in 1988.
The Whitechapel Art Gallery showed his work in 1986 and one of his compositions was included in Charles Saatchi's gift of nine works of art to the Tate Gallery where it was exhibited too briefly before Christmas.
There are exhibitions of new paintings by Katrine Herian at Frith (to 30 April) and of Kikuo Saito at Francis Graham Dixon (to 21 March).
Gillian Jason is showing portraits of real or  imaginary sitters by Craigie Aitchison, Frank Auerbach, Leon Kossoff, with a portrait of Rosalind, Lucian Freud, represented by a new etching of Kai, the artist's adopted son, Leonard McComb and ten other painters (10 March-3 April).
At Flowers East, an exhibition of new works by Peter Howson opened in the middle of last month (to 14 March).
There are eight large paintings, including a crucifixion scene and other apocalyptic subjects vaguely reminding of Stanley Spencer, and twenty smaller pictures.
Julian Spalding is curating a forthcoming retrospective survey of Howson's career for Glasgow's McLellan Gallery (opening July).
Alison Watt's new paintings will be shown at Flowers East in the middle of the month (19 March-18 April).
The following exhibitions were reported in last month's issue and deserve note before they close: Hamish Fulton's elegant installation of wall texts and photographs of his walks, the most handsome exhibition to have been held at Annely Juda (to 6 March), two large sculptures by Mario Merz and new paintings and charcoal drawings, the best of his career, by Leon Kossoff at Anthony d'Offay (to 6 March), Michael Young's new sand paintings at Turske-Hue-Williams (to 15 March), ‘Out of Sight Out of Mind’, Nicholas Logsdail's survey of international painting and sculpture 1965–1975 at Lisson (to 20 March), Michael Landy's ‘Warning Signs’ at Karsten Schubert (to 6 March), new paintings by Arturo di Stefano, coinciding with his retrospective survey at Liverpool's Walker Art Gallery, at Purdy Hicks (to 6 March), new works by Riccardo Cinalli, featuring in a touring exhibition organised by the Accademia Italiana, at Long and Ryle (to 19 March), and print exhibitions of Jim Dine at Waddington Graphics (to 14 March) and Robert Ryman at Victoria Miro (to 29 March).
COLOGNE
Contemporary Art to Premierentage
Rozhdestwjenski, pupil of Malevich, at Gmurzynska
Krystyna Gmurzynska is showing the art of Konstantin Rozhdestwjenski, a disciple of Suprematist founder Kasimir Malevich, in an exhibition titled ‘Under the Sign of the Red Cross’(13 March-2 May).
Building upon the experience which he gained as Malevich's assistant at the National Institute for Artistic Culture in Leningrad in 1923–26, when he helped to create the master's ‘Analytic Tables’, Rozhdestwjenski directed his talent towards the decorative arts, designing books and advertisements, painting porcelain, and creating, with Nikolai Suetin, the Soviet Pavilion for the World Exhibitions held in Paris in 1938 and in New York in 1939.
With his works exhibited at Gmurzynska, Rozhdestwjenski joins an illustrious group of other East European artists promoted and placed in Western museums by Krystyna and her mother Antonia Gmurzynska (who died in 1986) since the opening of the gallery in 1965.
Among their best known artists have been Michail Larionov, Natalia Gontcharova and Alexander Rodchenko.
Since 1991 Krystyna Gmurzynska's exhibitions have been presented in Gmurzynska's new gallery, designed by Swiss architect Roger Diener in a suitably Suprematist coat of red paint and situated in a residential neighbourhood in the south of the city (Goethestrasse 65a).
Christian Nagel is an art historian from Munich who did his doctorate on the Paris avant-garde galleries of the nineteenth century.
Since opening in 1990, his intimate room at Brabanterstrasse 49 has encouraged artists to reflect on the gallery structure itself.
In 1991, for example, Fareed Armaly and Christian Philipp Muller cloned the banal façade of the building and relocated it full scale at the edge of a forest: ‘Fassade Galerie Nagel 1:1’ showed the same, faceless, empty apartment building but joined to a work belonging to Munich art dealer, Hanns Daxer and his wife (to which ‘Fassade’now also belongs).
It was a decision which provoked questions of originality and identification.
Nagel represents Cosima von Bonin, Clegg and Guttmann, Mark Dion, Peter Fend, Andrea Fraser, Renée Green, Charline von Heyl, Michael Krebber, Hans-Jörg Mayer, Jörg Schlick, Josef Strau and Heimo Zobernig.
Now he is showing Josef Zehrer (2–27 March) who works in a variety of different media.
He has produced strip compositions from photographs, created a map of the world from silicone, and given readings.
He was included in ‘Koln Show 1990’ and, with Krebber and Mayer, showed in San Francisco in 1991.
Zehrer also had a one-man show in Kunstraum Daxer in Munich last year.
His new work attaches itself to the ready-made tradition, taking the theme of laziness into ‘a la recherche du temps perdu’.
For example, he is showing a Bavarian factory bench used for a craftsman's coffee break and retitled ‘Laziness’.
In April Nagel is exhibiting photographs by Tulsa artist, Larry Clark.
For thirty years, Clark has been obsessed with sex and death and has achieved some notoriety for his books Tulsa (1970) and Teenage Lust (1984), in which his nude models have portrayed, in turn, lust, despair and boredom.
Philomene Magers continues to show artists who have exerted a strong theoretical influence upon a younger generation.
Following an exhibition of one Black Painting by Ad Reinhardt in the context of his theoretical writings, he is working with Allan Kaprow, celebrated for his Happenings (15 March-30 April), and hopes to show an installation of white-band Chevrolet tyres originally created by Kaprow in 1961.
Until that exhibition opens, there is a regular programme of two art films, Emile de Antonio's ‘Painters Painting’ which concentrates upon Pollock and Rothko, and a short version of Andy Warhol's ‘Empire State Building’.
Other exhibitions taking place before ‘Premierentage’, the weekend when Cologne's contemporary art galleries organise simultaneous previews (30 April-I May), include Sherrie Levine, who will be showing six tables copying an original design of De Stijl artist Gerrit Rietveld and eighteen identical paintings at Jablonka (to 17 April), and Spanish artist Julio Rondo at Tanja Grunert, whose monochrome canvases presented behind sheets of glass covered with gold lacquer have been compared to Ed Ruscha (13 March-17 April).
General Idea, with a black AIDS work, Dominique Gonzalez-Foerster, who has created a ‘chambre de couleur’, Angela Bulloch, represented by a sound and light work, and Liam Gillick, who has reprinted bulletins extracted from scientific publications, feature among those artists showing with Esther Schipper, who opened her gallery at Neusserstrasse 28 in the north of the city in 1990.
Following on from that she shows American artist Sean Landers (from 24 April).
Daniel Buchholz has opened a tiny ‘chambre separee’, just twenty square metres in dimension, concealed behind the bookstore formerly owned by his father at Neven Du Mont Strasse 17.
Since August 1992 the programme at Buchholz + Buchholz has included photographs by Nineties nightlife photographer Wolfgang Tillmanns and ‘Proiezioni’, in which thirty-three artists showed five slides apiece.
Now there is a single work, a sculpture of a dead Viking, by fancied Los Angeles artist, Paul McCarthy, who was included in ‘Post-human’(to 30 April).
At Albertusstrasse 26, Buchholz is showing the work of Munich and Paris art dealer, Rudiger Schottle (from 26 March).
Across the street at Albertusstrasse 9–11, Galerie Berndt marks the one hundredth birthday of Beatrice Wood, a friend of Picabia who met Marcel Duchamp in New York in 1917 and was encouraged to make sketches in which the seeds of Surrealism can be detected.
Her exhibition includes original drawings and remade sheets (to 24 March).
Sadly she will not be present for her birthday on 3 March.