

News
Alchemy
Monsignor Garlato, chairman of the body which advises the Vatican on its artistic patrimony, has told a conference in Perugia that the Church should sell at least ten percent of the 95,000 ecclesiastical buildings in Italy rather than see these redundant places of worship fall down.
This was greeted with shock and outrage by an Italian public which, although it goes to church in ever smaller numbers, would like to see the outward signs of the Church's existence march on unchanged, and recoils at the prospect of a sacred building housing something so profane as a fashion house, for example.
The times they are a-changing, however, and the Church is doing no more than facing up to the inevitable, as did the Anglicans as long ago as 1968.
The Art Newspaper has now heard of a really amazing suggestion.
A veteran New York dealer with a reputation for having always sensed the latest in art movements is making an offer to the Vatican.
‘Why don't you sell me your redundant relics?’, he says.
Since the second Vatican Council modernised the Church and began to discourage the cult of relics, their religious power has seeped away.
Now, this dealer is saying, the time is ripe for these jawbones, femurs, teeth, thorns, cloth fragments and so on to be launched on a new, numinous existence as works of art.
If the English artist Mark Quinn can get his own head, cast in his own frozen blood, on display in the Saatchi Gallery in London; if the Italian papers can be filled with agitated articles about whether ‘a cardboard box covered in cloth, with bits of cardboard, bone glue, red pen, tempera and oil paint’, until recently exhibited at the Brera Academy in Milan, is or is not an authentic, therefore meaningful, work by the shamanesque German, Joseph Beuys; if Duchamp's own famous urinal of 1917 can grace the Palazzo Grassi in Venice as from this month, then surely there is room for those centuries-old objects of ancient devotion to be resurrected as the focus of the new cult.
All that is needed is for the philosopher's stone of artistic intention to be applied to them.
The miraculous moment of transmutation, when lead turns into gold, as it were, can be proven to have taken place at the precise second when the first buyer hands over his American Express card to add the foreskin of the Infant Jesus or a mummified fish from the Miraculous Drought of Fishes to his collection.
An answer from the Vatican to this unique offer is expected by 1 April.
Cultural property
The Russian will to return war booty exists — the necessary laws do not
Long delays foreseeable, despite creation of a Russian-German Commission for the return of works of art
Early last month, a Russian war veteran took matters into his own hands and delivered to the German embassy in Moscow a cache of drawings, prints and paintings, among which, according to the German Foreign Office, is a Durer.
A spokesman confirmed that they probably come from the Bremen Kunstverein, from which fifty paintings, 1,715 drawings and 3,000 prints went missing at the end of the war, and that experts are still examining them.
He foresaw no problem in having them returned to Bremen, and that they would not be the subject of discussion at future sessions of the Russian-German Commission for the return of art treasures.
This was set up on 10 February in Dresden when delegates from Russia and Germany held their first joint session to discuss the restitution of art treasures  missing since World War II.
The Russians, represented by the Minister of Culture, Yevgeniy Sidorov and the Germans, represented by the Minister of the Interior Rudolf Seiters and the Culture Ministers of the Lander of Berlin, Bremen and Saxony, expressed themselves in favour of a fair solution to the problem.
The commission, which will meet two to three times a year, will work out general proposals and arbitrate in the matter of claims lodged by both sides.
However, most of the work involved in the identification of objects is to be carried out by independent groups of experts handling archives, libraries, museum collections and legal matters.
Unlike the euphoric articles which have appeared in Germany on this subject, the response in Russia has been more muted.
Valeriy Kulishov, advisor to the Russian Minister for Culture on restitution matters and member of the Restitution Commission, told The Art Newspaper: ‘The talk at the Dresden meeting was to a large extent about a legal basis, and the protocol of the meeting itself is a kind of ‘framework’ agreement.
It sets out the order in which talks are to be held, the nature of these talks, the powers of the parties involved, the level of discussions etc.
However, even here there are some differences: the German position, officially supported by Bonn, is that work should be based on the international agreements signed by Mikhail Gorbachev and Boris Yeltsin, under which the issue would be limited to the return of treasures located on their territory.
The Russians, on the other hand, believe that the legal framework should be considerably broader, with the whole range of international agreements and conventions applied.
On this basis, art treasures which have been misplaced, lost or have ended up in private collections should either be returned or covered by compensation from the guilty party’.
‘There are also some problems to do with the the nature of the joint commission.
In Germany, both the Minister for Internal Affairs and the Ministers of Culture in the Lander can take independent decisions, while the Russian part of the commission is a consultative body and can only make recommendations which are subsequently ratified at State level.
As far as the make-up of the commission is concerned, the Russians want it to be composed of professionals and specialists, while the Germans believe that it should above all have a strong political element’.
‘The newspaper and television campaign in Germany over the imminent handing over of certain art treasures is gamesmanship to exert pressure on public opinion during the talks.
None of the members of the Russian delegation has given any ground for premature celebration.
Only after Russia has received official lists of claims will she begin to work on bringing items to light and checking them.
After all, claims on items are not the end of the matter.
For example, there seems to exist an impression that Russia has all of the works from the Bremen collection.
However, a certain number of these works are obviously scattered around the world’.
‘The mutual return of art treasures is also being hampered by the different conditions prevalent in Germany and Russia.
While a large number of the items taken from Germany are held in special State-run storage facilities and are easy to work with, the majority of works removed from Russia were scattered over the world in the post-war period’.
Valeriy Kulishov goes on to describe the legal vacuum in which Russia currently finds itself.
‘There is still no mechanism in this country for taking decisions on restitution.
We and our partners tacitly recognise that there are a number of captured art treasures on Russian territory.
However, there have as yet been no official state decrees, announcements or acts of recognition to this effect.
Without this we cannot engage in any worthwhile legal work or provide access to items.
However, some items are effectively open.
It is no secret that the Koenigs collection is now located in the Pushkin State Museum of Fine Arts, where, by the way, they also hold a large part of the Hungarian works of art’.
Kulishov does not rule out some complications in the talks with Germany and Hungary caused by relations between the former republics of the USSR.
It seems that there is still some mileage in the situation which arose in February 1992, when at a meeting in Minsk the presidents of the Commonwealth of Independent States signed the now infamous Agreement on the Return of Cultural and Historical Treasures to their States of Origin (The Art Newspaper No. 18, May 1992, p. 2).
In spite of the fact that the Russian parliament suspended the agreement on Russian territory, an interdepartmental commission, which includes Russian officials, is still at work in Minsk sorting out claims between the former republics of the USSR.
Russia, in helping to restore the museums in other former republics after the war, gave them works both from its own museum collections and from war booty.
And there is another problem which can only be solved in close collaboration with Ukraine and Belarus — the Polish aspect, for, according to Valeriy Kulishov, the Poles are also preparing their claims.
However, work has gone on.
In the near future, following a Russian Presidential Decree, a centralised fund for the storage of captured art treasures is apparently to be set up, a kind of depository with restoration facilities.
There has also been a meeting in Bremen during which the conditions for the return of the Bremen collection were worked out.
Among these, according to Fedor Polenov, Head of the Russian Delegation and Chairman of the Russian Supreme Soviet Commission for Culture, is the intention on the German side to give Russia a number of works from the Bremen Collection for Russian museums, and also to give financial and technical aid for the restoration of the Novgorod Museum and Park, and to help in making up the museums collection which was destroyed during the war.
A further agreement has also been reached on the return to Germany of a part of the library of the German town of Gotha, 300,000 volumes of which were returned by the Soviet Government to the GDR back in 1956.
Paris
Van Gogh's ‘Jardin a Auvers’ in the courts
Owner sues French State for compensation
Jacques Walter, the former owner of van Gogh's ‘Jardin a Auvers’, auctioned last year for only FFr55 million after being classified an historic monument (see The Art Newspaper No.24, January 1993, p20), has taken out four law suits against the French State for compensation.
The painting of July 1890, executed just days before van Gogh killed himself, and France's first historic monument to go on the block, was sold on 6 December by Jean-Claude Binoche to French banker and businessman Jean-Marc Vernes.
Acting through his sixty-year-old son, electronics engineer Jean-Jacques Walter, Walter père is demanding FFr300 million (£37.5 million; $56.25 million) compensation for the loss in market value of the van Gogh, which was unable to find an international buyer because of its classification.
In addition, the family is suing for the restitution of one-quarter of the immense Walter-Guillaume collection of modern masterpieces donated to the State by Jean, father of Jacques and grandfather of Jean-Jacques, who died in a car accident in 1957.
Comprising 327 paintings, including twenty-four Renoirs, sixteen Cezannes, ten Matisses, twelve Picassos, five Modiglianis, twenty-two Soutines and nine Douanier Rousseau, the collection is now housed in the Orangerie in Paris and estimated very roughly at FFr40 billion.
The van Gogh and Walter-Guillaume suits, started last September and December respectively, could take three to four years and the Walters' lawyers fear French authorities could divert the former case to an administrative Tribunal which could take a further three to four years to judge it.
Acting through a second firm of lawyers, Jean-Jacques Walter has taken out proceedings against the French State in the European courts of Strasbourg and Luxemburg for violating the European Convention of Human Rights and failing to apply the Treaty of Rome.
Walter argues that the Convention guarantees compensation whenever a citizen is deprived of property.
The Treaty of Rome meanwhile guarantees free circulation of goods.
French authorities first asked Jacques Walter not to remove ‘Jardin a Auvers’ from France in 1977.
In 1982, when he requested an export licence, they evoked the 1941 law, passed by the collaborationist Vichy regime, restricting the export of ‘national heritage’ works of art.
The argument was slim: the painting had been bought in the US and declared as a temporary import in 1955.
Van Gogh was not French and Walter was a Swiss resident.
In addition, the deal covering the Walter-Guillaume donation (handled by Jacques Walter after his father's accidental death) implied that the international nature of his own private collection — his right to dispose of it on the international market in other words — should be respected and the French State show itself ‘worthy’ of the gift.
French authorities were all the more interested by the historic and stylistic importance of ‘Jardin a Auvers’, as national museums only possessed twenty-five other works by the artist.
In 1988 another request was made to export the canvas.
It was classified an historic monument the following year.
To justify their failure to grant compensation, French authorities argue they could have simply stopped ‘Jardin a Auvers’ from leaving the country by invoking the 1941 Vichy law, which makes no provision for compensation.
Jean-Jacques Walter's suit to recover some FFr10 billion from the Walter-Guillaume collection, meanwhile, is inspired by the fact his grandfather left no written instructions about his paintings.
The French law which stipulates 25% of any estate be preserved for direct descendants was waived by his widow, who felt she was interpreting her husband's wishes.
Art on film
Carter Brown to be godfather of American arts TV
New cable channel, Ovation, to show cultural news, performances, museum visits and concerts
Carter Brown, who only last year retired after twenty-two years as director of the National Gallery of Art, has again assumed an enormously influential position in the American art world.
The gallery's director emeritus has been named chairman of the board of America's first arts cable-television channel.
The privately owned company, Ovation Inc, plans to begin advertiser supported programming nationwide in late 1994 and hopes to reach an audience of tens of millions within the most affluent sector of the U.S. population.
‘American television viewers need and want a channel dedicated to high quality theatre, music, dance and visual arts’, Mr Brown says.
Ovation will differ from America's sole current provider of high-brow television, the non-profit Public Broadcasting System (PBS) by dealing only with the arts, as opposed to science, educational and general news shows.
Unlike existing cable ‘arts’ channels, such as Bravo and Arts & Entertainment, which mainly carry movies and series reruns, Ovation will focus on performance and behind-the-scenes reporting on the international art world.
Broadcasting seven days a week from 3 pm to 3 am, and increasing to eighteen hours a day within two years, Ovation will offer a daily cultural news review, interviews, profiles, live or pre-recorded dramatic performances, dance events, museum visits and concerts (possibly with radio simulcast), as well as specially promoted monthly ‘blockbuster specials’.
At first the station will air existing programmes, but eventually will produce its own material, with Mr Brown himself sometimes appearing on-camera.
‘TV is our new reality’, he says.
‘It's the electric fireplace which the American public watches an average of six to eight hours a day’.
The National Cable Television Association reports that cable service jumped from 17 million homes in 1980 to 56 million in 1992, with an average of thirty-seven channels available.
Channel compression technology will soon provide access to more than one hundred channels, spawning dozens of ‘narrowcast’‘niche channels’ such as Ovation.
Ovation's founder and chief executive is cable pioneer Harold E. Morse, who in the 1970s established an educational network called The Learning Channel that he recently sold.
‘Carter was the first guy I sat down with to discuss this thing’, he told The Art Newspaper, ‘and as soon as I did, we were off to the races’.
Mr Brown is responsible for marketing strategy, programme development and quality control, while Mr Morse will administer day-to-day operations.
The venture is funded entirely by its board of directors, which includes Messrs Brown and Morse, along with Anthony S. Harrington, a Washington attorney who served as general counsel for the Clinton-Gore presidential campaign, and US Senator Terry Sanford, formerly North Carolina's governor and president of Duke University.
Takashimiya
Art shopping Japanese-style
The Japanese retail conglomerate Takashimiya Co Ltd may be in for a bitter disappointment when it opens a commercial art gallery in its new North American flagship design-speciality store on 23 April.
Located in The Takashimiya Building, an $80-million tower on Fifth Avenue, the street-level gallery will sell Asian and American contemporary art, traditional crafts and design.
Its mission is ‘to foster Asian-American cultural exchange’ and ‘to promote the synthesis of the fine arts with everyday life which is a hallmark of Japanese culture’.
More simply put, the aim is to persuade Americans to get comfortable with the idea of buying art in a department store.
Such a notion — anathema in the West — is commonplace in Japan, where most art sales take place not in independent galleries or auction rooms, but in omnibus retail outlets like Takashimiya, Mitsukoshi and Seibu.
Many department stores operate non-profit spaces for ticketed cultural events such as museum shows from abroad.
And Takashimiya, for one, has established a non-profit cultural foundation that grants $300,000 annually to Japanese artists and arts organisations.
Since Takashimiya opened its first gallery in Kyoto in 1911, the company added ‘art departments’ to nine of its eighteen Japanese branches.
(New York's is Takashimiya's first in a foreign store).
In 1992 gallery sales reached $120 million, making the company one of Japan's principal purveyors of fine and decorative arts.
‘We see art as an aspect of lifestyle’, explains Takashimiya vice president and gallery director Hiroak Yamamoto.
What Takashimiya may not be counting on, however, is the degree to which Americans regard art as an expression of individuality and social cachet.
The notion of casually mixing fine art and housewares may be offensive to them.
The inaugural show ‘Alternative Visions: Liu Dan and Hiromitsu Morimoto’(23 April-12 June) juxtaposes a Chinese-American painter with a Japanese-American photographer, and will subsequently travel to four Takashimiya venues in Japan.
The second exhibition will feature work by Japanese sculptor Kiichi Sumikawa.
Washington D.C.
U.S. set to restore tax advantage for museum benefactors
Clinton's deficit reduction and economic growth plan ‘good for American patrimony’
President Clinton's economic package proposed to Congress on 17 February calls for restoration of the pre-1986 tax benefits for gifts to non-profit institutions.
The measure, certain to become law within months, is hugely important for the conservation of America's patrimony and the well-being of the country's museums.
Before 1986, donors could reduce their taxable income by the full fair-market value of gifts to non-profits institutions.
After the 1986 Tax Reform Act, however, such gifts were subject to an Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT) whereby donors could deduct only the original purchase price.
The reform dealt a critical blow to American museums by eliminating the tax advantage for charitable donations of appreciated property.
The American Association of Museums reported that gifts fell off by more than 60% in both number and value.
Then, from January 1991 to June 1992 the restriction was temporarily suspended for tangibles (i.e. works of art), stimulating a windfall of museum benefactions, but when the ‘tax window’ closed in June.
‘It was like turning off the faucet’, says Peter Marzio, director of the Museum of Fine Arts, Houston.
The arts community is confident the measure will pass easily since the proposal enjoys the strong support of both Daniel Patrick Moynihan and Dan Rostenkowski, chairmen respectively of the Senate Finance Committee and the House Ways & Means Committee, the Congressional groups that originate all tax legislation.
Last year the proposal was part of the overall tax bill which was vetoed by former President Bush.
This time both Congress and the White House are in agreement over tax policy.
The Treasury department estimates the tax break will cost the government around $70 million, an amount that would be far outweighed by the benefit to public institutions.
Senator Moynihan's chief tax counsel, Joseph Gale, declared, ‘The tax benefits are a small price to pay to keep the private non-profit sector thriving’.
James Wood, director of the Art Institute of Chicago, believes the proposed legislation ‘signals a basic change in the attitude of the national government towards museums and the recognition of their importance as educational institutions in our society.
Mr Marzio also maintains that the tax law affects more than the stream of gifts to museums.
‘It's good for the American patrimony’, he says, explaining that when the tax advantage was removed, many important works that might have been donated were instead sold at auction to non-Americans whose countries have strict patrimony laws.
Both dealers and auction houses favour the tax benefit.
Nicholas Hall of Colnaghi sees it as ‘one more thing to encourage people to become collectors, since they're not burying their money in their paintings.
They are guaranteed a future financial benefit’.
Leo Castelli notes, ‘Collectors don't give art away only to save taxes, though dealers will surely lose some objects they would have gotten otherwise.
Still, we all work together to make our museums richer.
In the end it is to everyone's advantage’.
Christie's has even gone to Washington to lobby for the bill.
Their lawyer, Patricia Hambrecht, says: ‘We witnessed a dramatic drop in our appraisal business for donations to institutions, and even though we realised it was not in our narrow self-interest, we knew it was for the good of the overall arts community’.
Paris Matisse exhibition
Shchukin heiress case pending
Curators fear Russian loans withdrawal
Curators at the Pompidou Centre are anxiously awaiting the results of negotiations between Russian museums and the eighty-nine year old Russian heiress Irina Shchukin over property rights to twenty-five of the 130 paintings in the exhibition ‘Matisse 1904–17’ running until 21 June.
The centre's administrator general Marion Julien said museums throughout the world were keeping in daily touch with her for information about the row over the works, which are on loan from the Pushkin Museum in Moscow and the Hermitage in Saint Petersburg.
The paintings became State property after being nationalised in 1918 from the collection of Irina's industrialist father, Sergei, by Lenin in person.
Irina Shchukin took out two suits in a Paris court just two days after the Matisse exhibition opened in Paris on 24 February.
The first, whereby she claimed reproduction rights on the works from her father's collection and demanded the confiscation of the 40,000 catalogues published by the Pompidou Centre, was rejected by the court on 5 March.
Her lawyers had argued the heiress retained reproduction rights on works by Matisse purchased by her father before 1910, when French law first made the distinction between property rights and ‘immaterial rights’ such as those of reproduction.
A verdict on the second suit concerning property rights, however, is not due until 12 May.
The Paris court must consider whether it is entitled or competent to act on a decision taken in a foreign country such a long time ago.
Curators of the ‘Matisse 1904–17’ exhibition think Shchukin has started the case to pressure Russian authorities who had not replied to earlier requests about the paintings.
Their major worry is that the Pushkin and the Hermitage may simply choose to withdraw the controversial works as a precaution before 12 May, thus wrecking the Pompidou exhibition.
Such a move would also jeopardise future collaboration between Russian museums and the West in general and in particular the sponsorship of a Matisse exhibition in Moscow by Elf, the French petrol company.
Success in the courts for Shchukin would dissuade Russian museums from lending to the West again.
Edinburgh University Trustees bid to sell collection
The legal wrangle continues over Edinburgh University's bid to dispose of works of art from its collection.
The University has now presented a new petition to the Court of Sessions which informs the Trustees of the will which governs the Torre Bequest (including a work by Ruysdael and a sculpture by Adriaen de Vries) that their rights over the collection are to be removed.
The Trustees have twenty-one days to appeal.
Scotland's Lord Advocate is now known to be taking a personal interest in the case.
Santa Monica
An Italian to unite estranged castes?
Salvatore Settis appointed head of the Getty Center for the History of Art
An Italian, Salvatore Settis, has been appointed to direct the Getty Center for the History of Art and the Humanities, the institution devoted to advanced research by international scholars into the history of art ‘broadly defined as an integral part of human history and society’.
Settis, who was born in Southern Italy in 1941, is by training a classical archaeologist, but his writings range beyond Antiquity and include a study on the meaning of Giorgione's ‘Tempesta’, articles on Aby Warburg, the founder of the great library now part of London University, and — very much in the Warburg tradition — an edition of papers on the classical tradition in Italian art, La memoria dell'antico nell'arte italiana (1984–86).
Settis has impeccably international credentials for such an international institution, having held, among other posts, professorships in classical art and archaeology at the University of Pisa and Scuola Normale Superiore, served on the faculty of the Ecole Normale Superiéure at Paris and in1991 having been appointed the first Warburg Professor at the University of Hamburg.
He knows the Getty well as he was a scholar at the Center in 1988–89, when his predecessor, Kurt Forster, who has left to be Professor of Art and Architectural history at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich, was en poste.
When Settis takes up his appointment in January 1994, his main task will be to bring about a productive collaboration between the Getty Museum and the Getty Center, which, because of Forster's dislike of object-based studies, have become almost estranged.
An example of how they were ideologically disconnected is the photo archive, which at Forster's instruction was reorganised so that it was no longer under names of artists, obviously the most useful approach for museum curators.
Fortunately, Settis is known to be a good friend of the Museum's director John Walsh, and is a member of the committee planning for the future of the J. Paul Getty Museum in Malibu after the new museum opens at the Getty Center in west Los Angeles.
Art law
Sculpsit and imprimit triumph over invenit
US Copyright Office decides printers, not artists, own reproduction rights to art
The US Copyright Office has decided that artists do not own the reproduction rights to their work; the printer does.
This has been reported in an article in Art Business News by Joshua J. Kaufman, a specialist in art law and executive director of Volunteer Lawyers for the Arts in Washington D.C.
Although the focus of the decision reached in July last year was photomechanical reproduction, its implications reach more widely, affecting fine art prints, photographs, limited edition posters and cast sculpture.
According to the decision, a printer's or atelier assistant's participation in any phase of the production of a work of art, no matter how minimal, automatically entitles them to reproduce that work.
Right to reproduce the wax model remains with the sculptor, but his hired hand can reproduce the bronze.
The new decision does not affect the artist's ownership of the work of art itself, but it does effectively strip him or her of control over how, when and where it may be reproduced.
It is conceivable that they could even be denied permission to reproduce their own work.
At issue is the definition of a work of art.
To art professionals an editioned print is an extension of the original drawn or etched image from which it was run off.
Likewise a bronze sculpture is considered an outgrowth of the wax or plaster model from which it is cast.
In either case, each is considered indivisible as an artistic creation.
By contrast, the US Copyright Office thinks in terms of two distinct types of work of art: ‘underlying’ and ‘derivative’.
The former is the initial, original creation of the artist — the etching into the plate, the drawing on the lithographic stone and so on.
The latter is what follows from that, prints in the case of a graphic artist, editions for the sculptor.
In this interpretation rights to the reproduction of derivative works of art rest with the printer.
The new decision also sets an almost negligible threshold of collaboration.
A master printer need only say to the artist, ‘We need more yellow’, to qualify for ownership rights to any reproduction of the image that has emerged under his hand.
That he played no material role in the creation of the original image does not matter.
Distinguishing between ‘underlying’ and ‘derivative’works of art is common in other areas, says Mr Kaufman, who draws a comparison with a book, which is covered under the author's copyright, while the film made from that book is covered under a separate copyright, because the film has been derived from an existing work of art.
Applied to the procedures of art-making, however, the notion could lead to chaos.
‘The effect of this ruling could be to divest artists and publishers of ownership in reproductions made by outside printing firms’, he writes.
‘This ruling could also represent a windfall to many printers’.
According to Mr Kaufman, the issue arose after an artist tried to copyright one of her watercolours and the photomechanically offset reproduction her printer had made.
‘After ascertaining that the reproductions had not been printed by the artist herself’, he writes, ‘[The Copyright Office]ruled that the printer's contribution added enough originality to the process to make the reproductions derivative works…and that the copyrights of the reproductions were therefore owned by the printers.
The artist…explained that the printer's contribution in creating the official lithograph was merely mechanical, that his sole contribution was to reproduce the original as closely as possible, and that she had the absolute right of approval of all aspects of the final prints.
The Copyright Office…maintained its holding that the amount of originality necessary to hold a copyright in a derivative work is minimal and that the printer owns the copyrights in the prints.’
The simplest way around this is for artists to get their assistants to sign over the reproduction rights before work begins.
Theft of Bellini in Venice; Oudry ‘Duck’ missing
Two great paintings are now on the list of missing masterpieces.
Despite the near impossibility of offering such works on the open market, theft of world-famous works continues, many, presumably, stolen to order.
For the third time in just over twenty years Giovanni Bellini's ‘Madonna and Child’ has been stolen from the church of the Madonna dell'Orto in Venice.
Although fitted with an alarm courtesy of the Venice in Peril Fund, this had not been working for some time.
To climb up and remove the picture the thieves used scaffolding already in place for restoration work.
They removed the picture from its wooden frame, wrapped it in a linen altar cloth and left the church by the main door, forcing the lock from the inside.
‘The painting has no value’, commented Giovanna Nepi Sciré, Venice's Soprintendente for Beni artistici, ‘in that there is no other picture on the market like this one’.
Still missing following its theft from Houghton Hall on 30 September last year is Jean Baptiste Oudry's ‘White Duck’, the artist's masterpiece.
A substantial reward is now being offered for its recovery.
Speak to Det.
Chief Insp.
Coyle on 0553 691211, or R.A. Mangnall on 071 377 0282.
On a more cheerful note, a Rubens painting of a Dominican monk, stolen in the £30 million Beit Collection robbery in Ireland in 1986, has been found in a house in Borehamwood, Herts.
Eire
Prime Minister stresses importance of Anglo-Irish artistic past
Timely conference by Irish Georgian Society
Speaking at a conference on the ‘Future of the Irish Country House’(26 February), the Prime Minister of Ireland, Albert Reynolds made a statement of profound importance about how Ireland has come to terms with its Anglo-Irish past, at least so far as its architecture is concerned.
He said: ‘One of the reasons I wanted to be here was to copperfasten, I hope, the central role that architecture in general, and especially the architecture of the last 300 years has in our cultural and heritage policy.
It is no less important that the neolithic, early Christian or medieval’.
Such a statement is a far cry from the years immediately after independence, when many country houses were burnt down as symbols of British oppression.
Mr Reynolds looked back also to an era of ‘bureaucratic and commercial indifference which was perhaps understandable in the light of history but nevertheless misguided’ and which resulted in even more destruction than was caused by the Troubles, such as of Coole Park (the inspiration for two of Yeats's most famous poems) and of Bowenscourt in the 1960s, as well as much of Dublin's eighteenth-century architecture.
This change in attitude and increased government commitment (albeit ‘limited by current economic and fiscal conditions’) has produced some concrete results, most notable of which is the Irish government's decision to assume responsibility as from January 1994 for Castletown House, the largest of the great Irish Palladian country houses.
More broadly, Mr Reynolds referred to developments in the funding and expansion of cultural institutions under his department and noted the setting up of a new Department of Arts, Culture and the Gaeltacht.
A paper on ‘The future of the country house: financial and legislative aspects of ownership’ by Dublin solicitor Frank Carr set out some interesting facts on ownership.
Mr Carr also deplored the effect of Capital Acquisitions Tax (CAT).
Designed to ensure, in John Major's words, that wealth will not ‘cascade down the generations’, this tax system envisages that a wealthy family will hand over approximately 40% of its wealth each generation.
The alternative is for the wealthy individual to give up residence in Ireland and move his investments out of the country.
CAT is a donee-based tax in which the more people who share in a particular inheritance the lower the tax will be.
The inevitable result is that a family's capital base will be both eroded and diffused to the point where maintaining a large house becomes impossible.
Letters to the Editor
Venice: better flood than fire
I was dismayed that the front page leading article of your March issue, under the heading ‘Proposal to ban tankers from Venice at last’
(which also touched upon other problems such as the flooding which occurs when high tides combine with strong winds, and the hydrogeological imbalance caused by fish farming) made no reference at all to the mortal peril in which Venice stands from a serious fire.
No city in the world is more vulnerable to a fire than Venice and no city in the world has less adequate defences.
Between the years 1988 and 1991 I was engaged in researching a contemporary history of Venice.
In the early part of 1990 there was a run of particularly low tides, one of which resulted in a boatyard in Sant'Elena, on the north-eastern edge of Venice, burning to a cinder because the fire boats had to take a roundabout route.
Shortly after this there was another fire, close to La Fenice Theatre.
This time the difficulty which confronted the firemen was that there was not enough water in the canal for their pumps to operate properly.
No one in public life in Venice had extrapolated from these facts to assess what would happen if there was a really serious blaze and a strong wind.
I interviewed the commander of the Venetian fire service who told me that he had three boats at his dispersal and a fourth at half an hour's readiness.
These boats had to cover the whole of the lagoon and there could obviously be no support from neighbouring fire services on the mainland which had wheels.
What about hydrants?
I said.
He told me that he had been asking for them, to no avail.
As a result of my stirring things up, the subject got an airing in the Venetian press.
The Daily Telegraph published a long article from me on the subject on its editorial page.
The terrible fire, which had destroyed the historical centre of Lisbon in the summer of 1988 was at that time still fresh in the memory.
Windsor Castle had still to happen.
In Venice the Green Party, which has a passion verging on paranoia when it comes to the oil tankers has prevented the dredging of the canals getting under way in any meaningful sense.
Meanwhile, only a dribble of money finds its way into the provision of hydrants.
In my view, the provision of adequate fire prevention and fire fighting measures should be Venice's top priority.
No penguins in the Med
You reported in The Art Newspaper No. 26, March 1993, p. 14, that ‘There really were penguins in the Mediterranean’, referring to the paintings found in the Grotte Cosquer near Marseille.
Unfortunately not.
Although the paintings are genuinely of
Palaeolithic age, they do not represent penguins.
They were described in French accounts of the discovery as representing ‘pinguins’ which is correctly translated into English as ‘Auk’.
The ‘Large Penguins’ referred to in English accounts should really be the Great Auk (Alca impennis).
(The translation error is corrected in Antiquity 66, no.253, December 1992, pp. 828–29.)
Perhaps you could note the correction in The Art Newspaper before ecologists begin to argue ecological doomsday scenarios based on the disappearance of the Penguin from the northern hemisphere?
Many thanks for a thoroughly useful newspaper which is essential reading.
Exhibitions
The Rosenthal-Joachimedes definition of the twentieth century
Who's in, who's out in American art
The century will be reviewed in Berlin and London this year with sixty-four artists
‘American art in the twentieth century’, the fourth in a series of exhibitions which attempt to define national schools of modern and contemporary art, opens in Berlin next month.
Since 1985 Rosenthal has surveyed German, British and Italian art.
In this new show, he has shared curatorial responsibility with his old partner Christos Joachimides with whom he also worked on the German art show (1987, London and Stuttgart), and earlier, ‘A New Spirit in Painting’(1980–81, Berlin and London).
The latter managed to sense the way the wind was to blow during the Eighties by anticipating the various forms of emerging Neo-Expressionism.
Their ‘Metropolis’ of 1991 on the other hand, also in Berlin, is generally thought not have succeeded in pointing the way for the decade, probably because the art scene is much more fragmented now and no single trend can be identified.
‘American Art in the Twentieth Century’ is at the Martin-Gropius-Bau (8 May-25 July) and will be shown at the Royal Academy in London in the autumn (16 September-12 December).
Inevitably, this attempt to define the most powerful school of art since the war is going to lead to fierce arguments.
Here, for starters, is who's in and who's out.
IN
Historical
Marsden Hartley
Joseph Stella
Arthur Dove
John Covert
Edward Hopper
Charles Demuth
Charles Sheeler
Georgia O'Keefe
Marcel Duchamp
Gerald Murphy
Man Ray
Stuart Davis
Abstract Expressionism and Colour Field
Arshile Gorky
Jackson Pollock
Willem de Kooning
Ad Reinhardt
Franz Kline
Sam Francis
Clyfford Still
Mark Rothko
Barnett Newman
Cy Twombly
Philip Guston
Sculpture
Alexander Calder
David Smith
Joseph Cornell
Neo-Dada and Pop Art
Jasper Johns
Robert Rauschenberg
Andy Warhol
Roy Lichtenstein
James Rosenquist
Claes Oldenburg
Edward Ruscha
John Chamberlain
Minimalism and Conceptual Art
Agnes Martin
Ellsworth Kelly
Frank Stella
Robert Ryman
Brice Marden
Carl André
Donald Judd
Robert Morris
Sol LeWitt
Dan Flavin
Eva Hesse
Richard Serra
Bruce Nauman
Lawrence Weiner
Dan Graham
James Turrell
James Lee Byars
Art of the Eighties and Nineties
Julian Schnabel
Jean Michel Basquiat
Keith Haring
Jonathan Borofsky
Martin Puryear
Jenny Holzer
David Hammons
Cindy Sherman
Bill Viola
Gary Hill
Jeff Koons
Robert Gober
Mike Kelly
OUT
Historical
Maurice Prendergast
George Bellows
John Marin
Thomas Hart Benton
John Graham
Milton Avery
Andrew Wyeth
Abstract Expressionism and Colour Field
Hans Hofmann
Richard Diebenkorn
Robert Motherwell
Helen Frankenthaler
Morris Louis
Kenneth Noland
Sculpture
Louise Bourgeois
Lucas Samaras
Neo-Dada and Pop Art
John Cage
Larry Rivers
Tom Wesselmann
Robert Indiana
Jim Dine
Minimalism and Conceptual Art
Richard Artschwager
Robert Smithson
Michael Heizer
Walter de Maria
Scott Burton
Chris Burden
Art of the Eighties and Nineties
Susan Rothenberg
Jennifer Bartlett
John Baldessari
David Salle
Eric Fischl
Ross Bleckner
Terry Winters
Robert Longo
Mark Tansey
Mark Innerst
Philip Taaffe
Meyer Vaisman
Allan McCollum
Ashley Bickerton
Haim Steinbach
Peter Halley
Starn Twins
Donal Sultan
Tim Rollins and KOS
Prestigious touring exhibition for Susan Rothenberg
The survey of the art of Susan Rothenberg has moved to the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, Washington (until 9 May 1993).
Comprising thirty-six paintings and a comparable group of related drawings, it has been organised by the museum's Chief Curator, Michael Auping, who supervised Jenny Holzer's pavilion at the Venice Biennale in 1990, and circulates to the St Louis Art Museum (27 May-25 July 1993), Chicago's Museum of Contemporary Art (20 August-24 October 1993) and the Seattle Art Museum (17 November 1993–12 January 1994).
Liquid refreshment at the Corning
Around 200 drinking vessels, some 2,000 years old, will be exhibited in a survey exhibition at the Corning Museum of Glass, probably the world's finest collection.
From 24 April to 17 October the exhibition will explore the origin, history and various customs of drinking wine, tea, coffee and other beverages.
Some of the objects on show are drawn from the collection of the late Jerome Strauss who assembled a group of 2,400 pieces, donated to the museum after his death in 1979.
Objects displayed will include a first-century AD Roman ewer, an Islamic drinking horn, Venetian goblets of around 1600, American lemonade glasses of around 1880 and two sculptural goblets created by the American glass artist Susan Plum in 1989.
‘Any Miró’
A guide to the centenary exhibitions in 1993
Surveys in Barcelona and New York with many smaller shows
In a powerful statement of local pride, the Generalitat de Catalunya, Catalonia's regional government, has declared this year to be ‘Any Miró’ in commemoration of Joan Miró's birth in Barcelona in 1893.
The occasion will be marked by a series of exhibitions and other events taking place in Spain and abroad during the next nine months and related to his career, achievement and influence.
The Centro de Arte Reina Sofia launched the celebrations in Madrid with ‘Joan Miró: Campo de Estrellas’(closed 22 March), a distinguished exhibition which reunited fourteen of the twenty-three ‘Constellations’, those beautiful gouaches created by the artist in difficult circumstances in 1940–41, and sought to trace the development of their imagery in his work.
The most important of the forthcoming exhibitions is the survey of nearly 200 paintings and 350 drawings to be held at the Foundation which Miró himself established in Barcelona in 1975 and to which he gave a large collection of his work before his death.
Sponsored by the Banco Bilbao Vizcaya and opening on the day of the artist's birth, this survey (20 April-30 August) has been curated by the Foundation's director, Rosa Maria Malet.
Her advisory committee includes Jacques Dupin, writer Vicenc Altaió, art critic Maria Lluisa Borras and the artist's grandson, Emili Fernandez-Miró.
The catalogue, to be published in five languages by Leonardo-De Luca Editori, Milan, contains scholarly essays by Robert Lubar of New York University, Professor Christopher Green of the Courtauld Institute and Rudi Fuchs, ex-director of the Gemeentemuseum in The Hague.
Important loans have been trawled from all the major international collections.
From the early years of his career, there are ‘Nude with a Mirror’(1919, Nordrhein-Westfalen Museum, Dusseldorf), ‘The Hunter’(1923, MOMA, New York), ‘Harlequin's Carnival’(1924–25, Albright-Knox Art Gallery, Buffalo) and ‘Dutch Interior I’(1928, MOMA, New York) which will be shown with eight preparatory studies.
The period of the Spanish Civil War will feature ‘Man and Woman in front of a pile of excrement’(1935, Fundació Joan Miró, Barcelona) and ‘Une etoile caresse le sein d'une negresse’(1938, Tate Gallery).
A strong selection of his later work includes ‘Bleu I-III’(1961, Hubert de Givenchy and Centre Pompidou, Paris).
About one quarter of the paintings and virtually all of the drawings selected for the exhibition come from the Foundation itself and from other family sources.
Day by day, all the Miró events
barcelona
Fundació Caixa de Catalunya ‘Mirar Miró.
El Joan Miró de Catala-Roca’(23 April-21 June) Curated by Daniel Giralt-Miracle.
One hundred photographs of the artist taken by Francesc Catala-Roca in Barcelona, Majorca and other places 1952–83.
Fundació Joan Miró ‘Joan Miró 1893–1993’(20 April-30 August)
Palau de la Virreina ‘Joan Miró ceramista’(21 April-31 August) Curated by Trinidad Sanchez-Pacheco.
Eighty-six ceramic works, ranging from dinner plates to monumental sculptures, which Miró realised with the collaboration of Josep Artigas.
Biblioteca Joan Miró ‘Cartells de Joan Miró’(21 April-13 May) Eighteen original posters created by Miró as advertisements for his own exhibitions and for other local events, including the city's football team.
Galeria Joan Prats ‘Joan Prats i Joan Miró’(29 April-12 June) Curated by Joan de Muga.
Documents the friendship between artist and dealer through drawings, gouaches and graphic work.
Centre d'Art Santa Monica ‘Miró-Dalmau-Gasch.
L'aventura per l'art modern 1918–37’(20 May-10 July) Documents the relationship between Miró, Josep Dalau, his first dealer, and art critic Sebastia Gasch.
Centre d'Art Santa Monica ‘Festegem Miró’(24 June-30 August) Curated by Miguel Servera.
Old Master and modern painters admired by Miró, including Velazquez, Goya, Monet, van Gogh, Picasso, Masson and Giacometti.
Fundació La Caixa ‘Ver a Miró.
La irradiación de Miró en el arte espanol (17 June-1 August) The show that opens in Madrid this month.
See below for comment.
madrid
Fundación La Caixa ‘Ver a Miró.
La irradiación de Miró en el arte espanol (15 April-6 June) Curated by Victoria Combalia.
The influence Miró has exerted on Spanish modern and contemporary art.
Ten paintings and four drawings by Miró himself, fifty masters of different generations and styles including Picasso, Antoni Clave, Tapies, Eduardo Arroyo, Antonio Saura, Luis Gordillo and Equipo Crónica.
palma, majorca
Fundació Pilar i Joan Miró ‘Joan Miró’(1 April-1 May) Assembles the permanent collection of this new Foundation which opened at the end of last year on the property where Miró and his family lived.
Includes fifty paintings, seventy drawings and twenty sculptures dating from his later career.
The studio built for him by Josep Luis Sert in 1954–56 and housing his last unfinished canvases can be viewed by appointment.
Victoria Combalia is organising an international symposium (9–16 May).
Participating scholars include Jacques Dupin, Christopher Green, Margit Rowell, Robert Lubar, Carolyn Lancher and Rosa Maria Malet.
Fundacion la Caixa ‘Ver a Miró.
La irradiación de Miró en el arte espanol’(November-December) The last of four venues for the exhibition which opens at the Caixa's Madrid branch in April.
canary islands
CAAM ‘Ver a Miró.
La irradiación de Miró en el arte espanol’ September-October) Opening date in September yet to be decided.
The same exhibition shown earlier at the Fundación la Caixa in Madrid and Barcelona (see above).
saint-paul de vence, south of france
Fondation Maeght Although no special exhibition is planned, the Foundation maintains a delightful sculpture garden filled by a dozen works by Miró and regularly shows eight paintings from its permanent collection.
malmo, sweden
Konsthall ‘Joan Miró’(13 November-6 February 1994) Curated by director Sune Nordgren.
Concentrates upon Miró's activity as a sculptor, a chapter omitted from the survey in Barcelona.
About one hundred sculptures and constructions, the majority loaned by the Fundacio Joan Miró and shown with related drawings and sketches.
Also original posters from the private collection of Dr Nils Trydings.
new york
Museum of Modern Art, ‘Joan Miró’(13 October-11 January 1994) Curated by Carolyn Lanchner.
The other major exhibition of ‘Any Miró’, incorporating many paintings and drawings selected by the Fundacio Joan Miró but also including sculpture, ceramics, prints and illustrated books.
Exhibition turned back because guards lacked gun permits
Russia's new borders with the so-called ‘near abroad’(the republics of the former USSR) are becoming a reality.
Russia's oblast of Kaliningrad, virtually cut off from the rest of the republic by the new Baltic States, is in a unique position.
An exhibition of eighteenth- and nineteenth-century watercolours from the Hermitage, which was planned for Kaliningrad, was stopped at the Latvian customs.
The pictures, together with the museum staff and the two guards accompanying them, were turfed off from the train because the guards lacked permits to carry weapons on Latvian territory.
The exhibition was turned back.
The Kaliningrad Museum had planned to receive another five exhibitions from Russian museums this year.
The Hermitage now says that, without clear rules of transit and guarantees of safety, the museum is not prepared to risk lending its collections to the republics of the former USSR.
Robert Gober's wax legs and cat litter take London by storm
Reminiscent of the peak days of Studio 54, the Serpentine Gallery was mobbed by a large audience struggling to gain admission to the opening night of Robert Gober's exhibition (to 25 April).
Tempers flared as gallery staff were forced to restrict entry in order to protect the works of art.
Gober's exhibition comprises four rooms wallpapered with the artist's own designs and filled with the sculptures for which he has become celebrated: several untitled wax legs with candles, the wax hermaphroditic torso, the wedding dress, the bags of cat litter and the drains sunk into the gallery's walls.
To scholars of contemporary art, this material will be known from exhibitions at Paula Cooper in New York and from a survey shown at the Jeu de Paume, Paris, and at the Centro de Arte Reina Sofia, Madrid, in 1991–92, but his work has never been shown in such depth in London.
A slightly smaller version of the exhibition travels to the Tate Gallery, Liverpool (19 June-22 August).
A new installation by Robert Gober continues at the Dia Center for the Arts, New York (to 20 June).
Henry Moore goes east
The first exhibition of works by Henry Moore to be seen in Hungary, Slovakia and the Czech Republic since 1967, will be opened by the British Ambassador to Hungary at the Museum of Fine Art, Budapest, on 16 April.
Organised by the Henry Moore Foundation, the show features works from 1922 to 1984 and includes sixty-five carvings, maquettes, working models and life-size figures.
Among sixty drawings are many early studies including shelter and coalmine subjects.
The exhibition has been selected by the curator of the Henry Moore Foundation, David Mitchinson and the majority of works are borrowed from that institution, with others lent by the British Council and Leeds City Art Gallery.
The touring dates are: Budapest, until 30 May; Palffy Palace and Mifbach Palace, Bratislava, 18 June to 5 September; Central Bohemian Gallery and Karolinum University Gallery, Prague, 22 September to 31 October.
Van de Velde moves from Weimar to other old stamping grounds
The Belgian Art Nouveau designer and architect, Henry van de Velde (1863–1957), is being celebrated by a exhibition with the sub-title ‘A European artist of his time’, which is touring most of the cities where he made his mark.
A dullish designer if one compares his work to the brio and subtleties of French Art Nouveau, he nonetheless had considerable influence as a theoretician early this century, and at the end of his life, wrote his memoirs in which he emphasised his role in the creation of the modern movement.
The exhibition left Hagen near Essen 8 November last, where it was installed in the Karl Ernst Osthausmuseum (formerly the Folkwangmuseum) decorated by van de Velde between 1900 and 1912, and whose original interiors were partially reconstructed for the occasion to house over 1,000 paintings, designs, ceramics, silver, carpets and pieces of furniture.
From Weimar, where van de Velde taught at the new school of applied art, became a founder member of the DeutscheWerkbund in 1907, and chose Gropius as his successor, the show has moved on to Berlin's Bauhaus-Archivmuseum fur Gestaltung (until 18 April).
Further stops are the Museum voor Sierkunst in Ghent (3 May-4 August; the Museum fur Gestaltung in Zurich (28 August-31 October); and the Germanisches Nationalmuseum, Nuremberg (18 November-30 January 1994).
The exhibition organiser is Klaus-Jurgen Sembach, who is also co-author, with Birgit Shulte, of the catalogue.
Small Italian dealer gets very big Russian show
Italian art dealer Marco Datrino who works from the Castello Canavese just outside Turin, has pulled off what seems to be an extraordinary coup.
Signor Datrino has secured the loan from the Kremlin of 104 treasures which he will be exhibiting at the Castello from 4 April for three months.
These objects include some of the museum's most precious objects, many never lent outside Russia before.
The throne of Ivan the Terrible, the great mechanical clock known as the ‘Temple of Marvels’ and Peter the Great's crown are among the objects loaned for the event.
In an interview with the Giornale dell'Arte, Signor Datrino explained that his links with Russia began with a visit there in 1990 with the intention of buying antiques.
Not finding any, he brought back a group of modern realist pictures which he mounted as a selling exhibition, together with a loan show of eighteenth- and  nineteenth-century Russian pictures.
The selling show was apparently an enormous success: one hundred paintings sold, and 40,000 visitors.
A second trip to Russia in 1991 involved a trip to the Kremlin where Signor Datrino proposed his exhibition, involving the significant loan of treasures in return for sponsorship of restoration, restructuring and other work at the Kremlin.
The Kremlin have paid for the production of the catalogue which will be on sale at the exhibition.
Signor Datrino attributes his success and influence within Russian circles to the ideal combination of Russian fatalism and Italian fantasy, noting that he has achieved enormous recognition for his efforts, including the patronage of the Italian President Scalfaro who will be paying a visit.
Sponsors will include a number of major Italian companies with Russian connections such as Alitalia, INA, SIP and STET.
Malevich in Madrid
Following not so long after the large retrospective devoted to the Russian Suprematist in Amsterdam in 1989, the Fundación Juan March is holding a much smaller show (forty-two pictures rather than 215) from 4 April.
The exhibition has been put together by the State Russian Museum in Saint Petersburg, and covers the years 1900 to 1933.
It includes some early post-impressionist works as well as some Fauve-inspired canvases, followed by a brief cubist phase in 1913–14.
Key suprematist works on show will include ‘Black square on a white ground’, exhibited at the ‘0.10’ exhibition of 1915.
In May the exhibition travels to the Picasso Museum, Barcelona, followed by the IVAM, Valencia, dates to be confirmed.
The Genius of Venice part II in 1994
Next year's exhibition schedule at The Royal Academy includes a survey of eighteenth-century Venetian art which will be shown in London from September to December before moving to the National Gallery of Art, Washington, from January to April 1995.
The exhibition is being coordinated by a team of international scholars including Professor Francis Haskell of the University of Oxford and Professor Alessandro Bettagno of the Fondazione Cini in Venice.
Artists included in the exhibition are: Ricci, Piazzetta, Longhi, Bellotto, Canaletto (views of Italy and England), G.B. and G.D.
Tiepolo, Carriera, and Guardi.
There will be space devoted to prints and drawings, as well as sculpture and the decorative arts.
Rome/Oxford/Naples
Rare or fleeting pleasures
rome.
One of the greatest historic collections of classical sculpture has been almost inaccessible since it was acquired by the Italian State in 1901.
Ninety-five marbles, including the famous ‘Ares Ludovisi’, a beautiful study of a young seated warrior in repose, were bought that year from the noble Boncompagni Ludovisi family after their villa was destroyed to make way for Roman suburbia.
Now the Fondazione Memmo has paid for the sculptures to be cleaned and they are on display in the Palazzo Ruspoli, Rome, until 30 April.
Thereafter, they return to store; for how long, not even the Italian Ministry of Culture knows.
oxford.
The longer the restoration of Leonardo's ‘Last Supper’ in Sta Maria delle Grazie, Milan, goes on, the less appears to survive of the master's own hand.
To get the best idea of what this ‘great miracle wrought by human genius’, really looked like, as Sir Ernst Gombrich said last month, go to Magdalen College, Oxford.
There, Gombrich, to the singing of choristers and a toast drunk by the Fellows and guests, celebrated the translation from the Royal Academy in London to the ante-chapel walls, of the earliest copy made of the ‘Last Supper’.
This full-size version in oils was done by Leonardo's assistants in his studio around 1510.
It was bought by the R.A. in 1821.
Because of its size it has rarely been on view there this century.
naples.
Napoli 99 is a private organisation founded in1984 to improve the negative image that the city was acquiring.
Its work to restore and reopen Naples' forgotten patrimony continues with a new programme whereby schoolchildren adopt a local church or other monument.
In addition, on 8 and 9 May two hundred buildings normally closed to the public will be thrown open, including the Archbishop's Palace, S. Gregorio Armeno, Palazzi Spinelli and Carafa, the Castel dell'Ovo, the Villa Rosebery and the Tomb of Virgil and Leopardi.
In an initiative by Nicola Spinosa (Soprintendente per i beni artistici e storici in Naples) thirty churches formerly closed to the public because of restoration work after the 1985 earthquake, or through lack of custodians, are open on Saturdays until June to allow visitors a brief glimpse inside.
Thirty Naples churches open this month
Pio Monte della Misericordia, Via Tribunali 253 (9.30–13)
Capella Pontano, Via Tribunali (9–13)
Croce di Lucca, Piazza L. Miraglia (9–13)
S. Paolo Maggiore, Piazza San Gaetano (9–13)
Donnaregina Nuova, Largo Donnaregina (9–13)
S. Giovanni a Carbonara, Via San Giovanni a Carbonara 5 (9–13)
S. Pietro a Majella, Piazza L. Miraglia (9–13 and 17–19)
Sant'Angelo a Nilo, Piazzetta Nilo (9–12 and 16.30–19)
Sant'Angelo a Nilo, Piazzetta Nilo (9–12 and 16.30–19)
Monteoliveto, Piazza Monteoliveto (9–12.30)
Santa Maria di Costantinopoli, Via Santa Maria di Costantinopoli (9–12 and 17–19)
S. Lorenzo Maggiore, Piazza San Gaetano (9–12 and 17–19)
Santa Caterina a Formiello, Piazza De Nicola 65 (8.30–12.30 and 17–20)
Santi Apostoli, Largo SS.
Apostoli (10–13 and 17–19)
Cathedral, Via Duomo (9–13 and 17–19)
Cappella del Tesoro, Cathedral, Via Duomo (9.30–12)
S. Giorgio Maggiore, Piazza Crocelle ai Mannesi (8–12 and 16.30–19.30)
S. Gregorio Armeno, Via S. Gregorio Armeno (9–13)
Capella Sansevero, Via de Sanctis (10–13 and 17–19)
S. Domenico Maggiore, Piazza San Domenico Maggiore (9–11.30 and 17–19)
Santa Chiara, Via B. Croce (9–13 and 17–19.30)
Santa Maria Maggiore detta La Pietrasanta, Via Tribunali (9–13)
Purgatorio ad Arco, Via Tribunali 38 (9–13)
Gesù Nuovo, Oratorio dei Nobili e Oratorio delle Dame, Piazza Gesù Nuovo (9–13)
Cappella della Sommaria, in Castelcapuano (9–13)
Donnaregina Vecchia, Vico Donnaregina (9–13)
Santa Maria Incoronata, Via Medina 19 (9–13)
Santa Maria del Carmine, Piazza del Carmine (7–13 and 17–18.30)
S. Giacomo degli Spagnoli, Piazza Municipio (8.30–11)
Pietà dei Turchini, Via Medina (9–13)
S. Pietro Martire, May and Piazzetta R. Bonghi (7.30–13 and 17–19)
(To check dates in June, and possibly into July, telephone the
Soprintendenza per i beni artistici e storici, 81–741 8324)
Tübingen
Cezanne encapsulated
The current survey to be followed by two more major exhibitions
Gotz Adriani's latest show for the Tübingen Kunsthalle, ‘Cezanne's paintings, masterpieces from four decades’ marks the beginning of a period of radical reassessment of the artist's career.
Although not a complete survey, the ninety-seven paintings assembled by Adriani, director of the Kunsthalle, and Walter Feilchenfeldt, a Swiss dealer who inherited from his father the archives of the Cassirer Gallery in Berlin with account books tracing sales of paintings by Cezanne, are balanced chronologically and include both of revered icons and surprises.
In covering the themes of Cezanne's work — landscapes, still lifes, portraits, and figure studies — the exhibition is the most comprehensive since the major Paris retrospective of 1936.
The loans, which have come from New York, Boston, Chicago, Philadelphia, Sao Paolo, St Petersburg, London, Paris, Rome, Prague, Tokyo and Berlin, as well as from rarely seen Swiss and German private collections, will only be seen in Tübingen (catalogue published by DuMont at DM86).
Currently under preparation for 1995–96, and likely to coincide with the publication of the long-awaited catalogue raisonné by John Rewald, is an excitingly broad survey curated by Joseph Rishel of the Philadelphia Museum of Art and Francoise Cachin of the Musée d'Orsay.
The opening in Paris at the Grand Palais is scheduled to take place on the centenary of the one-man show that Vollard gave Cezanne in September 1895, the only major exhibition of his work during the artist's lifetime.
The exhibition will also be seen at the Tate Gallery in London (late January 1996 to late April1996) and at the Philadelphia Museum of Art (May 1996 to July 1996).
According to Joseph Rishel the aim is to ‘try to get together the most serious pictures and pull together all the themes’.
Around 120 painting loans have been requested, fifty watercolours and forty to fifty drawings.
A complementary exhibition that will bring Cezanne and Pissarro together should be on at the Musée d'Orsay in Paris at the same time as the Rishel/Cachin retrospective.
Organised by Philip Conisbee of the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, it will also be seen in Los Angeles (opening in spring 1995) and a second American venue currently under discussion.
Titled ‘Cezanne and Pissarro: an Impressionist collaboration’, Philip Conisbee explains ‘Cezanne and Pissarro had one of the most fruitful and important relationships in nineteenth-century French art, especially in the 1870s.
We hope to juxtapose paintings that they painted at the same site at the same time’.
The friendship broke off in the 1880s.
The organising committee, which includes Rick Brettell of the Dallas Museum of Art and Joachim Pissarro, hope to borrow thirty-five paintings by each artist.
Isabel Boucher 
City of Culture 1993
Antwerp spends £20 million for Euro-event
The home of Rubens, Jordaens and Van Dyck celebrates itself
Following Athens (1985), Florence (1986), Amsterdam (1987), Berlin (1988), Paris (1989), Glasgow (1990), Dublin (1991) and Madrid last year, Antwerp is the Cultural Capital of Europe for 1993.
The whole idea originated with Merlina Mercouri, former Greek Minister of Culture, and by the end of 1996 each of the EC member states will have had its turn.
Just to make sure the new world order is not left out either, a new scheme is launched this year that will focus for one month on a city in Central or Eastern Europe (this year Graz, next year Budapest).
In Antwerp, under the overall directorship of Eric Antonis, who wields a budget of BFr900 million ($27.7 million; £18.4 million), the celebrations are, of course, intended to reflect the diversity of the city's cultural heritage, and cover all the main art forms.
Mr Antonis sees the role of art in the city as socialising, democratising and spiritually refreshing: ‘Opt for Art’ is his slogan.
In more concrete terms, the city's tourist industry hopes to receive a massive boost from the year's events: visitor numbers are expected to double from two million to four million in 1993.
This compares with past culture capitals such as Glasgow, which spent £86 million including capital costs to promote and mount its celebrations, which yielded a net return of £15 million.
On the other hand, prior to 1990 visitor numbers to Glasgow were under one million per annum.
During 1990 they rose to a sizeable four million.
The shows of old art
‘Jacob Jordaens’(Koninklijk Museum voor Schone Kunsten until 27 June), a major loan show to coincide with the four hundredth anniversary of the artist's birth (see this page).
The great age of Antwerp in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries is inevitably the theme of the main exhibitions the year.
‘Botany and the Southern Netherlands 1500–1650’(Plantin-Moretus Museum until13 June) concentrates on the publication of botanical works, many from the Plantin presses.
Engravings, woodcuts, drawings and botanical specimens, both living and dried, are on show, while, outside the museum, the inner courtyard has been replanted in period style.
The Rubens House (15 May to 27 June) is showing copies of the study drawings kept by the artist in his inner studio (a room known as the cantoor) made by his pupil Panneels.
Rubens' own material was largely dispersed after his death, so these copies are now invaluable.
Loaned from the Royal Print Collection, Copenhagen.
The ‘Raising of the Cross’, Rubens's great altarpiece, is newly cleaned and restored and back in its original place in the cathedral.
Sixteenth-century retables (carved wooden altarpieces) of the type which once filled the cathedral but were lost in the fire of 1533 or destroyed in the Reformation will be on show in the cathedral in a small exhibition from 26 May until 3 October.
Lent from churches across Belgium, all the sixteen retables on show will be restored under the supervision of the Musem of Religious Art before they are returned to their respective churches.
Major restoration projects include the Cathedral of Our Lady whose exterior is now almost complete; inside, the first phase of work on the nave and roof was completed some years ago.
Work on the presbytery and transept is planned for this year.
Other successfully completed restoration projects around the city are: the Episcopal Palace; the interior restoration of St Paul's Church; the Carolus Borromeus Church; the Plantin Moretus Museum; the façades and  pavilions of the Zoo; the interior of the St Augustinus Church; the Zuiderpershuis; the City Festival Hall; the Smidt van Gelder Museum; and Royal Museum of Fine Arts; the Grand Bazaar; the Neo-classical Bourla Theatre; and the magnificent 1905 Central Station.
Total costs of pre-celebration restorations are put at around £60 million.
Antwerp
Jacob Jordaens: success was not good for him
The quatercentenary of Rubens's rival celebrated by a major exhibition
The day after Antwerp's cultural capital programme started last month, the celebration's most important exhibition opened at the Koninklijk Museum.
It is devoted to the Flemish painter Jacob Jordaens, who conveniently was born in 1593.
The present Mayor of Antwerp and promoter of the city as cultural capital, Mr Cools, was formerly responsible for Antwerp's cultural heritage, and one of his projects then was to turn the Jacob Jordaens House into a museum, much like the Rubenshuis.
In 1989 he asked Roger A. d'Hulst, a leading authority on Jordaens, to organise the current exhibition.
Together with experts from the Rubenianum, N. de Poorter, H. Nieuwendorp and M. Vandenvenn, d'Hulst conceived the structure of the exhibition, and has negotiated the loan of ninety-three paintings, sixty-seven drawings, around thirty engravings and the unique set of seven tapestries in the Kunsthistorisches Museum Vienna, designed by Jordaens and showing riding horses put through their paces.
The aim of the exhibition is to show the quality and variety of Jordaens's work and to reassess where he stands in relation to Rubens, by whom he has always been overshadowed.
Paintings and drawings are presented in chronological order, which demonstrates Jordaens's artistic development from good to indifferent, as heavy demand for his paintings led to more and more workshop involvement.
Among the earliest works are the remarkable ‘Adoration of the Shepherds’ from the Metropolitan; ‘Paul and Barnabas’from St Petersburg, and ‘Meleager and Atlanta’from the Antwerp museum's own collection.
Jordaens's mature years are represented by ‘St Christopher’ from Belfast, the ‘Veneration of the Eucharist’from Dublin, ‘Diana and Actaeon’from Dresden, ‘The Rape of Europa’from Lille, ‘The Repose of Diana’from Paris and ‘Bacchus and Ariadne’from Boston.
The exhibition also attempts a reconstruction of the ceiling decoration from Jordaens's own house which depicted the story of Psyche and was removed in 1888.
The exhibition continues until 27 June.
Dutch and English editions of the two-volume catalogue, divided between paintings and drawings, have been published by the Gemeentekrediet bank at BFr1950.
‘I can't imagine ever wanting to be white’
At this year's Biennial exhibition at the Whitney
Museum of American Art (until 13 June), visitors are issued an admission button which bears all or part of the following sentence: ‘I can't imagine ever wanting to be white’.
Wearing these badges, the overwhelmingly white visitors roam about the galleries, from one installation condemning the racism of white America to a humming collection of heating ducts that its creator calls a model of a nuclear reactor.
The show's catalogue makes approving reference to last year's Los Angeles ‘uprising’.
The message might be the following: the people may not have triumphed, but the ruling classes (the management and visitors at the Whitney) have indeed surrendered.
But not entirely — outside on Madison Avenue is a huge lifesize model of a red fire engine, the work of Charles Ray, who says he tried to make an object that would embody a fundamental sense of ambition, in the form of a child's toy.
This toy, however, is not a plaything, at least not in the tactile sense that its creator seems to be suggesting.
The ‘vehicle’ is watched twenty-four hours a day by a private security guard, hired, not by the populist Whitney, but by the Austrian gallery which invested in the work.
The Metropol Gallery of Vienna is seeking a buyer for the fire engine, provided the graffiti artists the Whitney once championed don't get to it first.
The price: only $250,000.
In what may be an ironical comment, an exhibition of Swedish artist Lasse Aberg in London this month (at House of Sweden in Hampstead Road NW1) is distributing buttons that say ‘NO! artists against everything’.
Largest Swiss Dubuffet retrospective for twenty years
The Fondation Gianadda has announced that it is mounting the largest exhibition to be devoted to the work of Dubuffet since the Basel show in 1970.
It is not borrowing any works from the Musée d'Art Moderne, Paris, or from MOMA, but will be relying heavily on loans from Swiss and French private collections.
The final part of the show has been boosted by the loan of around fifteen works from the Fondation Dubuffet at Perigny-sur-Yerres, while a number are coming from the Musée des Arts Décoratifs, Paris.
Among the 122 works on show will be those relating to projects for monumental sculpture and architecture, particularly of the Seventies and Eighties, including maquettes for five works installed in the grounds of the Fondation Gianadda.
The accompanying catalogue contains new essays by Jean Paulhan, Pierre Matisse, Lorenza Trucchi, Francois Mathey and others, together with contributions from the exhibition's organiser and from Michel Thevoz, conservator of the Musée de l'art brut in Lausanne.
London
‘I want to live art and I want everyone to live art’— Rosa Maria Letts
The Accademia Italiana represents the best in Anglo-Italian cultural cooperation, without a lira of Italian State funding.
It now needs £2 million to survive
The Accademia Italiana opened in Rutland Gate off Hyde Park in 1989.
It is run by the energetic and ebullient Dottoressa Rosa Maria Letts, and holds a wide range of exhibitions, including the recent, highly successful ‘Pompeii’.
She has never received a lira of State help, despite the fact that her brother, Giuseppe Ciarrapico, chairman of the Roma football team, was a close associate of ex-Prime Minister Andreotti.
This, as it happens, has turned out to be fortunate, because her brother is now one of the many public figures in Italy under investigation for corruption.
Dottoressa Letts has independently raised all exhibition expenses from sponsorship.
We asked her why she has given herself such an arduous task.
Dottoressa Letts, what was your primary motivation in founding the Accademia?
I really felt that there was room in London, and in Great Britain, for a permanent space to show Italian art, or Italian-related art.
I felt that there was such an understanding of Italian art by the British spanning the last three or four hundred years.
Furthermore London is a great centre for art historical studies of Italian art: institutes like the Warburg and the Courtauld.
Did you look at any comparable institutions when you set up this one?
I don't think there was one, even though there is the magnificent Royal Academy which does temporary exhibitions as we always do here, but there is a different approach here in that the management is always present.
I am a dominant personality, I know, so I invaded all the different areas.
The Friends of the Accademia are really friends.
I think this participation is unique; so many other institutions lack this.
So do you see yourself as a cultural ambassadress for Italy?
In a way, whether I see myself as such or not.
I have been made the Cultural Counsellor of the Italian Embassy, for example.
It's a temporary position, only three years, but there is obviously a desire on the part of the Embassy to integrate more, not only through the Accademia, but also for the purpose of contacts with English museums.
Italy has realised that mine is a very useful role.
What sort of contacts with museums?
I've sent out a questionnaire at the request of the Italian Minister for Foreign Affairs, to find out how English museums are structured, how they operate, their legal status, their independent rights and duties, for the new Italian Minister of Culture [Ronchey]who is very forward thinking, a journalist.
He's a good thing?
A very good thing.
With these new ministers who are experts in their relevant fields Italy will I hope change very soon.
Ronchey wants to see whether there is any improvement to be made in Italian museums.
We are also asking British museums whether they would like to host more exhibitions of Italian art and whether they would like to send more exhibitions of British art to Italy.
It's amazing how difficult it is to get the British to send art to Italy.
To get a Constable out is far more difficult than for you to get a Raphael.
Do you think we have become obsessed with conservation?
There is this idea that if you send the works of art abroad, either you put them in danger, or you're selling your art cheaply, even though its only lending.
And yet, a lot of English people, including museum directors, have a complex that British art is not as good as the others.
But it is not known.
Because of the recent return to figuration in the last ten years there is an enormous interest in British portraiture, but they put on a show like the ‘Swagger portrait’ only at the Tate Gallery; why don't they do it at the Gallery of Modern Art in Rome; why not the Palazzo Reale, Milan?
They say, ‘Oh, we don't trust how you look after the paintings’ and so on, but you can be over cautious.
Do you think it's rather patronising?
Well, let's say there is a slightly more natural way of dealing with the objects in Italy than there is here.
Perhaps Italians are less fetishistic.
You see we live with art.
It is everywhere you turn, often in bad repair.
I think you should make art a little bit more alive.
I want to live art, and I want everyone to live art.
Art is an acquired taste.
No-one is born knowing that Michelangelo is wonderful; you have to be exposed to it, and this is the job that has to be done.
In the light of the current problems regarding a number of prominent figures in the Italian cultural world, have you in any way had to dissociate yourself from any of them?
Really they've dissociated themselves from us.
Some of them used to come to the Accademia and to me they're still welcome if they want to come and speak.
My previous astonishment at the fact that people who came here like De Michelis [the former foreign secretary], or like ex-Prime Minister Andreotti, never endowed us with any money is now diminished.
Before I couldn't understand, and I almost felt it was a bad reflection on us, and that we must be the worst institution that Italy has.
Now I understand that it is because we weren't part of the system.
As Italy suffers increasing economic problems, sponsorship from major corporations and private individuals must be harder and harder to find.
Definitely.
It's a very difficult moment.
Even though I can say they are eager to do it, a lot of people in authority don't feel confident enough to sign a cheque.
We've lost sponsorship for our next exhibition [on contemporary European architecture]and we will be putting it up ourselves with students to guard it.
People in Italy have a complex: without a raccomandazione they don't think they can do things.
If only Italy believed you could get ahead without it, simply by doing things well.
Finally, apart from achieving financial stability, what are your long term aims?
To go on for a long time doing better and better exhibitions.
But I really also see us as a great link between our two countries.
Europe is here, English is the language of Europe, the influences are from all the other countries.
England is much more forward-looking in accepting other races and other countries than any other European country.
I have never felt discrimination in England because I am Italian.
Museums
New York
The Greek miracle Met-style
The recently acquired ‘Hope Dionysus’, found by a Florida pool, points the way for Carlos Picon's plans for classical antiquities at the Met
Recent visitors to the Metropolitan Museum of Art who have entered its restaurant have encountered a newly acquired sculpture squeezed onto the first floor landing which now serves as gift shop, restaurant lobby and Greek and Roman antiquities gallery.
The sculpture is the ‘Hope Dionysus’, a first-century BC Roman replica of a monumental Greek statue of a standing Dionysus with his arm resting on an archaistic female goddess, thought to be Aphrodite-Spes.
The only other similar existing work is a copy in the Hermitage.
Both are important examples of a Greek sculptural type from the second quarter of the fourth century BC.
The ‘Hope Dionysus’ is famous as a central work in the collection of Henry Philip Hope, who acquired it in 1796 from the influential sculptor and restorer Vincenzo Pacetti, who attached Dionysus's head to the torso and supplied the larger figure with arms, lower legs and other details.
The Hope heirlooms were sold in 1917, and the statue was purchased by Francis Howard, the great-grandson of Benjamin Franklin.
Its whereabouts remained unknown until it was consigned at auction by a private collector in Spring 1990, and bought by collectors who gave it to the Metropolitan.
It turns out that for decades the statue had stood alongside a swimming pool in Palm Beach, Florida.
One snapshot shows the figures sheltered from the sun tourist-style, by a beach umbrella.
The ‘Hope Dionysus’ was one of the first acquisitions for the Met's Greek and Roman Art Department by curator in charge Carlos A. Picon, who assumed his position in 1990.
If Picon has his way, the statue will be a sign of things to come in that department: expansion of gallery space, conservation and display of long-unseen areas of the museum's collection and an ambitious schedule of special exhibitions.
Greek and Roman objects were the first works the Met acquired after its founding in 1870, but in recent years the department has figured far less prominently than other areas which have undergone elaborate reinstallation.
In fact, the space devoted to Greek and Roman art at the Met today is about one-half of what was allotted to those works in the late 1940s.
It is fitting perhaps that Picon has placed the Hope Dionysus just in front of the entrance to the restaurant, a space which was formerly part of the Greek and Roman galleries.
That space will revert to galleries, as soon as central kitchens for a new museum restaurant are built elsewhere in the Met.
With the restaurant gone, Picon expects the Cypriot corridor, now lined with Cypriot archaic sculpture and glorious Boscotrecase frescoes, to cease being a corridor and become a calm gallery again — instead of a passageway from the Great Hall to the restaurant, which can turn into a snarl of baby strollers on a Saturday.
Picon also admits quietly that he would like to construct additional galleries above the current restaurant space.
Besides showing more sculpture, Picon would like to put more glass on display, since ‘we have the best collection of antique glass in the Western hemisphere’.
The new space will also have galleries for Greek and Roman gems, part of a Met collection that has never been shown.
‘Perhaps the most difficult challenge we have, besides finding the appropriate funding that we need’, Picon says, ‘will be to handle the conservation of 25,000 objects’.
The Met has already hired five conservators for that vast job.
Picon says he would like to hire more, plus another curator if he can raise the funds.
Another priority for Picon is a programme of publications.
The last catalogue of the museum's Greek bronzes was published in 1915 by Gisela Richter, the museum's first curator of Greek and Roman Art.
Picon foresees a new bronze catalogue as a ten-year project for which the department now lacks the staff.
A catalogue of the glass collection is also planned.
Outside the permanent galleries, Picon's hand is also seen in the Met's installation of the current travelling show, ‘The Greek Miracle’(until 23 May), a selection of classical sculptures on loan from Greece.
The exhibition was shown first in the United States this autumn at the National Gallery of Art in Washington where it was presented as an aesthetic vision which heralded the emergence of democracy in Greece.
According to some of its Washington hosts, notably Republicans then in power, the development of a classical style led to an uninterrupted two millennia of democracy which culminated in the collapse of the Berlin Wall, a political subtext to the exhibition which the Met has jettisoned entirely.
The Met installation, in the circular galleries of the Lehman Wing, includes sculpture from the Met's collection as points of reference.
Many works that were situated against walls in the National Gallery are now shown in the round.
After ‘The Greek Miracle’ leaves the Met, the next special exhibition will be of Hellenistic and Roman cameos, bringing together objects from the Met collection and from the Kunsthistorisches Museum in Vienna.
After that, the Met will host an exhibition of classical Greek gold from the fourth and fifth centuries BC, drawn from the collections of the Hermitage, the British Museum and the Met.
That show will be displayed at each of the three venues.
Picon also plans a collaboration with the Palazzo Grassi in Venice of work from Magna Graecia, plus an unprecedented tour of Hellenistic sculpture from the Pergamon Museum in Berlin, which would also travel to San Francisco and Kyoto.
Exhibitions such as these could bring a new visibility to Greek and Roman art at the Met.
They also demand huge special budgets.
If Picon's experience at his last job, in San Antonio, is any indication, he may have some cause for optimism.
There he entered a museum which had no antiquities, and in the course of several years built galleries to house two private collections which he brought to the museum.
San Antonio has since joined the small number of US museums which are now active on the antiquities market.
Part of what enabled Picon to build that collection was the formation of a Philodoroi (Friends of Antiquities) group to fund lectures and symposia and promote local interest in Greek and Roman art.
A similar group has existed at the Met for years.
Picon says that its twenty-five active members are funding the lecture series accompanying ‘The Greek Miracle’ show, as well as library purchases and other activities.
Stockbridge, Mass.
Spielberg/Time Warner museum for Norman Rockwell
Norman Rockwell would have been one hundred years old next year.
For more than twenty years, Rockwell's work has been shown in the Norman Rockwell Museum, a small white clapboard house on the main street of picturesque Stockbridge, Massachusetts, where visitors grew from 5,000 people in 1969 to 160,000 today.
Now the museum has moved to a new incarnation to accommodate its popularity — a former estate nearby, where a $9.2 million, 27,000-square-foot building has been constructed by Robert A.M. Stern Architects, seeking to replicate the mythical New England town hall, as does everything in the landscape from ice cream parlours to petrol stations.
While exhibitions will be devoted largely to Rockwell works, curators plan to offer other shows by illustrators.
Evidence of the power of Rockwell's legacy is a gift to the museum from producer/director Steven Spielberg (who might be considered the Norman Rockwell of cinema) in conjunction with Time Warner Inc.
Accordingly the museum's trustees have named the museum building the Steven Spielberg/Time Warner Building.
The main museum building opens Sunday 13 June with the display of Rockwell's renowned ‘Four Freedoms’ series, based on Franklin Delano Roosevelt's 1941 conception of the four fundamental conditions of the democratic society.
D.D'A.
National Gallery, Washington
Anglophile professor donates 322 drawings
An anglophile university professor who used his modest means to amass 322 British and continental drawings has given the entire lot to the National Gallery.
The collection spans the sixteenth to nineteenth centuries with sheets by 199 artists, more than half of whom are new to the gallery (including Peruzzi, Ribalta, Coypel, Schinkel, Landseer, Doré and Alma-Tadema).
The donor is William Bainter O'Neal (born 1907), Professor Emeritus of architectural history at the University of Virginia in Charlottesville, where he taught from 1946 to 1972.
Mr O'Neal spent thirty-five years acquiring an eclectic array of landscapes, figure studies, architectural views and history compositions with only his eye and a ‘tight budget’ to guide him.
He first started in the 1940s while stationed as an army draftsman in London, and from 1966 to 1988 made annual return visits, establishing relationships with Agnew's, Jeremy Drummond, J.S. Maas and others.
‘You can't imagine trekking through Heathrow carrying two bags full of drawings’, he recalls.
‘I nearly killed myself carrying those things home’.
Nearly two-thirds of the drawings are English, mainly Victorian, and Pre-Raphaelite, including a large tempera and oil ‘Saint Barbara’ by Burne-Jones that once belonged to Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin, a Ruskin watercolour of the sun-drenched cathedral of Sens, and a bellowing stag by Landseer, with earlier works by Romney, Rowlandson, Varley and Cotman.
The professor's interest in architecture and theatre is reflected in Pietro Fancelli's mythology set in the palace at Persepolis, stage designs by Schinkel, Mauro Tesi and others.
In tribute to Mr O'Neal's generosity, the gallery is showing fifty-eight works from the collection (until 15 August), accompanied by a scholarly catalogue with entries written by Margaret Morgan Grasselli, curator, and Judith Brodie, associate curator of drawings at the National Gallery of Art.
Gemeentemuseum, The Hague
‘Not my fault’, says ex-director Rudi Fuchs
$2.3 million overspend leads to postponement of major Mondrian show
Dutch museum director Rudi Fuchs, fifty, has left his post at the Gemeentemuseum, The Hague, to take on the directorship of the Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam.
Fuchs's career as a museum director has not been without controversy.
At the Castello di Rivoli, Turin, which he headed from 1984 to 1990, his very liberal interpretation of what was meant by a part time post made him unpopular.
As director of the Van Abbemuseum in Eindhoven until 1987 (the year he was appointed to the Gemeentemuseum), he left behind a sizeable financial deficit, caused by overspending on buying modern art and on travel expenses.
He now stands accused by The Hague city council of serious mismanagement of the Gemeentemuseum's financial affairs, resulting in a deficit of DFl.4.2 million (£1.6 million; $2.3 million), a charge which may result in his being held personally responsible for the debts.
He says, cryptically, that he feels ‘responsible but not guilty’.
Left with this huge deficit the museum has resorted to trenchant measures: the coming centenary exhibition of Piet Mondrian in 1994 has been postponed; vacancies at the museum have been frozen and there are to be no new acquisitions.
Visitor numbers at the museum also saw a sharp falling off under the Fuchs administration: of the 200,000 expected in 1991, only 124,000 materialised.
Mr Fuchs has made it clear that he cannot be called to task for the museum's deficit and has blamed two principal factors.
The first is the series of cut-backs dating from 1980 which lopped a total of 25% from the museum's budget, bringing it down to DFl.12 million.
This amount has to pay the salaries of 160 employees, leaving little for the purchase of works of art.
Fuchs wanted to solve his finance problems by selling off two Picassos in order to set up an endowment fund: the attempt was foiled although it resulted in a healthy debate about de-accessioning in Dutch museums.
Second, Fuchs blamed the deficit on the museum's poor administrative structure, ‘I did not have a system which enabled me to accept responsibility for the financial affairs of the museums’.
It does seem to be the case that Fuchs was very poorly served by his finance director Cees List.
Fuchs, however, held ultimate responsibility for Mr Lees's actions and seems not to have made adequate attempts to investigate problems within his own museum as they developed.
Mr Fuchs claims that he repeatedly warned the city council of the administrative shambles in his museum and that he had proposed to bring in management consultants, a request which was refused on grounds of cost.
Mr Fuchs's champions say that he made no attempt to hide the financial problems that had arisen during his previous post when he was employed by The Hague.
Now Amsterdam seem to be willing to take him on despite the scandal, and are presenting him as an exciting and controversial figure, while many of his former colleagues in The Hague admire him, as do the public; he is seen as decisive, inspiring and provocative.
Legally, however, it seems that if it can be proved that Mr Fuchs spent above and beyond the municipally approved budget of DFl.12 million without authorisation, then he may be held personally responsible for the losses.
Certainly the fact that he exceeded his travel budget of DFl.36,000 by DFl.120,000 on long trips to Mexico, the US and elsewhere will not help his case.
Hans Locher, former professor of art history at Groningen University and chief curator at the Gemeentemuseum since 1987 is seen to be Fuchs's most likely successor there.
He blames the current problems on a lack of clear leadership, leading to a policy dilemma: ‘On the one hand there was the desire to concentrate on the museum's own collections, and on the other there was the attempt to become part of the dynamic international art scene’.
Pompidou Centre to spend $18 million on forecourt
The Pompidou Arts Centre is to renovate the ‘piazza’, the sloping cobbled forecourt on its west side, as part of director Dominique Bozo's policy of reconsidering all the aesthetic and technical problems of the institution.
Costing around FFr10 million and financed jointly by the Ministry of Culture and Paris City Hall, the renovation will start in 1994 and should last two years.
The northern half of the piazza, which was left at a lower level to accommodate a pedestrian subway (unbuilt as yet) to the nearby Forum des Halles shopping centre, will be filled in.
The nearby Brancusi workshop will be entirely rebuilt and an underground car park constructed under the piazza to accommodate tourist coaches.
Chateau de Sceaux, home of the Sun King's grandson, reopens
The Chateau de Sceaux, which has just undergone restoration lasting one year, and whence in 1700 the duc d'Anjou, Louis XIV's grandson, set off for Spain as Philip V, re-opens on 2 April with an exhibition devoted, appropriately, to the court of the Spanish Bourbons.
The exhibition, running until 27 June, comprises 130 items from French and Spanish collections including vessels carved in semiprecious stones and mounted in enamelled and jewelled gold, from the ‘tresor’ of the Grand Dauphin, presented in France for the first time since the eighteenth century, and works by French painters such as Michel-Ange Houasse, Louis-Michel Van Loo and Jean Ranc and sculptors Rene Fremin and Jean Thierry, who were commissioned by Philip to decorate his palaces.
The exhibition is directed by Yves Bottineau, professor at Paris X-Nanterre, former curator of Versailles and author of L'art de cour dans l'Espagne de Philippe V, 1700–1746, who is organising a three-day conference on the same subject 7–9 June.
Edinburgh acquires Raphael drawing
The National Galleries of Scotland have acquired a highly important study by Raphael for the altarpiece now in the Prado called ‘The Madonna del Pesce’.
Acquired for £775,000 (after tax settlement on a price £1.8 million and the douceur for selling to a public institution) by private treaty negotiated by Christie's, the sheet was formerly in a private collection in London.
It depicts the Virgin and Child enthroned with the young Tobias and the Archangel Raphael on their right and St Jerome on their left and is a preparatory study for the altarpiece of around 1514, painted in Rome for the church of San Domenico, Naples.
The drawing was once in the collection of Sir Thomas Lawrence.
It is now the second drawing by Raphael in the National Gallery in Edinburgh, the other being a study of a kneeling nude, purchased in 1987.
Assistance to purchase came from the National Heritage Memorial Fund, which gave £100,000, the National Art Collections Fund, which gave £50,000 and £250,000 from the legacies of the late Keith Andrews, keeper of the Gallery's print room from 1958 to 1985, and his sister.
The rest will be paid over two years from the £1.75 million annual purchase grant of the National Galleries of Scotland.
National Gallery, Washington
Bellotto's ‘Konigstein’ bought for $9.6 million
Most expensive purchase since Leonardo's ‘Ginevra de’ Benci’
The National Gallery of Art has just purchased Bernardo Bellotto's ‘The Fortress of Konigstein’ from Bruno Meissner for $9.6 million (£6.4million), the most expensive Old Master painting purchased by the gallery since Leonardo da Vinci's ‘Ginevra de'Benci’bought for around $6 million from the Prince of Liechtenstein in 1967.
One of the most monumental and impressive works by the artist, Meissner had bought the canvas at Sotheby's London on 11 December 1991 for £3.1 million ($5,728,800 hammer price), a little below expectations.
At the time of the auction, it was believed that the wide expanse of sky had been skinned; in fact the original sky was in remarkably fine condition, the skinned appearance due to discoloured overpaint.
In contrast to his contemporaries Canaletto and Francesco Guardi, Bellotto's crisper and more incisive works are rare.
Although he produced Venetian and Italian vedute his views of Poland and Germany are the most sought after, although most of them are in the Dresden Museum and National Museum in Warsaw.
Representative examples of some recently on the market are a pair of views of Vaprio and Canonicha, sold at Christie's in December 1991 for £1.9 million the pair, $4,421,900 hammer price; and Walter Chrysler's ‘Architectural capriccio with a self-portrait’ sold at Sotheby's New York in June 1989 to Muck Flick for $1.7 million.
The National Gallery, Washington, already owns two smaller views of the ‘The Castle of Nymphenburg’ and ‘A view of Munich’, donated by the Kress Foundation in 1961, but these are less ‘important’, being replicas of originals now in the Residenzmuseum, Munich.
The Bellotto ‘Konigstein’ is one of five large-scale views of the Saxon fort, commissioned by Frederick Augustus II of Saxony around 1756.
Two others from the series are in the Manchester City Art Gallery, the remaining two are untraced.
The canvas bought by Washington was sent to Sotheby's by the executors of the Countess Beauchamp.
There were some murmurs of interest from the National Gallery, London, and it will be interesting to see whether an export licence will be withheld.
The Alte Pinakothek in Munich was also rumoured to be a potential buyer at one time.
When Meissner exhibited the picture at the International Fine Art Dealers' Fair in New York this past autumn it was shown to Jayne Wrightsman who reportedly disliked the picture because it ‘wasn't pretty enough’.
She had bought a lesser work by the artist ‘Pirna: the Obertor from the south’(an autograph replica of a larger canvas in Dresden) for the Metropolitan from London dealer Derek Johns several months before for around $3 million).
Washington, D.C.
Lest we forget
$150 million Holocaust Museum opens
The United States Holocaust Memorial Museum opens this month in a privately funded $150-million building located on 1.9 acres of government land adjacent to the National Mall.
The five-storey 225,000-square-foot facility houses a permanent installation telling the story of the Holocaust, a computerised interactive learning centre, a theatre, an auditorium and the archive of the Holocaust Research Institute.
The cost of operating the memorial is to be covered by the Federal government.
Architect James Inigo Freed, of Pei Cobb Freed & Partners, avoided the kind of blatant kitsch that would severely trivialise the subject.
Avoiding ‘a purely scenographic approach’ he adopted instead what he calls ‘the tectonics’of the camps, ghettoes and Nazi buildings.
Thus, boarded windows, metal fences, gates and brick watchtowers make Post-modern reference to the bleak death camps, without actually depicting them.
More abstractly, a wall in the Hall of Witness is deliberately cracked as a symbol of ‘the rupture of civilisation’.
More than the architecture, the museum's Identity Card Project is likely to raise eyebrows.
Each visitor receives a ‘passport’ bearing the story of an actual victim or survivor who was the same age and gender as the visitor.
The exhibition itself contains artifacts, photographs, audiovisual materials and oral histories supplied by individuals as well as European governments and institutions.
The circuit starts on the fourth floor and spirals downward through three sections: 1933–39 covers the repression of the Jews; 1939–45 describes the ghettoes, deportations and mass murders; and 1945 to the present recounts survivors' efforts to rebuild their lives and come to terms with the ineffable tragedy.
The United States Holocaust Memorial Museum is at 100 Raoul Wallenberg Place S.W. (formerly 15th St), between the Bureau of Engraving and Printing and the Department of Agriculture, just south of Independence Avenue.
N.Y.
Historical Society approves plan for its survival
The near bankrupt New York Historical Society (see The Art Newspaper No. 26, March 1993, p. 4) has approved a financial plan intended to redefine the institution's mission and provide an endowment for operating funds.
The plan, drawn up by Wilbur L. Ross Jr., senior managing director of Rothschild Inc., calls for selling portions of real estate adjacent to the Society's Central Park West building and for the eventual sale of $20 million worth of art from its collection, valued at $1 billion.
Before this can be put into effect however, the Society must raise $110,000 just to keep its library open until 1 June, and must come up with an additional $2.5 million to cover a bare-boned operation from June 1993 to June 1994.
The society's board of trustees is hoping that at least part of the funds it needs by June will come from government sources: in response to a stampede of scholars from around the world who invaded the library in what were to be its final days last month, local government provided an emergency $66,000 to keep the library open until 2 April.
Meanwhile, to keep as much of its collection as possible in New York City, the Society is offering other New York institutions the right of first refusal in the purchase of its works put up for sale.
The details of this arrangement are far from clear, but Sotheby's has offered to waive its seller's premium for any works the Society deaccessions at auction.
Sotheby's has also agreed to extend its current loan of $1.5 million, secured against $3 million worth of works of art from the Society's collection, past the due date of November 1993 to avoid ‘precipitating a foreclosure or [consequent]sale’ according to Mr Ross.
D. D'
London gets new architectural fittings museum
A fascinating collection of architectural fittings and other objects relating to the history of London's architecture will be on permanent display for the first time in its ninety-year history from April.
Formerly the collection of the Greater London Council, the 5,000-piece strong holding (give or take a few balusters) is now the property of English Heritage, curated by Mr Treve Rosoman who has looked after it since its days with the GLC.
From April it will be housed in a  permanent gallery created from the coach house at the Ranger's House, Blackheath, one of English Heritage's finest London houses, which already holds collections of musical instruments and Jacobean pictures.
The coach house has been converted at a reasonable sum drawn from the annual budget.
The collection continues to expand, mostly by donation but a very small purchase grant enables Mr Rosoman to pick up the occasional piece at auction: he recently purchased some papier mache moulds at the Christie's Crowther sale.
The key point about all the objects collected is that their provenance is known; they are not collected for aesthetic merit alone.
Professional architects, town planners and students have made use of the collection over the years, but the new display will be used for a much wider educational programme for primary and secondary schools.
Only a part of the collection will be on show at any one time, and the display will probably change.
Conveniently, the most comparable holding of objects of this type is in nearby Dartford: the Brooking collection at Thames Polytechnic is strong on windows, but not on plasterwork.
Mr Rosoman's collection has a particularly outstanding collection of plasterwork (about which he is particularly passionate) and wallpapers, but not much on windows.
Archaeology
Mysteries
The truth behind the search for Ivan the Terrible's fabled library
Dowsing, the Moscow Underground and even some real scholars are all involved in this ongoing quest
Last month, after checking with the experts in Moscow, we felt compelled to publish the disappointing news that Ivan the Terrible's library has not after all been found, whatever Pravda and The Times might say.
The story behind the rumour is so curious, however, that it is worth telling nonetheless.
The article in Pravda reported that an interdepartmental commission on dowsing (‘bio-location’) had contacted the Russian Ministry of Culture, claiming to have discovered Ivan the Terrible's legendary library in the city of Alexandrov.
In the 1970s a prisoner from one of the labour camps had assembled a group of volunteers, including experts on dowsing, to investigate what he claimed to have located — Ivan the Terrible's library.
He refused however to make his findings public until he had been released and given a car, a flat and other luxuries.
Although nothing came of this particular incident, it acted as a spur to non-traditional methods of archaeological research: dowsing, use of the divining rod and geomagnetic surveying.
The results of what followed have led Ivan Koltsov, who led the research and was a Member of the Geographical Society of the Russian Academy of Sciences, to announce that there was no longer any doubt that what had been found beneath the monastery at the Alexandrov settlement was indeed Ivan the Terrible's library containing priceless works of art.
This is only the most recent of a number of ‘discoveries’ of this elusive library, which really belonged to Ivan the Terrible's father, the Grand Duke of Moscow, Vasily III, who in turn had inherited it from his father, Ivan III, husband of Sophia Palaeologus, the niece of the last Byzantine emperor.
One version has it that this Byzantine princess caused a collection of manuscripts to be brought to Moscow that was so splendid as to leave sixteenth-century eyewitnesses dumbfounded.
There is some historic evidence to suggest that it included about 800 titles, among which some so important that they have tantalised historians ever since: works by Cicero, Tacitus, the Greek historian Polybius, the playwright Aristophanes etc., quite possibly in complete versions.
The passing centuries have done nothing to diminish the ardour of those (including many foreign scholars) tirelessly engaged in trying to hunt these manuscripts down.
Their interest has been titillated by occasional manuscripts said to come from Ivan the Terrible's library, which have periodically come to light in Moscow.
Over the years, searches have been carried out both above and below ground.
Studies of Moscow's subterranean systems have been made, in particular those under the Kremlin, and searches have been conducted to locate hiding-places and underground passages at the tsarist palace in the village of Kolomenskoye, and at the Alexandrov settlement, to which Ivan the Terrible moved in 1565.
Even this century has produced stubborn opponents of the view that the library was either burnt in one of Moscow's fires, or that the books were long ago dispersed to other libraries, or that, in reality, there never was such a library.
One researcher was Ignaty Steletsky, who in the 1920s was able to take advantage of the fact that the Moscow Underground was being built.
He carried out some work in the labyrinths beneath central Moscow and partly beneath the Kremlin.
However, the Moscow Underground was completed without the library ever being found.
Later, during the 1960s, Academician M. Tikhomirov proposed setting up a commission to locate the library, and some of its expeditions were still active as late as the 1970s.
The last of these was the excavation at Alexandrov led by Academician Boris Rybakov, which unearthed nothing but ancient foundations.
Incidentally, it was he who thought that if the tsarist library actually still existed, then it would be situated beneath the Moscow Kremlin (to this day there are legends of its sealed-off hiding-places and passages).
Commenting cautiously on the present situation for the newspaper Kultura, the Chairman of the Archaeo-Geographic Commission of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Academician Sigurd Schmidt, has said that he is convinced that a library belonging to the Muscovite sovereigns does in fact exist, and that, wherever it may be located, it will be possible to find at least fragments of what is left.
However, he points out that all that has been achieved by dowsing until now has been to locate the points of entry into the tunnels beneath the Alexandrov Kremlin, and some archaeologists are not even sure of this, regarding what has been found there as simply the old moats.
What puts Sigurd Schmidt on his guard is that Ivan Koltsov and his team have not used the results of previous researches.
He says that if the Ministry of Culture still go ahead and grant permission for the excavation to proceed, then it will be vital for them to involve scholars and specialists.
Some archaeologists, irrespective of their scepticism over Ivan Koltsov's announcement, have expressed concern that Pravda should have shown a map of the underground areas, and that Koltsov publicly described seeing local boys playing with ancient gold goblets which they had supposedly found in the underground passages.
All this may lead to a spate of private ‘gold rush’ excavations which may well damage whatever remains of this ancient culture underground.
The research is scheduled to be carried out by Moscow's Archaeological Office, an affiliate of the Cultural Association's Sloboda Club for research into architectural planning and environmental studies, and will involve the participation of the Alexandrov settlement's Museum of History and Art which is situated on the site of the old monastery.
Egypt
The return of the mummy
A huge new museum of the Pharaohs planned for Giza
President Mubarak of Egypt has announced that a new archaeological museum, the largest in the world, will be built to the west of the pyramids on the plateau of Giza, on the road that links Cairo with Alexandria.
To realise this the Egyptians have enlisted the expertise of Italian museum curators and scholars.
One conclusion to emerge from a recent conference at which the Italians and Egyptians met was that the existing Cairo Egyptian Museum should be maintained.
Built in 1902 it was constructed specifically to house fifty per cent of the finds made by foreign teams of archaeologists which, under the law of 1857, belonged to the Egyptian government.
The museum quickly became unable to house the constant influx of new objects, while the surroundings have become unable to cope with problems such as coach parking posed by the enormous numbers of visitors.
The construction of the new museum in a relatively remote area will also diminish the danger of attacks on tourists by Muslim extremists.
Dubbed the ‘Museum of the Pharaohs’, the Giza museum is part of a wider project to restore Egypt's monuments and upgrade its minor museums such as that at Aswan, which will in future house the Nubian antiquities.
A large conservation centre will also be built at Giza, alongside the museum.
Meanwhile, the mummies of the pharaohs, removed from display by President Sadat in 1970, are to go back on show in the Cairo museum in May.
The mummified corpses, which Sadat decreed should not be made a spectacle of, include those of Seti I, Segnere III and Ramses II.
The last was discovered to be infected with eighty types of funghi and was sent to France for treatment.
New showcases, designed by the J. Paul Getty Museum and equipped with humidity and temperature controls replicate the conditions inside the tombs as nearly as possible, reducing the oxygen levels to a minimum.
A fierce archaeological row has erupted over government plans to erect a new housing complex on the west bank of the Nile at Luxor.
The plan has been drawn up in consultation with the Egyptian Antiquities Organisation which maintains that there is no danger to nearby sites, but is fiercely opposed by other archaeologists who say this area has not yet been explored.
Endoscopy for the Riace Bronzes
Bronze B of the two Greek warriors known as the Riace Bronzes undergoing examination by an endoscope in the Museo Nazionale at Reggio Calabria.
The Rome Central Institute of Restoration and the Calabria Soprintendenza Archeologica have teamed up on a year-long project to remove the corrosive salts from the interiors of the statues.
The small amounts of clay, still adhering from the date when the bronzes were cast, became impregnated with salt while the bronzes were immersed in sea water up until their discovery on 16 August 1972.
The endoscope, attached to a long probe, is manoeuvred into the statues though the tiny casting holes in the feet of both, through the head of A and the missing eye of B, and its movements controlled by a television monitor.
Apart from removing an estimated thirty kilos of encrustation from the interior of each statue the restorers hope to gain information on the composition of the bronze alloy, the casting method and the origin of the casting clay.
Visitors to the museum are allowed to watch the ‘operation’ on each bronze from behind a glass screen
Rome
San Clemente: a rich source of discoveries
The church of San Clemente in Rome (a remarkable complex of buildings built on three levels with a Mithraic temple in the lowest level) has recently been the site of considerable research and investigation.
The initiative has come from the order of Irish Dominican monks who live at San Clemente, and particularly from Father Leonard Boyle, prefect of the Vatican Library and former member of the community.
Over the past ten years the excavations at the church have yielded some remarkable discoveries.
The sixth-century papal sacristy used during Lent has been located in the former wine cellar of the convent.
It retains its original mosaic floor decorated with strips of marble and porphyry on a ground of multi-colour tesserae.
Nearby a smaller annex, probably used for ritual cleansing, has also been identified.
The tomb of St Cyril, patron saint of slaves, has been found near the altar and the saint's ninth-century funeral monument reconstructed, while the wall decoration of the third-century Roman church has also been uncovered.
Regarding the lower levels, it now seems that the first-century building was an elaborate Roman house richly decorated with stuccoes and fresco, the remains of which have been published for the first time.
The famous mithraeum was not built from scratch but was adapted from a grotto/nymphaeum, the remains of which are still attached to the present structure to a height of twelve metres.
Recently a startling discovery was made on the level of the main church.
Hidden for centuries under plaster, the architrave of the main doorway is now revealed to be a monumental inscription from the time of the Emperor Trajan, which must have come from either the Roman baths or the imperial mint, both of which are nearby.
In addition the columns supporting a fifteenth-century monumental tomb, previously thought to be Byzantine, have now been identified as Roman, adapted and reworked for their new site with sixth-century capitals made from Carrara marble by Byzantine craftsmen (therefore made in Rome).
Since 1987 an extensive programme of restoration has been underway on the fresco cycle by Masolino in the chapel of Saint Catherine in the upper church.
Sponsored by Olivetti at a cost of L200 million (£88,300; $132,400), it will be completed by 1994.
Olivetti were recently sponsors of the cleaning of the Brancacci chapel, Florence, frescoed by Masolino and the young Masaccio.
In Rome the work has been carried out by the Istituto Centrale del Restauro.
Conservation
Technology and art history
How good is an eye?
Dendrochronology and infra-red photography are giving surprising results among Netherlandish paintings at the Metropolitan Museum
It's a rivalry which can only become fiercer: the connoisseur's eye versus technology's bag of tricks.
The Metropolitan Museum has been examining some of its most treasured paintings with the aid of the latest technology, and it has come up with a result which confounds the hitherto accepted history of art.
One of its most important early Netherlandish paintings ‘Christ appearing to His mother’, formerly thought to be by Rogier van der Weyden, was downgraded by technology to a workshop copy a decade ago.
Now a different scientific process has shown that, instead of being an early fifteenth-century painting, it in fact dates from the end of the century, which calls into question all the assumptions about artistic development on which traditional art history has been based.
The major tool in these discoveries has been the use of infra-red reflectography to read underdrawing.
Developed by the Dutch physicist J.R.J. van Asperen de Boer, it employs a camera equipped with an infra-red vidicon that allows an image of a small section of a panel to be transmitted to a television screen.
It will penetrate most pigments, with the exception of those that are carbon-based, underdrawings being in charcoal or carbon-based ink.
It surpasses the use of infra-red photography in its clearer rendition of the various ‘handwritings’ of panel preparation.
In tandem with dendrochronology, the dating of wooden panels by tree-ring analysis (the current leading expert in which is Peter Klein of Hamburg University), these new techniques have enabled scholars to attribute, place and date early paintings more accurately, though often new questions arise from their findings.
Underdrawing analysis is, however, not always conclusive, nor indeed always possible.
Curator Maryan Ainsworth of the Metropolitan Museum is quick to note that, ‘The thorny problem of underdrawings and workshop practice in, for example, the works of Lucas Cranach and his circle is not easily resolved through underdrawing analysis, since in many cases, the picture was drawn in with a non-carbon substance, like iron-gall brown ink, that is not penetrated by infra-red, and is invisible on the reflectogram screens.
It is maddening, since so often you can see traces of underdrawing on the painting's surface just with the naked eye!’
One of Ainsworth's and her colleagues' most astonishing findings has been the downgrading of ‘Christ appearing to His mother’ by a follower of Rogier van der Weyden.
Acquired by bequest in 1921, it used to be considered one of the Metropolitan Museum's greatest early Northern paintings.
It, and two cut-down companion panels in the Capilla Real, Granada, were thought to be originals by van der Weyden of an altarpiece that had belonged to Queen Isabella of Spain, while another version, in the Gemäldegalerie, Berlin, was dismissed as a workshop copy.
This view held until 1991–92, when Berlin's curator of early Netherlandish painting, Rainald Grosshans, published his findings on the underdrawing of the Berlin version, which unmistakeably showed Rogier's characteristic hook-ended drawing style, with several changes in composition.
Then subsequent research by Maryan Ainsworth revealed the mechanical underdrawing of the Met's panel, done without changes, and probably taken from a pattern or tracing.
‘This wasn't conclusive in itself’, says Ainsworth, ‘but Grosshans correctly noted that the perspective in our painting had been subtly altered, mostly in the architectural surround, to conform with a one-point perspective, which is a much later fifteenth-century development.
What has made the re-dating definitive has been the dendrochronologist's report which dates the panel to around 1485 — some twenty years after Rogier's death’.
Ainsworth has just published her findings along with another study of the Met's ‘Adoration of the Magi’ formerly attributed to Jerome Bosch, and now to a later follower, in Volume 27 of the Metropolitan Museum's Journal (see p. 19).
The reattribution of the panel, Ainsworth admits, is not nearly as unnerving as its re-dating.
‘The entire concept of artistic licence and innovation, on which we put such a high premium these days has nothing to do with the way much early Northern painting was created.
The medieval craftsman tradition was such an important part of Northern painting.
We don't really comprehend how rigorous the training in the guild system was.
Artists could make these perfect copies, not just reproducing the composition, but even the way it was painted, and the handling of the paint.
Jellie Dijkstra has published some telling information she discovered in Belgian archives: around one-third of all the fifteenth-century commissions and half of the sixteenth-century commissions request a copy of one kind or another.
Copies were not denigrated; in fact, it was nearly as important to own an image that had a certain spiritual value and worth as it was to have something new.
The San Francisco Museum is loaning us their beautiful Dirck Bouts ‘Madonna and Child’ that was done from the same cartoon or pattern as ours, the main difference being that theirs has a brocade background and ours is plain.
There is a version in the Bargello even closer to ours, and I'd love to have the opportunity to examine and show all three together’.
Another future project, for 1994, is an exhibition at the Metropolitan of the works of Petrus Christus, which Ainsworth is organising.
This exhibition will be exceptional in that it will be a nearly complete overview of his output.
The fragility of most Early Netherlandish panels means that most museums will refuse loans save for a very good reason.
Most recent early Netherlandish shows have therefore tended to be closely focused, either with very few outside loans (as with the National Gallery, Washington's 1992 show around its Gerard David ‘St Anne altarpiece’ which temporarily reunited the gallery's three central panels with its predella panels from Edinburgh and Toledo, Ohio), or organised as in-house ‘dossier’shows, as with the 1991 Joos van Cleve exhibition at the Louvre, organised by Cecile Scaillierez, who is preparing an in-house Hans Memling show for 1994.
A major Memling show, organised by Dirck de Vos for the Bruges Museum, is planned for the same year.
In the meantime, with funding support from the Kress Foundation, Molly Faries of Indiana University, Bloomington, is preparing to enter her extensive archive of over 10,000 infra-red reflectograms into a database.
Covering artists from Byzantine times to the nineteenth century, it should allow scholars to establish underdrawing styles for individual painters.
Byzantinist appointed chief of Russian Scientific Research Institute for Restoration
The new director of the all-Russian Scientific Research Institute for Restoration is a specialist in Old Russian and Byzantine architecture, Dr Aleksey Komech.
He is the co-chairman of the museum council of the International Fund for Culture and has written extensively, as well as having had thirty years of work experience with staff at the institute.
The Institute for Restoration is one of the leading institutes in its field.
It is here that new methods for the conservation and restoration of works of art, ancient manuscripts and books, and archaeological artefacts are developed.
The Institute is involved in research and in the practical restoration of the top cultural monuments.
Examples of its projects are paintings and works of applied art from the museums of the Moscow Kremlin; the iconostasis from the Kirill-Belozerskiy Monastery; a sculpted Gothic altarpiece by Bernt Notke and Hermann Rode in Tallin, Estonia; murals and clay figures from a Buddhist shrine in Uzbekistan and frescoes of Dionysus in the Ferapontovyy.
Cathedral Clochemerle row
The beautiful fourteenth-century cathedral in Den Bosch is suffering from the men drinking at the surrounding cafes and bars.
The walls have turned a gruesome red-brown from the urine which has also eaten away at the wooden structure of one of the portals.
The sexton is complaining that he has to scrub away the unbearable smell every day, and that the church has already had to undergo several repair jobs because of the problem.
Nevertheless, the town council is divided on whether to make the cathedral less accessible to desperate men by placing a fence around it and thus lose a centuries-old tradition.
For the record
Venice
Life is a game; life is art
From 4 April to 18 July the Palazzo Grassi is showing a 300-work exhibition by Pontus Hulten of the work of Marcel Duchamp, the artist whose ideas have pricked through the whole history of twentieth-century art.
Here we publish one of his last interviews, made in 1966
Duchampians all: Arman, Joseph Beuys, Marcel Broodthaers, Christo, Michael Craig Martin, Salvador Dali, Robert Gober, Richard Hamilton, Jasper Johns, Yves Klein, Jeff Koons, Michael Landy, Sherrie Levine, Piero Manzoni, Picabia, Robert Rauschenberg, Man Ray, Daniel Spoerri, Haim Steinbach, Jean Tinguely, Andy Warhol, Robert Wentworth — and many, probably too many, more
Two years before Marcel Duchamp's death in 1968, the Belgian director, Jean Antoine, filmed an interview with the artist in his Neuilly studio in the summer of 1966.
This was shown on French-speaking Belgian television in 1971 in the programme ‘Signe des Temps’(Sign of the Times).
When the Video Library was set up ten years ago by the non-profit-making association, Jeunesse et Arts Plastiques, I suggested to Jean Antoine that he should keep a U-matic video copy.
Apart from being broadcast on Belgian television, this interview has been shown several times to the mainly student audience of the association, but the text has never been published.
This unpublished transcript, edited for The Art Newspaper, is the most faithful rendering possible of the way Marcel Duchamp expressed himself.
It is a remarkable document which gives us a fresh and immediate insight into Marcel Duchamp's mind.
Michel Baudson
Jean Antoine: When you started out, you painted like everyone else, you created art.
Then you became the man whom André Breton called ‘the most intelligent man of the twentieth century’.
So, does that mean, since you have given up painting, that you associate painting with stupidity?
Marcel Duchamp: No, not stupidity.
First of all, I want to defend myself a little against the charge of being the most intelligent man in the world.
It's fairly easy for someone to call you that, but it's fairly difficult to convince yourself that you are.
And I find it hard to believe, because first of all you have to understand the word ‘intelligent’ in the way he meant it and I'm not sure that I know what he meant; and there are any number of ways of being intelligent.
I accept it because it was said by Breton whose opinions I respect greatly, but that's all.
But you haven't answered my question about the problem of painting and stupidity?
No, no, not at all.
No, stupidity has got nothing to do with it.
It's simply an activity which has been a little overestimated and is regarded as something of major importance.
Personally, I don't believe it is all it's cracked up to be.
It's one of those human activities which is not crucially important.
That's what I mean; especially now, when it has become completely esoteric and everyone paints, everyone buys it and everyone talks about it.
I wonder if it counts for anything at all when it comes to expressing more profound thought.
When you gave up painting, did you believe that painting was dead?
No.
Firstly, you know, I haven't given up painting; if I get an idea for a painting tomorrow, I'll do it.
I didn't make any hard and fast resolutions at all, of any kind.
I simply stopped because I didn't have anything more to say at the time.
I had run out of ideas; ideas don't come as easily as all that.
As I have never been in the habit of working at my easel every morning from 8 am, I only feel inclined to work when something stirs me in some way.
Then I try to find a way of expressing the idea and there isn't one.
There hasn't been one for a long time and that's all I can say.
But I didn't make any hard and fast decisions about giving up painting at all.
Tell me something about your urinal which you sent to the Independents Exhibition, signed R. Mutt?
That was a bit of an exception, as it was sent to the first Independents Exhibition in New York and, as is the case with all the Independents exhibitions, there was no hanging committee.
The whole point of the Independents exhibition was to enable artists to satisfy their need to exhibit without having to submit their work to a hanging committee.
So I sent that piece under the impression that there would be no problem having it accepted and that afterwards we would see how the public reacted to it.
But the organisers, or the hanging committee, decided against exhibiting it.
It was too shocking, I suppose, even though it was not obscene or pornographic, or even erotic.
As the organisers couldn't find any reason to suppress it or reject it, they dumped the piece behind screens where it could no longer be seen and we lost sight of it for the whole exhibition.
We didn't know where it was and it was only at the end of the exhibition, when everything was being dismantled, that we found the piece hidden away and realised what had happened.
What is more, I was on the organising committee, so I resigned and I never again exhibited at the Independents exhibition.
And what about the ready-mades you created afterwards?
Basically, they grew out of a thought process which was perhaps a little too logical, but logical all the same, relating to works made with your hands: you can cut off the artist's hands and still end up with something which is a product of the artist's choice since, on the whole, when an artist paints using a palette he is choosing the colours.
So choice is the crucial factor in a work of art.
Paintings, colours, forms, even ideas are an expression of the artist's choice.
So you can take this even further if you want, by saying: why go to the trouble of using your hands at all?
So the idea of making something which is not physically created by the artist, which simply stems from choices he has made, that is, something already created like the ready-mades, was valid — personally speaking, at any rate.
But remember, I definitely do not want to create a school of the ready-made; far from it.
As a matter of fact, doesn't your concept of ready-mades preclude the idea of a school?
Yes, to some extent, but not entirely.
But, ultimately, I know there is an inherent danger in the ready-made, and that is the ease with which it can be produced.
So, if you were to create tens of thousands of ready-mades per year, that would become extremely monotonous and irritating.
So I would recommend restraint in the production of ready-mades.
You yourself provided detailed pointers to the inner workings of ‘The Bride Stripped Bare by her Bachelors, Even’, in ‘The Green Box’, which is a sort of instruction manual, and there have also been numerous commentaries by critics.
Do you think that the work is accessible to the general public?
Yes and no, because everything is accessible, you know!
The analyses which have been put forward are not necessarily of any value, since I have not offered any explanation myself.
That is, I have done something, but I don't analyse myself and above all I don't judge what I have done.
What I intended is of no interest; what is interesting is the effect the work has on the spectator, on the public who will decide if the work is important enough to survive.
If not, if the public decides against it, if they are unmoved by it, then the Glass will be broken and people will stop talking about it, which could quite easily happen in twenty years or ten years, or even sooner.
So, it's nothing to do with me; I have nothing to say.
I created something and it's up to the public — they decide whether the work survives or disappears.
You don't trust the judgement of art critics at all?
No.
I believe that a picture, a work of art, lives and dies just as we do.
That is, it lives from the time it's conceived and created, for some fifty or sixty years, it varies, and then the work dies.
And that is when it becomes art history.
So, art history only begins after the death of the work, but as long as the work lives, or at least in the first fifty years of its life, it communicates with people living in the same period who have accepted it or rejected it and who have talked about it.
These people die and the work dies with them.
And that is where the history of art begins.
In that sense, I believe that the history of art is extremely random.
I am convinced that the works on view in the museums and those we consider to be exceptional, do not represent the finest achievements in the world.
Many geniuses have foundered due to their lack of direction; ultimately they could not find a way of remaining geniuses throughout their life.
A simple error of judgement was tantamount to artistic suicide.
Their works have disappeared as a result, and there are many more interesting things that have been consigned to oblivion.
In other words, this is my understanding of mediocrity.
Basically, only the mediocre works created in the past have survived, while the most beautiful works, the finest works, have vanished.
This is something I really believe, but I'm not forcing anyone else to believe it too.
Do you hold any specific beliefs about what might be called beauty?
No.
Beauty doesn't come into it, because I am not terribly interested in words like ‘beauty’ and ‘truth’.
These are concepts which are not exactly weak, but they lack substance; they are words and words are extremely dangerous.
When you try to analyse a painting using words, you can only manage a very questionable approximation, worse than questionable, because, after all, painting and art in general, especially visual art, is a language in itself, a visual language instead of a spoken language.
So it's already like a Chinese poem which has been translated into English — it doesn't mean anything any more.
Generally speaking, are you wary of words?
Very much so.
I only recognise the poetic meaning of words, that is, the sound of words, their music, which has nothing to do with their meaning.
The meaning of words changes every fifty years.
The same word, used at the time of Louis XIV, no longer has the same meaning today.
Have you ever been aware of belonging to a movement, a school?
No.
I belonged to them in the sense that when I was interested in something I tried to understand it as far as possible and, of course, even tried to make use of it.
But the word ‘school’ only leads to the word ‘group’and, ultimately, only individual works are produced, such as the works of a certain Leonardo da Vinci.
It's down to the individual to emerge from any school or so-called school.
The idea of a school in itself is basically of no interest to me at all.
You were, however, closely linked with the Dadaists and then the Surrealists?
Yes, but I probably tried to create my own personal brand of Dadaism, just as each of them had their own brand of Dadaism based on the same ideas but expressed in an intensely personal way.
Do you think that your work would have been possible if these movements had not existed?
Absolutely not.
I followed the ideas of various schools at various times, with my own reservations of course, but I was strongly influenced by each school, each time, like everyone else.
No-one can escape the influences surrounding them.
Do you think that our century will be the age of surrealism?
Yes, probably, but I don't know for sure.
Deep down, I believe that our century will not be very interesting compared to other centuries.
I think we will be regarded as being rather limited.
Ours isn't a century like the eighteenth century which is impossible to love but which has its own integrity, an identity.
I believe that we will be regarded as a slightly frivolous century, and that we will not be showered with the sort of praise that we have blithely been giving ourselves.
Playing games is an important element in everything you do, I believe.
You have played chess all your life and I think that, in the same way, you have always approached your work as a player?
Absolutely.
I am extremely playful in that sense and I believe it's the only form of fun possible in a world which isn't always much fun.
I am inclined to be witty.
I regard humour as one of life's vital ingredients.
Sorrow and pain, on the other hand, are not at all essential; there is no good reason for them and people seem to feel obliged to cry much more often than they laugh.
Doesn't that imply that you don't take things seriously?
No, not at all; it's a witty seriousness, black humour, or whatever you want to call it.
It's such a necessary part of life that I don't even question it.
I would like to talk to you now about what is being done today, which has often been inspired by you.
What is your opinion, for example, of Pop Art?
I have a very high opinion of Pop Art; I regard it primarily as a phenomenon which stands apart from everything else this century.
Turning its back on influences such as the distortion of art, systematic distortion, anti-photography and anti-perspective, the work of the Pop Artists represents a restoration, a reintegration of ideas which are of great interest to me and which perhaps appear extraordinary.
Yet their work also represents a very important process, unlike any of the preceding ‘-isms’, which were always a continuation: Impressionism started the ball rolling, was continued by Fauvism which was a distortion of it, followed by Cubism, again a distortion but still ‘retinal’, because the importance of the visual experience was always the decisive factor.
With Pop Art, this all changed.
What do you think about the Nouveau Realistes, the creators of the Surrealist Object, whose work takes the idea of the object as its point of departure?
I think it's very interesting since half the century has been concerned with this question of objects.
The word ‘object’ amuses me because no-one talked about objects in the eighteenth century.
This particular interpretation of the word ‘object’ was invented as if to make it virtually some sort of fetish, serving as a basis for an entire movement; and that is what is interesting: found objects, this object, that object.
It isn't sculpture, and yet it is three-dimensional.
It has a completely unique quality and is obviously one of the distinguishing features of our century.
But you don't seem to be advocating it as a way forward?
On the contrary, it may not last but it represents perhaps one way to move away from traditional easel painting, for example.
That has lasted for five centuries, which is long enough; especially oil painting which certainly doesn't last forever, and may possibly disappear completely.
Once, there were frescoes, mosaics and other techniques which were dropped in favour of oil painting.
But, in my opinion, oil painting is far from perfect: it darkens, it needs to be restored, any painting on show has generally been restored countless times and is no longer the painting that the artist originally created.
You have lived on both sides of the Atlantic — you have lived in France and you have lived in the USA for many years — and now you are going back there.
Have you ever felt as though you don't belong in either place?
Yes, but I was quite happy to feel like that, precisely because I was afraid of being influenced by my roots.
I wanted to get away from that.
When I was in the USA, I had no roots at all because I was born in Europe.
So it was easy, I was bathing in a calm sea where I could swim freely; you can't swim freely when you get tangled up in roots.
So, European traditions were a sort of net in which you might have got caught?
Exactly.
Traditions are inevitably deep-rooted; distance enables you to see more clearly.
You have taken up American citizenship.
Should we regard you as an American artist?
Absolutely!
Officially speaking anyway, just as I have a passport.
But that doesn't mean a thing in any other way.
Biological functions don't give a damn about nationality; your arm works without knowing if it's French or American.
Officially, since you have to have an official existence, you have a nationality of which you are either proud or fond.
And you are fond of this nationality?
Yes, I'm fond of it.
America's a nice place to live; I have more friends over there than I do here and basically, as far as I'm concerned, nations do not exist; they are a place where you have friends, that's all.
Do you feel that people understand you better there?
Perhaps.
But, most importantly, its just that I have made more friends there.
I have not necessarily been understood, because they don't always try to understand, but the feeling of warmth is either there or it isn't and that's the only difference that counts.
If, when you attended the major retrospective of your works which recently took place at the Tate Gallery, someone had asked you: Marcel Duchamp, what have you done with your life?
What would you say was your greatest achievement?
Using painting, using art, to create a modus vivendi, a way of understanding life; that is , for the time being , of trying to make my life into a work of art itself, instead of spending my life creating works of art in the form of paintings or sculptures.
I now believe that you can quite readily treat your life, the way you breathe, act, interact with other people, as a picture, a tableau vivant or a film scene, so to speak.
These are my conclusions now: I never set out to do this when I was twenty or fifteen, but I realise, after many years, that this was fundamentally what I was aiming to do.
Books
Medieval studies
The hand of the master
Is this the best book yet written on medieval illumination?
In 1253–54 the French sent an embassy to the Great Khan in the Far East, hoping to convert the Monguls to Christianity and to enlist their support in a crusade against the Muslims.
The queen sent with the delegation an illuminated Psalter and the king, Louis IX, sent a Breviary and a Bible to be given as presents.
Professor Alexander quotes friar William of Rubruck's report that Mangu Khan (grandson of  Genghis and brother of Kublai Khan)‘took a good look’ at these illuminated manuscripts in Karakoram in 1253 and that he ‘made diligent enquiry as to the meaning of the pictures’.
There is no scholar in the English-speaking world better qualified than Professor Alexander to take a good look at illuminated manuscripts and to make enquiry as to the meaning of the pictures.
This book is the substance of his Lyell Lectures in 1983 but is the synthesis of thirty years' work.
The result is a candidate for the best book on illuminated manuscripts ever written.
Jonathan Alexander first looked at manuscript illumination in Oxford in 1959.
He has since gone on as librarian and as professor of art history to write standard books on eleventh-century illumination in Normandy, Flemish illumination in the 1480s, Italian illumination of the Renaissance, insular illumination from the sixth century, English illumination of the thirteenth century, and many other far-ranging studies and catalogues and exhibitions.
He does this with a modesty and a delight in enquiry which has lost none of its adventure in thirty years.
Probably no manuscript historian has ever had such wide range of confident experience, except perhaps the late Otto Pacht, Professor Alexander's first teacher and M. Francois Avril in Paris, to whom the present book is dedicated.
The book is in six chapters, but really falls into two parts.
Chapters1–3 discuss the actual work of designing and painting manuscripts, based on the closest examination of the most minute and subtle clues.
The caption for pl.56, for example, is ‘Hardpoint drawing of St Matthew photographed by ultra-violet light’ and for pl. 99 is ‘Marginal drawings (very faint)’, wonderful evidence easily missed.
Chapters 4 to 6 are art historical, interpreting about 800 years, beginning with a time when a miniaturist copied approved models with almost or actual religious obedience, and ending in a period in the early Renaissance when an illuminator does not even stand up when the Chancellor of France enters the room or when John of Holland can complain that Jacquemart de Hesdin has stolen his private pattern sheets in 1398.
Many medieval illuminators appear here by name (128 are listed in the index).
There are some delightful and newly published illustrations of them from manuscripts they made, peering out of initials which they are still painting, or kneeling in corners, or, in the case of Nicolaus Bertschi of Augsburg, apparently accepting a mug of beer from his wife Margaret.
Human interest emerges frequently from this manuscript archaeology.
We glimpse Raulinus, for example, who came from Devon in the mid-thirteenth century, wasted time as a student in Paris for two years and then came on to Bologna making a living copying manuscripts, drinking and writing love poems to Meldina.
Actually, a curious discovery is how many scribes and illuminators were still members of religious orders, even after the thirteenth century when book production had largely become a secular enterprise.
There are Franciscan manuscript painters like Johannes de Valkenberg around 1300 and the Irish Hugo the illuminator in the 1320s, and Dominican manuscript painters like John Teye in the 1370s and John Siferwas about 1400.
Furthermore, even if scribes and illuminators were secular, many books seem to owe their iconography to religious advisers.
The question of how illuminators knew what paintings to put into manuscripts forms the core of Professor Alexander's book.
Unlike the history of panel paintings, actual contracts between illuminator and patron are rare, and separate orders for illustrations very vague: ‘such as Guillaume wishes and will specify’(1398), for example.
But written instructions in the blank spaces of books themselves do survive and so do tiny marginal thumbnail sketches to indicate subjects.
Though a great deal of Professor Alexander's book is new and original work, it is probably in his study of these indications of manuscript planning and iconographic guidance that his book is most fascinating.
We still may not know who gave orders and made guide sketches — and Professor Alexander is extremely cautious in references to heads of workshops and their assistants — but the fact that such marks exist at all will send us all back to gazing into the parchment margins beside initials.
Not everything Mangu Khan might have asked is answered here.
The choice of text, the patrons, the bookshops, the scribes, the pigments, the bindings, the readers, and many other important aspects of the medieval book are referred to only in passing, if at all.
Within its own parameters, however, the book is magnificent.
For a sensitive understanding of the manuscript artist and an experienced and wise judgement on his miniatures, this beautifully illustrated and concisely written book is the work of a great master.
Letters between artists
A trip to the doctors with Messieurs Bonnard and Matisse
Melancholy reflections on art, life and liver disease
This is a terribly sad little book: as much about illness, old age and the brevity of life as about art.
The publishers make much of the fact that the first entry records a postcard from Matisse to Bonnard inscribed ‘Vive la peinture!!!
Amities.’, a joyful enough shout, but it is downhill after that.
There are of course references to work in progress — a letter from Matisse on the installation of ‘La Danse’ at the Barnes Foundation: ‘the panel is installed and suits the architecture, from which it seems inseparable’, as well as a melancholy reflection on the nature of drawing by Matisse from 1940: ‘A colorist's drawing is not a painting.
One must produce an equivalent in colour.
And that's what I'm not managing to do’.
Another pleasure is the little note from Bonnard, who in May 1946 had borrowed two pictures by Matisse, including ‘L'Asie’(sold to the Kimbell Art Museum at Sotheby's, New York in December 1992 for $10 million): ‘Your two pictures decorate (that's the word) my dining room, against an ochre background that becomes them.
Especially the woman in the necklace — the red there is wonderful late in the afternoon.
By day it is the blue that takes the lead.’
When not on art, however, the talk is all of liver attacks (pp.44, 110, 112), flu (pp.48, 50, 91), winter chill (p.62), head cold (p.70), intestinal troubles (pp.76–82), embolism (p.84), eye problems (pp.96, 94), sore throats (p.106), kidneys (p.116), and more.
Sadder still are the references to death — Bonnard's brother in early 1941 and his wife, ‘ma pauvre Marthe’, in January 1942.
Meanwhile the war progresses, causing little more than a headache over the shortage of petrol (p.66).
The reader's spirits are lifted by the photos of the two artists at work by Cartier-Bresson, Brassai, Osier and others, and by the reproductions of the original notes and cards.
Ultimately the most memorable lines in this volume must be those penned by Bonnard to Matisse in January 1940: ‘When I think of you, I think of a mind cleansed of every old aesthetic convention, and it is that alone that permits a direct view of nature, the greatest joy that can befall a painter.
I enjoy a little of that, thanks to you.’
Printmaking
Friendly impressions
The new gravure: Hayter, Hecht and Gross
Fortuitously, the catalogues raisonné of three friends and collaborators in the field of experimental printmaking have appeared together.
Stanley William Hayter and Anthony Gross both came to realise the enormous untapped potential of the burin thanks to the example of the lesser known Polish sculptor and printmaker Joseph Hecht, whom they encountered in Paris in the 1920s.
Hecht studied the dying craft with old-fashioned reproductive engravers, but transformed the skills he acquired into a highly personal means of conveying the expressive character of line.
Naive subject matter — landscapes and animals — often belie incredible subtleties and contrasts of markmaking.
The catalogue raisonné, which accompanied an exhibition at the Musée du Dessin et de l'Estampe originale, Gravelines, contains a penetrating and thorough essay on Hayter's relations with Hecht by Carla Esposito (who organised the important Hayter and Atelier 17 retrospective in Rome in 1990), a detailed chronology, and a reprint of a 1926 appreciation by the Symbolist writer André Saures.
Stanley William Hayter is broadly acknowledged as one of the most influential figures in twentieth-century printmaking, on three counts: his technical innovations, especially in intaglio colour printing; the encouragement of artists from Miró to Pollock and beyond to treat printmaking as a means of original expression (rather than just a way of reproducing images); and a remarkable body of prints produced over six decades, which attest to his broad interests in mythology, the workings of the unconscious, and the new mathematics.
This catalogue raisonné has been keenly awaited for several years; work began before the artist's death in 1988, aged eighty-six.
The authors — one of whom, Desiree Moorhead, was his young widow — based their research on Hayter's own logbooks, but also travelled extensively to study proofs and plates.
There are three introductions, which somewhat overlap, as each author (Black, Moorhead, and the American artist Jacob Kainen) offers an overview of Hayter's development, technical and thematic.
However, there is much that is useful and original in them.
Wisely, three representative images are chosen for detailed state by state analysis, rather than encumbering the whole catalogue with such voluminous information.
Sadly, the quality of Scolar Press's catalogue of Anthony Gross prints does not match its subject.
The blurred, poky , and inadequate black and white illustrations will just about serve the devoted collector but will not make new converts.
The extraordinary qualities of Gross's etchings rest on his delicacy of touch combined with dense overall design.
Unlike Hayter, for whom the application of colour was a way of further transforming an image during the creative process, for Gross, colour was more often an afterthought.
It would have been better to devote the resources given over to eight pages of colour prints to larger reproductions of his seminal black and white images, perhaps treating the reader to duotone to show his tonal range.
Miniatures
A very big book on very small pictures
Not living up to its size: 37,000 artists but only forty-nine illustrations
There are a number of reference books on miniature portraits, enamels and silhouettes available today.
However many of the existing publications deal with specific countries, limited periods or specialist subjects.
Harry Blattel's recent book provides in one volume a comprehensive list of over 37,000 miniaturists world wide.
It includes for the first time in one volume additional indexes for porcelain painters, enamellers and silhouettists, incorporating the work of artists up to the present day.
For reasons of its very comprehensiveness the book will be of use as a companion for the collector, art historian, student and librarian.
It has an international appeal, with the introduction — written by Betty Viner and providing a brief history of the subject — written in English, German and French.
The layout is tabular in format but the abbreviations are complex and time-consuming to understand.
Each page is divided into columns, giving the artist's name, dates, country of origin, speciality, literary references and a column for remarks.
The author uses this latter column to mention the artist's family ties, associations with rulers, where they exhibited and how they signed.
These factors alone could make the book most valuable but the data is by no means complete, and as such could be misleading by its omission.
The bibliography is extensive with over a thousand entries, but it could be argued that it is a little haphazard.
It is divided into three sections: the first records the books that are most frequently referred to in the dictionary, the second lists the books in numerical order, the last registers the books in alphabetical sequence.
There are far too few illustrations for the size of the volume: ideally a dictionary of this size should contain many more, displayed in either date, alphabetical or country order, or perhaps in a comparative sequence.
None of these methods are followed here.
The present volume does not aim to replace any reference book by providing fresh research, but it will certainly stand as the most complete index on the subject.
Perhaps its most useful asset is that it enables the user to locate references in relevant literature.
Antologia di Belle Arti
The age of the Valadier
The great strength of Antologia di Belle Arti, and indeed of its editor, is the ability to combine the zeal of the archiver with the eye of the curator, to ferret as effectively for documents as for objects, preferably objets de luxe, forgotten in palaces or bewildered in the marketplace.
The third volume of Antologia devoted to Neo-classical studies (n.s. nos. 39–42, 1991–92) includes a highly important article by the editor, Alvar Gonzalez-Palacios, which recapitulates what has so far been published on the great Roman bronze founders Francesco and Luigi Righetti and then adds twice as much more and concludes with a fascinating technical account of the casting of Canova's equestrian statue of Charles III Borbone in Naples taken from a family notebook.
From another article we learn that Giuseppe Valadier's silver service made in 1801–1803 for Palazzo Pallavicini in Rome turns out still to be there.
Yet another reveals that a fanciful sculptured clock at Waddesdon previously regarded as French is also by Giuseppe and related to a fascinating sequence of designs.
There are five articles on the Valadier family workshop, all stimulated by the recent spectacular discoveries of drawings and documents — many of the former included in the memorable exhibition mounted by the Artemis group in 1991.
This volume closes with a long inventory of the furnishings belonging to Cardinal Valenti Gonzaga not long before his death in 1756.
The collection was notable for chinoiserie, and for a mechanical dining table devised by the ingenious English Abbe Wood.
It included such items as an ivory Saint Sebastian tied to a tree in the form of a coral branch, something which Gonzalez-Palacios will surely soon locate.
There are surprises too — the cardinal owned an Indian hammock woven in coloured cottons.
The ambience evoked belongs to the era before a Neo-classicism to which the volume is ostensibly devoted, but no one will complain about that.
Archangel to reproduce its Gospels
The authorities in the northern Russian town of Arkhangelsk have made the money available for a facsimile edition of one of the most ancient Russian manuscripts, the Arkhangelsk Gospels, which date back to the year 1092.
The organisation behind the reproduction of the Gospels is the Russian State Library, where this rare manuscript is held.
The Arkhangelsk Gospels are divided up according to the liturgical year.
In 1913, four copies were made of the original, one of which is on display in Arkhangelsk Museum.
Papadakis out, Spens in
Following the announcement earlier this year that VCH publishing group had decided to ‘terminate the employment’ of Dr Andreas Papadakis, hitherto managing director and former owner of Academy Group, London, with immediate effect, a new appointment has been made at senior level.
Michael Spens, architect, author, critic and editorial consultant specialising in architecture and the environment, has been appointed Commissioning Editor for Academy Editions, a subsidiary of VCH Group, together with Ernst and Sohn.
Revival of Maxwell heritage magazine
The latest issue of the history and culture magazine Nashe naslediye [Our Heritage]has reappeared after a break of one year.
The death of Maxwell, the British publishing magnate whose empire collapsed in ruins of fraud, and who was the magazine's publisher, gave the periodical a brief international fame.
However, the main consequence of Maxwell's demise was to put its financial future in jeopardy.
It has found a new publisher in the American corporation Elegant Logic which is at present attempting to gain a foothold in the Russian market.
The revived magazine, now printed in Finland has, it is generally agreed, become even more polished and elegant, but it has also become considerably more expensive.
The Met's new journal
The contents of the newly-released 1992 Metropolitan Museum of Art Journal (volume 27) is as follows: John Oliver Hand ‘Salve sancta facies: thoughts on the  iconography of the ‘Head of Christ’ by Petrus Christus’; Timothy B. Husband ‘The Winteringham Tau Cross and Ignis Sacer’; Maximilian P.J. Maartens ‘The epitaph of Anna van Nieuwenhove’; Shirley Neilson Blum ‘Hans Memling's ‘Annunciation’with angelic attendants’; Maryan W. Ainsworth ‘Implications of revised attributions in Netherlandish painting’; Hans J. van Miegroet ‘The sign of the rose: a fifteenth-century Flemish Passion scene’; Christian Heck ‘Baldung Grien's Grunen Worth altarpiece and the devotion of the two St Johns’; Walter Liedtke ‘Addenda to ‘Flemish paintings in the Metropolitan Museum of Art’’’; Edgar Munhall ‘A Sevres Biscuit bust of Louis XV acquired by the Frick Collection in memory of Guy Bauman’; James David Draper ‘Philippe-Laurent Roland in the Metropolitan Museum of Art’; Joseph Baillio ‘Hubert Robert's decorations for the chateau de Bagatelle’; and Helmut Nickel ‘The bride and the cat: a possible source for Overbeck's ‘Freundschaftsbild’of Franz Pforr’.
The volume is priced at $48 (available from the University of Chicago Press) and is dedicated to the memory of Guy Bauman, associate curator in the Met's department of European paintings, who recently died at a sadly early age.
London gets a new art book publishing house
A new art book publishing company, Merrell Holberton, came into being in January.
Founded by Hugh Merrell, formerly at Scala Books and Philip Wilson, and the art historian Paul Holberton, it aims to specialise in publishing exhibition catalogues, art reference books and other museum publications.
For institutions with no in-house publishing arm Merrell Holberton plans to offer editorial, translation and production services as well as local, English language and worldwide distribution.
The first publication will be the catalogue of an exhibition of paintings from the Bowes Museum in Country Durham which opens at the National Gallery on 28 April.
For October the new company is producing and publishing the catalogue for ‘Canaletto and England’ organised by the Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery to inaugurate the newly refurbished Gas Hall in the city centre as an exhibition space.
Projects under discussion in Britain include a series of books on the permanent collections of English museums, while in Europe they are publishing a guide book to the collection of the Historisches Museum, Basel, which includes some of the late sixteenth-century Amerbach Kabinett, to coincide with the museum's centenary next year.
Northern prints at Bologna: the catalogue completed
The important collection of 295 fifteenth-century northern prints now in the collection of the Pinacoteca, Bologna, is the subject of a detailed catalogue.
The majority of the prints came from the prestigious collection of the Bolognese conte Lodovico Aurelio Savioli, curator of the paintings, prints and drawings collection of the Elector Palatine Carl Theodor in the last quarter of the eighteenth century.
His collection was particularly strong in German prints — it includes works by the Master E.S., the Master P.W., and the Master of South Germany, active between 1490 and 1500 — and was consulted by print experts from Zani in the late eighteenth century to Lehrs and Kristeller in more recent times.
Published by Arts and Co., the present catalogue is the first comprehensive treatment of this collection.
It includes a preface by Andrea Emiliani and a full introduction by Marzia Faietti of Bologna's Prints and Drawings department, with catalogue entries edited by Beatrice Hernad.
Each print is illustrated and there is an appendix on watermarks.
The publication will be marked by an exhibition at the Museo Civico Archeologico, Bologna, of all the prints, until 16 May.
Publications received
Nineteenth- and twentieth-century art
Ed.
Jane Munro Nature's Way: Romantic  landscapes from Norway (Whitworth Art Gallery, Manchester, 1993) 79pp. 22 col. 97 b/w ills.
£9.95 Catalogue to accompany exhibition at the Fitzwilliam, Cambridge (until 20 June).
Focuses on the work of Norway's two greatest early nineteenth-century landscape artists, Johan Christian Dahl (the so-called ‘father of Norwegian painting’) and his pupil Thomas Fearnley.
Both artists travelled extensively in continental Europe and Fearnley was inspired by Britain's Lake District.
Trained in Copenhagen (where he shared a house with Caspar David Friedrich) Dahl spent most of his working life in Dresden.
The present exhibition suffers slightly in not including any of Dahl's large, finished paintings, but it draws on a wealth of smaller oil sketches, watercolours and drawings by both artists, as well as rare prints by Fearnley.
The excellent accompanying essays set their work within the context of European landscape painting and provide general overviews of their careers.
Detailed catalogue entries for each exhibit.
Herman de Meulenaere Ancient Egypt in nineteenth-century painting (Editions Berko, Knokke-Zoute, 1992) 145pp. numerous col. ills.
£103 Glossy and evocative album format, coffee-table book.
Alma-Tadema, Lord Leighton, Gerome, Roberts et al.convey Ancient Egypt in all its Hollywood splendour.
Divided into thematic chapters with a particularly splendid one on the death of Cleopatra.
Tells you nothing about Ancient Egypt but much about the nineteenth century.
Interlinking text by the Honorary Director General of the Musées des Beaux-Arts, Brussels.
Pity about the price.
David Boswell and Corinne Miller Cotmania and Mr Kitson (Leeds City Art Galleries, Leeds, 1992) 64pp. 18 col. 52b/w ills h/b £10 Leeds City Art Gallery holds over 1,000 watercolours, drawings and prints by one of the great British exponents of the watercolours medium, John Sell Cotman.
The richness of this collection is entirely due to the generosity and collecting mania of one man, the Leeds-born architect Sydney Decimus Kitson.
Kitson died in 1937 and by 1939 his collection was distributed between the Ashmolean, the Fitzwilliam, the Royal Institute of British Architects, of which he was honorary secretary, the V&A, the British Museum, the Norwich Castle Museum and Leeds.
According to Kitson's family, the architect suffered from ‘Cotmania’, a term first used in a poem of 1803.
The stock market crash of the 1930s meant that British watercolours were to be had at bargain prices, with major compositions costing less than £20.
The present catalogue includes over 140 watercolours, drawings and etchings spanning the artist's career.
The exhibition closes 24 February.
Vivien Hamilton Boudin at Trouville (John Murray, London, with Glasgow Museums, 1992) 159pp. 101 b/w and col. ills.
£29.95 Charming and highly informative book produced to accompany an exhibition on this subject previously at the Burrell Collection, Glasgow, and now at the Courtauld Institute, London (until 2 May).
Happily interweaves the life of the artist (a separate essay on ‘Boudin's Modernity’ by John House) with fascinating detail on the fashion for bathing resorts in the late nineteenth century and the development of towns such as Trouville, le Havre and Dieppe as a consequence.
A separate chapter on ‘Fashionable Dress and Boudin’ by Liz Arthur indicates the thorough approach to the subject.
Much for the specialist and general reader to enjoy.
Mungo Campbell A Complete catalogue of works by Turner in the National Gallery of Scotland (National Galleries of Scotland, Edinburgh, 1993) 104pp. 76 b/w 65 col. ills.
£8.95 The National Gallery of Scotland's Turner collection is largely based on the thirty-eight works bequeathed to it by Henry Vaughan in 1900, representing outstanding works from all periods of the artist's career.
Son a Southwark hat manufacturer, Vaughan purchased Constable's ‘Haywain’ from Christie's in 1866 and presented it to the National Gallery, London that year.
He also purchased seven drawings attributed to Michelangelo from the Woodburn sale at Christie's in 1887 and gave them to the British Museum (five are still accepted as autograph).
Vaughan divided his Turner collection between Edinburgh, Ireland, the V&A and the British Museum (which received the preparatory drawings for the Liber Studiorum, since transferred to the Tate).
In 1988 Edinburgh acquired the complete set of watercolours for Edward Moxon's edition of The Poetical works of Thomas Campbell, the only set of his illustrations now remaining together.
The present volume includes catalogue entries for all the works by Turner (oils, drawings, rejected attributions, prints after Turner) now in the collection.
Robert Upstone Turner: the final years, watercolours 1840–1851 (Tate Gallery Publications, 1993) 68 pp. 16 col. 74 b/w ills.
p/b £7.95 Last in this series examining watercolours from successive decades of Turner's career.
Definitely conforming to the notion of a great, late period, these works, executed in Venice, Switzerland, the Italian Lakes and elsewhere, are painted with all the power and expression of the late oils.
Catalogue entries for each item together, with an extremely interesting introduction discussing the contemporary critical reaction to the artist's late work, and a poignant account of his final years.
While ordering the drawings in the Turner Bequest, Ruskin wrote to Elizabeth Browning in 1858 that he  believed ‘the old man's soul had been gradually crushed within him, leaving him at the close of his life weak, sinful, desolate — nothing but his generosity and kindness of heart left’.
Patricia Mainardi The End of the Salon: art and the state in the early Third Republic (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1993) 210pp. 51 b/w ills.
£30 Examines the cultural forces that contributed to the demise of the Salon exhibitions.
The book traces the history of that institution from its break with the Académie during the Revolution to its abandonment by the state in the 1880s.
A detailed, comprehensive examination of the forces — social, political and artistic — which resulted in the ultimate collapse of one of the key institutions of French cultural life, brought down, according to Mainardi, by the Salon's internal contradiction as aesthetic instructor and commercial enterprise.
The book also examines the relationship of individual artists such as Manet, Monet and Degas as well as more ‘traditional’ names and the Salon, and looks at critical reception to individual works.
Ed.
Roberta M. Olson Ottocento: romanticism and revolution in nineteenth-century Italian painting (The American Federation of Arts and Centro Di, New York and Florence, 1992) 293pp. fully illustrated in b/w and col. $67.95 Catalogue of the first major exhibition on this topic to be seen by an American audience since 1949 (see The Art Newspaper, No. 22, November 1992, p.11).
The exhibition can be seen at the Frick Art Museum, Pittsburgh until 25 April.
The exhibition examines the close political links between the art of  nineteenth-century Italy and the changing political situation throughout that period, with particular reference to four periods: 1797 to 1814, the years of Napoleon; the restoration of the monarchy until mid-century; the triumph of Realism in tandem with the move towards Unification, 1849 to 1870; and the period from 1870 to the end of century when Realism was influenced by European art, leading to the development of Italian Symbolism and Divisionism.
The catalogue essays include: ‘Painting in Milan and Venice in the first half of the century’; ‘Aspects of collecting in nineteenth-century Naples: the portfolios (cartiere) of Giacinto Gigante’; ‘Diego Martelli, the Macchiaioli, and the Impressionists’; and ‘Art in Rome, the capital of Italy’, by a team of Italian scholars.
Thomas Parsons and Iaian Gale Post-Impressionism (Studio Editions, London, 1992) 424pp. 25 b/w 385 col. ills.
£35 General introductory survey of the period.
Accompanied by wonderful press release describing it as ‘pound for pound the best value art book…high quality art publishing for just over 8p per page’.
The whole text littered with rather dotty observations: ‘What could possibly be so terrifying about a turtle?’ is the caption to Matisse's ‘Bathers with a turtle’.
Probably best used as a picture book.
Helen Braham Kokoschka: Prints, illustrated books, drawings in the Princes Gate Collection, with notes on the paintings (Courtauld Institute Galleries, London, 1992) 72pp. 6 col. 59 b/w ills.
£5.95 During and after World War II Count Antoine Seilern, the Courtauld Institute's major benefactor, assembled a collection of the work of Oskar Kokoschka.
Both men were part Austrian by birth and spent formative early years in Vienna.
Kokoschka fled to Britain from Prague in 1938 and Count Seilern from Vienna in 1939.
This catalogue accompanied an exhibition of the works on paper at the Courtauld (closed 28 October 1992).
It starts with the artist's first major — and arguably finest — graphic work, the illustrated book Die traumenden Knaben produced in 1907 as a children's book for the Wiener Werkstatte, and includes graphic work from throughout the artist's career.
Paintings from the collection supplement the show including the largest canvas in the artist's oeuvre, the ‘Prometheus Triptych’ commissioned by Seilern in 1950 and now dominating the Great Room at Somerset House.
Carsten-Peter Warncke Picasso (Benedikt Taschen, Cologne, 1992) 740pp. 962 col. ills.
474 b/w £39.50 A new addition to the extensive Picasso literature is a pair of volumes neatly contained in a gift case.
It is a handsome package, richly illustrated with colour reproductions of superior quality, but spoiled by an essay which is superficial and, on occasions, embarrassingly dim.
The publisher may be correct in believing that there is a space for a book which reviews Picasso's career in its entirety and discusses the full range of his activity as a painter, draughtsman, printmaker, sculptor and ceramicist, but this publication is certainly not the solution to this requirement, and Professor Warncke of the University of Tübingen is, sadly, not the scholar to undertake this enormous task.
His text, divided into seventeen short chapters which follow a broadly conventional, chronological arrangement, is short of biographical information and does not offer any new or detailed analysis of the works.
His portrait of Picasso subscribes to, rather than blows away, the legend.
He is a solitary genius, the carnivorous conqueror, constantly embarking upon fresh adventures.
‘Whenever new movements were started, it was Picasso and his work that served as a rallying cry.
In a word: he became the hero of twentieth-century art’ is the author's assessment, which concludes that he is the new Michelangelo.
Picasso falters only when his colossal talent is hampered by the inadequate instruction of his teachers or by the limitation of his pictorial sources.
His variations on the theme of Velazquez' ‘Las Meniñas’ are, rather surprisingly, cited as a rare failure in the master's career.
The value of the publication resides in its comprehensive selection of illustrations, the majority of which are not mentioned in the text and form, therefore, a quite independent feature.
Chosen by Ingo Walther and including less familiar material and important works of art which have appeared in the auction rooms in recent years, they are mostly presented in good colour reproductions which reach a remarkable standard for the Cubist constructions and plaster assemblages.
All the studies related to ‘Guernica’ and ‘Las Meniñas’are reproduced and each work of art is identified by references to the catalogues of Zervos and the other authorities.
A detailed and illustrated chronology, based upon the biographical material published in the Museum of Modern Art's exhibition catalogue of 1980, is supplied as a supplement.
Pierre Daix Picasso: life and art (Harper and Collins, New York, 1993) 450pp. 49 b/w ills.
£19.99 Update of 1987 edition by friend of the artist and writer on Picasso.
The author notes the importance of the ‘Demoiselles d'Avignon’ exhibition at the Musée Picasso, Paris and ‘Picasso and Braque: pioneering Cubism’at MOMA which took place since the first edition and have resulted in a number of amendments to this version.
This solid, reliable book has a number of features to recommend it as a starting point in the discovery of Picasso, not least the interesting thematic chronological charts which cover topics such as‘Stages in the discovery and appropriation of primitivism’ e.g. ‘Autumn 1906, Derain and Matisse return to Paris, each having acquired his first African mask’, and ‘Stages of the revolution in papier colles’.
The downside of the book is that it is written in a terribly deadpan style: ‘At forty-five Picasso had become a successful man.
He was about to buy his first Hispano-Suiza, the automobile of kings, which would be driven by a liveried chauffeur.’
Having been spoiled with John Richardson, we now expect more.
Monica Bohm-Duchen and Janet Cook Understanding Modern Art (Usborne Publishing, London, 1992) 64pp. numerous b/w and col. ills.
h/b £7.95 Shortlisted for the 1992 Times Education Supplement Senior Information Award, and aimed at secondary school students.
Accompanying press-release refers to ‘snack-sized bites’ of information, this presumably being standard National Curriculum fare.
Usual sort of terribly busy layout which publishers (and TV programme makers) seem determined to inflict on today's youth.
Divided into single-spread sections with headings such as‘Emotion’, ‘City Life’, ‘Propaganda’.
The text written with a generally light touch (surely some unintentional humour: ‘Some people consider Rego a feminist because her main characters are always women and they are usually up to mischief’) but the artist's biographies are fairly useless and the glossary too short to bother with.
Difficult to decide exactly which age-group the book is pitched at.
Ed.
Stephania Terenzio The collected writings of Robert Motherwell (Oxford University Press, New York, 1993) 325pp. 8 col. 28 b/w ills.
$39.95 Representative selection of the artist's writings about art dating from 1941 to 1988.
Contains sixteen or so essays, a number of entries from exhibition catalogues, a dozen public lectures and all Motherwell's journalism.
The latter comprises his introductions to several volumes of the series The Documents of Modern Art which he directed and edited from 1944, his contributions to Possibilities, the first magazine devoted to modern art and culture in the US, as well as those to Modern Artists in America, a book on the contemporary art movement published in 1951.
A few letters and edited sections of four interviews with the artist make up the rest of the volume which has some interesting illustrations reproducing photographs of the artist and friends.
Motherwell regretted the scope of his literary outpourings in later life, and was seen as an unnecessarily literary figure by fellow artists.
Much of his criticism does look back, although not necessarily in a particularly informed way: ‘Realism historically has always been mainly the mode for reaching the vulgar, the great lump of people…
But important realism has always been historically rare, the nineteenth century in Western Europe, the seventeenth century for a moment in Holland, ancient Rome, and what else?— not much more.’
He is far better on the art of his own time, particularly on Miró: ‘Miro's miracle is not in his breathing, but in that his surface does not end up heavy and material, like cement or tar of mayonnaise, but airy, light, clean, radiant, like the Mediterranean itself.
There is air for his creatures to move about in.
No wonder he loves Mozart.’
Motherwell writes about everything, from Mexico to Michelangelo, from Verdi to Victor Hugo.
Almost everything is worth saying, some of it is fine and perceptive but the notion of less is more seems to apply more to his art than his writings.
The Art Market
Contemporary Artists Index
February's off-peak sales of Contemporary Art in New York produced respectable results as well as evidence that the price-gap between first-rate works and the rest may be widening.
The market's decline — most artists are 30% to 70% down from their peak — ended in Spring last year.
Isolated successes since then do not constitute a recovery.
Sotheby's sold $2.3 million (70% by value; 64% by lot) against Christie's $2.1 million (65% by value; 53% by lot).
Sharply reduced reserves — often 50% of 1990 levels — have not lured buyers back into the market for second- and third-rate works.
The Contemporary Masters Index made up of ten internationally shown and collected artists shows a drop of 44% from the peak in 1990 yet an overall rise since 1985 of 235%.
The February sales demonstrated that Pop Art is the school with the big problem, Lichtenstein, Warhol, Wesselman and others having soared in 1988–90 on Japanese and Swedish buying.
Among American artists, Basquiat is down 50% from his 1990 peak though a mainstream work now averaging £22,000 is still 200% ahead of the 1985 level.
The Whitney retrospective may have helped sell three good Basquiats at Sotheby's, though two difficult, insubstantial pieces failed at Christie's.
The volume of Keith Harings on offer has made buyers choosy and wary.
Sotheby's sold three, but Christie's got away just two of their six at 30% under low estimate.
The hardest hit Americans included Ed Ruscha, Donald Sultan and Frank Stella though Anthony Grant at Sotheby's stresses that demand has already bounced back for top works by Julian Schnabel and others badly mauled in 1991.
American curators were recommending German artists to American collectors in the mid-1980s and Grant now sees US buyers reinforcing natural German demand for Richter, Polke, Immendorf, Baselitz and Kiefer.
Of the three Italians in the Index, Paladino, down 60% from 1990, is just 10% ahead of his 1985 average, while both Chia and Clemente are close to their 1990 peaks with rises of 170% and 540%.
Buying is  centred in New York and northern Italy.
The Tapies market was also badly hit.
Spanish demand pushed the average for a mainstream work to £106,000 in 1990 but that fizzled out in 1991 leaving the average today at around £28,000 — down 74%.
One bright spot is the growing interest in artists using photography such as Cindy Sherman, Gilbert & George, Gunther Forg and John Baldessari.
Christie's London
‘O Attic shape!’
Dispersal of a top private collection of sixth- to fifth- century BC Greek vases
The sale of important Attic vases on 28 April is one of the last major twentieth-century collections in private hands of sixth- to fifth-century BC vases likely to be dispersed.
Thought to belong to the London-based collector Nicholas Embiricos, it was formed in the 1960s and '70s, at a time when it was relatively easy to acquire pieces of known provenance for less than astronomical prices.
The Castle Ashby sale in 1980 of Lord Northampton's collection marked a watershed in the collecting of Greek vases.
While in 1965 at the Spencer Churchill sale top examples were changing hands for around £600, and in the 1970s in the low thousands, the prices at the Castle Ashby sale shot up into the hundred thousands for the first time as new collectors, both Greek and American, competed against each other.
The Northampton amphora, the best vase in the sale, made a record price of £190,000.
Now Christie's estimates that the thirty vases to be offered on 28 April should realise around £750,000.
Nearly all the Embiricos vases — which range from black- to red- figure, include white-ground Lekythoi, and presente a representative sample of Greek vase types — are by known painters, making this an exceptionally interesting group.
At least half are documented in the Beazley Archive of black- and red- figure vases in Oxford's Ashmolean Museum, or have been previously published, including examples by the Affecter painter, the Acheloos Painter, the Theseus Painter, Epiktetos, the Berlin Painter, the Brygos Painter, the Pan Painter and the Niobid Painter.
Some pieces, like the hydria acquired by the Second Marquess of Sligo (lot 22) were known from the nineteenth century, as was the Amphiaraos stamnos (lot 24) which appeared in an early drawing by Benndorf published in Berlin in 1833, after which it disappeared, only to surface again in this collection.
In the opinion of Professor Martin Robertson, former Lincoln Professor of Classical Archaeology and Art at Oxford University, the collection as a whole ‘shows taste and appreciation.
It is a really nice representative collection, although stronger in red- than in black-figure pieces — the better early painters are not represented’.
The earliest piece in the collection is an Attic black-figure neck-amphora attributed to the Affecter Painter (dated 530–520 BC, lot 3, est. £60,000–90,000).
Interested more in decoration than in narrative, the painter has composed a scene of gesturing figures, unidentifiable except for Hermes.
The lid does not belong and is slightly later in date.
Among the six black-figure vases, the Attic psykter (wine-cooler) attributed to the Acheloos Painter (dated 520–510 BC, lot 4, est. £15,000–25,000) is outstanding.
The Attic bi-lingual eye cup  attributed to Epiktetos (dated circa 520–510 BC, lot 9, est. £60,000–90,000) is, like many eye cups, painted in contrasting styles with red-figure on the outside and black-figure on the inside.
The beautifully drawn tondo in the base of the cup shows a running figure of Hermes holding the caduceus.
Robertson questions the attribution to Epiktetos, favouring Psiax.
An Attic red-figure amphora attributed to the Berlin Painter (dated around 490–480 BC, lot 11, est. £40,000–60,000) shows Nike flying and playing a kithara with, on the other side, a standing draped youth holding a staff.
The Attic red-figure pelike attributed to the Pan Painter (dated 480–470 BC, lot 17, est. £50,000–80,000) is the highlight of the collection.
In the opinion of Professor Robertson it is a careful and elaborate piece of great quality.
Financial results
Sotheby's battling, Christie's up 5%
Continued cutbacks in 1992
The full year financial results announced by the two major auction houses provide a telling demonstration of just how difficult conditions continued to be in 1992.
Of the two houses, Sotheby's seems to be suffering the most.
As announced on 12 March, their net income for the year ending 31 December was $4 million.
Income from principal activities was $1.8 million compared to $15.8 million last year.
The opening of three international sales centres and the cost of installing a new software system added $7 million to auction operating costs and there was a further cost of $4.9 million in redundancies.
Michael L. Ainslie, president and chief executive officer, pointed to a modest increase in sales to $1.132 billion from $1.104 billion as a positive sign, while noting that income from principal activities decreased significantly due to a decrease in sales from Acquavella Modern Art.
With regard to financial services, the company's loan portfolio has been reduced, resulting in a pre-tax income of $5.2 million.
Christie's International Plc announced pre-tax profits of £6.7 million for the year to 31 December 1992.
This represents a rise of 5% on 1991's exceptionally poor results.
As announced on 11 March an unchanged final dividend of 1p per share is being recommended.
Total sales in 1992 amounted to £636 million compared to £583 million in 1991, a rise of 9% and the first rise after two years of decline.
Operating costs in 1992 were down by some £29 million (22%) compared to 1990, partly achieved by the continuing redundancy programme which cost the company £1.7 million to implement last year.
Far East
Singapore is key target for sale rooms
Big tax concessions offered
The way ahead lies in the Far East.
This is the message coming loud and clear from a number of recent announcements in London and Singapore.
Christie's, who opened an office there in 1991, are to hold their first auction on 27 May, at the Oriental Hotel, comprising the Indhusophon Grand Prix collection of Thailand Stamps, estimated at around $1 million in total.
The move will clearly further raise the auction house's presence in Singapore, where it already holds twice-yearly exhibitions of Chinese paintings, ceramics, jade carvings and jewellery.
On 2 March the Singapore Trade Development Board devoted part of their budget statement to the burgeoning art trade in the region.
They announced a 10% concessionary tax rate to approved art and antique dealers on income derived from transactions on behalf of non-residents with approved auction houses.
This concession will be granted for an initial period of five years with possible extension after that.
In addition, ‘well-established’ auction houses which conduct substantial auctioneering activities in Singapore, and private museums can qualify for the service tax incentive.
The approved income of the company will be exempt from tax for a period of up to five years with a possible extension of a further five years after that.
The statement ends: ‘It is expected that more people will visit museums as a result of the wider interest generated by the presence of an international art and antiques market here.
Some may donate their carefully assembled collections to the museums.
In recognition of donations to the National Museum, we will allow tax deduction of up to twice the value of the donation.’
All the above measures will be administered by the Ministry of Information and the Arts, and the Economic Development Board.
Recently released statistics indicate something of the potential for the would-be investor in the Singapore art market.
According to an Economic Development Board report of October 1992, annual sales turnover for the fine arts sector exceeds S$90 million (US$55 million) while the annual turnover of the numismatic market is estimated at S$70 million (US$43.2 million).
More generally in a report by the Swiss-based IMD and World Economic Forum entitled ‘The World Competitiveness report’ Singapore and Malaysia both boast higher domestic savings than Japan and Switzerland, ranking first and third in the world.
Finally Singapore's status as a duty-free port (no import duties or sales tax), together with a relaxed approach to repatriation of profits and movement of currencies, are all relevant.
Taking advantage of the above is the new Asian International Contemporary Art Fair which takes place from 29 September to 3 October this year at the Singapore World Trade Centre.
Sponsored by corporations such as American Express and Philip Morris Inc., the whole event is conceived on an ambitious scale and will include all media including photography and video.
The selection jury is chaired by London's Roy Miles and includes Mrs Alice King of Asian Fine Arts Ltd, Hong Kong; Mr Satoshi Takachi of E's Gallery, Tokyo; Mr Jacques Barrere of Art d'Extrème Orient, Paris; and Mr Karsten Greve, of Galerie Karsten Greve, Cologne and Paris.
Still out in the Far East, Christie's have announced that they are opening a jewellery department in Hong Kong, to be headed by David Warren.
Mr Warren, has been a senior director of jewellery in London.
London ceramics sales
Cracks under the surface?
As experts leave, is the quality of cataloguing suffering?
The Continental ceramics sales at Christie's and Sotheby's on 1 March and 2 March continued to demonstrate the basic soundness and stability of this field.
Christie's British and continental ceramics totalled £1,336,289 ($2,004,433) with premium, of which 15.3% was unsold by value and 33.6% by lot.
Sotheby's Continental ceramics sale made £607,645 ($911,467) with premium, with 21.3% unsold by value and 25% by lot.
While the market as a whole has shrunk over the past five or six years as the generational pattern of collecting and dealing has shifted, it did not see the boom prices of the 1980s and therefore has not experienced the recession to the same degree as some other areas.
All the important pieces were contested by trade and private buyers and most of the prices for these should be considered equivalent to retail prices.
At Christie's, the erstwhile in-house expert, now consultant, Hugo Morley-Fletcher was extremely active; given his dominant influence on the turnover of goods, some in the trade are beginning to wonder what exactly his role is: auctioneer or dealer?
Christie's offered the second part of the important Korthaus collection in a mixed owner sale.
While Louise Newman's cataloguing continues set the standard for European auctions, Christie's Plc should be chastised for not producing a single owner catalogue that will become a standard reference.
One wonders whether Mrs Newman will be able to continue the standard now that her workload has increased with the recent firing of head of the department Anton Gabszewicz.
Sotheby's continues its cost-cutting format of having multiple lot colour illustrations far distanced from the cataloguing, much to the irritation of buyers who were seen constantly frantically flipping back and forth.
Among the highlights of the two sales, and selling well above its £10,000–15,000 estimate at Christie's was a Sevres soup plate from the Catherine II service, ordered in 1776 and consisting of 797 pieces of which seventy-two were soup-plates.
It sold for £23,000 ($34,500).
Perhaps the most beautiful lot at Christie's was lot 225, a Meissen figure of a dancer called ‘L'Indifferent’, modelled by J. J. Kandler, circa 1738.
Estimated at £20–30,000, it sold for £32,000 ($48,000).
Another J. J. Kandler piece was Christie's lot 220 from estate of late Robert Clarke, a pair of Meissen models of Hoopoes, of around 1740 with nineteenth-century ormolu mounts; estimated at £30–50,000, they sold for £34,000 ($51,000) to Munich dealer Freddy Reyes of Roebbig against bidding by Hugo Morley-Fletcher on behalf of a client.
Less successful on the bird front was Sotheby's lot 237, a ‘fine and rare’ Marseilles Faience turkey tureen and cover, circa 1770, estimated in the catalogue £25–35,000, revised before the sale to £40–60,000; it was bought over the telephone, against a dead room for £38,000 ($57,000) but appeared as unsold in the post-sale results.
A notable sleeper was Sotheby's lot 265, undercatalogued as ‘a Meissen figure of an actor’, estimated at £700–900, sold over telephone for £4,800 ($7,200); again lot 339, a Berlin Cabaret set, catalogued misleadingly as circa 1880, estimated at £1,200–1,800, was a good buy at £3,200 ($4,800); trade sources affirmed it was eighteenth century.
Making a retail price was Sotheby's lot 278, a fine Meissen Augustus Rex bottle vase of 1725–30, estimated at £20–30,000, it was contested in various places in the room and over the telephone, selling in the room for £42,000 ($63,000).
(More results and pictures on page 27).
New York
Sotheby's win battle for the Sharp Collection
Snatched from the Met and Christie's — or maybe not
When Peter Sharp, sixty-one, Manhattan hotelier and real estate developer, died in April 1992, it was assumed that the Metropolitan Museum would receive his collection as a bequest.
The small but very fine collection of Old Master paintings, drawings and works of art had been built up over the last decade on the encouragement and advice of Metropolitan Museum curators.
Intentionally or not, Sharp's collection was strong where the museum's was weak; among his treasures were an exceedingly rare Adam Elsheimer copper of ‘The flight into Egypt’, Annibale Carracci's ‘Boy drinking’(the primary version of the ex-Ellesmere canvas now in a private collection, Zurich), Giovanni Gerolamo Savoldo's ‘Boy with a flute’, Guido Reni and G.A.
Sirani's ‘Liberality and Modesty’, and drawings by Fra Bartolommeo and Claude.
To its disappointment, Sharp left the museum nothing, instead bequeathing his collection to a charitable foundation administered by his children (two daughters and one son).
For nearly a year, Sotheby's and Christie's engaged in warfare to secure the estate sale.
During this time, one senior auction house official noted that ‘Each house has promised the heirs so much: advances, separate hard-bound catalogue, etc, that no matter which auction house gets it, it is bound to lose money on the sale’.
For a time it seemed that Christie's had the inside track — they offered the Sharp apartment for sale in the late autumn of 1992.
But Sotheby's eventually won the day, causing an annoyed Christie's to tip off The New York Times before Sotheby's could proudly announce their coup.
Caught unprepared, Sotheby's admit that, while they have the Sharp collection, they are still not sure when it will be sold (most probably in January 1994) and more importantly, what exactly will be sold.
This leaves the Metropolitan with one last hope to secure some of the most urgently needed Sharp items before their dispersal, either by private purchase or by gift.
The latter may occur if President Clinton successfully puts his tax-plan in action, wherein it will be advantageous for individuals to donate works of art to American museums once again.
Paris and Monaco
Eastern millionaires
Syrian and Turk sell up
Over 400 rich Middle Eastern and European buyers packed into Paris's Maison de la Chimie on 7 March to compete hard for the art collection of Syrian multi-millionaire Mowaffik Midani.
The auction, by Jean-Louis Picard, raised a total of FFr 23,739,000 ($4.5 million; £3 million) well above the estimate of FFr15–20 million.
Ninety-nine percent of the 193 lots were sold in terms of value.
Midani, who also owned two French chateaux, a Cannes hilltop villa and a townhouse in Paris, had built up his collection during the last ten years of his life.
The condition of items was particularly fine.
An Empire gueridon table with gilt-bronze support and marble marquetry top sold for FFr1.4 million, over twice its high estimate.
A set of four covered Quianlong Chinese porcelain vases went for FFr 1,310,000 (est.
FFr800–1 million).
A pair of covered Sevres vases in Wedgwood Jasperware style unglazed porcelain (bought at Drouot in 1990, described as Wedgwood, for FFr200,000) raised FFr420,000.
Auctioneer Jacques Tajan of the Paris firm Ader-Tajan and former partner of Jean-Louis Picard, held his own successful Middle Eastern sale in Monaco, putting under the hammer the art collection of Turkish-born Ilhamy Hussein Pasha, a French Riviera socialite and former associate of King Farouk of Egypt.
The first day of the sale on 14 March, comprising 217 lots, raised just under FFr53 million ($9.9 million; £6.6 million; including 11% premium and fees) with only seven items bought in.
Most lots sold for around their estimates.
A set of two English silver soup tureens and four sauceboats by Andrew Fogelberg, 1770–71, raised FFr832,500 (est.
FFr500–600,000) while Francois Boucher's ‘Venus pleurant le corps d'Adonis’ estimated at FFr1 million sold for FFr880,000.
A pair of commodes attributed to Charles Cressent, meanwhile, brought FFr8,880,000 from a Belgian client against an estimate of FFr5–6 million.
Sotheby's, London
Hurray-for-the-Medici cycle of paintings to be split up after 370 years
Lloyds losses force Lord Elgin to sell; the Italians are indifferent
By a curious coincidence, this month you have two chances to buy depictions of the Grand-ducal coronet of Tuscany destroyed during the Napoleonic invasions.
One is in the album of drawings being sold as part of the Gutmann collection on 2 April (see this page), and the other is in the huge Jacopo Ligozzi painting, the ‘Marriage of Joanna of Austria to Francesco de Medici’.
The coronet is shown in loving detail as it embodies the moment when this family of merchants made it to the princely ranks.
The painting is one of a cycle of seven consigned by the Earl of Elgin for sale on 21 April to make up for losses incurred on the Lloyds insurance market.
These seven canvases from the original ten — three are now lost — are to be offered as separate lots with estimates between £50,000–70,000 and £80,000–120,000.
They were painted for Marie de Medicis, wife of Henri IV, for the Cabinet Dore of the Palais du Luxembourg in the 1620s, at time when her standing was low in France.
The cycle was intended to re-establish her position and remind France of its debt to the rich Florentine family.
It therefore depicts the successful marriages which had allied the Medici to the Imperial, French and Spanish dynasties.
The artists commissioned for the cycle were Anastasio Fontebuoni, Giovanni Bilivert, Domenico  Passignano , Jacopo Ligozzi, Francesco Bianchi, Jacopo da Empoli and Valerio Marucello.
The costs were to be met by the Medici in Florence.
The seven canvases were bought in Paris from Quintin Craufurd by the Seventh Earl of Elgin (he of Elgin marbles fame) between 1803 and 1806, following his detention in France when returning from Constantinople.
While clearly not of the same artistic merit as Rubens's earlier cycle on the life of Marie de Medicis, now in the Louvre, the present canvases are of considerable historical and symbolic significance to the history of the Medici and of Florence.
It seems, however, that the paintings are not an acquisition priority for the Pitti Palace or any other Florentine public collection.
Speaking to The Art Newspaper, Marco Chiarini, director of the Pitti, said that his collection already contained autograph versions of two of the canvases.
The paintings are large, expensive and not of outstanding merit, he commented.
With regard to their cultural associations, he feels that these lie with the Palais du Luxembourg for which they were commissioned.
Sotheby's, London
What did Italy's ransacked treasuries once contain?
On 2 April Sotheby's will be offering books, prints and drawings from the collection of Rudolf von Gutmann (1880–1966), assembled by means of the enormous family fortune derived from coal mining and iron smelting in Bohemia.
After 1945 these interests were taken over the by the communist regime in Czechoslovakia.
Rudolf Gutmann had been able to leave the running of the family business to his elder brother while he studied prints at the Albertina.
Purchases of prints included sheets from the great Lanna collection sold in 1909 and 1910.
His interests were not confined to works on paper, but also included tapestries, silver, glass, bronzes and paintings, some of which were offered at auction by Sotheby's in 1987.
In May 1938 Gutmann fled Austria for Czechoslovakia, abandoning his collections and soon after emigrating to British Columbia.
Most of his treasures were catalogued and stored by the Austrian Bundesdenkmalamt (national heritage ministry) and were partly recovered after the war.
The exception was the print collection, which was requisitioned by Hitler for his proposed museum at Linz and was removed to Dresden.
These prints are still in the process of being recovered.
The present sale comprises 121 lots, with estimates ranging from £100–200 to £150,000–200,000.
Outstanding among these are 202 coloured drawings collected by John Talman in Italy between 1709 and 1717 and added to the great collection of architectural and ornament drawings amassed by himself and his father William, the Comptroller of the King's Works.
The drawings, by Talman himself and a group of mainly Italian artists, depict objects from ecclesiastical and princely treasuries, many of which disappeared during the Napoleonic invasions.
Following John Talman's death his collection was sold and these two albums entered the collection of the ceramics industrialist Josiah Wedgwood.
Other Talman drawings from the original group are now in the British Museum and the Victoria and Albert Museum.
The estimate for the two albums is £150,000–200,000, and one might expect interest to be shown by an Italian State collection such as the Museo degli Argenti in Florence.
Here are minutely detailed drawings of ‘An ostensory of gold designed by Algardi…in ye church called ye Chiesa Nuovo belonging to ye Fathers of ye Oratory of St Philip Neri in Rome’; of ‘The crown wherwith [sic]Alexander first duke of Florence was crowned by ye hands of Pope Pius V at Rome; of ‘The Corna, or the crown worn by the Doge of Venice, kept in the Great Treasury of St Mark’, and many more numinous and valuable objects, now vanished.
European Community law
How to get your art export licence as from 1 April
From the 1 April the harmonised EC licence system for exporting works of art beyond the EC enters into operation.
The Department of National Heritage (DNH) says that it cannot delay because otherwise exporters would fall foul of the tough penalties laid down by the Custom and Excise Management Act (1979).
The EC Regulation (3911/92) requires exporters of works of art located in a member State on 1 January 1993 or thereafter, and falling within certain categories and above a certain value (The Art Newspaper No. 23, December 1992, pp. 1–33), to obtain a licence from the DNH.
For intra-Community trade, national systems apply as before.
For extra-Community trade, so far as Britain is concerned, the DNH has worked out how the two systems are to be meshed together, as the UK categories and monetary limits, although similar to those of the EC, are not identical.
EC legislation does not require the national system to be brought into line with the EC system and the DNH has given repeated assurances that British historic portraits, textiles as well as arms and armour more than fifty years old will continue to receive extra protection.
The British trade is dismayed that the Open Individual Export Licence (OIEL), which allowed Sotheby's and Christie's to issue licences for objects imported in to the UK within the last fifty years without having to go through the DNH, does not apply to objects controlled under the EC Regulation.
The same applies to bulk licences or OIEL operated by antiquarian booksellers for certain documents, manuscripts and archives.
These sections of trade argue that this change will significantly increase their administrative burden, although the DNH has given assurances that they will endeavour to deal with such applications efficiently and quickly.
Procedures
When UK and EC categories and monetary limits coincide, the procedure is straightforward.
For instance, if a sculpture is to be shipped to the US and is valued at above £39,600 (both the EC and UK limit), the exporter needs to fill in an EC licence application.
If the object, however, has been in the UK for more than fifty years, the so-called Waverley procedure is triggered also in order to establish whether it is a national treasure.
Where the UK limit is higher than the EC one, for instance in the case of a print valued at below £39,600 and above £11,900 (respectively the UK and EC limits), the exporter still needs to fill the EC licence, but this will be granted quickly, provided that lawful provenance is proven.
Conversely, if the UK limit is lower than the EC limit, the exporter of an item valued at or above the UK limit has to use the UK application form.
This would be the case with architectural and scientific drawings, which are zero-rated under the UK system, but subject to a £11,900 limit under EC legislation.
Again if the object has been in the country for more than fifty years, the Waverley procedure is triggered.
The DNH will issue a licence only if the object was in the UK on1 January 1993 and thereafter ‘lawfully and definitively located’.
If the object has been imported for sale and is accompanied by the appropriate papers from another member State, there is no problem.
If it is not, the department will make enquiries with the competent authorities in other member states, asking them to reply within five working days.
It is thought that some member States will have difficulty in adhering to such timing, although a spokesman for the Italian Ministero dei Beni Culturali said that, provided that the deadline was reasonable, there was no particular difficulty in cooperating with British authorities.
In any case, if no reply is forthcoming, the DNH will issue the licence.
Leggatt's library goes on computer
The thousands of sale catalogues formerly in the collection of the London art dealers Leggatt Brothers, recently sold at Sotheby's, have been purchased with the intention of putting them on database.
The London-based company Thesaurus intend to establish a bank of information aimed to be of use to all those researching trends in the art market.
The Leggatt catalogues date from 1836 to 1992 and concentrate mainly on paintings, drawings and prints.
The majority include buyers' names and prices realised.
Thesaurus are predicting that dealers, academics and financial analysts will be keen to use their services.
Their telephone number is: 071–487 3401.
Skinner moves and grows
Skinner auction house, the fifth largest in American, has moved into new and larger premises in Boston.
Its location is now The Heritage on the Garden, 63 Park Plaza.
Phillips yields to the inevitable
Despite an obvious desire to hold out against its bigger competitors, Phillips have been forced to give in on the issue of increased buyers' premium.
As from 3 May the premium for lots sold for over £30,000 will be raised to 15% while those making less than that figure will still be charged at 10%.
Economic gloom hits Sotheby's Peel
Spain's increasing economic difficulties were seen to lie behind the dire results at Sotheby's Peel & Asociados sale of Old Master paintings on 25 February.
The total for the eighteen-lot sale was Pta29,040,000 (£172,652; $247,149) with only four lots sold.
Of these, only one, Giuseppe Recco's ‘Still life with flowers, a plate of sweet-meats, a dog and parrot’(lot 5), sold within estimate, the rest sold below.
The result will be of particular disappointment to Sotheby's who repurchased the firm from Mr Peel last year.
Tarquin and Lucretia go through the roof
As illustrated on the front cover of last month's Art Newspaper, the recently rediscovered ‘Tarquin and Lucretia’ by Hans von Aachen, sold at Dorotheum on 10 March, far exceeded its pre-sale estimate of ASch2–3 million.
It was bought by the Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna, for ASch 6.5 million (£391,566) against strong competition from other Austrian bidders.
The picture joins von Aachen's other great work, ‘Bacchus, Ceres and Amor’, already in the Kunsthistorisches Museum.
Greuze paintings bought in after being notified by French authorities
A self-portrait and a portrait by Jean-Baptiste Greuze were bought in at a sale held at Drouot by Laurin-Guilloux-Buffetaud-Tailleur on 10 March after French museum authorities notified the auction firm the same day that the first work might not be allowed to leave the country.
The self-portrait on a walnut panel of Greuze wearing peasant costume and a hat was bought in after bidding failed to exceed its low estimate of FFr1.5 million.
The Greuze portrait of General d'Oyre, also on walnut panel, estimated at around FFr1.2 million, was bought-in at FFr1.1 million.
Auctioneer Eric Buffetaud wrote to French authorities about the two works a fortnight before the sale.
On the morning of the auction he received a letter informing him that after a ‘first examination’ the self-portrait was considered ‘to be of major interest to the national heritage’and as such would go before a commission for its fate to be decided.
‘I had to tell buyers we could not guarantee the painting could leave France.
The British auction houses must be laughing up their sleeves — clients will go to them more and more’, said Buffetaud.
Dealers & Galleries
The London Original Print Fair
Dealers' favourite fair rides out the recession well
A reasonable year for Academy show
By mid-way through the four-day London Original Print fair (the eighth) a number of dealers were reporting some encouraging results, and by the close of the event every participant had made a sale.
Overall, however, there were few signs of any sales at the higher end of the price range.
Attendance figures reached 6,700, some 10% up on last year.
Speaking to The Art Newspaper, the repeated comment from a number of dealers was the high level of understanding among the visiting public about prints and printmaking techniques, particularly in comparison to visitors to the New York Works on Paper show.
A number of dealers noted that they had gained regular new clients from the fair, who, despite these difficult times, returned year after year to purchase one print for their collection.
Much of the general goodwill of participating dealers was undoubtedly due to the excellent organisation of the London event, run from the start by print dealer Gordon Cooke and ex-Christie's expert Helen Rosslyn.
The fact that the London fair is comparatively small (twenty-nine dealers compared to the eighty or so in New York) also works in its favour: at this size it is just about possible to look at every print on every stand.
The main criticism of the event came from dealers specialising in contemporary work: Waddington Graphics, in particular, noted that the balance of the fair was much in favour of Old Master dealers and that the juxtaposition of Old Master prints with contemporary prints did not work in their favour.
Compared to other graphics fairs, the London event was seen to be somewhat old fashioned in its approach and emphasis.
Among the prints on the Waddington stand were recent works by Jo Tilson, and prints by Hamilton and Hodgkin as well as their fine impression of Picasso's ‘L'Egyptienne’.
Contradicting their view, however, Pia Hayes of Angela Flowers Graphics, noted considerable enthusiasm for the broad range of contemporary work on her stand, including monotypes and etchings by Prunella Clough, a papier colle by Trevor Sutton and a forceful screenprint and woodcut head of a man by John Kirby of 1990, a tour de force of printing.
Dealers reporting successful sales included Hilary Gerrish of Lott and Gerrish whose stand featured the usual range of British prints with an emphasis on wood-engravings.
They sold around forty prints including their impression of Edward Calvaert's exquisite wood-engraving, ‘Chamber Idyll’.
New York dealer Paul McCarron noted good sales as always, attributing this to his policy of bringing a wide range of competitively priced prints.
He was particularly pleased with the sale of a striking woodcut by the little known German artist Kurt Scheele of carnival figures from 1929, executed in an Expressionist style.
The print was bought by a leading British institution.
Most pleased with their results among the major Old Master dealers were Hill-Stone Inc. of New York who had sold a Canaletto etching and had seen considerable interest shown in their Leon Davent ‘Cupid with bandaged Eyes’(Z.5), their Schaufelein woodcut ‘Wild man and family’— a rare uncut impression with the text beneath — and their beautiful ‘Bacchus and Ariadne’ by Vico, printed on blue paper.
Artemis
Eighty Rembrandt plates on the market
For years on loan to North Carolina Museum
The largest intact group of Rembrandt plates, eighty in all, have emerged on the London art market.
The copperplates of some of the most famous of the artist's prints, including ‘Faust’, ‘Self-portrait with feather in cap’, ‘The Raising of Lazarus: arched plate’, ‘The Pancake Woman’, ‘Beggars receiving alms at the doors of an inn’, ‘Jan Cornelis Sylvius’ and ‘Joseph and Potiphar's wife’, are currently on show at Artemis and are selling extremely quickly to both private collectors (one has bought the ‘Beggars receiving alms at the doors of an inn’) and institutions: the Rijksmuseum has already acquired a group which will be divided between the Rijksprentenkabinet, the Rembrandthuis and the Amsterdam Historical Museum.
The Fitzwilliam and Ashmolean Museums have expressed strong interest, as has the Victoria and Albert Museum.
Sadly, the British Museum, which does not own a plate by the artist, has turned down the opportunity to buy one on grounds of expense.
Until recently the plates were on long-term loan to the North Carolina Museum of Art, Raleigh, having been lent in 1956 by collector and supporter of the North Carolina Museum, Robert Humber who purchased them in 1938.
Mr Humber died intestate and the plates therefore returned to the family.
David Steel, Curator of European Art at the museum expressed the opinion that Mr Humber would probably have left them to the museum had he made a will, while he himself had tried to persuade the owner to donate them to the Rembrandthuis, Amsterdam.
The last time some of these plates were printed was in 1906, by Alvin Beaumont, whose family sold them in 1938.
After the 1906 printing the plates were inked up and varnished over but not cancelled in any way: theoretically, therefore, it would be possible for a new purchaser to print from them.
The plates have a long and illustrious history, being passed from print dealer to dealer and were at various times published by Watelet, Basan and Jean.
After their last printing all the plates were mounted in extremely heavy mahogany and leather frames, grouped together by subject.
Although Artemis have removed them from these frames they will be offering them to some of the purchasers as interesting records of the plates' history in their own right.
The condition of all the plates is extremely good, although some — particularly earlier plates — are quite coarsely reworked.
Others, such as the ‘Seated male nude model’ appear to retain much of their original freshness.
Most of the plates bear one or two scratched numbers of the reverse: their meaning has not yet been identified but a research student from the Rijksmuseum has made a detailed survey of them and will be publishing his findings in the journal Print Quarterly at a future date.
Lingotto goes well
More than 32,000 people visited ‘Arte Antica 93’ at the Lingotto, Turin, from 27 February to 7 March and the event was considered a commercial and artistic success by its organisers, the Sindacato Piemontese Antiquari.
An important feature was the international vetting jury of nineteen, headed by Federico Zeri.
Spink's annual watercolours
Close on the heels of Agnew's annual watercolour exhibition (closed 2 April), and the Royal Academy's large survey show, Spink and Son are holding their annual event from 5 to 28 May at 5–7 King St, London SW1.
With a price range of £2,000 to £130,000, artists include William Callow, George Chinnery, George Cuitt Snr, William Daniell, Peter de Wint, Johann Fuseli, Edward Lear, Samuel Prout, David Roberts, Thomas Rowlandson, Paul Sandby, Turner and Cornelius Varley, among others.
Subject matter includes views of Windsor, Lyon, Dresden and the Glacier du Bois, Vallee du Chamonix.
The event is Spink's main watercolour show of the year: the autumn event concentrates on works under £2,000.
Partridge still in profit
Partridge Fine Arts Plc have released their financial results for the year to 31 October 1992.
Pre-tax profits are £1.1 million, compared to £2.2 million for the same period last year, a drop of 48.5%.
Retained profit for the financial year was £221,387, compared with £951,027.
Final dividend on shares is held at 2.25p, reflecting the upturn in business in recent months.
In the accompanying  chairman's statement, John Partridge said that the market for the year covered had been one the of the most difficult he had seen in thirty years of heading the company, with a particularly poor level of sales in the early summer months.
Lack of buying by US clients was singled out as a particular problem.
The recent devaluation of the pound was noted as a helpful step in encouraging business.
Gold of the Mycenaeans in New York
The largest group of gold jewellery and objects still in private hands will be on show in New York at Michael Ward Inc. (2 April to 5 June).
Eighteen objects including large gold rings, engraved gems, necklaces and other examples of jeweller's work similar to pieces in the National Musem in Athens will be displayed.
Mainly produced between 1400 and 1150 BC in the palace workshops of Mycenaean princes, the raw materials for the objects were imported from Egypt and the near East as well as amber from the Baltic.
Outstanding in the present group are two gold rings, one of which depicts a two-horse chariot with driver in raised relief engraved with superb naturalness.
Also of note are six  large gold rosettes which were probably fitted to a belt and twelve elements from a necklace modelled on lily or papyrus motifs.
No provenance is supplied for the majority of the pieces, which are likely to have come from Greece.
There is an accompanying catalogue by John Betts of Bristol University.
Georgia O'Keefe at Lefevre
Timed to coincide with the major retrospective of Georgia O'Keeffe at the Hayward Gallery, Alex Reid and Lefevre are holding the first commercial exhibition of the artist's work to be held in Europe (8 April to 7 May).
The show is small and does not aim to be a total survey of her work but contains some of her most celebrated subject matter: Lake George; New Mexico; Ghost Ranch; shells; flowers; and abstractions.
All works are for sale.
Eskenazi on the move: new building, new show
The distinguished firm of Oriental art dealers Eskenazi are moving from their Piccadilly location to nearby Clifford Street where they will occupy number 10, once the home of Sir James Gray, founder of the Society of Dilettanti.
The interior of the building has been completely demolished and a new gallery designed by Jon Bannenberg and the architectural firm M.R. Partnership.
The building is now divided into two areas, with the ground and first floors forming a gallery space and the upper three floors housing the offices, boardroom and library.
The move will be celebrated with an exhibition entitled ‘Early Chinese Art from Tombs and Temples’(8 June to 9 July).
Around fifty works of art will include: four Eastern Zhou bronze vessels dating from the fifth century BC, cast in two different alloys of bronze and inlaid with a design incorporating small pieces of malachite, paste and copper wire; a bronze male figure of the third to fourth century BC, supporting a candlestick; of a similar date and from a royal treasury is a bronze and silver ox inlaid with a complex pattern of curved scrolls; a gold and turquoise garment-hook in the form of three intertwined dragons; a group of Tang figures including an ochre camel in unglazed earthenware; and a  twelfth-century carved wooden figure of a seated Bodhisattva, last shown in London at Eskenazi's in 1972 and purchased back for this exhibition.
Livres d'artiste: a London fair
A new venture to promote the sale and appreciation of livres d'artiste has been launched by London book dealer Marcus Campbell.
A one-day fair showing the work of around forty artists, publishers, printers, art  schools and other interested bodies will be held at the Queen Elizabeth Hall on 29 May.
Work on show will range from highly finished de luxe editions priced at several thousand pounds to the work of young artists and students, with some pieces resembling multiple art objects rather than straightforward books.
The last time books by young artists were shown on any scale was at the Atlantis Gallery, Wapping, in 1984.
Mr Campbell was inspired to set up the fair by the publication last year of an Arts Council pamphlet which gave names and addresses of those producing books in Britain at the present and his fair is concentrating on British work.
Neatly coinciding with the fair is the publication of a new book, Facing the Page: the artist and the book, by Silvie Turner, published by Estamp which provides details of those working in this field in Britain at present and the projects currently underway as well as  summarising the work of the last decade.
Participants at the new fair will include: Bookworks; Anthony Burrill; Previous Parrot Press; Knife Edge Press; Wimbledon School of Art; Mikel Horl, Rocket Press; Bob Wakefield; Julia Farrer; and Orangebox Editions.
Danish art in Surrey
At a time when national collections such as the National Gallery, London, are seeking to enlarge their holdings of Danish art from its golden age (the early nineteenth century), a new gallery opened earlier this year in Weybridge, devoted exclusively to the art of Danish and other important Scandinavian artists of the nineteenth and twentieth century.
St George's Hill Gallery is owned by Danish collector Kurt Andersen and will be showing the work of a number of artists now represented in national collections, including H.A.
Brendekilde, Peder Monsted, O.D. Ottesen, Emma Thomsen, Carl Holsoe, Paul Fischer and Wenzel Tornoe.
Their current exhibition, somewhat optimistically titled ‘The Golden Age of Danish Art’(most of the pictures on show date from the later decades of the nineteenth century and the early years of this one) includes around thirty artists, with all of the above.
Given the currently depressed state of most Scandinavian art at auction in comparison to the great boom of the late1980s, it will be interesting to see how this new venture fares.
New York
The Art Show: it's O.K. to buy again
Attendance up 27%, with 80% of the dealers doing business
The Art Show, the prestigious New York fair for members of the Art Dealers' Association of America, gets close attention from market watchers.
Many regard the success rate at this mass offering of top quality works culled from the inventories of the biggest names in the business as a key annual indicator of market health.
Since the show's inception in high-flying 1989, attendance and sales had slipped in direct proportion to the misery on 57th Street and West Broadway but now things are apparently looking up.
Attendance for the show's 25 February to 1 March run was up 27% over last year.
Visitors were still mainly local — the days when eager buyers jetted in from Japan and Paris are long gone — but the Association estimates that 80% of the sixty-one dealers did ‘some business, including five to ten sales of over half a million dollars’.
The overall mood was decidedly ‘up’.
‘This is the best art fair I've done since 1989’ enthuses Susan Sheehan, a New York print dealer who sold twelve works, including a Matisse aquatint, for ‘just under $100,000’, and New York dealer Peter Findlay adds, ‘There is a sense that it is alright to buy art again’.
This happy trend had not been clear earlier on when the Art Dealers' Association was trying to fill its sixty-four booths.
‘We were asking for deposits between June and November of last year, and for a lot of people times were tough, says Art Show director O. Kelley Anderson.
In the end, only sixty-one signed on, including thirteen new exhibitors.
As usual, the show was heavily weighted with modern and contemporary dealers, with only five Old Master dealers participating.
One of these, Guy Sainty, made no sales this year and believes the show's imbalance is the reason why no expensive Old Master pictures were sold by anyone.
‘There is the perception that this is a twentieth-century fair’ he says.
‘Most major Old Master dealers are not members of the Art Dealers’ Association of America’.
But Agnew's, who exhibited for the first time this year and made at least one sale of ‘around $50,000’ said they were ‘pleased with the quality of the crowd and would definitely do the show next year’.
The biggest sales were of works by classic, early twentieth-century artists: Richard Gray Gallery of Chicago sold six works in the ‘mid to high six figures’, including paintings by Picasso and Paul Klee, and a rare early alabaster sculpture by Henry Moore.
New York private dealer William Beadleston had been asking $725,000 for ‘La Fleur de Barbe’, an oil on paper by Jean Dubuffet of 1959.
They declined to name the final selling price.
The Donald Morris Gallery of Detroit and New York reported a total of fifteen sales ‘of five or six figures’ by such artists as Aristide Maillol and Alexander Calder, and Peter Findlay sold at least two big ticket works by Mary Cassatt and Emil Nolde.
New York private dealer Stephen Hahn is reported to have sold the priciest picture of the show —‘Bertele Chat Sauvage’, a rare, early oil by Jean Dubuffet.
He declined to discuss the price, which some have pegged at over $1 million.
Many more dealers reported sales of under $50,000.
San Francisco dealer John Berggruen sold twelve works in this category, all by younger artists, and New York dealer Nancy Hoffman, calling this year's fair ‘the best yet’, sold ten works by contemporary artists, including three to people she'd never seen before.
Dealers also reported healthy sales of nineteenth-century American paintings, photography and prints.
Tallying up their invoices, many participants agreed with first time exhibitor Peter Findlay who, when asked if he would ‘do’ The Art Show again next year, replied, ‘I'd do it again next month’.
Paris, Salon du Dessin
Expansion to Grand Palais justified
12,000 visitors, and one third of exhibits sold
With 12,000 visitors, and one-third of the 1,000 drawings on view sold, the third annual Salon du Dessin de Collection proved a greater success than most of the twenty-five dealers attending had expected.
Held 2–8 March, the fair enjoyed twice as much space in its new premises, the Grand Palais, as it had done in its former venue, the basement of the Hotel George V. Still an all-French affair despite the eagerness of foreign galleries to get in, this year's Salon was the first to include nine contemporary dealers, including Gerald Piltzer who made a last minute decision to join in.
Most major European collectors such as Dutch supermarket billionaire Anton Dreesman came along and Helene David-Weill, who collects contemporary drawings, made several visits.
The only big American collector to be seen, however, was Patty Thaw, the assistant of Gene Victor Tang of New York.
The Salon's academic responsibility was acknowledged by the number of drawings department curators visiting stands — not only from the Louvre and Musée d'Orsay, but also from museums such as Marseilles, Lille, Rennes and Compiègne.
Only fifteen drawings costing over FFr200,000 (£25,000; $37,500) were sold during the Salon.
Those priced at between FFr10,000–50,000 however — frequently ‘impulse buys’ according to the Salon's founder and General Secretary, Patrick Perrin — sold very well.
So did decorative works and portraits of children: small, elegant eighteenth- and nineteenth-century watercolours by artists such as Huet and Granet at Galerie du Carrousel or Eugene Isabey and Felix Xiem with Brame et Lorenceau soon found buyers.
Galerie de La Scala sold a drawing of two boys by nineteenth-century artist Guiguet for FFr14,000.
Bruno de Bayser, who sold sixteen drawings priced at FFr12,000–80,000 failed however to find a taker for an exquisite and very rare ink sketch of two boys by eighteenth-century Roman artist Pier Leone Ghezzi at FFr450,000.
Contemporary dealer Yvon Lambert said he was very pleased with the Salon, after selling one gouache and two small black chalk on paper works by Jean-Charles Blaise at FFr18,000–25,000 along with eight white and red chalk drawings by Robert Combas at FFr12,000, mainly to French buyers.
Marwan Hoss with an array of contemporary works priced mainly at FFr70,000–150,000 managed to sell the most important watercolour by Jean Helion on his stand.
Contemporary dealers Liliane and Michel Durand-Dessert, however, seemed less than enthusiastic about the results of their one-man show of gouaches by Gerard Garouste and unsure whether they could return next year.
Jean-Francois Baroni, a newcomer to the Salon specialising in Italian drawings, failed to sell the rare portrait of Countess Skavronsky by Vigee le Brun which he bought at Sotheby's New York in January for $4,500.
He did, however, sell works by Andrea Boscoli, Jacopo Palma, Orazio Fidani, Jacopo Chimenti and Benedetto Gennari — mainly anonymous portraits.
Galleries with an eclectic choice of drawings did the best business of all.
Galerie de Stael with works as varied as a Theodore Rousseau ink sketch at FFr30,000, a powerful black and white chalk Saint Jerome by Jacopo Palma at FFr240,000 and three rare drawings by seventeenth-century French artist Louis Cheron, and a number of decorative nineteenth-century watercolours, sold twenty-six works in all, priced at FFr10,000–100,000.
Eighteenth-century specialists Galerie Cailleux sold two Fragonard drawings of Old Master paintings at FFr50,000 each.
Next year, Salon du Dessin dealers are planning to stay inside the Grand Palais and expand.
Contemporary Paris dealers Louise Leiris, Jean-Polak Ariel, Daniel Malingue, Thaddaeus Ropac and Albert Loeb have all shown interest in taking part.
This year's seventh annual SAGA print fair, held in the Grand Palais alongside the Salon du Dessin de Collection from 3 to 8 March and attended by 138 dealers, attracted 32,000 visitors and recorded a turnover of around FFr10 million, an increase on last year.
Chicago Art Fairs
Three organisations battle it out
The art fairs multiply as organisers await the reopening of Navy Pier
This year there are not two, but three concurrent contemporary art fairs at different sites around the city.
Shuttle buses will commute between the various sites, but confusion would seem to be the order of the day.
One longs for the unity of the Chicago International Art Exposition (CIAE), America's leading art fair during the boom years of the 1980s.
But the CIAE lost its lustre in 1991 when renovation of Navy Pier forced the fair to relocate to bland Donnelley Hall, a remote site south of the Loop.
After last year's recession-strapped event, a bloc of disgruntled dealers asked organiser John Wilson to increase marketing, freeze booth prices and give them a voice in gallery selection.
When he rejected their demands, the angry group urged CIAE executive director Thomas P. Blackman to start his own event.
Mr Blackman hesitated, and by the time he had formed a limited partnership to launch his schismatic fair, the would-be faithful had signed on with CIAE's crosstown competition, David and Lee Ann Lester's three-year-old Art Chicago International.
Overnight, the insignificant Lester fair was transformed from the ‘other show’ into the show of choice.
Mr Blackman still proceeded with Art 1993 Chicago: The New Pier Show to take place in a temporary structure near the old Navy Pier.
Booths were competitively priced at $3,200 for a 120-square-foot space, slightly more than the Wilson fair, and slightly less than the Lester fair where the minimum rental is 288 square feet.
The organisers each claim more than eighty galleries, but by mid-March none had more than fifty.
The Lesters had the edge in seniority with veterans from Chicago and New York (André Emmerich, Forum, Richard Gray, Carl Hammer, Nancy Hoffman, R.S. Johnson, Phyllis Kind, Zolla-Lieberman and Holly Solomon), along with Annely Juda and Waddington from London.
Mr Blackman listed some familiar names (Brooke Alexander, Richard Feigen, Bernard Jacobson, LA Louver, Marisa del Re, Il Ponte and Daniel Varenne) with a large contingent from Vienna.
Meanwhile, Mr Wilson's anonymous advisory committee was forced to accept many applications from little-known galleries that would have been rejected in earlier years.
All would agree with Mr Lester who says, ‘The concept of three fairs is infinitely confusing and not in the best interests of Chicago’.
He believes ‘Chicago will evolve back into one major large fair’, and Mr Blackman agrees that within a few years, ‘there will be one show of real importance, or there will be two distinctly different shows’.
The situation will sort itself out when the city reopens Navy Pier, the fair's preferred location.
For information on Art Chicago International (6–10 May), fax (407) 220–3180; Art 1993 Chicago: The New Pier Show (5–10 May), fax (312) 587–3304; Chicago International Art Exposition (6–10 May), fax (312) 787–2928.
Klinger prints and drawings up for sale
An interesting exhibition of prints and drawings by proto-Surrealist artist Max Klinger will be shown at the Shepherd Gallery, New York, from 6 to 21 April.
The fifty drawings and 250 prints comprise the collection and antiquarian book dealer Georg Hirzel (1867–1924) and have been on loan to the Leipzig Museum.
The collector's descendants have now withdrawn the works from the museum and have entered them for sale at Villa Grisebach, Berlin, where they will be offered on 4 June.
Lawrence and Wilkie at Feigen
One of the few American dealers to take an interest in British Romanticism, Richard L. Feigen has taken advantage of the excellent exhibition of Sir Thomas Lawrence's work at the Mellon Center at Yale to mount his own show, coupling Lawrence with Sir David Wilkie, an artist barely known to Americans.
Until 15 May, ‘Sir Thomas Lawrence and Sir David Wilkie: Two Romantics’ features six paintings each by the two artists and twenty-six drawings by Wilkie.
Lawrence's facility at portraiture is amply demonstrated by such works as the full-length of ‘George Nugent Grenville’(from the estate of Rudolph Nureyev) and a rare excursion into landscape is provided by his oil study of ‘A deer shoot at night’(private collection, New York).
Despite the drawings, only a glimpse of the richness of Wilkie's art is shown, a fine example being an oil sketch of ‘The Death of Sir Philip Sidney’, which looks to early Titian in colour and feeling.
Richard L. Feigen & Co, 49 East 68th Street, New York, NY 10021 Tel: 212–628 0700.
Out of the Ark in Mallett of Bond Street
Playing it thematically safe, Mallett of Bond Street's spring exhibition (until 17 April) is entitled ‘From ark to art: animals in the decorative arts 1650–1900’.
The show is intended to celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the British Antique Dealers' Association.
With a price range of £600 to £1 million plus, objects on show include their Florentine pietra dura cabinet attributed to Domenico Benotti, inlaid with fruit, birds and a view of the Piazza della Signoria, made around 1645.
The cabinet was spotted by a runner in a garage in Vienna and was bought by him for £70,000.
He sold it to Mallett who sold it on quickly to Fred Koch for £1 million.
Having bought it back from him, they are now offering it for £1.6 million.
Other items include: a Chippendale giltwood mirror of around 1760, carved with monkeys and birds: a Regency giltwood and black japanned daybed with shell-shaped ends and crocodile legs; and a German engraved flask, probably Nuremberg, around 1700, the flattened body with a dragon-fly alighting on the hump of a camel.
Around the galleries
LONDON
Eric Estorick returns
Kapoor at Lisson with stage designs
The Grosvenor Gallery, Eric Estorick's famous gallery which, in recent years, has been operating from offices in South Moulton Street, has moved to the spacious premises vacated by the Albemarle Gallery in Albemarle Street.
It marks a change of speed for a business long associated with the work of Erte; the artist's death, and the end of a lease, have prompted a reconsideration and director Ray Perman has decided that now is the right time to relaunch the gallery with a series of exhibitions.
His programme, which will concentrate upon modern and contemporary Italian art and include work from Russia and Eastern European countries, is inaugurated by forty-five gouaches, watercolours and drawings by Mario Sironi (21 April-14 May) dating from 1916.
With Sironi's inclusion in the Tate Gallery's ‘On Classic Ground’, and a general reappraisal of European art between the wars, it is a timely decision and brings out of retirement Estorick, now eighty and recently living in New York and Barbados, who built his reputation in the art market by buying Futurist and Surrealist paintings shortly after the conclusion of World War II.
Lisa Milroy has not exhibited new paintings in London since 1988 when she showed with Nicola Jacobs, although there was a museum exhibition at Glasgow's Third Eye Centre and in Southampton the following year.
More recently, she has exhibited with Mary Boone in New York and was one of several British artists included in the Carnegie International in Pittsburgh in 1991.
Her new exhibition at Waddington (7 April-1 May), the month's most exciting development in Cork Street, comprises twenty-five canvases and provides evidence of several new directions in her work.
Waddington's exhibition launches a busy season for Milroy.
This show travels to the Museum Schloss Hardenberg in Velbert in the summer, and there are two different Continental gallery exhibitions planned for the autumn, at Jennifer Flay in Paris and with Luis Campana in Cologne.
In other galleries in and near Cork Street, Browse and Darby is commemorating Jeffrey Camp's seventieth birthday with a small retrospective exhibition (to 24 April).
Mayor has mounted an exhibition titled ‘The Figure’(to 30 April) and featuring thirty-six British and international artists represented by paintings, drawings or sculpture.
Under the title of ‘Irony and Ecstacy’, Salama-Caro is showing twenty younger American artists, including Lydia Dona, Susanne McClelland, Nicholas Rule and Raymond Pettibone (21 April-29 May).
Curated by Klaus Ottmann, editor of the Journal of Contemporary Art in New York, this exhibition makes use of both floors of the gallery for the first occasion.
At Benjamin Rhodes there are new paintings by Tricia Gilman (to 24 April), abstract tapestries of paint into which she has introduced charming pictograms of her young son and his world of toys, flowers and butterflies.
Thomas Gibson's new commitment to contemporary British art continues with an exhibition of paintings by Paul Harbutt (to 16 April) who showed with Long and Ryle in 1990 and 1991.
His current paintings rework and develop the imagery of Magritte's earlier Surrealist paintings.
In Dering Street, leading Spanish artist Susan Solano is showing new sculptures at Anthony Reynolds (to 10 April), coinciding with her impressive retrospective survey organised for the Palacio de Velazquez, Madrid, and currently showing at the Whitechapel Art Gallery (to 2 May).
That survey will be seen at the Konsthall, Malmo and Le Magasin, Grenoble through the summer.
Annely Juda is exhibiting new wood sculptures by David Nash (22 April-22 May).
At Lisson, there is an exhibition of new works by Anish Kapoor (16 April-20 May).
It features new stone sculptures intended to be shown outdoors as well as in the gallery, a new red ‘Void’ from that continuing series of wall sculptures, one of which was shown in Kapoor's pavilion at the Venice Biennale in 1990, and material related to the stage designs which he made for recent performances by dancer Laurie Booth at the Queen Elizabeth Hall.
Alison Wilding's new sculpture will be shown at Karsten Schubert (22 April-22 May) and with his partner, Richard Salmon.
At Flowers East, Alison Watt is showing nude portraits, some of which are self-portraits, and smaller head studies (to 18 April) in her first gallery exhibition since her impressive debut at the Scottish Gallery in 1990.
Her work was included in a recent initiative in Los Angeles, where local galleries invited dealers from other countries to mount exhibitions of their artists, and Matthew Flowers took a selection of paintings to Salander O'Reilly.
Purdy Hicks is showing work by gallery artists (to 13 May) including pictures by Gillian Ayres who will be holding an exhibition in May.
The following exhibitions were listed in last month's column and deserve recognition before they close: the large exhibition of sculpture, paintings and miniatures by Francesco Clemente at Anthony d'Offay (to 30 April), Catherine Lee's beautifully patinated wall reliefs at Annely Juda
(to 17 April), the retrospective of paintings and works on paper by Victor Willing at Karsten Schubert and Richard Salmon (to 17 April), the, new sculptures by John Davies at Marlborough (to 30 April) and William MacIlraith's paintings at Connaught Brown (to 20 April).
New York
What's up in SoHo
New galleries boomlet
In recent months a parcel of galleries have sprouted on the streets between Spring and Grand in SoHo — not an area previously gallery-intense.
Brooke Alexander, of course, and Josh Baer, Ronald Feldman, Pat Hearn and Feature have been there for some time.
But Jack Tilton, who closed uptown at the end of last season, will open there next month and Kasmin, Fawbush, Daniel Newberg and Thomas Nordanstad have recently re-located there.
Wooster Gardens, a new gallery, has taken a floor in the building that houses Tom Cugliani and American Fine Arts and other new ventures — Penine-Hart, Sandra Gering and David Zwirner — have all recently opened their doors in SoHo.
Sandra Gering is showing works by Dove Bradshaw, an artist close to the late John Cage and much influenced by his ideas (3 April-1 May).
Fischli & Weiss, the German team, are showing pieces related to two recent projects at Wooster Gardens.
One is called ‘Wurst’ and the other ‘Equilibrium’, a reference to their eponymous film in which the notion of cause-and-effect is tinkered with in innumerable and ingenious ways (10 April-15 May).
Until the end of the month David Zwirner, son of the Cologne gallery magnate Rudolph Zwirner, shows a video installation called ‘hors-champs’ by Stan Douglas, a young Vancouver artist whose work was seen at the most recent ‘Documenta’.
Just around the corner at Fawbush a senior member of the Canadian art scene, Betty Goodwin, holds forth with paintings, sculpture and drawings.
A few seasons back she had a small show at the now defunct 49th Parallel gallery but this is the first time New Yorkers will get to see works by this figurative painter in any profusion.
J. deFeo, the influential West Coast painter who died six years ago, was introduced to New Yorkers in one of Dorothy Miller's legendary ‘Americans’ shows at the Museum of Modern Art over thirty years ago.
Since then she has been but rarely seen here and so it is a special treat to have works on paper by her (from the 1950s) at Nicole Klagsbrun (until 17 April).
Also in the neighbourhood are recent works on paper by the second generation Abstract Expressionist Glenn Goldberg — at Penine-Hart, all this month.
But the Oscar for the Most Unusual Drawing Show of the Month goes — may I have the envelope please?— to Pace, uptown, for ‘Directors’ Drawings’, starring works on paper (and on story-boards) by the likes of Alfred Hitchcock, Martin Scorsese, Satajit Ray, Federico Fellini, Sergei Eisenstein, John Houston, Orson Welles, David Lynch and Terry Gilliam (among others).
There are also a few video loops showing the actual scenes to which the various drawings refer.
Pierre Alechinsky, at Emmerich until 24 April, may want to dash across 57th Street to see the ‘Directors’ Drawings’show at Pace.
His work has often incorporated a story-board-like element, smaller ‘pictures’ marching in squared-off boxes around the borders of his canvases or forming a predella-like frieze along the bottom.
His present show includes paintings, screens and ceramic works and is called ‘Trees and Water and Other Works’.
Jules Olitski's brush-stroke abstractions  iridesce at Salander O'Reilly (6 April-6 May) and Robert Miller has mounted a show of Joan Mitchell's paintings done during 1992, the last year of her life (until 1 May).
Dysfunction is a term currently enjoying great vogue, perhaps because it so aptly describes so much of what we laughingly refer to as modern living.
Or how about the scenes of ambiguously happy home life in Philip-Lorca di Corcia's photographs (at Wooster Gardens from 10 April to 15 May)?
And what of Mark Greenwold's small-format, hyper-real paintings of family violence (at Phyllis Kind, 4–25 April)?
And how about the ambiguous comments on contemporary tabloid domesticity — Woody Allen, among others — featured in Hans-Jorge Mayer's paintings (at Thomas Nordanstad from 2 April to 3 May)?
Perhaps the grand master of dysfunction was the late Francis Bacon, who made a considerable fortune out of it.
Paintings from the last decade of his life have been gathered at Marlborough until 27 April.
They include ‘Study for Self-Portrait’ from 1981 and ‘Study for the Human Body’from 1991.
At first glance Gwen John and her brother Augustus were opposites: he was flamboyant, domineering, possessed of a fluent natural talent and hugely prolific; she was retiring, reclusive and worked hard to produce a limited number of small works.
Yet they had in common healthy self-esteem and the need to form passionate personal relationships, some of which had a way of overlapping.
Though close throughout their lives, Gwen felt the need to personally distance herself from her brother by moving, early on, to Paris.
She seems to have cared little for her brother's work; he, on the other hand, thought she was great.
‘Fifty years after my death I will be known as Gwen John's brother’, he once wrote.
It is now thirty-two years since that event and the prophecy is well on its way to becoming true.
This month (2–28 April) Davis & Langdale present a rare cache of paintings, drawings and watercolours from Gwen John's estate.
Among them are a portrait of the beauteous Dorelia with whom she took a passionate walking trip across France and who later lived in a ménage à trois with her brother and his wife.
At heart Holly Soloman has always been a SoHo-ite.
She began there in the Seventies on Greene Street, where she opened a multi-discipline art and performance space.
Later she moved to a proper — and vast — gallery on West Broadway.
For the cash-happy Eighties she absconded to 57th Street.
But roots will out and this month she makes a triumphal re-entry to SoHo in a former high-ceilinged, window-fronted exercise studio directly across from the Angelika Film Center on Houston Street.
Her opening show (3 April-8 May) is of her long-time artist Nam June Paik.
The show will be of new work and will include a large piece which will later travel to the Venice Biennale, where Paik is representing Germany (?…don't ask).
PARIS
Immendorf all over town
John Copians at Anne de Villepoix
Jorg Immendorf, pupil of Beuys and master of the new German Expressionism, is receiving  unprecedented attention in Paris this season.
In addition to the exhibition of recent paintings at Daniel Templon until 24 April, the contemporary galleries of the Centre Pompidou are showing an installation and a huge painting, while the monographic gallery Piece Unique is showing one of his most important late works for the duration of the month.
Anne-Marie Jugnet is at Froment & Putman until 24 April while at Laage-Salomon Philippe Cognee's ‘Four Seasons’ continue until mid-May.
At Darthea Speyer Lionel Guibout's paintings are on show until 30 April.
John Copians, co-founder of the journal Artforum and ex-director of the museums of Pasadena and Akron, made his debut in the Seventies with Hard Edge abstractions, and in tandem developed a profound interest in the history and aesthetics of photography which has taken him, over the course of the past ten years, to the production of self-portraits executed as universal images.
His architectonic ‘torsos’ are at Anne de Villepoix until 17 April.
At the Jeu de Paume until the 11th is the last ten year's work of Martin Barre, who is also showing a coherent group of gouaches from 1957 to 1960 at Barbier-Beltz until 17 April.
Finishing on the same date also at Barbier Beltz is the sculpture of Peter Briggs in a show called ‘Lose the object’.
The recent works of Willem Cole are at Gilles Peyroulet until 24 April; Sarah Charlesworth and Laurie Simmons are showing at Gallery Rizzo while Claire Burrus has Marthe Wery, and the Dado show on Cardinal de Retz continues at Galerie Beaubourg.
Pierre and Gilles' patinated and baroque world continues with their photographs at Samia Saouma until the 30th.
A group of artists whose work differs widely in style but is united in the interest in landscape the portrait are at Durand-Dessert until 28 April.
The artists are Ger van Elk, Yan Pei-Ming and Claudio Parmiggiani.
At Gallery Lelong for the whole month the recent paintings of Konrad Klapheck give life and individuality to to objects of everyday use.
‘The Archipelago of the Pacotilles’ is a series of paintings under glass by Philippe Favier, graduated in different dominant colours and bringing together everyday visual stimuli and images from dream and memory.
On at Yvon Lambert from 8 April to 9 May.
The practice of holding exhibitions in private apartments in Paris is quite common; that of using empty blocks destined for renovation or sale is less so.
The group ‘Brut de culture’ is doing just that, under the organisation of Patrice Bazille.
The third nomadic show of this type at 24, rue Petrelle in the 9th Arondissement until mid-month, uses the theme of abstraction and includes twenty photographs of Corinne Filippi and around fifty paintings by Catherine Marchadour, Annick David and Sylvie Lenormand-Bacot.
The Californian Richard Overstreet paints  iridescent landscapes which invert our normal perceptions and codes of geographical representation, juxtaposing sunsets and full moons with the sophisticated lighting of a cinema set.
Overstreet is at Montenay until the end of the month.
‘Regard d'un amateur’ brings together the photographs of a group of artists including Monica Baumgartel, Connie Beckley, Gwen Akinand Alan Ludwig, Luciano Castelli, Mereth Oppenheim, Pierre Molinier, Ewe Sonneman and Mac Adams, at Farideh Cadot for the whole month.
Until mid-Month Galerie 15 present a group of unpublished sculpture by Yvan Messac while works recently shown at the Sandro Chia retrospective at the Berlin Nationalgalerie can be seen at Thaddeus Ropac until 10 April.
On the same date the exhibition of Ray Smith's sculpture also closes at that space.
Finally Zabriskie shows the work of Pascal Kern which explores and combines the traditions of photography, sculpture and printing.
BERLIN
Aufschwung Ost
Early Sigmar Polke at Brunnet
In April Franck + Schulte is showing ‘Black Series’ and ‘Basics on Composition’by the Austrian Helmut Federle.
In response to the large-scale survey of American art of the twentieth century at the Martin-Gropius-Bau (8 May-25 July) the gallery plans a show in May with one of their American artists.
Iris von der Tann also offers a combination of older and thoroughly contemporary American art.
First comes Andrew Topolski, who condenses his statements about the world into works which are technical in appearance, and crafted with extreme subtlety.
Following this are a retrospective of Eva Hesse and a view of Carol Seborovski's work.
Barbara Weiss is showing murals and paper works by Knut Bayer until 24 April, and Maria Eichhorn from 4 May to 26 June.
At Bruno Brunnet, Oliver Schwarz explores the theme of new aesthetics and forms of communication and their impact on a traditional understanding of art, through the example of the museum (to 30 April).
Early works by Sigmar Polke are shown from 8 May under the provocative title (borrowed from contemporary  politician jargon)‘Gemeinschaftswerk Aufschwung Ost’(Community Work East Revival).
In April Brusberg presents a mixed show of gallery artists' work.
With the exhibition of Johannes Heisig, Tammen & Busch present a prominent young representative of the Leipzig School of painters, which became famous for the dissolution of figuration into shimmering points of colour.
With a solo exhibition of the works of Klaus Suss from Chemnitz (until 5 May), Gunar Barthel continues its introduction to the artists who set up the first collective gallery of the GDR (called ‘Clara Mosch’ using the initial letters of the names of its founder members).
Suss collaborated at Clara Mosch from 1977 to 1982 and for a long time worked with coloured linocuts.
Literature is often the thematic point of departure for his cycles of graphic and portfolio works (‘Holderlin’, ‘Cassandra’).
Enthusiasts for installations will find Reiner Gorß's scurrilous interpretation of his journey to the USA and Brazil at Eigen & Art in April.
Gorß was the first in the DDR to follow the footsteps of Beuys along the path from painting to object art and the securing of evidence.
In May at his gallery Eigen & Art, Judy Lybke is showing the works of Kaeseberg from Leipzig (who has become famous as a painter and a draughtsman): roughly carved wood sculptures reflect on our use of toys and the apparatus of war.
In the close vicinity.
After noteworthy exhibitions of modern classics (Paula Modersohn-Becker,
Jean Fautrier and Edouard Vuillard), Wolfgang Werner is showing paintings of the Neue Sachlichkeit movement at his Berlin gallery.
The exhibition at Pels-Leusden, over the road, until 25 May presents a medium rather than a theme.
It conveys a good impression of the stylistic diversity of the woodcut as a medium, from Expressionism to today.