

DOUG SCOTT Himalayan climber DEATH OF AN ENGLISH WALKER A tragedy that could have been prevented?
WORLD CUP Some of the world's best climbers compete in Birmingham STAY WARM THIS WINTER Over £1,000 worth of thermals to be won
COMPASS
COMPILED BY PETER BEAUMONT, ED DOUGLAS & DAVID ROSE
NEW THREAT TO CLIMBING AT CHEDDAR
Climbing in the Cheddar Gorge, home of such vertiginous spectaculars as Coronation Street and Spectre Direct, is under renewed threat following two recent accidents involving climbers, which has led the owners — Longleat Estate — to reconsider whether climbing is compatible with other interests in the gorge.
In response, the British Mountaineering Council is proposing a Pen Trwyn style scheme of abseil points and lower-offs, and is to apply to the Sports Council for a grant to help pay for a geological survey of the rock.
In the first accident last October, climber Wayne Gladwyn dislodged a telly sized chunk from a ledge 40 feet above the Horseshoe Bend, unfortunately arriving on the deck at the same time as the rock, which narrowly missed giving him a potentially fatal bashing on the head.
The second incident took place in November when two climbers from Liverpool Polytechnic, also climbing above the Horseshoe Bend area, dislodged another huge block which hit the road within 18 inches of one of the estate's senior guides.
The problem, notwithstanding the alarming nature of such rockfalls (of which this correspondent has had an uncomfortably close experience), is how best to stabilise the areas open to climbers.
Under the present access agreements climbing is banned in the gorge from April until October, with climbers required to have third party insurance.
In addition to these restrictions, the gorge is also closed at present until February 14 while stabilisation work is undertaken.
However, in a letter to the BMC, Longleat Estate have made it clear that any cleaning work necessary to stabilise climbs will be done on the advice of its own specialists, dependent on the interests of tourists and the estate's employees and not undertaken from a climbing perspective.
The letter concludes: ‘In this light, you will understand that the Longleat Estate is increasingly coming to the view that the wishes and interests of the climbing community are inimitable to the interests, duties and priorities of the estate.’
The bone of contention appears to be the cost involved in stabilising the rock.
According to the estate this is running at around £30,000 per annum and in addition to this, a survey that would take into account climbing as well as safety interests would cost a further £10,500.
Falling rocks continue to cause problems in the gorge
It is this extra sum which the estate is using as a stick against the BMC, in the hope that it will stump up the cash as the estate cannot afford to invest this much in climbing.
The BMC's response has been to offer to install abseil points and lower-off stations on the Horseshoe Bend area and to apply for assistance from the Sports Council for stabilising work
MASSIVE WALL FOR SHEFFIELD by Chris Craggs
Sheffield has always lagged behind other areas in the provision of a good climbing wall.
After a long battle one was opened in the Polytechnic gymnasium, with the BMC footing the not inconsiderable bill.
In mid-December last year the Foundry opened in an old mill building and the balance has been redressed in favour of the city with the highest density of climbers in the country.
This place is so good that some Peak activists reckon they will take their holidays indoors next year!
The complex includes a cafe and a climbing shop, but it's the walls that are something special.
The Bendcrete bouldering wall —‘The Wave’— is very much in the mould of the highly acclaimed Berghaus Wall in Newcastle, but a bit steeper!
Then there is a vertical top-roping wall with colour coded routes and top-ropes permanently in position.
There's soon to be a beginners' wall as well, but the most impressive construction is an immense leading wall built by DR Climbing Walls.
On first impression it looks like the builders have managed to enclose Malham Cove, such is the scale of this set up.
It is up to 50 feet high, overhanging throughout and wide enough to allow 15 or more teams to operate at one time.
Routes vary in grade from E1-sh, to E-impossible and the numerous bolt-on holds allow for regular route changing.
All the leading routes feature captive quick draws, so all you need to bring is your own rope.
The Foundry was a joint project by gear manufacturers Wild Country, Jerry Moffatt and the shop Outside, and the whole set up cost a cool £200,000.
If the project's a success, similar constructions may spring up elsewhere in the country.
The complex is open every day from 9.00am to 9.00pm and admission is £2 during the day and £3 in the evening for as long as your arms can take it.
The place may seem fairly pricey, but when you see what you get for your money, you won't be disappointed.
VENABLES AND RENSHAW CLIMB NEW ROUTE ON KUSUM KANGRU
A strong British team led by Everest summiteer Stephen Venables has climbed an impressive new route in alpine style on the south face of Kusum Kanguru in the Sola Khumbu region of Nepal.
Venables, 37, with Brian Davison, aged 30, and veteran British mountaineer Dick Renshaw, set out to attempt the 6,368 peak.
The team was on the mountain — although on the opposite side — at the same time as Ulric and Cathy Jessop, the latter of whom died from pulmonary oedema during a retreat, unbeknown to the south face team.
The approach route to the mountain was complicated by dense bamboo forest on the final climb up the Kusum Khola, hacking through thickets to cover the last four miles to the base camp at 4,000 metres.
With a choice of either a direct line up the centre of the face or a buttress to the right that led to the unclimbed south ridge of the mountain, the team opted for the buttress approach, avoiding serious stonefall on the direct line.
The first attempt on the buttress was delayed for two days because of bad weather, and it took a total of five days to climb the feature, which included a band of loose rock at the base, and reconnoitre the south ridge to the start of a large rock pillar at about 5,900 metres.
The first attempt was abandoned in perfect weather when Davison fell ill and found it difficult to see.
It was decided the risk of going on was too great and the team retreated.
Following two days' rest Venables and Renshaw set off for a final attempt taking a more direct line, avoiding sections of 70 degree snow and ice by passages of rock and mixed climbing.
The pillar itself gave several excellent pitches on sound granite, but on the second night on the pillar the wind was so strong that Venables and Renshaw were forced to pitch their tent inside a chimney, squeezed onto a jammed block.
Preparing the campsite also involved some ingenious engineering, with a large pivoted chockstone winched up on a Friend belay to create enough headroom.
Day four brought three final pitches of mixed climbing up to a summit ridge of spectacular ice towers leading to the summit, which was reached on November 20.
NEW BMC INSURANCE
The British Mountaineering Council is expanding its customised insurance cover for climbers and mountaineers with three new policies to choose from.
With some landowners now looking towards insisting on third party cover for climbers, insurance is increasingly looking indispensable.
The three policies separate cover for climbers into new user friendly packages, with options of year long cover for domestic use and two policies for climbing abroad.
They will include climbing in the traditional foreign flesh pots and a new policy covering expeditions locations not included under the old general policy.
The expedition policy leaflet shows National Officer Roger Payne dramatically suspended between two peaks.
As the man from the BMC says: ‘You're not properly equipped without it.’
MT COOK LOSES PART OF EAST FACE
An enormous avalanche has completely altered the East Face of Mount Cook, the highest mountain in New Zealand.
The incident occurred in mid-December and knocked several yards off the summit, which formerly stood at 12,349ft.
Thousands of tonnes of rock and ice poured off the mountain travelling almost four miles, cutting a gash two miles wide and landing thousands of feet below on the Tasman Glacier, a popular tourist spot.
The avalanche was so enormous that it carried on travelling uphill on the other side of the valley.
Ray Bellringer, a national park spokesman, said it was the biggest event of its kind in the recorded history of the mountain.
‘It's awesome,’ he said, ‘an event of the century.
It's completely altered the topography.’
He also added that the mountain was no longer safe to climb.
All this is bad news for students of mountain history and first  ascensionists .
The East Ridge, first climbed in 1938 by Don Bryant and Lud Mahan, is thought to be affected, and the East Face route description is no longer entirely valid either — what with if falling off — which is a disappointment for first ascensionists Peter Farrell, Don Cowie, Vic Walsh and Lyn Crawford who climbed it in 1961.
Fortunately nobody was on the face at the time of the avalanche and all climbers and walkers in the area have been accounted for.
Mount Cook, or Aoraki (Cloud-Piercer) as it is called by the Maoris, has suffered from massively shrinking glaciers in recent years, which is never good for a mountain's constitution, and heavy snowfalls with a recent warm spell haven't helped.
Mount Tasman, at 11,482ft the second highest mountain, must now be in line for a reversal of the pecking order.
Mt Cook — dangerously unstable.
INDEPENDENT ECOLOGIST FOR LAND'S END
An independent ecologist is to be appointed at Land's End to discover whether climbers are destroying fragile plants and soils.
The planned research follows a suggestion from the British Mountaineering Council at a meeting in December between access and conservation officer Bill Wright, Land's End management and local activist Rowland Edwards.
Land's End announced last autumn that bolted abseil points and fixed gear would be placed in the interests of conservation and safety.
‘If there's a protected species of plant at the top of relatively new routes which happen to be of good quality, then we've got a really complex problem to manage,’ Bill Wright commented, ‘but if it's just cotton grass, then the damage done by agricultural pesticides is probably much greater.’
Both sides described the meeting in early December as ‘constructive’ and Cairns Boston, managing director of Land's End, added he was confident that ‘climbers who come to Land's End can continue to enjoy their visits along with the enhancement of the environment rather than to its detriment, and as safely as possible.’
Funding for the ecological study will come from the BMC and Land's End and assistance is being sought from the Penwith Peninsula Project, a body dedicated to conserving the area's unique landscape.
Rowland Edwards vehemently denied that he was interested in a safe sports-climbing venue and expressed surprise that the BMC had opposed his plan to protect the environment.
Edwards has heavily cleaned, prepared and climbed a number of new routes in the area in the last ten years.
BRITISH MOUNTAIN GUIDES PRESSED TO SUPPORT ADVENTURE
Rob Collister, president of Britain's mountain guides, has made a plea for guides to set the example to the climbing community of the virtues of adventure climbing over convenience climbing.
Speaking at the annual general meeting of the British Association of Mountain Guides at the Ulswater Hotel, Collister lamented the way guides in the alps had over equipped routes for their own convenience at the expense of the clients share in the adventure.
Collister later commented: ‘What I was trying to get at was the way that in the alps in particular, the experience of adventure had been swapped for glamour.
‘It is the question of guides overbolting routes for their own convenience, and the extensive use of radios.
I also made the point of linking the ideas of wilderness and beauty, which you lose if the place is covered in telephones and railways.
‘Guides should be setting the example and I think we should think about the way we put adventure first.’
SAVED BY THE PRUNE
A British walker survived for seven days without food, save for a few prunes she managed to scavenge out of  a dustbin, while lost in New Zealand's rugged Taparua mountain range.
Police said 26-year-old Amanda Glazier from Wales, who is an experienced skier and keen walker, sprained both ankles after falling down a bank while hiking in the mountains north of Wellington.
Amanda was rescued after meeting up with a group of hikers who escorted her out of the bush.
Police spokesman Graeme Jarvis commented she was very, very lucky and added that woollen clothing and wet-weather gear had probably saved her life.
WORLD CUP
Graeme Alderson, who acted as a route-setter for the event, reports on the action from the second international indoor climbing competition on the world circuit to be staged in Britain
Isabelle Patissier came to Birmingham with a narrow lead in the UIAA World Cup to retain her world crown.
She lived up to her reputation and cruised to victory in the woman's event.
The Gore-Tex Climbing World Finals as this second British international competition was erroneously called, since it was merely the final round of a six competition series, was a great success, both from the organisational point of view and the paying spectator's viewpoint.
The event was held at the new National Indoor Arena in central Birmingham — a magnificent auditorium that's set to become one of Britain's premier indoor venues.
The arena management were extremely co-operative with DMM International, the event organisers, providing nearly half the £150,000 needed to stage the competition.
With major backing from W.L. Gore & Associates, and minor sponsorship from other outdoor firms, the world's largest ever rock climbing competition was even a moderate financial success.
The climbing was staged on a 15 metre high Enterprise wall, which overhung by up to four metres.
It wasn't the most exciting design of wall ever seen, but with only 24 hours to be built, it served its purpose.
The competitions started with the British Men's Open — 70 hopefuls looking for just 20 places in the next round.
Most floundered low down, but the heat was completed without too many upsets.
The only person to flash the sustained F7c was Lancashire's Ian Vicers — not bad for a sprog of only 17.
Rumour has it he smiled when topped out.
The successful 20 progressed to the International Open, where they competed with foreign challengers for places in the Grand Prix.
The route was again F7c and again Ian Vickers flashed it, this time accompanied by Scotland's Stuart Cameron and a strong French contingent.
Chris Hamper was unlucky, coming 11th by virtue of not slapping the wall above his highest hold.
No Women's Open was held as it attracted so few entrants, so all gained automatic entry to the Grand Prix.
This started on the second day with the women's quarter and semi finals and the men's semi final.
The women kicked off on fairly straightforward F7a, but the last move was the crux.
Seventeen competitors flashed the route but unfortunately no Brits got through.
Felicity Butler and Glenda Huxter failed on the last move.
The men were on-stage next — the cream of the world's competition climbers.
although many famous names were missing from the register: notably Moffatt, Nadin, Legrand (already sure of retaining his crown and recovering from a knee operation), Rabatou, Godoffe, Cortijo and Edlinger.
British qualifiers Lovatt, Oxley, Vickers and Cameron joined British team members Cuthbertson, Moon, Delafield, Sutcliffe, Ryan and Gomersall, as well as wild card Malcolm Smith.
The quarter final was hard F7c± with a vicious move at 10 metres.
This saw off 27 of the 64 challengers, including most of the Brits.
Moon walked this section as if it were HVS, only to fail just below the top.
Again there were no major surprises in this round, with all the favourites pulling through.
Stefan Glowacz looked very smooth as he cruised his way to the only flash of the round.
That was the end of the action for the day, except for the route setters.
Mark Pretty, Chris Plant, Sean Myles, yours truly and the chief route setter Chris Gore had to work until 4.30 am next morning to finish off the routes for the day's play.
You should try working on E6 at 3.00am — its bizarre!
The day began with the men's semi final, 28 qualifiers competing for eight places in the final.
All the big names did well, with Glowacz again completing the only flash of the route.
He was certainly odds-on favourite for the final.
Young Malcolm Smith was provisionally given a place in the final but had to settle for 10th place after some deliberation.
Malcolm became only the third Brit to gain any World Cup points this year and is definitely a name to watch for the future.
Before the finals the veterans came out to entertain the crowd.
Jerry Peel was pre-event favourite in this over-40s competition, but had to settle for third place behind Peter Black and Dave Barton after failing to read the last move.
The women's final was next on the agenda, taking in the biggest roof on the wall.
This was to provide many exciting moments as the women cut loose on the lip of the overhang on huge jugs, with plenty of ‘oohs and aahs’ from the crowd as the stronger challengers clipped and shook out footless.
Three women flashed the route: Isabelle Patissier, Susi Good and Robyn Erbesfield, all three of whom had also topped out on the previous two routes.
The stage was set for an exciting finale on a modified version of the men's final.
It was Isabelle who triumphed, cruising past the move low down where the other two failed.
Ben Moon and on-form Stefan Glowacz were favourites for the men's final.
But all did not go to plan.
Glowacz fell low down and Moon floundered only a little higher.
The winner on the day was Francois Lombard — a result which took him to third place overall in the championships.
One competitor who made a lot of friends was Yuji Hirayama, who had the biggest grin on display and dragged an outrageous rest in the semi final.
He also came second on the day, but I'm sure a lot of people would like to have seen him win.
Overall the event was a major success and has already been provisionally booked for the  same venue year.
Special thanks must go to the Ackers Trust for much needed help, and the belaying team from Sheffield.
Above left: Women's winner Isabelle Patissier climbs with the confident ease that brought her victory.
Above right: British hopeful Ben Moon, who had to settle for fifth place.
Right: Japanese challenger Yuji Hirayama won support from the crowd.
CRAMPON TECHNIQUE
WINTER SKILLS TECHNICAL
The efficient and correct use of crampons can make all the difference between a mediocre climber and a good one.
Allen Fyffe provides some useful guidance
When climbing on snow and ice, crampons are probably the single most important piece of gear.
As with any type of climbing it's the footwork that's all important, and it matters little what you have in your hands if your feet aren't used properly.
Safe, efficient movement over snow and ice is impossible without suitable, well fitting and properly maintained crampons and, like any piece of technical equipment, an understanding of variations in design and methods of use are important to get the best from them.
Crampons for climbing normally have ten or more downward facing points and two forward facing ones.
Forget about instep crampons or ones without forward facing points, which are only of interest to walkers.
COLOUR PHOTOS Left: Back and footing up Deep Cut Chimney on Hell's Lum Crag in the Cairngorms.
Right: Front-pointing up steep, lean ice.
Fig 1: Three types of crampon points —
a
curved lobster claw
b
general purpose
c
straight lobster claw.
Fig 2: A strapped crampon attachment showing how the straps should go.
Fig 3: Clip on crampons in action on a plastic boot.
Note the horizontal position of the foot for maximum purchase.
There are several different styles of front points, each suitable for different sorts of climbing and terrain.
However, no crampon will perform properly  unless correctly fitted to a suitable pair of boots.
This means a rigid leather boot with a full shank or, more commonly, a plastic boot with a rigid sole.
If the boot sole is flexible then a crampon is unlikely to give a secure enough fit and will be difficult to use properly for serious mountaineering.
CRAMPON STYLES
Articulated Crampons
Crampons come in two main styles: rigid and articulated.
Articulated crampons have a separate front and heel piece linked in some way, and are better for less than totally rigid leather boots and boots with some curve on the front sole.
The hinge connecting the front and rear pieces sits under the instep and lessens the chance of failure due to the metal flexing.
This ability to bend means the crampons will fit these types of boot more securely.
Rigid Crampons
Rigid crampons are best fitted to a nearly flat, rigid sole such as on a plastic boot, and provide a secure, stable platform suitable for pure ice climbing.
Front Points
The shape and configuration of the front points will determine what they are most suitable for.
The traditional design has a vertical orientation for the two downward points behind the front points, with the front points themselves either angled or curved.
This gives a good general purpose crampon suitable for all types of snow  and ice climbing.
The downward points do not interfere with the front points on rock holds, making this type of crampon suitable for mixed climbing, particularly if the points are somewhat shorter than normal to cut down on leverage (Fig 1).
The other configurations of front points are generally found on crampons better suited to pure snow and ice routes.
These may also have longer points.
In the most common style, the first points behind the front points are angled forward in a ‘lobster claw’ shape.
This allows both sets of points to be placed in the ice to give more support (Fig 1).
Front points usually show a horizontal cross-section when viewed from the front, but some technical crampons have front points with a vertical cross-section.
This gives easier penetration with less shattering of the ice.
However, when used in poorer conditions, particularly thawing ice, some climbers feel they tend to cut down through the ice and give poor support.
There are even crampons with a single front point, specifically designed for use on pure ice such as frozen waterfalls, but these are too specialised for general use in this country.
ATTACHING THE CRAMPON
Crampons can be attached to the boot with straps or clip-on (step-in) bindings.
Straps are the traditional method and give a very secure fit to the boot if used correctly (Fig 2); but this is time consuming and cold on the fingers.
However, for leather boots without a pronounced welt at the heel or toe, this is usually the best arrangement.
The best straps are neoprene coated nylon with a simple buckle.
Clip-on crampons are quick and simple to fit if the crampon has been adjusted correctly.
Their main advantage comes when crampons must be put on and taken off several times a day — more of an alpine situation than a Scottish winter one.
They are definitely more suited to plastic boots with a rigid sole and pronounced welts at the toe and heel for the bails (Fig 3), but there are still some drawbacks, and they can come off.
This is usually because they have not been adjusted correctly, something has loosened in use or they have not been put on correctly in the first place.
This can happen if the toe bail isn't located properly in the groove at the welt — something which can easily happen when there is snow blowing about and the boot itself is covered in snow.
An ankle strap will prevent the heel lever being released or the crampon being lost should it become disconnected from the boot.
GENERAL PRECAUTIONS
When wearing crampons it's important to remember that it's very easy to spike yourself and trip up.
All loose clothing such as overtrousers should be tucked into gaiters and you should learn to walk with your feet a bit further apart than normal.
In certain conditions, usually in damp snow, crampons may collect snow and ‘ball-up’ underneath, making them heavy, tiring to use and possibly ineffective.
The easiest cure is to knock the snow off with a regular tap with the axe shaft.
FIGURE 4: French technique used on ice.
The weight is kept over the feet with the crampons flat.
The axe in the uphill hand is used as a balance aid.
FIGURE 5: Changing direction using the French technique, placing the feet in a ‘V’ shape, turned uphill.
CRAMPON TECHNIQUE
French Technique
Also known as flat foot technique , this uses all the downward points on the crampon and is most suitable for easier angled snow and ice.
On gentle slopes it's easy to place the foot with the sole flat; your bodyweight will then secure the points.
As the slope steepens or becomes icier, it is necessary to flex the ankles and knees more, and turning the toes downwards from the direction of travel will help.
The steeper the slope the more the toes must face downhill, and the steepest slopes climbed using this technique would be ascended backwards.
It may be necessary to stamp the boot more firmly when using French technique on harder slopes, but it is important that the edge of the boot isn't kicked in as it would be when not wearing crampons, as this only uses half the available points.
Using the edges in this manner on ice might cause the points to skate off or shear out (Fig 4).
When using French technique the axe is held normally  in the uphill hand for support and extra security, but it is important not to lean on it and into the hill; your weight must be kept over the crampons.
When changing direction, one method is to put your feet into a V position facing uphill, using the axe as a safeguard while doing this (Fig 5).
An alternative is to go onto front points for the turn.
Although French technique does seem awkward to begin with, it is the most efficient way of moving on easier angled terrain and is also the basis of resting on steeper ground.
It does require some practise however, and can be painful on the ankles, particularly when wearing stiff plastic boots.
Front Pointing
The method used for climbing steep ice which employs the two forward facing points and perhaps the first two of the downward ones.
The points are placed in the ice with a firm swing of the foot.
If the kick is too hard the crampons tend to rebound from the ice, and a hard kick can be painful on the toes.
The points must be placed at right angles to the ice for maximum support and the feet kept about hip width apart for stability, and to spread the load.
FIGURE 6: Keeping the feet in a horizontal position is important when moving from steep to easier angled ground, until a step onto the easier angle can be made.
FIGURE 7: The American technique, where the lower foot has all crampon points in contact with the slope, while the upper one front points.
The most important thing is the angle of the crampons to the ice, which should be horizontal (Fig 3).
This means that if the ice is not too steep then the first of the down points will come in contact as well as the front points, creating a more stable platform.
If the heel is too high (the most common fault) then the toe will lever the points out; if too low then the first down points will catch and the front points will again lever out.
If the crampons are horizontal, even if the ice breaks then the points should bite again lower down if the angle is maintained as the boot drops.
The need to keep the foot horizontal makes coming off the steep ice onto easier angled terrain a difficult manoeuvre.
In this situation the hands must be kept low and the crampons used in a front point mode until it is possible to step onto the easier ice with a flat foot (Fig 6).
To help relieve the strain on the calf muscles when front  pointing , a slightly knees-bent position is adopted, even to the extent of resting the knee against the ice occasionally.
To rest properly it is necessary to get your weight onto your heel and off the front points.
This can be done by using French technique, cutting a step or making use of natural easings.
American Technique
This is a combination of French technique and front pointing; the uphill foot front points while the lower foot is flat footed.
The lower foot is usually placed at about 2 o'clock or 10 o'clock to the slope.
The advantages of this technique is that it puts less strain on the legs than straight front pointing and the uphill foot (the one most difficult to flex when flat footing) is kept horizontal.
By zig-zagging up the slope the strain can be lessened, but the foot that is front pointing must still be placed at right angles to the slope (Fig 7).
MAINTENANCE
For crampons to work effectively and be reliable they should be maintained correctly.
They should be checked regularly to endure that all nuts and bolts are secure, and also inspected for cracks and flaws which can develop at places which are subject to a lot of stress, such as the bottom of attachment posts, the hinge area and where the metal is thinner round nut holes.
Straps should be checked for cuts and tears, especially round the rivets, and with any crampon type it is worth carrying a long strap so that emergency repairs can be made in the event of breakage.
The points should be sharpened vertically downwards to give a chisel point (except on vertical front points, which are sharpened as an ice-axe pick).
Downward facing points are sharpened along their edges and not across the front faces.
Do not make too sharp a point which can bend and so become blunt more quickly, and use a hand-held file rather than a mechanical grinder, which can overheat the crampon and ruin the temper of the metal.
CAIRNGORM CONTRASTS
Robert Durran experiences the climatic extremes of the Cairngorms during encounters with climbs in summer and winter
Left: Ready to do battle with Sticil Face on Shelter Stone Crag.
Above: Shelter Stone Crag — a familiar playground for winter climbers.
Right: Exposed moves on The Needle.
Far Right: At the entrance to the Shelter Stone in the calm of a summer day (photos by the author).
I was terrified, slipping out of control, beginning to black out whenever I tried to use my hands, the frenzied white maelstrom subsiding into a quietly pulsating grey.
Convinced by fear that another attempt to manipulate the rigid ropes and frozen krabs at my waist would result in permanent loss of consciousness, I let Roger take over, clipping me into the belay while I lowered by head against the ice, shivering violently, numb fingers screaming with the return of feeling, struggling rationally to convince my swimming brain that this was not the final descent into hypothermic oblivion.
‘Let's just get down from here!’
My half mumbled yell was torn from numb, bleeding lips across the icy crag face in a hellish blast of burningly-cold spindrift.
I should have known better.
My last winter sortie into the Cairngorms had resulted in three days and nights trapped with Pete by a blizzard of historic proportions on the squalid mud floor of the Etchachan hut.
Our greatest asset had been a copy of The Scotsman , originally bought to give us wise counsel on the weather.
Its function had eventually been fourfold.
We had read it, used it as an absorbent insulating layer to combat puddles and spilt porridge, and finally, when it and our bowels had reached saturation point, used it as lavatory paper!
We eventually made good our escape to Braemar, where we sat miserably in the pub, lamenting the fact that our dry clothes were a 200 mile bus and train journey away in Aviemore.
So when Roger and I stepped off the night train in Aviemore this time, my hopes were raised by a starry February sky.
Dawn, despite its revelation of an ominous pall hanging over the mountains, found us hitching towards Cairngorm.
At Glenmore the snow-gates were shut, indicating drifting at higher levels.
To the half amused, half concerned stares of the long frustrated queue of skiers, we shouldered our crippling packs and joined the snow-ploughs, grinding slowly up the hill.
Above the treeline conditions became  decidedly unpleasant.
An hour or so later, Roger honoured his cafe-culture principles and I compromised mine by patronising the plastic vulgarity of the deserted skiers' day lodge.
We assessed the situation, our snowy hair dripping over cups of tea, Having endured a night on the train, the purgatory of the road and now this, we felt obliged ‘to be at one with the mountain’, and were soon following the pylons of a ski tow en route for Loch Avon and the Shelter Stone.
We struggled up the wind-blasted Fiacaill Ridge, staggered over the plateau rim to relative shelter and ploughed through drifted snow across the bowl of Coire Raibeirt until it steepened.
Here a narrow gully gave a long, powdery glissade almost to the shores of the frozen lock, which gave an easy highway to within five minutes of our night's accommodation.
Things were going deceptively well.
At the head of Lock Avon we were reasonably sheltered by the surrounding amphitheatre of high crags, which emerged at times from gently swirling clouds of blowing snow.
By far the most spectacular was Shelter Stone Crag, a tapering white spire rising nearly 1000 feet immediately behind the bivouac.
After a brew we walked to its foot and to our delight discovered that the covering on the lower slabs was not powder as we had suspected, but acres of perfect névé and climbable anywhere.
After playing happily on it for a while we romped back to our sleeping bags and a meal, excited at the prospect of getting to grips next morning with the classic grade V, Sticil Face.
The night was thoroughly miserable.
It proved impossible to block the jets of spindrift which sought us with every gust of the noisily strengthening wind and settled on our Gore-Tex bivvy-bags, making them ineffective unless constantly shaken clear.
For 13 hours I lay shivering in my inadequate bag, drifting in and out of sleep.
I ignored the resident rodent rustling through our vital porridge supplies.
It had already shared dinner and such a tough mouse deserved all the nourishment it could get.
MUTTERING OATHS
As soon as the first insipid light filtered through the entrance, I was glad to make tepid tea and chewy porridge garnished with mouse droppings, while enjoying a limited success in coaxing Roger from his marginally more substantial pit.
Following my economically truthful pronouncements on the local meteorological trends (I had already been for a pee), he reluctantly committed himself to an extended struggle with frozen boots and gaiters, muttering foul oaths about his much vaunted, but now soaked, pair of newly customised salopettes.
When he finally got on his feet, Roger seemed unduly keen, and I found myself unexpectedly on the defensive.
We were already worn down by the long night and another was almost unthinkable — our sleeping bags would be a frozen mass of down by evening.
However, it seemed fair enough to start the climb in the hope of an improvement.
Although the upper part of Sticil Face involves a long and committing traverse above the central slabs, the lower section, following their open, left-bounding corner, would pose no real problems in retreat.
Wearing eight layers of clothing including a duvet, I was almost pleasantly warm flogging up to the bottom of the crag.
Above us the slabby face was just visible through wildly animated curtains of driving spindrift.
Roping up, we moved together for 200 to 300 feet to the foot of the first big ice pitch in the corner system.
The immense build-up made it impossible to find a decent anchor and, having stamped out a rather unstable stance, I had to settle for a couple of drive-ins in a clod of frozen turf.
Occasionally we could glimpse the bare walls of the vertical crux corner 100 feet or more above — that was to be my pitch.
Roger led up and rightwards onto the ice and it was quickly apparent that in places the snow was lying directly over rock, with what ice there was insecurely bonded to the smooth slabs.
Roger battled upwards as delicately as possible through the vicious, omnidirectional spindrift.
He gained height painfully slowly, clearing the ever-shifting snow with care and checking every crampon and axe placement, well aware of the shortcomings of my laughable belay and his negligible protection.
Communication soon became virtually impossible and a rope tangle forced me to take off my dachsteins briefly.
Kept damp overnight inside my clothing, they almost instantly froze and filled with spindrift.
It became a desperate struggle to get them on; the longer it took the more difficult it became as my fingers became numb and useless.
Eventually, frantic with frustration, I managed to force them over the raw meat of my knuckles with my teeth, my sore and bleeding lips spreading red stains through the grating wool.
By the time the rope went tight I had been standing in the same spot for nearly an hour and a half.
Worried about how chilled I was, I knew we had to retreat, but in the meantime there was no choice but to follow the tugging rope.
Ripping out the belay, I thrashed my way up, hardly able to see my own feet, but vaguely registering Roger's impressively determined lead.
Things did not improve.
Towards the top of the pitch feeling began to return agonisingly to my hands, my head was spinning, and the white world was doings its best to darken.
At first Roger, warmed by his work, confidence boosted by a bombproof hex in the base of the corner, was still looking optimistically to the crux, and seemed surprised by my shaken croaks of retreat.
But my inability to belay or take the lead soon became obvious.
My only blurred thought was to reach shelter as soon as possible and the good belay spelt one word — abseil.
Roger quickly joined both ropes together and we descended the 300 feet to where I could follow our steps without difficulty to the foot of the crag.
Moving freely, I was joyously relieved to find my head clearing and body warming.
I careered down the snow-slope below and sat in the shelter of a boulder to watch Roger abseil down the ice pitch, coiled the ropes and climb carefully down to join me for a marvellously welcome brew under the Shelter Stone.
Fortified for a final fight, we stuffed everything into our sacks and set off on the laborious slog back up Coire Raibeirt for a buffeted race against darkness over the plateau and down to the vast, eerily deserted car park.
As we descended the road, stumblingly wearily over mighty drifts, I reflected soberly on a frightening experience.
It was hard to believe we had been indulging the same appetite for climbing and on the same crag I had visited during a July heatwave three years before.
Approaching in the soft hazy warmth of a still summer evening, Alec and I had descended from the plateau into the cool shadows past the skirting snows of Hell's Lum Crag.
SOARING MASTERPIECE
I preferred a patch of grass among the boulders to the damp interior of the Shelter Stone and slept beneath the stars until the sun eased itself, huge and rippling from the haze, reflected in the perfectly flat surface of the loch, spiriting away the glistening dew and kissing the weathered pink granite of the crags.
With the night's chill dispelled from the air, Alec and I boulder-hopped our way to the foot of Robin Smith's soaring masterpiece, The Needle.
It was a leisurely day and we padded up the rough, warm rock of a plinth of slabs until an awkward overlap sharpened our claws for the crux pitch above.
A beautifully clean, steep layback leads to an exciting but easy traverse and a nasty pull into a frustratingly smooth scoop.
A long, exposed ramp leads to a mossy ledge below the Crack For Thin Fingers, which we contemplated over lunch in the last of the morning's sun.
Below us sparkled the Garbh Uisge, bouncing noisily down from the melting snows over jumbled slabs.
Alec led the strenuous but short-lived pitch and I continued up the long Needle Crack: sustained but never too difficult; glorious bridging above the full height of the crag.
We scrambled over the chockstone of the Eye onto the plateau and wandered over shimmering snowfields to drink from the icy waters of the Garbh Uisge where it emerged from a shadowy blue tunnel before tumbling from the plateau.
We bathed our feet deliciously before sprawling on the soft mossy bank in the drying heat of the sun.
An idyllic evening bouldering and lazing on the golden sands of the loch had us planning to try Needle's stupendous sister route, Steeple, next day.
Only slightly harder but much more sustained, flawed only by a not pleasant stretch of vegetated scrambling, Steeple gives six long and magnificently varied pitches and is without doubt one of the finest rock climbs in Britain.
Above a miniature bergschrund, a slabby groove sporting a teasing overlap led us to another intriguingly smooth corner.
Large holds at the top are welcome for the strenuous pull out left onto easy ground.
The technical crux follows the scrambling: an absorbing pitch working intricately rightwards until thin moves give access to good holds in a short overhanging corner, which ends at the base of a long steepening ramp.
This grows gradually more difficult and strenuous until a final wild swing out and over a jammed block deposits the leader in a superb eyrie behind a tottering pinnacle.
Above is a monolithically impressive corner.
This is a Cenotaph Corner with five hundred feet of lurching exposure thrown in and with the arms already tested by four demanding pitches.
Strenuous laybacking for 40 feet or so brings better holds, allowing exhilaratingly steep bridging, and the whole rope will have run out by the time you pull onto the platform at the top, all too soon for the fit, but thankfully for the tired or those leading at their limit, as I was on this occasion.
The last pitch was a real sting in the tail, but the perplexing moves up a short crack in a wall soon succumbed to brute force and determination and I swung exultantly over a final bulge on the monstrous, weathered holds to sit satiated on the plateau, soaking up the sun until Alec pulled over, grinning with triumph.
Alec had to hurry home, but I was tempted to linger.
I left my sack at the top of Cairn Lochan and scrambled down to the foot of Savage Slit.
I soloed back up it in the last light, an orgy of vertical but easy bridging on huge holds.
As the sun dissolved in the west, a surreal pink haze rolled around the hollows of the plateau and obscured the foothills and forests to the north, lapping silently into the corries.
I climbed into my sleeping bag and slipped from one dreamworld into another, waking a few hours later to drift down through birdsong in the cool forest to the jarring heat and bustle of Aviemore.
WELSH ICE
Bob Wightman falls head over heels for the unpredictable nature of Welsh winter climbing
Nigel Bonnet on Llyn Idwal, proving that ice climbers are slightly insane
Winter climbs in Wales?
Yes, they do exist, if only briefly: to entertain or more usually frustrate the human porcupines who come out of summer hibernation around Christmas.
Unfortunately, all too often ‘ideal’ conditions turn out to be no such thing and the dejected suitor must return home, desire unrequited.
The locals, in theory, should have a better time of it, the grapevine telling them where the ice is best.
And ice is what Wales is about.
There are few modern mixed routes here — the crags are just a bit too clean for good buttress climbing with its reliance on frozen turf and heather.
The only other area in Britain which can compare for steep ice-fall climbs is the North West of Scotland, and that's a long drive for a weekend's climbing — even for the Scots!
My first winter route in Wales was grabbed in a midweek raid from the Lakes.
Steve Reid and I had a couple of free days and were eager to climb somewhere different.
Actually I had lots of days free and was making the most of the best weather conditions for years.
Despite two weeks of pre-dawn starts, the 6 am exit from Kendal was still a bit of a shock.
The blast down the M6 was less stressful than usual, with little traffic on the roads until we came to Betws y Coed.
Time to slow down — I'd been booked here a couple of years earlier.
As we approached Pen y Gwryd the usual game unfurled.
What to do.
Black Cleft?(we were going well enough).
Devil's Appendix?(well we'd have to turn round, so let's save it for tomorrow).
Craig y Rhaeadr?(brrr! enough said).
Ahead lay Lliwedd, which appeared well plastered.
Our screwed up eyes imagined they say a straight line in the bottom of Central Gully.
Could the Direct be in nick?
There was only one way to find out.
An hour later and our gasping, sweaty bodies stumble across the boulders of the gully's scree fan.
Looking up our luck is in: the ice is continuous, thin, but all there.
A change into dry clothes before gearing up and a quick brew.
Gentleman that I am, I offer Steve the first pitch.
Not so much a gentleman actually, more a devious swine, since this means I get the overhang which is meant to be the crux.
Steve heads off, his initial rush slowing as the difficulties mount.
Now down into crawler gear he pushes on, finding regular protection by the simple expedient of removing most of the ice!
Come on, leave some for me!
It's HVS in summer and it feels like it in winter, too, as I shiver upwards to join Steve at the stance: a misnomer if ever there was one — just room enough for four front points on an edge.
My turn now and it's more of the same: a bit of gear her, a skip of the heart there as I scratch my way toward the roof.
The ice occasionally shears away as I put my weight on it.
A metre below the roof the ice unexpectedly improves: a Friend in a welcome crack then no excuses but to reach over…and sink the axe into perfect ice.
The power of imagination!
I romp to the belay.
The upper section of the gully is much easier and we race upwards, moving together over 100m pitches to emerge just yards from the summit of the mountain.
Only one thing to do now, the Snowdon Horseshoe!
At least mid-week there no crowds.
We even make it into Pete's Eats before dark for tea.
Next day it rained and rained…
DANCING EYES
It was only after moving to Llanberis that I did my next winter route in Wales — a quick solo of Sinister Gully.
The winter looked promising.
It thawed!
It's a lazy Saturday and I decide to go for a walk in Cwm Idwal.
My eyes dance as I approach Devil's Kitchen.
The Appendix needs another eight feet to be climbable, so I decide to leave it a week.
The next Saturday I have a hangover so it's another lazy start.
This time the cwm is alive with walkers, families, dogs — and climbers in their headlong rush to the ice.
The lake is frozen and provides a pleasant path to the back of the cwm.
Disappointment.
It's been so cold that the freeze-thaw needed for the Appendix to form fully hasn't taken place and the ice is in just the same condition as the previous week.
I'm on my own anyway, so Introductory Gully and South Stream are taken as warm ups for the more serious fare to the right.
South Gully looks good so I excuse myself past a team on the first pitch who are finding the thin, bubbled ice formation awkward.
Above a pair are just abbing off: they've decide it's not for them today.
Ahead, another pair are at work on the second pitch, which is steeper and longer than the first.
The leader sounds relieved to reach the belay.
I consider joining the retreating pair below me but have no harness for the abseil, so I settle down to wait while the climber above seconds the pitch.
Rhona Lampard near the top of Central Gully Direct on Lliwedd
When the second's about six metres up I realise there's another line just to the right.
It looks even thinner than the main line but I set off anyway.
In reality it's just verglas with fist sized lumps of ice dotted around on the wall.
My mind locks in: take it steady, keep cool and don't kick at the ice!
It eases off eventually and the leader on the stance is taken aback by my appearance.
A quick chat and I'm on my way, only to be stopped by a bare chockstone.
Brute force pays dividends as the landing is deep, soft snow.
Walking down the descent rake I notice tracks leading into the Kitchen itself.
Mmmm, could be good I think to myself.
Despite the cold there's still water flowing   under the ice covering the boulders.
Taking care not to break through the ice, I career upwards to the prize at the top: a crystal chandelier in a dungeon.
Two teams await me, one just about to start climbing.
‘Is it all right if I nip in front of you?’
The traditional soloist's question.
‘Not if you're going to back off like the last one did.’
With that my respondent turned and attacked the ice with such ferocity that I had to step back to avoid the avalanche of detritus.
The other pair looked at me as if to apologise and we began to talk.
After an hour our man was still bludgeoning away.
Cold, I descended out of the narrow cleft to seek out more sport.
Just below the Kitchen lies The Screen.
Today it was popularity incarnate.
I await my turn.
‘Are you going to solo this?’
(I looked at the young lad) 'Cos my mate's tired and I'd like to do it.
Would you take me up it?
I agreed.
So with borrowed gear, no harness and a stranger I set off.
Never hard, the greatest difficulty was in avoiding the results of clumsy ice technique.
If we didn't get a move on there wouldn't be a route left to do!
The top pitch had barely survived one day's assault by the ice brigade.
At the rake I parted with my companion and, sated for one day, returned home.
BRITTLE FORMATIONS
Somehow I was back next day with two friends, Bob Brewer and Mark Pudney, soloing again while they roped up.
Eventually we met up below the entrance to the Kitchen.
Neither of them felt up to leading and their enquiring eyes forced me into the lead.
Twll Ddu (The Black Hole)— a well named stygian cleft.
The walls seem to meet overhead to block out the sky and a chill wind blows as we approach the impasse at the head of the gully.
Abandon hope all ye who enter here .
As we're roping up, who should arrive to tie on but the lad who'd joined me the previous day.
He must have thought I went there to take fold up routes!
The way ahead, although short, was steep, with no opportunity for a rest.
I set off, unsure of the brittle formations.
No need to swing the axe here, just slot the picks onto the cracks between the welded icicles.
An ice-screw at 5m then go for the top, taking care not to knock out any ice onto those waiting below.
There's no escape, either for them or for me.
Early morning sun on the approach to Lliwedd
At 15m I nearly come undone.
I need a placement and as i swing the axe the other tool pulls, only to jam again about 30 centimetres  lower.
Heart in mouth I continue more cautiously to a sound belay in the upper gully.
I bring up the others, cooling all the while, before we flounder over to the descent rake and back to the house.
As the winter continues it becomes too cold to work and a day off is in order.
Three times through the winter, Cascade had been within days of being fully formed, only to fall down at the last minute.
Bow the plum was ripe for the picking.
The walk-in is easy and we were soon at the foot of the icefall.
Up to now the routes I'd been climbing had hidden themselves in gullies or grooves.
Cascade is not so demure, proffering itself to anyone who cares to look up from the road — an many do.
No hiding here.
The first pitch begins at an angle of around 80 degrees, slowly steepening to the vertical.
The ice is thick enough to take tools but not protection — the only offer of salvation a mention in the guidebook of a peg at 20m.
We gear up amongst the debris of ascents earlier in the week, thankful that we're first to the route today.
With courage grasped I begin to climb, tentatively at first, until nerves evaporate as I become absorbed in the climbing.
They return as a step at 10m offers the chance of protection.
After blunting two ice-screws I give up and go for the peg.
This clipped, the final section to the belay is relaxing by comparison.
Bob follows, complaining of pumped arms.
‘Relax and you'll enjoy it more’ I tell him.
Relaxing is the key to these climbs: grip the axe shafts too tightly and you'll pump out, so let the wrist loops do their work.
The next pitch is running with water.
It's Bob's lead, and one runner and a long traverse make seconding interesting; then it's my turn again.
It looks steep — it is steep!
I fix a screw and head upwards, searching for weaknesses in the ice — pockets, slots, anything to make placing the tools that little bit easier.
Slowly, ever so slowly the angle eases as the distance from the ice-screw increases and at last I can place another.
Some 50m later I have to belay on ice-screws and axes.
The last pitch is a pleasant romp to the source of the feeder spring.
As the season progressed I'd become more aware of the gradual decline in the sharpness of my axes and crampons, bringing them more in line with mixed rather than ice climbing gear.
Some elbow grease was needed.
This applied, I planned the routes for the next weekend.
It thawed, then it rained…
On the upper reaches of Central Gully Direct, Lliwedd
DEATH OF AN ENGLISH WALKER
Toby Haggith relates the tragic story of the death of Jeremy Parkinson in the Spanish Gredos mountains, and the disturbing questions it raises about the competence of the authorities involved in launching a search when Jeremy went missing
At 2.45pm on Sunday, November 1990, the body of an Englishman was found in a small gorge high up in the Sierra de Gredos mountains of central Spain.
In the hazy conditions a bright yellow camera bag was spotted first, a few feet from the corpse, which was lodged face down between a rock and a bush.
Patches of ice and snow had begun to fill the crack in the ground.
A few days more and the man's body would have been buried completely — another name to add to the list of 12 who have disappeared in the Gredos over the past two years.
According to the coroner's report, 27 year old Jeremy Parkinson had been dead for only 48 hours when he was found.
On a walking holiday in the Spanish mountains, Jeremy had been staying at the Elola climbers' refuge and had left there two weeks before to spend a day taking photographs.
In bad weather the Sierra de Gredos — a wilderness region that shelters eagles and wolves — can be unforgiving even of expert mountaineers.
That morning, as Jeremy walked along the spectacular path clinging to the 2,400 metre high arêtes overlooking the Cinco Lagunes, the weather had been fine.
But later in the afternoon the light clothing he was wearing left him ill-prepared for the chilling mist and rain that slid down the mountainsides, poignantly recorded on the damp film found in his camera.
Incredibly, Jeremy had managed to stay alive for nearly 13 days before the effects of hypothermia, combined with minor neck and head injuries, had overcome his strength and determination to survive.
The autopsy found his stomach was empty, and in his bag was a tin of sardines, which had remained stubbornly closed to his frozen fingers.
Details of mountain deaths like this are chronicled regularly in the newspapers.
What makes this particular story so tragic is that while Jeremy fought to survive, no doubt focusing his efforts on the hope that we were looking for him, a succession of minor acts of negligence, committed by both the Spanish authorities and the British Consul, conspired to delay a proper search being mounted.
Jeremy was a good friend.
When I heard he was missing, I did what he would have done for me in similar circumstances.
On November 11 rang the British Consulate in Madrid to enquire if I could travel to Spain to help.
By then Jeremy had been missing for 11 days.
Although the duty officer I spoke to had read of the case in the local Spanish press, he knew no details.
On November 3 another friend, Marc Radvanyi, and I left England to help with the search.
At that stage I was optimistic about what we were doing — Jeremy was physically strong and fit and had a resourceful mind and a determined, even stubborn, character.
We knew he'd taken a survival kit and space blanket on his trip, and that knowledge gave us hope.
We came up against official incompetence as soon as we arrived in Spain.
Not only were the British Consul staff unable to answer questions about the search and weather conditions, but they were also reluctant to provide us with any basic help.
I asked the man on duty to ring the Avila police headquarters, where the search was supposedly being co-ordinated, but he protested that his Spanish was poor.
I pointed out that mine was non-existent.
The conversation he then conducted in what seemed like good Spanish to me — revealed that the weather in the mountains had improved enough to use helicopters in the search.
Realising it was vital, we left for the mountains immediately.
I asked to be provided with a car and an interpreter/guide.
The request was politely refused, although we were given directions to the Avila headquarters.
Luckily we had the phone number of a Spanish schoolfriend.
Juan Pan-Montoko, to contact in an emergency.
Juan quickly established that Avila was nowhere near the rescue base (had we followed the consul's directions we would have ended up three hours away) and within an hour he was driving us into the heart of the Sierra de Gredos.
RADIO MESSAGE
The next morning (Sunday) I walked into the valley of the Laguna Grande de Gredos, heading for the Elola Refuge to join the rescue team, and was heartened by the sight of a helicopter floating between the menacing crags overlooking a serene glacial lake.
At least the Spanish authorities had been conducting a professional search.
It was a sunny, crisp autumn day.
On the granite porch of the refuge was a group of cheery young walkers.
The big thermometer on the refuge wall read zero degrees C, and I recalled how cold it had been the night before during our four hour drive from Madrid.
A couple of hours later, as I sat in the hostel kitchen, a message came over the radio that a body had been found.
The kitchen was suddenly full of men from the mountain rescue team of the Guardia Civil, and messages were relayed from the mountaineers who had found the corpse.
The helicopter pilot appeared, then flew off, taking with him the photos I had brought to aid identification.
Walkers coming to and from the refuge stopped to watch, aware that some tragedy or other was being enacted.
The corpse was Jeremy.
As I walked back from Elola, the body was flown to a tiny infirmary in a local village.
For the first time I met Jeremy's father, who had just arrived from America, and together we went in to see the body.
Apart from bruising on the face it was very familiar.
The ankles and feet were slightly twisted, Jeremy's mouth was open, and dried blood covered his lips and discoloured his teeth.
Jeremy's father fought to control his turmoil.
He kept remarking on Jeremy's resourcefulness: shreds of silver indicated that he had used his survival blanket, and he had also stuffed leaves down his trousers for insulation.
Chick then scrutinised Jeremy's compass, checking the bearing against a map, trying to interpret his son's obvious endeavours to survive.
That evening the British Consul staff seemed insensitive and professionally inadequate once again.
Our Spanish friend Juan, who had given us so much time, had to work next day, so we needed a replacement to help tackle the bureaucratic process of preparing the body for despatch to Britain.
When I rang the consulate I was told such help would be hard to obtain on a Sunday night.
Only when I lost my temper, pointing that people don't always die during officer hours, did they offer to find someone.
LENGTHY CAMPAIGN
Recently it has emerged that the search party conducted on that final weekend was a rather showy finale, put on for our benefit.
When we arrived in Navarradonda where the body was taken, the local police assured us that ground searches had been conducted with dogs the day after Jeremy's disappearance.
However, following investigations by the British Consul and a lengthy campaign by the Avila press, a different version has come to light.
Jose, the refuge guardian, was concerned when Jeremy didn't return to Elola on the evening of Sunday, October 21 — he had left his camping gear behind in the hut.
The guardian asked three climbers going down to the village to inform the police, as he was unable to contact them himself since the refuge radio was broken.
By the time Jose had found Jeremy's passport and return air ticket, so it was clear he hadn't just wandered off.
But it was not until the next Sunday, October 28, the day after another climber had taken a message to Navarradonda, that a small ground search was mounted.
And it was the following weekend before a full scale search was undertaken.
It is not clear why the local police did not start the search immediately.
Although mist and rain prevented helicopters being used, the weather was not bad enough to prevent a large ground search being mounted.
I was told that in Britain the weather has to be really dire before a mountain rescue search is called off.
The area where Jeremy went missing.
Unfortunately the broken radio hindered swift communication.
(Incidentally, the unreliability of the radio had been reported to the Civil Governor some time before, and it was his responsibility to replace it).
The police cannot pretend they didn't know of Jeremy's disappearance until the 27th.
The three climbers who originally passed the message to them were eventually traced, and confirmed that not only had they informed the Guardia Civil in person on the 21st, but afterwards had phoned each day to see if Jeremy had been found.
The police didn't inform the British Consulate about Jeremy's disappearance until October 30, and it wasn't until the next day that the consulate contacted Jeremy's grandmother in England.
His parents then called from the USA and were given the false impression that British Consul staff were co-ordinating the search, when they actually had no regular contact with the Spanish authorities involved.
The Parkinsons were not encouraged to travel to Spain from the USA.
It was then 11 days since Jeremy had last been seen, and according to the coroner's report he was still alive.
All these delays are particularly galling, as Jeremy was found less than two kilometres from the glacial lakes where he'd been walking.
The Avila press believe, as do we, that had a proper search been conducted from the beginning, Jeremy would have been found alive.
Moreover, had the local police contacted the British Consul at once, his friends and family would have got to Spain earlier to ensure that all efforts were being made to find him.
We now suspect he had been written off by both the consul and the Spanish authorities at an early stage.
It is obvious that all these breakdowns in communication should be investigated and tightened up, so that a tragedy like this never happens again.
Responsibility for mountain searches should not just lie with the local police.
In Britain the police report missing persons to a ‘mountain rescue controller’ who, using his expertise and local knowledge, decides what action to take.
In Jeremy's case, given the bad weather and the fact that he was lightly clothed and had left his camping gear at the refuge, such a controller would have been likely to mount a search earlier.
In addition to police help and helicopters, the British controller can call on a network or volunteer mountain rescue teams in the region at any time.
But in Spain the climbing clubs are not properly integrated into the civil protection unit, and their assistance can only be expected at weekends.
Finally, the British Consulate should improve its working practices in cases like this, so that anxious friends and relatives are aware of the extent of its involvement in search and rescue operations.
It is also the consul's responsibility to establish close links with the police, so that in future loved ones can be updated on the progress of searches.
Footnote
Jeremy's friends, together with some local climbers in Spain, plan to publish a guidebook warning visitors of the potential hazards of the Sierra de Gredos.
The fee for this article will be used to help finance it.
Climber and Hill Walker is only too pleased to be of assistance in bringing the circumstances of Jeremy's death to public attention —Ed .
Junior Rockers
TONY GREENBANK GOES BACK TO SCHOOL — ROCK SCHOOL THAT IS — WHEN HE GETS OUT ON THE CRAG WITH SOME YOUNG LAKELAND CLIMBERS
‘If Anyone Can Canon Can’, or so the TV commercials tell us.
Well, so can the pupils of Orgill Junior School Rock Climbing Club in Egremont, Cumbria.
Cannon to them is flesh and blood rather than a camera or a camcorder.
Teacher Andy Cannon in fact — all six foot plus of him — their main man and the driving force behind their Lilliputian endeavours (Lilliputian only in the sense that they lack height).
Egremont's claim to fame is the gurning at its annual Crab Fair, where rivals pull gnarly faces through a horse's collar.
(Crispin Waddy and partner recently put up Uncontrolled Gurning, E5 6a,6a, supposedly the wildest route on Lundy, which shows how Egremont's highlight has gained currency in the English language.)
But it might also be famed for having the only junior school rock climbing club in Cumbria — and possibly the country — where nine to 11-year-olds climb up to Hard Severe.
I arranged to meet club members on Oxford Crag and was immediately intrigued.
Oxford Crag?
It's not in any Fell and Rock Climbing Club Guidebook.
Following Andy's directions, I saw climbers on a previously uncharted crag, which looked so big I began to run.
But as I drew nearer the crag became smaller still, the stature of the brightly garbed climbers, who were smaller still, creating the optical illusion.
‘Oxford Crag is just one of the places we visit,’ said Andy.
‘It has rock so easy for initial routes that every time you reach up there's a hold.
Also it's out of the way, something we prefer so we can't be accused of over-running crags with school parties.’
The club was started in late spring 1991, with an original funding of £200 from the school to help broaden the experience of its pupils.
The aim is to introduce rock climbing as a sport that is safe, exciting and above all fun!
Once upon a time school teachers who climbed might take a favoured few pupils to the crags in the Lagonda or Alvis.
But this is the 1990s.
Andy is the possessor of a Validation Certificate (necessary when you take school children rock climbing today).
Lisa Robertson is wearing diminutive pink rock boots that Andy had (as with much of the other gear) bargain-hunted in local shops: and which the others take it in turns to wear.
‘It's great rock climbing,’ she says.
‘We love it.’
‘I like abseiling best,’ says Fiona Wilson, also 10.
Would you like a cheese Quaver?’
The two Davids (Pennington and Jackson), meanwhile, are clearing litter left by walkers on the footpath below, before top-roping their respective routes to either side of a large rock flake, bridging, jamming and armbarring like miniature Johnny Daweses.
‘There are four children today because of the photos,’ said Diane Walker, Andy's assistant.
‘Normally we take three at a time.
The club is limited to 15, although half of the school wants to join.’
And who knows, there could be a future star in the making here.
But even if there isn't, these junior rockers are sure to carry the flag for climbing for years to come.
Above left: Andy Cannon, Diane Walker and their young pupils.
Above: Fiona Wilson concentrates hard on her next move.
Below: Lisa Robertson and David Jackson scan the rock for holds
HIGH ANGLE
This month sees the publication of a new book by Doug Scott, recording his climbing career over the last 30 years in photographs.
Reproduced here is a selection of these remarkable images, often taken in extreme circumstances.
Publisher Ken Wilson introduces them.
Main photo: The magnificent conical shape of Shivling (6,543 metres) in the Garhwal Himal, India.
Scott climbed a new route on the East Pillar (left of picture) in 1981.
Insets, left to right: High on the West Ridge of The Ogre in the Karakoram.
Scott and a team including Chris Bonington made the first ascent in 1977; on the rock ridge of Shivling East Pillar; Greg Child belayed on Lobsang Spire in the Karakoram — another first ascent for Scott in 1983.
Doug Scott's life is driven by a passion to climb.
He is consumed by the challenge of the world's highest peaks, but this has been accompanied by a geographer's fascination with visiting new places: a curiosity about the metaphysical undercurrents that accompany great risk; a need to plumb the capabilities of mind and body and a corresponding empathy with mountain peoples who confront such tests in their everyday struggle with life.
His climbing record lists a multiplicity of outstanding ascents from around the world.
It places Scott in the front rank as one of the world's most innovative Himalayan climbers.
What Chris Bonington has achieved in terms of single-minded organisation and drive, or what Reinhold Messner has demonstrated by his speed and panache, have been matched by Doug Scott's determination always to try for something different and never to be satisfied by the more obvious and easier routes to success.
Himalayan Climber provides a comprehensive photographic portrait of his remarkable climbing career.
Scott has assiduously photographed his travels and has always had enough strength to record the critical moments of the highest climbs, thus capturing some of the best high altitude photographs ever taken.
But though the pictures reflect the splendour and danger of the great peaks, they may fail fully to convey the challenge of the environment in terms of wind, low temperature and rarefied air pressure.
Those seeking authenticity would have to leaf through the book in a wind-blasted, refrigerated decompression chamber in full climbing gear, with a heavy rucksack and working a treadmill; all in an atmosphere adjusted to one third normal sea-level density.
Above 7500 metres, climbers who eschew bottled oxygen play a deadly physiological game where the penalty for miscalculation, while usually not immediate, can be terminal.
Even then progress is slowed to a snail's pace, and the capacity for logical judgement is also impaired.
Carrying any weight (tents, food, fuel, sleeping bags and equipment) makes the task immeasurably greater.
Today's Himalayan climbers must have immense strength and vitality, must acclimatise very carefully, should be fully skilled and experienced, must be alert to danger yet hardened enough not to be critically frightened (and mountains are very frightening places) by any unexpected trauma; be patient during storms, determined in attack and wise in retreat; be a skilful diplomat and a team player; be compassionate but sometimes have a touch of selfishness.
With these qualities they well be fully prepared for the big trial, but they must also know themselves in the deepest sense —‘to be in touch’, as Scott frequently mentions, ‘with that critical inner voice.’
A great Himalayan climb draws on the deepest resources of body and mind.
It can lay bare the climber's weaknesses and strengths.
It can turn humble and elate.
Its fascination may be because it exemplifies mankind's continuing need for trial by fire: that quest for the ultimate human test.
Doug Scott has been there often over the past three decades.
This book provides some hint of insight into his quest of self-discovery.
Main photo: Pete Boardman approaching the summit of Kangchenjunga (8,595 metres), Nepal on the North Ridge ascent in 1979.
Below: Dougal Haston on the South West face of Everest, 1975.
Below centre: Scott nursing his broken legs after a traumatic descent of The Ogre.
Chris Bonington also broke ribs during the descent.
Below right: Starting the initial A1 pitch on Lobsang Spire.
Doug Scott, Himalayan Climber is published by Diadem books,Climber & Hill Walker readers can take advantage of an offer to obtain the book.
Turn to page 41 for details.
Frustrating equipment failures forced Victor and His partner Steve Sustad to abort their summit attempt on a 24,000 feet high unclimbed peak in the Karakoram last year.
This is the story of their danger-filled retreat
UTMOST ON ULTAR
‘We failed,’ Steve said to Kees when we returned to our base at Shokumshun.
‘So did Mick and Crags,’ replied Kees, ‘and the other news is the Japanese are here.
They've taken 130 porters up the Ultar Gorge, and what's more they've brought 22,000 feet of Kevlar rope for fixing.’
‘This is mind boggling’ I thought, as I looked over our basecamp: two tents, brought up with the help of four porters.
A week earlier Steve and I had been on our way to the summit of Ultar with a pair of 150 foot ropes.
When the alarm dragged us from our dreams on September 3 last year we were one night's work from the summit ridge — just 12 hours from the top of Ultar.
Our line would follow the Great Triangular Icefield, a feature angled at about 50 degrees, dotted with ice cliffs here and there, to its apex 1500 feet higher.
The top of the icefield was connected to the summit ridge by a double corniced snow crest, about 500 feet long, leading to 200 feet of difficult climbing, which in turn led to a col on the ridge at slightly over 22,000 feet.
From this col we could see easy snow slopes to the summit at 24,000 feet.
We felt optimistic about the weather, which had remained perfect, and about our chances.
But our optimism was horribly misplaced.
By 11 am the next morning we knew our climb was over.
Not only that, we would be lucky to make it down alive.
Steve and I had climbed to the end of the Double Corniced Crest, a hateful and difficult section with all the solidity of a haystack on edge, balanced on a skyscraper.
Steve was in the lead, on the Fourth Brittle Ice Thing, when I noticed that my left crampon had broken.
We had a discussion at rope length, me shouting and Steve hollerin'.
We agreed to push on.
Within five minutes Steve hollered that his ice hammer had broken.
In all our combined climbing careers, spanning a total of 27 years, neither of us had broken an axe or crampon.
Now, within the space of five minutes, we had broken one each.
It was unbelievable.
We were one day from the summit, after six weeks of effort.
The sun shone out of a mockingly blue sky.
I could have cried had our situation not been so serious.
Now we had to reverse all those brittle ice traverses with broken tools.
It took us the rest of the day to struggle back to our last bivouac, I remembered how Stephen Venables had dropped his rucksack, our stove and tent poles at 23,000 feet on Rimo 1, and knew how the poor fellow felt: devastated.
I caught him jumping up and down, tearing at his hair and wailing ‘Why me?
Oh, why me?’
And now I felt like doing the same.
So did Sustad, which just shows that Norwegian-Americans are not totally devoid of emotion.
LONG RETREAT
Steve and I left the bivouac the following night, having spent the day preparing our abseil equipment, attaching short slings to our ice screws and pegs.
We planned to cut ice bollards and ice threads to save our precious supply of abseil gear.
There was 9,000 feet of descent to the glacier to prepare for.
Fifteen thousand feet below us flowed the Hunza River and edging it, like fine purfling, the Karakoram Highway.
A patchwork of green terraces, bordering the river, betrayed the cultivations of the people of Hametabad.
‘It's horrible being able to see Hametabad from here,’ said Steve.
‘It's much better not being able to see anything.’
Before starting the long retreat we waited till dark for the sun to go off the slopes, for the stones and avalanche slopes to re-freeze, and possibly because the sight was too horrible to contemplate.
There was no moon, just soot black night.
As I dangled in the middle of our first abseil there was a sound like a freight train out of a tunnel as a large section of mountainside decided to share our icefield.
In the echo of the receding explosions and the sulphurous cordite of the rockfall, I said to Steve we might live longer if we abseiled down the rocky left side of the icefield, well away from the fall line.
‘You're right,’ he said, ‘If we stay here we're going to maybe die.’
On the rocky left side, our ropes immediately jammed.
It was Steve's turn.
With heart in mouth he pulled tight on the free end.
It would not move.
The other end of the rope was somewhere up there in the blackness.
He pulled again, there was no movement.
I shone my torch at him and he made a face like he had just chewed a lemon: ‘I'm going to have to pull from higher up — I guess it's the knot.’
I nodded.
‘Take care’ I said, impotently, making plans to try and grab Steve should he fall in my general direction.
Steve was up there for half an hour while I shivered with cold and neurosis.
The south-east face of Ultar in 1987
‘Victor,’ came the voice from the dark, if the ropes go on jamming like this we are going to definitely die.
If we abseil down the middle of the face, we'll maybe die.’
‘That is incontrovertible logic,’ I said to myself.
In the middle of the icefield there was a waterfall in a large runnel.
The nearest thing I had seen to this were monsoon drains in Malaya: deep, concrete channels meant to take away storm water, but which usually lay like mantraps, just under the flood surface.
The ropes took the first opportunity of falling into the waterfall and freezing solid, bending at unpredictable angles, more or less imitating wire hawser.
Some hours later, I don't know how many, two abysmal and free-hanging abseils deposited us below the fangs of the bergschrund.
We were not far below the hanging glacier bivouac, where we stopped for two hours before pushing on to make the most of the night.
The imperative was, as always, to make as much ground as possible before the sun made all progress impossibly dangerous.
Against this we had to set our growing exhaustion, and increasingly dysfunctional limbs.
Steve, with the instinct that marks him out as a real mountaineer, not just a climber, had searched for and seen an abseil that avoided the First Brittle Ice Traverse, It took us past the Pocket Hanging Glacier seracs, where the ropes twisted into corkscrews and jammed tight.
‘I can't believe these ropes,’ said Steve, as I cambered up the free end.
‘They are the worst jamming ropes I have ever used; there should be a public health warning on each one.’
‘The sun emerged into an almost clear sky as we reached the ‘Z’ couloirs.
The Hidden Valley was spread out before us like a model landscape.
It was incredibly, and compellingly beautiful.
In that moment a realisation dawned on me: we weren't unlucky at all.
We were privileged just to be here; to have attempted two new routes from this valley; to have explored this unvisited glacier; to have done all this with just one other person: a friend, a tent and a rope.
My mood changed from one of deep despair to sheer exultation, possibly in the reasonable hope that we might now survive the descent.
I shouted to Steve ‘Hey Steve, wouldn't you rather have failed on this route than have succeeded on the Japanese Route?’
After a moment came the reply: ‘Yeah…every time.’
FOOTNOTE This account is a description of part of the 1991 North London Club expedition to Ultar — an unclimbed 24,000 foot peak in the  Karakoram .
For further information see the expedition report.
Copies can be viewed at the :
ON THE ROCK
AN ACT OF FAITH
The mists clear from the Snowdon Horseshoe.
This must be the first time anybody has been profiled in current editions of both Climber & Hill Walker and Homes & Gardens .
But the subject of both pieces is a rare species and one of the genuine and original characters.
He was, as far as anyone can be reasonably certain, the first Briton to climb all the 59 (or is it 75?) 4,000 metre peaks in the Alps.
He's just written a book about his personal odyssey over them all, entitled In Monte Viso's Horizon , published by that entirely admirable small publishing house The Ernest Press.
And between the months of October and March he doesn't climb, so this On the Rock begins with a compromise.
Will McLewin rolls into town 40 minutes late, parks his battered VW van on double yellow lines in Llanberis High Street and wanders into Pete's Eats with a mirthful, wondering, combative expression on a face I once compared to a quick and breathing version of Norman Tebbit's.
In fact, the accent fits the likeness better than the face, being only thinly veiled East End.
‘Dagenham I come from ‘, he remarks.
‘Famous for one thing.’
He casts a weather-eye outside along the dripping street and concludes: ‘It has the lowest rainfall in the country.’
This last comment neatly encapsulates a problem which faces us.
It's not a new problem.
For the last five years I've been doing this series, for the last 12 months sharing it with Ed Douglas, and in all that time there's been the rain.
Sometimes it hasn't, mostly it has, but whatever the weather's been like, the copy has to be delivered, the pictures taken, the enthusiasm maintained.
Today was one of the wet ones.
But it wasn't just wet: it was raw, cold and grey.
And as I said, Will doesn't climb in the winter.
He runs ('If you can call what I do running!’) with Dark Peak Harriers ('It's a good club — doesn't take itself or anything else too seriously.’)
He plays the French Horn.
('Sorry I'm late — I just had to confirm some bookings on our European tour.
Not that I'm any good you understand — no natural talent — but I make up for it with hard work.’)
And he grows hellebores Christmas Roses to the uninitiated — and has done so professionally since retiring from his job as a mathematics lecturer at Manchester University at the age of 50, 18 months ago.
Hence the profile in Homes & Gardens , and since the hellebores are winter-flowering, hence the non-climbing season.
Still, Will had driven from his Stockport home for the twin purposes of getting some exercise and talking about his book, and neither he nor I fancied a day in sad cafe ambience doing nothing but the latter.
So we drove up the Llanberis Pass and on the way conceived the unoriginal compromise idea of a Snowdon Horseshoe circuit.
There'll be plenty of atmosphere, even just flogging round it in the cloud,’ we  agreed, pulling into the clammy, deserted car park at Pen y Pas with hearts in boots.’
So we gritted our teeth and set off along the Pyg-motorway past the army's blasted and unforgivable folly, writhing and frothing and swearing and laughing aghast — the vapours thickening the while, so that when we looked down from Bwlch Moch, Llydaw was rimless, leaden obscurity and our hair mist-beaded like grizzled Rastafarians.
On the way from the col to the excitements of Crib Goch, Will held forth on his book.
‘Why the title, Will?
What's this Monte Viso in the horizon of which you operate?’
‘That's just it It's a peak of about 3,700 metres above the Po Valley — nothing special in itself.
I climbed it once and it's pleasant enough, but the point about it is that you can see if from all the 4,000 metre peaks; it's always there, distinctively, on the horizon.’
‘Is your book another guidebook, then?’
My tone must have been offhand.
Will scowled at me.
‘No, absolutely not, though people can take information from it and use it for that purpose if they're so minded.
But it's the story of how I did them, of what happened to me in doing them.
Sometimes things happened, other times not.
Some of them I slept out on, others — about half of them — I soloed, which I like doing and choose from preference these days.’
‘So you're still carrying on, even though you've finished the grand project.’
‘There's always something else to do — lines you see and feel you have to go back for, lower peaks you've left for later.
Finishing the book and having to go back to take photographs specially for it left me a bit jaded, so I didn't go out to the Alps this year.
But next year I'll be back.’
‘How's the book arranged?’
‘Well I split it into 12 areas, with a general essay between each — on things like equipment, food…’
‘Wirily built with large feet in huge old leather boots?’
‘Sounds a bit formal’
‘It's not — it's against the grain.
One of the questions I ask is: ‘If you had to go back to Winthrop Young's time, what is the single item of equipment you'd want to keep?’
And as for food, I take steak and new potatoes and whisky.
I've tried to keep the tone one of irony, of gentle mockery.’
‘Sounds better.’
This interchange brought us to the foot of the bad step beneath Crib Goch summit.
I leant against a rock and watched Will choose his line of ascent.
He's wirily built, not tall: large feet in huge old leather boots, and here, as later on the steep pull up onto the Crazy Pinnacle, he climbs with a deft, urgent economy.
We both reach the slanting, stepped strata which dip down round the summit, and above us, suddenly, came a lightening; an orange disc, a blueness, a sudden bursting through and resolution of mountain form, a drama of cloudfall, a flotilla of peaks afloat on the vaporous sea.
Brocken spectres, glories, intensity of colour, happiness, gratitude.
After an hour in which we ambled along the ridge, balanced along its crest, climbed the pinnacles, sat on ledges and talked and shared coffee and chocolate, the cloud closed round us again.
‘How,’ asked Will, ‘have I survived this long since I last saw that?’
‘Because the last time kept you going till now.’
Snowdon summit is in cloud and deserted.
We see no-one else all day.
Because of our late start and leisurely progress, the light is thickening as we stumble along the forgotten stretch of ridge between Bwlch Ciliau.
We race across Lliwedd on frost rimed ledges and hurl ourselves down towards Llydaw's outlet, slipping on frozen streamlets, crashing down scree, pausing to drink the silence.
Suddenly the bleak opacities quicken again, become suffused with a strange, delicate apricot pink light.
Overhead, a great circle of dark azure swirls round a gleaming crescent moon and into it, majestically, in the last light, sails Yr Wyddfa, as if to remind us that her magic lives.
Arms round shoulders in shared delight, we clip down the track, as untired as elation decrees.
Shaking our heads in grateful disbelief to the darkness of a deserted car park, the empty witness of which cannot prevail against us, whose minds have been imprinted thus.
If you take the chance, make the act of faith, the moments come.
SPANISH FOR BEGINNERS
EURO-ROCK
MONTSERRAT
Rob Milne forsakes the chills of a British spring and visits the amazing conglomerate crags of Montserrat
To me, rock climbing means hot sunshine, shorts and a T-shirt, and the usual way to find that is a holiday to the south of France, But another superb option is Montserrat, a paradise for climbers of all grades.
Getting in shape is always a problem when the spring comes and last year was no exception.
Luckily I managed to warm up on a few business trips!
An afternoon's bouldering in Paris; a day on overhanging conglomerate in Boston, and a weekend on Ohio limestone and I was ready to go.
My French climbing partner and I met in Toulouse and a short drive took us over the Pyrenees into Spain.
Descending from the mountains onto the Spanish plain, our first view of Montserrat was impressive.
In the afternoon haze, a tall mountain suddenly appeared, surrounded by rock walls and spires and looking like a faint fortress from the 11th century.
The rock is a unique form of conglomerate, so warming up on a few practice routes was needed to get a feel for it.
Starting out for Espero Fray Gary, the warm up area near the campground, we had to use what was left of the road after a landslide and I soon learned an essential fact about climbing in Spain — it's a great advantage to be able to speak some Spanish.
A security guard stopped us and tried to explain the area was closed.
To me he was incomprehensible, but having a climbing partner who was fluent in French, English, Spanish and Catalan, was a definite advantage.
After a long argument she convinced the guard we weren't tourists and that climbing was still allowed in the area.
I just stood by and smiled.
Without Spanish, it was one crag we'd never have visited.
Espero Fray Gary is one of the infamous ‘bolt a metre’ areas with short routes taking about 10 minutes to lead.
The rock was unusual, but my Boston conglomerate experience helped a lot and the great protection boosted confidence for my first lead of the season.
This is what real rock climbing is about for me: shorts and T-shirt, hot sunshine, good holds, and clipping bolts.
However, convincing myself the pebbles I was climbing on wouldn't pull out did take a little time.
I also learned not to step on the shiny ones and that red  pebbles usually have sharp edges on top.
For a time a chorus of bells from the monastery seemed to peel in celebration each time I finished a pitch.
It was only later I learned that with so many religious activities, there are bells every few minutes.
The next climb that attracted us was The Magic Line on El Gorro Frigio — a large dome higher up the massif.
Although there's a trail, walking up in the sunshine would be quite unpleasant, so we took a short ride on the incline railway to a more acceptable horizontal trail.
All along the trail are a number of low angle 500 foot domes composed of ‘glued together’ pebbles.
By now the sun was hot and prospects for a tan looked good.
The Magic Line follows a bolted, pebble-studded slab up the front of the dome and the route finding couldn't have been simpler.
Our route had silver bolts, while the bolts for the route on the left were painted red and the ones for the route on the right green!
The climbing was superb, with pitches of about Very Severe and many of the larger pebbles sticking out of the rock create great hand holds.
I spent as much time wondering how the dome was held together as I did actually climbing.
Higher up the dome became steeper, but by now I'd learned to trust the rock a bit more.
It was so enjoyable that at the headwall I took a line up the steepest part, just so I could play about hanging from the holds.
Above: Louise Trave-Massuyes belayed to the statue of the Virgin at the summit of Cavall Bernat
Right: Louise leading on The Trunk of the Elephant.
Protection bolts are essential in this area since there are no cracks for nut protection.
Often I climbed away from one bolt  without being able to see where the next one was, and this added a new dimension to route finding.
More that once I almost stepped on a bolt before I saw it.
It certainly made me wonder about climbers who object to bolts on the basis that they're an eyesore.
Unfortunately, there are so many bolts from so many routes on this dome that I sometimes found it difficult to stay on route.
At one point I traversed from the red bolts (off route) to the green bolts (also off route) without finding the silver bolts I was supposed to be on.
In the end I decided it didn't matter much where I went as long as it was up.
Just as the heat was getting too much we reached the cool breezes on the summit.
The view was impressive with the entire mountain covered in scores of domes and crags.
Most of the rock has bolted routes and my mind boggled at the potential.
SEA OF PEBBLES
Our next goal was a superb line — The Trunk of the Elephant — which ascends the steep profile of the rock formation that gives the route its name.
The approach from the monastery is a 500 foot high concrete stairway, created for monks, climbers and adventurous tourists, with a climbing hut near the top for those who like to sleep near the crags.
There's good bouldering outside the hut and the guardian's a good source of information (if you speak Spanish).
Our problems started on the first pitch.
In the sea of pebbles I couldn't see the bolts — so much for environmental concerns — but fortunately it was easy climbing.
The second pitch wasn't much better, but I did find a few bolts.
Since the crux pitch is (F6a), the climbers who bolted the route had assumed anyone on the route was good enough not to need bolts on the grade-4 pitches.
This is quite common at Montserrat, so be warned.
We'd been told by the guardian that the bolts on the climb were ‘good.’
After a few days climbing in the area we realised this might mean new or close together, but rarely both.
In this case we were lucky and the route had been re-equipped with new bolts placed in between the old bolts.
As a result, the very steep crux pitch had a bolt a metre and I became very pumped — more from clipping the bolts than from the climbing!
At the end of the pitch I ran out of strength and quick draws at the same time, and this seemed a legitimate excuse to frig about, rest and admire the superb view from my vantage point high on the mountain.
At the start of this climb we'd been uncomfortably hot in the sunshine, but by the end the sun had moved on and the wind had got up.
Within minutes it was very strong and while my partner seconded I began calculating the odds of freezing to death.
We rushed up the last pitches having learned a lesson — next time I'll take a windbreaker, even on a hot day.
Sunday mornings at Montserrat are a real treat, since the religious services are a celebration of Spanish culture.
While drinking our essential morning tea and coffee we were lost in a sea of women in traditional dress with castanets.
Watching them warm up was impressive, but we didn't wait for the show, wanting an early start for one of the best lines on the mountain.
Cavall Bernat is the best looking spire in the massif and the north face rises 800 feet in a great sweep of rock.
Described as a giant phallic symbol in the guidebook, I thought of it more as the Fickle Finger of Fate.
Ten pitches long, the route starts as easy angled slabs which lead to a vertical section and an overhanging finish in a tremendous, exposed position.
Montserrat conglomerate — a memorable climbing experience.
The initial pitches gave easy climbing up the low angled base, but as usual with routes having (F6a) and (F6b) moves, there were only two or three bolts a long way apart.
In general this only a problem if you want to change leads with a weaker climber.
Two Spanish climbers above us were working on the overhanging 6b pitches and although we'd been told you could aid the whole section it was obvious from the stance that the bolts were too far apart.
The pitch would have to be climbed free.
Watching the other pair struggle, I decided it was better to enjoy the view and convince myself they were incompetent.
In the end this section went very well.
In Spanish tradition, I rested when I wanted to on the bolts, 700 feet above ground, and with a little planning it was possible to use jugs for almost every move.
My enjoyment was only tempered by my fear of pumping out.
At the start of the pitch I'd been worried I couldn't do it; by the belay I was wondering why I'd rested so often.
The summit anchor added to the wonderment: a sling around a statue of the Virgin, complete with a bouquet!
Although the wind was cold, the view was awesome.
Standing on the summit I reflected on our few days of warm sunshine, high quality bolted routes, lots of fun and curious pebble climbing in a mountain setting.
INFORMATION
Transport & Tourism:Montserrat is just south of Manresa, one hour's drive north of Barcelona.
If you don't have a car you can get there easily from Barcelona by train and cable car.
Montserrat itself is a major religious centre, and in addition to the religious facilities it's well set up for tourists and climbers with a cafe, bakery, bar and essential ice cream store.
Guides & Camping:There are a number of Spanish topo guides to  Montserrat .
Climbing in Spain by Francois Burnier and Dominique Potard (1990),(distributed by Cordee), has a number of topos for Montserrat.
The text is in English and French.
For climbing information the campground is the best source, and the only place to buy guidebooks.
The campground has a terrific hot shower and a climbing wall and there are a number of good bouldering areas nearby.
EQUIPMENT
RAIN DRAIN
What are the alternatives to Gore-Tex and Sympatex membrane waterproofs, now hitting the lofty £200 mark?
Quite a few is the answer.
We test a new coated jacket and look at a brand new development in the field
LOWE TUNDRA JACKET


This jacket is part of a new range from Lowe Alpine and it's extremely supple and comfortable.
In many ways this is a no-frills jacket, but one with the features you would expect in a mountain jacket — four cargo pockets and one internal pocket, a generous hood, Velcro cuffs and a good wide flap over the front zip.
This jacket is styled for the American market, so the pocket zips open bottom to top and the main zip connects the other way round.
A high front zip gives good protection to the face and mouth, but this isn't a feature which will appeal to everyone.
A couple of design areas which could do with more thought are the hood and the pockets.
When worn battened down without a hat, the hood really needs some sort of volume adjuster at the back, or else the soft peak reduced visibility dramatically (Lowe say they are working on this).
Replacing the nylon cord on the hood with shock cord would save the eyes getting a lashing in the wind.
The only problem with the pockets is that none will take a 1:50,000 OS map.
When we brought this to Lowe's attention they said they were working on the problem.
Waterproofing comes from a hydrophobic, microporus coating.
In real terms, that means the coating repels water droplets from the outside, but microscopic holes allow water vapour from perspiration to pass through from the inside.
The inner is a mixture of breathable nylon mesh and nylon.
All seams are taped and for general use the jacket appeared to be more waterproof than it was breathable.
However, after a day of gale force winds and driving rain the jacket was soaking inside, mu fleece was damp and my thermal was dry.
Overall this is a stylish jacket worth considering for general mountain use.
Unfortunately the hood and peak are most unuser friendly when battling against the elements.
THE NORTH FACE CELESTIAL PAAK JACKET


The problem with Gore-Tex jackets in the past has been quite simple — they haven't kept the water out.
They might look cool in the pub and strutting around the car park at Ogwen Cottage, but when the chips were down you got wet.
Given the number of days I've spent wandering around the rain-sodden Moelwyns cursing Gore-Tex, my delight at this garment is quite understandable.
It also weighs in as the most comfortable waterproof jacket I've worn.
The outer is a flexible Two-ply Taslan Gore-Tex, in a tasteful dark green and subdued purple, with an inner polypropylene mesh.
This creates a breathing space between inner clothes and the waterproof outer skin; important when only thermals are being worn underneath.
The knitted cuff around the neck feels snug and the hood is well cut, lined and detachable.
The collar is cut high to provide good face protection in high winds.
Two zipped and flapped lower pockets are complemented by a third map-pocket over the left chest.
The lower internal lining also sports a couple of pockets, one zipped.
I reserve judgement on the external Velcroed cuffs.
They are efficient, but I think I prefer internal fastenings especially as Velcro is susceptible to becoming snowed up.
Elastic cords at the waist and lower hem allow the fit to be adjusted and, despite all the twiddly bits, the jacket does not seem inordinately heavy.
It's cut to upper-thigh length, my preference, and there's plenty of material for upper arm movement even when worn under a climbing harness.
The only small quibbles I have are the shape of the zip pullers, which sometimes dig into hips when a rucksack's carried, the lack of a horizontal chest pocket to take a map (very useful when navigating in poor weather) and a wired hood, which would stop it falling over the eyes at inconvenient moments.
Despite these, the Celestial Peak is a fine, all year mountain jacket.
PARAMO NEVADA JACKET AND SALOPETTES


Sometimes a piece of outdoor clothing comes on the market and leaves you with such mixed feelings it's hard to know where to start a review.
If fashion was the raison d'être of outdoor clothing (don't laugh), then I could end this review here.
But thankfully, function still has a role to play!
In terms of waterproofness and breathability this is very functional gear.
Designed initially as an all-day alpine suit, the Nevada jacket and salopettes can be worn next to the skin or over a thermal wicking layer.
Both jacket and salopettes are made of Parameta with a Pertex outer shell.
In many ways the fibres of Parameta are like the hairs of animal fur — tightly packed at source and more open towards the outside.
The design inherently prevents water penetration.
In nature it's backed up by waterproof animal oils — Nikwax use TX10i.
The Pertex outer is also waterproofed with TX10i and helps to break the force of the rain.
Furthermore, water running down the outside of the Pertex helps to draw out some of the water that penetrated through to the Parameta.a The rest stays there and evaporates in the wind or trickles down between the layers.
Sounds fine, but do you stay dry?
The answer is you do, providing it isn't wild and wet, but then little stands up to that.
For most weather conditions the Nevada is really waterproof, but it needs washing and will need re-proofing in time.
Breathability is excellent to start with, but full length zips on the legs and zips on the jacket improve this even further.
The leg zips also allow for calls of nature.
The only complaints to be levelled at the Nevada are some of the design features and durability (or lack of it).
There's no doubt that the Pertex will suffer from axes and crampons, and it flaps about horribly in a gale, but waterproofing doesn't appear to be compromised by holes in the outer.
However, when we contacted Nikwax it appeared that durability is already being addressed with plans for a beefed-up outer with reinforced areas.
Both garments are quite windproof but the jacket needs more than thermal underwear under it in wild weather.
The jacket is rather short, so a jersey or fleece has to be put under the shoulder straps of the salopettes, not over, or it will stick out below the jacket and get wet.
As for general design, cuffs storm flaps, pockets and parts of the hood all need looking at.
However, many of these areas are already receiving attention for son of Nevada.
So this is a very interesting development and extremely good value for money for a set of breathable waterproofs providing you don't plan to go out in really wild weather.
However, the durability, stylishness and functionality of the present design leaves something to be desired — especially for technical use in the mountains.
A lot of changes are being made which will go a long way towards making the garments more user friendly.
Meanwhile, watch this space.
BREATHABILITY & WATERPROOFNESS
These were both subjective tests and as such are only indicators of how our reviewers felt the garments performed.
All garments have been worn in a mixture of British mountain conditions ranging from clear and frosty to driving rain.
In general, the same clothing was used underneath — Rhoval/Modal thermals and Polartec 200 fleece.
The level of breathability and waterproofness was assessed by the wetness of the underclothing and the jacket lining in relation to the conditions and the amount of exertion.
COMFORT & DESIGN
Once again both of these were subjective tests.
Factors such as suppleness of the outer and inner materials, weight, general cut and ventilation were taken into account when assessing comfort.
Design factors included the ease of using zips, whether the pockets took a 1:50,000 OS map, hood visibility, ease of adjustment of toggles, number and placement of pockets and general cut.
HANWAG ROCKY SYMPATEX


At one time plastic boots were all the rage for summer climbing in the Alps and winter mountain walking in Scotland.
Thankfully, leather mountain boots are reasserting themselves.
Hanwag Rocky Sympatex boots are made from three piece leather with a Sympatex inner, shock-absorbing EVA wedge under the heel, Vibram sole with quick release crampon grooves and a moderately stiff sole.
The three piece leather does make for a lot of stitching at the sides and this suffered quite badly after a few days on rough moraine.
Things seem to have improved since running Superglue along the stitch lines (probably not the best thing to do).
Of course, losing stitches doesn't cause a waterproof problem — the boots have a Sympatex liner, but because of the liner, I imagine these aren't boots you can easily get repaired.
As for the Sympatex liner, these are by far the driest leather boots I've ever worn.
Over the months one of the D ring rivets at the flex point of the boot has started to dig into my foot, so although the padding inside the boot is OK, it could be better.
I also find the toe box a bit low — something which will not suit everyone.
The sole is excellent: suitably stiff for a mountain boot, but with a bit of flexibility to lessen some walking strain.
The EVA wedge at the heel gives good shock absorption, but I wish it travelled the whole length of the boot as I find the balls of my feet get sore after a long day on the hill.
Quick release crampons (Grivel 2Fs) worked well for glacier approaches, although the plastic heel lever was easily felt through the soft heel leather of the boot.
This may not be as bad with other crampon makes.
Overall a good supportive and waterproof mountaineering boot.
Perhaps not as comfortable or as durable as it could be, but good value for money, nonetheless.
Available in sizes 3½ to 13.
Weight 1.9g per pair (size 8).
NEW PRODUCTS
STUBAI GREEN LINE ICE AXE
Stubai's new Green Line ice axe system should make an appearance this winter.
The new FKW tool free modular system axe and hammer come with S-shaped shafts and should be lighter and better balanced than the original FKWs.
Axes should be available for testing this winter at:.
JACK WOLFSKIN
Pawing through the new range has turned up some interesting items.
Two new ranges of rucksack: the Yak two-compartment sack with an adjustable back and the Altai two-compartment, semi-adjustable.
On the tent front there's a lightweight backpacking model — the Termite — and two goose down sleeping bags to go inside, the 550g Kingfisher and 700g Kingfisher.
For mountaineers, there's a Lightweight Texaport jacket called the Avalanche and three microfibre jackets for hill walking or climbing..
OFF BELAY
BURYING THE DEAD
Ed Douglas looks at the continuing controversy surrounding plans to bolt parts of Land's End and suggests that though the idea may be dead, it's a long way from being buried
Let me introduce you to the world of press releases.
They are used by the publicity departments of large commercial organisations to do clever things with the truth.
They are written by people who have a slackening grip on the friendly hand of reality.
They can do things like tell you black is white and nuclear power is safe.
Or rather they can tell you that ‘previous assumptions on the dark nature of this pigment can no longer be considered entirely operative; indeed, we may be in total reversal scenario here, which is in line with expectations.’
The owners of Land's End are experts at the game and my friend Des Hannigan, who's been working as a journalist down there for a few years, tells me they spray press releases at the local media with mad abandon.
Peter de Savary's crew discovered climbing last year, although it appears he off-loaded the place on another property speculator in the summer without bothering to tell anyone!
DOUBLE-SPEAK
The teaming up of Land's End Ltd with Rowland Edwards, who seems to have his own unique version of reality, produced one of the choicer pieces of double-speak I've seen in a long time: a press release announcing a campaign to add fixed anchors and gear to the crags in the interests of the environment and safety .
Many climbers managed a gasp of amused astonishment and assumed, not unreasonably, that such a joke in poor taste would be swiftly buried.
But leaving others to bury the dead can be a dangerous exercise.
First, though, let's recall some of the refreshing nonsense the Land's End Ltd press release included: ‘Hard steel pitons were also leaving large unsightly rust stains on the cliff face and, by being chiselled in, were opening up large and damaging cracks that are irreparable by natural means.’
I hadn't known just how sensitive granite could be.
This rust-blood pouring from mortal wounds in the planet's skin is a terrible indictment of the tyranny we climbers inflict.
Little sterile pin-pricks from a friendly Bosch will put things straight.
Thank God for these defenders of the green faith.
Pete Agnew on Visions of Johanna (E1) at Bosigran —‘A bolt on that peerless sheet of granite would be an abomination; a denial of the kind of people we are.’
‘Rock faces were being eroded and plants that had taken millions of years to establish themselves were being destroyed  almost literally overnight,’ the fount of wisdom continues.
An interesting point.
What sort of phrase is ‘almost literally?’
This is the language of the press release, breathlessly informing us that a speculator whose environmental record is not exactly unblemished and whose monstrous Land's End ‘facilities’ are a blight against all aesthetic considerations, really does care what happens to the dear little flowers that have taken eternity to develop, and the cuddly cliff faces which shake and quiver at the climber's intrusive touch.
WEASEL WORDS
‘I have no wish to take the adventure out of climbing — that is not in my professional interests, after all — but I would be a hypocrite if I did not accept that we are causing environmental damage,’ Rowland confesses.
Weasel words, I fear.
Notice the reference to his professional interests.
Why mention them?
They are not relevant to his argument, since students of rock climbing would be sufficiently gobsmacked just to be on a top-rope at Land's End.
But professional interests are on Rowland's mind.
He's obviously been losing sleep about it.
I'm killing all these plants by taking my students to Land's End,I must do something about it .
To avoid the damage that large groups of climbers are doing the crags, bolt the hell out of them — it's obvious.
(It's also obvious that it's much safer, and the dangers of losing a client with the attendant bad publicity [not even a Land's End Ltd press release would cover that one], are not in anybody's professional interests.
It's so transparent.
Bolted climbing venues are massively popular, and if Land's End was bolted-up then climbers and climbing courses would be falling over themselves to get down there.
By encouraging this invasion Rowland and the Land's End Ltd managers are precipitating environmental damage, not reducing it.
The BMC immediately leapt on the white chargers they keep permanently tied up outside Crawford House in Manchester and thundered southward to deal with the problem once it arose.
Everybody reacted as one, condemning this nonsense and laughing at the bare-faced cheek of it.
Local climbers who had refused to support bolting in Cornwall reached new heights of frustration.
The Association of British Mountain Guides, of which Rowland is a member, expressed their deep concern, and ordinary climbers across the land who love Cornwall shuddered at the hypocrisy of it.
And so some backtracking has gone on.
An independent ecologist has been commissioned to assess the situation.
Land's End Ltd issued a new, more subdued press release.
The BMC praised Land's End reasonable attitude and thanked it again for allowing us all to use the car park.
Normal service has been resumed.
But has it?
Another extract, I feel:
‘It was acknowledged that the proposed new measures could be regarded as detracting from the sport's essential sense of adventure and freedom.’
‘But the alternative, it was argued, was a growing risk of tragedy and a Britain of ‘vertical deserts’ where climbers would ultimately be banned from climbing altogether.’
Is this extract from the first ‘brave new world’ document or the ‘let's look at this again’release?
It's from both of them, repeated verbatim despite the howls of protest raised at the very idea of it all.
The first paragraph is quite accurate.
The second is a refraction of the truth so wicked in its appeal to natural and real concerns that I can barely sit in my chair and type this.
DIFFICULT BELAYS
Don't leave the dead unburied.
Dig a deep pit, throw the whole mess in and cover it over.
If we don't finish this now, the corpse will rise and move on.
There have long been rumours of putting bolts on Bosigran routes where the belays are difficult to arrange.
Routes like the Nameless/Autumn Flakes combination, a cuddly VS which can be protected, but a route on which climbers have lost their lives through belay failure.
Routes like Suicide Wall, where the stumps of rusted pegs obscure an excellent belay.
A bolt on that peerless sheet of granite would be an abomination; a denial of the kind of people we are.
REPORTS
SCOTLAND
Snow & Ice
NEW WINTER GRADING SYSTEM PROPOSED
After a good start to the winter, early season conditions disappeared at the end of November, with a prolonged mild spell stripping the hills of snow.
This meant that the high pressure system which had established itself across the country in the first part of December, and the ensuing hard freeze, was next to useless from a winter climber's point of view, with the crags totally bare.
So just one new route to report this month, climbed by Rab Anderson just before the late November thaw.
McSod's Crack (IV) takes the turfy line just to the right of Maclay's Crack on the Cobbler's North Peak.
Over the autumn there's been much discussion on Scottish winter grades.
The current I to V system has existed since 1961 when the first grade Vs were climbed by the likes of Patey, Marshall and Smith.
Grade VI was introduced in the early 80s, and has been used, often with some reluctance, to describe the very hardest routes.
Over the years the number of grade Vs has quadrupled, with much over-crowding in the top end.
Less than half these Vs have had repeats, and the names of the first  ascensionists are often a better guide to a route's difficulty than its published grade.
Andy Nisbet suggested an open-ended grading system several years ago, and more recently Rab Anderson (after an original idea by Al Rouse) proposed grading winter routes pitch by pitch.
Neither system caught on, but with a new series of Scottish guidebooks on the way, a two-tier winter grade incorporating both ideas has been suggested in an attempt to resolve the problem.
The proposed system works the same way as summer E grades, with a Roman numeral (I-X etc) encompassing the overall difficulty of the route including seriousness, protection, sustainedness and length, and an Arabic numeral (1–10 etc) to reflect the technical difficulty of the hardest pitch or crux sequence.
It is not intended to use the system for multiple pitch gradings.
By adopting an open-ended scale, no downgrading of existing climbs should be necessary.
Point Five has been taken as the benchmark ice gully climb, and would be graded V, 5 under the new system.
Mitre Ridge on Beinn a ‘Bhuird would be a good example of a V, 5 mixed route.
These great classics are relatively straightforward compared to more recent climbs, and a grade as high as VIII, 8 might be a realistic assessment for some of the hardest routes in Scotland such as The Needle on the Shelter Stone, or Diedre of Sorrows on Lochnagar.
Devising a system that is applicable to Ben Nevis style ice routes and Cairngorm mixed routes is difficult, but this is one of the advantages of the proposed two-tier grade.
For example, consider two established ‘big name’ routes from each area.
Pointless VII, 6 is a major Ben face route involving long runouts on thin ice with poor belays.
Not surprisingly perhaps, it has only been repeated three or four times in 14 years!
Citadel: VII, 8 on the other hand, has excellent protection but is long and sustained with the crux right at the top when abseil retreat is both difficult and uninviting.
It has been described as the ‘touchstone of modern mixed climbing’, but despite several attempts, still awaits a free ascent.
Although obviously very different in character, both climbs are serious routes and merit the VII grade.
The technical grading, however, makes it clear that Pointless requires a cool head and a bold approach, while Citadel makes more demands on efficiency and technical ability.
Some climbers are very enthusiastic about the new proposal, recognising that the current system needs revising and bringing up to date.
Others are concerned that the two-tier grades are biased towards technical and safe mixed routes, and the seriousness of ice routes has not been properly addressed.
Another, equally valid, view is that one of the charms of Scottish winter climbing is the mystery and uncertainty concerning the route's grade, and the present system should be left unchanged.
Despite the mixed views on the issue, there does appear to be a consensus amongst a wide range of climbers that modern standards and trends now require at least an extension of the current system.
As a trial, two-tier grades for selected routes will be published as an appendix in the forthcoming Glen Coe guide which should be published in the spring.
No doubt this will provide much heated debate for the pub; but the real test will be if the system is accepted by those climbing new routes in the future.
PEAK
Now that we're well into the New Year and little seems to be happening on the rock, I guess it's time for the traditional retrospective.
With a few exceptions, 1991 wasn't a particularly memorable year in the Peak with the majority of the year's crop of new routes being mediocre or insignificant.
The two routes that do stand out are Seb Grieves' Clippety  Clop, Clippety Clop at Ramshaw and Sean Myles' Captain Invincible in the Burbage Quarries.
Both routes are E8, a rarity on gritstone, and deserve much praise.
No doubt there';; be more from Grieves and Myles this year.
On limestone, most of the action took place on the repeat scene, with Mecca (F8b±) seeing a lot of traffic.
Jerry Moffatt's solo of Pump Up The Power (f8a±) and Quentin Fisher's solo of Out Of My Tree (F7c±) are good efforts in insanity.
Apart from this very little happened!
This year might see a difference, especially now the Foundry climbing wall is open.
This has to be the most awesome wall around, so get down there and get cranking — be warned though, within four hours of it opening four people had damaged their tendons: remember always to warm up first!
SOUTH-WEST
At Pentire Head, the much talked about ‘last great problem’ has finally fallen to Martin Crocker.
Groove Full of Mirrors, E7 6B, crosses the imposing headwall between Darkinbad and reflections via some very bold, strenuous, fingery and technical climbing.
I'm sure it crossed Martin's mind that a fall could pendulum him back into the great flake of Eroica.
One point of aid was used, which in no way diminishes what is a major achievement.
The freeing of this aid point will leave a climb of immense daring and technical proficiency, but the honours remain with Crocker.
Also at Pentire, Martin climbed Another Nervous Breakdown, E6± 6B, starting right of Darkinbad and climbing the wall eventually to join Last Leviathan, while Beneath Black Waters, E6 6B, is a direct line up the triangular wall right of Siren's Cry with a roof as its crux: powerful stuff.
Further up the coast at Blackchurch, Frank Ramsey has taken another route that many have eyed.
His as yet un-named line starts right of Godspell and boldly climbs this grey wall on small, creaking flakes.
The fall potential on this wall is greater than the length of the climbs as well!
Scary stuff and graded (at least I'd have thought) E5 6a.
At Sanctuary Wall in Anstey's Cove, Ken Palmer abseiled down a line, placed two pegs then proceeded to flash Caribbean Blue, E6 6a.
This starts six feet right of Call to Arms.
In retrospect, Ken is a little unhappy that he didn't ask his belayer to place the pegs so it could have been an on-sight flash.
Still, it's a pretty fine effort.
Last summer nearly saw the second ascent of Ken's Fisherman's Tale by a visiting climber.
He managed to connect all the moves except for the last in one push and doubtless would have succeeded given more time.
The grade has been confirmed at F8b.
Will Devon see its first F8c this year?
I suspect so.
At Long Quarry, Nick White has climbed a bolted line through the cave to produce Losing My Religion at E6 6b.
Nick has also climbed an E6 6b/c line at Torbrien Quarry (one of Devon's better kept secrets) right of Mayday.
In West Penwith the new forcing ground appears to be the grossly overhanging slate mass of Carn Vellan, where Mark Edwards has produced two out and out sports routes.
This cliff already has an aid climb, The Lid, which, if it were to go free would be very hard indeed.
But  once again the thorny issue of bolts in West Penwith is raised.
One of Mark's routes is Bridge of  Sies at the Spanish grade of 7c.
All the protection is from stainless steel pegs or titanium knifeblades left in-situ.
It starts as for  Ziggerat , climbs direct to the first roof, pulls through this and continues up the steep wall to the next roof which is passed by very difficult bridging.
The second route, Blue Sky Lightning (Spanish 8±) uses four pegs and five bolts.
some of the pegs can not be clipped and were used to equip the route.
It is believed they well be removed.
The climb starts from Several Species etc, moves right onto the overhang, passes a chockstone and continues to a pod, then follows a groove to the final roof.
I seriously doubt if it would be possible to put up a climb like this without bolts, particularly as the rock is not beyond suspicion.
As it is Mark took some spectacular falls.
Also at Carn Vellan, Rowland Edwards has put up two routes in a more traditional vein, both un-named.
The first, an E3 5c, takes the left edge of the buttress right of Zero Gravity; the other, an E3/4 6a, takes the groove right of Silver Shadow.
Also here he produced Joy Riders, E3 5c, which takes the steep wall right of the chimney in the Arch Rock area.
At Robin's Rocks, Mark's The Silver Shadow, E5 6b, climbs the impressive overhanging wall right of Turco the Terrible.
Towland produced an E2 5c right of this, a HVS and Robin Hood, E1 5b.
At Gurnard's Head, Rowland has climbed the stunning arête right of Shark to give The Silence of a Lamb, E5 6b, and a candidate for two, if not three stars methinks.
At Horseman Zawn, Near Great Zawn, Tony Penning climbed an un-named E5 6b taking the groove left of 5th Horseman.
The route is described as desperate, so don't all rush at once now.
At Aire Point, Alan Cameron Duff top-roped then soloed Subterranean Homesick Blues, E2 5c.
Peter O'Sullivan climbed The Ridge, E2 5c, up the buttress next to Trimsaren at Trewavas Head: a line described as a little gem.
Pete and others have been very active here producing a number of routes.
Among these is Serial Killer, E4 6a, which climbs an overhanging corner on the seaward face of the island, while By Stealth, E3 6a, takes the smooth wallright of Lucozade.
O'Sullivan, Pete Greenwell and M. Dunning produced Stella Maris, E3 5c, on the seaward wall of Rabman Zawn, taking an obvious stack and roof.
This is said to be a future three star route.
Here they also climbed Raiders of the Lost Zawn, E1 5b, and Stella Artios, VS.
One member of this party almost vanished down a hidden disused mineshaft on the walkout, thankfully managing to stop himself in time from going the distance!
Who says climbing in Cornwall is no longer adventurous?
Rockfall has again altered the starts to routes in the Gullible/Mitre area at Chair Ladder.
Up at Carn Gowla, Davis Hope and A. Camm found a companion for Four For Texas with Rainbow Games, E2 5c, taking the thin crack on the left side of the pink wall.
They also found The Song of the Shirt, HS, which starts as for Nightride.
WALES
As the monsoon season ran its usual course in Snowdonia, anybody with any sense fled to warmer climes while the rest of us sat and talked about what we would do if it wasn't raining.
Now this kind of behaviour often ends up in a fierce debate about guidebook descriptions and grades of the participants' favourite routes.
What is surprising is that just for a change, some of this talk is being turned into action.
After a delay of some years there is now some momentum behind the production of a guidebook for the Clwyd Limestone area.
Gary Deckenson is collating information which will be published by Cicerone Press sometime this year with a bit of luck.
Gary would be very grateful for new route information and any historical detail that regular devotees of the area could supply.
Any guidebook is only as good as the input of information into it, and this is an opportunity to make sure the guide is up to date and accurate.
This input is not only welcome from those climbing in the higher grades; opinions about all the climbs are valid, with the need for accurate lower grade route descriptions being vital.
Please contribute via .
Other guidebook news includes the next Tremadog guide which is being masterminded by Leigh McGinley, who has a proven pedigree at the game, having written the guide before last (1983).
There is, I know, much gnashing of teeth, banging of beer glasses etc. about the non-appearance of the Ogwen & Carneddau and Llanberis guides, but both these tomes are at least on the horizon now.
The Climbers Club guidebook setup has been undergoing changes that should result in a much smoother flow of up to date guides without the huge time-lags that have recently featured between one volume selling out and the next one being published.
The whole shooting match is being computerised and guides will be held on disc and hopefully updated constantly to ensure the minimum of delay in publishing a new volume.
There are only so many ways to describe a pitch and there is very little need to alter descriptions if the existing ones work perfectly well, thus cutting down on the number of major rewrites required.
Another advance is to have writers working on each volume much sooner before the existing one sells out: hence work has already started on Tremadog, Gogarth, Cloggy and even Lliwedd.
As I suggested above, information, opinions and even historical anecdotes are all gratefully received and can be forwarded to the writers via .
The double volume, Ogwen & Carneddau, will hopefully be in the shops by Easter; Llanberis, at the time of writing, has much of the text complete, thanks to Iwan Arfon Jones, and Paul Williams has been rounding up all the loose ends.
Good quality colour slides for potential inclusion in this guide can be sent, or dropped off, at the previous address.
This volume will not include the slate crags, and by now a comprehensive new guide to these popular diversions should be available.
This is a local venture although modelled on the CC format of a written descriptions accompanied by photographs.
Another guide, which should be out anytime is a North Wales Limestone volume from Vertical Brain and produced by Steve Meyers.
This will feature the important information concerning which of the routes are still climbable under the current agreement with the owners of Pen Trwyn.
On Clwyd limestone, fears had been expressed over the possibility of losing the trees along the top of the World's End crags.
It now seems that the trees along the top, used as belays, will not be felled; only those areas below the cliff being affected.
Bird Ban time is upon us with the South Stack (Gogarth) bans beginning on the February 1st and most Pembroke bans starting on March 1st.
The particular areas covered in each case can be found in the relevant guidebooks or on notices posted at access points, car parks etc.
In some areas the precise details of the ban coverage has changed over the last few years and climber are requested to check that they re aware of these updates.
In Climbers' Club guides all seasonally restricted climbs are marked with an [R]symbol.
Finally, one first ascent worth mentioning; reputed to be the ‘world's softest route.’
Rubble (E7 6a 6a 5a) climbs the true line of the Concrete Chimney in Gogarth's Wen Zawn and was the inspired (deranged?) work of Paul Pritchard and Leigh McGinley.
Most teams will probably be quite satisfied completing the route Concrete Chimney, which spends most of its length studiously avoiding the feature after which it was named.
BOOKS
YAKS, BRIAN BLESSED AND EVEREST; BACKPACKING WITH CHRIS TOWNSEND
BACKPACKERS HANDBOOK
I suppose the trans-Atlantic term backpacking is here to stay, but at least it is a gap-filling work which, fully and simply, covers what is a fairly new sort of game walkers play.
Nobody has exemplified the extremes of this aberration of outdoor endeavour more than Chris Townsend, so it serves him right that he is called to write a book on the subject.
Being a dedicated tough cookie, he has delivered the goods in impressive manner.
The book is very personal, not at all a dry textbook, and even gives the impression of being a labour of love.
It covers everything, and if we, on this side of the pond, don't have to face bears, they do over there.
Too many books (to boost sales one suspects) tack on Americanisms, in language and practice, but Chris has made some of the greatest long expeditions over there, such as his 3000 mile Continental Divide route, so he is an authority on both sides of the Atlantic.
His Great Backpacking Adventure (also OIP) is a narrative of some of his backpacking trips, and this very much the practical manual on such efforts.
When I said the book under review covers everything, I mean it.
The contents include topics like:Into the Wilderness, The Load on Your Back, Footwear and Wilderness Travel, Carrying the Load, Keeping Warm and Dry, Shelter, The Wilderness Kitchen , and Skills and Hazards .
The book also has a useful appendix on further reading.
There is an engaging frankness in what Chris says.
If he does not know something he is happy to admit it — as in the paragraph on backpacking with children: ‘No experience’.
(Perhaps this shows a deficiency in the section Preparing for Bed and Coping with the Night!
In reality there is little Chris does not know, for the best of reasons — his constant personal participation at the toughest end of the game.
If we must have manuals then this is the one, for the author still goes into the wilds to revel in the ‘painful delights of exquisite beauty.’
May he escape the bears for a long time yet.
A LAKELAND MOUNTAIN DIARY
Towards the end of 1950 the editor of The Manchester Guardian , as then was, asked Harry Griffin whether he would like to contribute to the paper's ‘Country Diary’ about once a fortnight.
The offer was accepted with alacrity and Harry has been writing these little vignettes for the paper ever since.
The present volume is the paperback edition of a book which first appeared in 1990.
In it Harry has collected 240 of the ‘Country Diary’ pieces from 1976 to 1990 — or as he laconically points out, between the ages of 65 and 80.
Each piece is a carefully crafted little jewel, with polished facets that flint, or maybe elude the eye 'till second time around.
A master craftsman is at work here — don't be fooled by the apparent simplicity.
Each piece deals with a single incident, a mood, or reminiscence.
He knows the fells so well in all their guises, that familiar things become fresh.
His piece The ‘Magic’ Boots made me smile in reminiscence, since I was one of those with him on that occasion — the weekend in Langdale when Brasher Boots were launched on an unsuspecting world.
The book is illustrated by the superb black and white photographs of the late Geoffrey Berry.
Unfortunately, the designer has integrated them in the text, and while this might be admirable for coffee table books or even guide books, it is quite wrong here as it makes them look cramped and mean.
Anyone who likes the Lake District is bound to like this book.
THE TURQUOISE MOUNTAIN, BRIAN BLESSED ON EVEREST
This book contains 25 photographs of Brian Blessed and one of a yak.
These two creatures — Blessed and the yak — are indistinguishable in build and hairiness, though it should be noted that the latter moves on all fours and has horns.
The book, written by Blessed, who is an actor or, as he puts it, ‘sexy and a star’, is about how the actor (but not the yak) reached 25,400ft on the North Ridge of Everest while making the film entitled Galahad of Everest .
If your memories are stirring uneasily around thoughts of the odious and contemptible graverobbing expedition of a few years back to try and recover Mallory and Irvine's ‘camera and other remains’, forget it.
True, some of the usual crowd of hustlers and hangers-on make brief, unctuous appearances in the course of the narrative, but the book itself and the character of its author is a huge, innocent delight, and one with some unexpected depths and dimensions.
Not least of these is the achievement of a 53 year old, who resembled nothing so much (yaks apart) as the reincarnation of General Bruce and weighed 16 stone at the outset of the expedition, in getting to that height.
I suspect that the more serious — or serious minded — members of the climbing community will find a certain amount to irritate them here.
They shouldn't let it.
Once you've pondered the crucial question of which is the bigger — Mount Everest or Blessed's supremely affable ego, then the best course of action is simply to let the saltily ribald tidal wave of his enthusiasm for the Big Hill and its history wash over you.
Laugh off the endless epithetising of everyone who crosses his path — his ‘pretty elder daughter’, the ‘renowned tailor’, even my own guest appearance as ‘that respected mountaineer’; roar aloud at the over-the-topness of the following: ‘That evening at dinner the flap of our tent opened and in strode a figure of heroic majesty.
The noble forehead, glittering blue eyes, high cheekbones and well-formed beard suggested the conquistador Cortes.
The handsome, smiling face exuded confidence and good cheer.
It was the great climber Peter Habeler…’
But make sure you pay attention not just to the basic impulses and enthusiasms, which are sound and fine; not just to the incidental portrait of a consummate mountaineer in the passages about Dave Breashears; but also to a strange sort of instinctual third dimension which Blessed's larger than life character seems to entice into play:
‘I know what happened to Mallory and Irvine,’ he said.
‘Several days after they had died.
I was at the Rongbuk Monastery, below Base Camp, with a monk in a dark chamber.
By the power of his mind, he had the ability to focus a film-like apparition of their last hours on a blank wall…there, quite clearly, were Mallory and Irvine with their backs to the summit, which was a small distance above them…’’
That's Captain J.B.J. Noel — the 1922 and 1924 cameraman — talking to Blessed, and I'm as willing to give credence to that as I am to Simon Fraser's dream of Tilman's end.
The Noel interview is one of the book's gifts.
Among others accruing from its overwhelming rush of energy is a wry self-perspective which brings balance.
This may be the book of a man whom ‘mountaineering makes…happy, but there's no doubt at all that I have very little talent for it.’
But like its author, it's a damn sight more broad and generous than most of the literature that modern mountaineering has produced.
MAIL
 Lordly , self-righteous and elitist
I doubt I am alone in responding to Hamish Brown's article on Munros in the December issue, where again he adopts his posture of lordly authority and treats us to a display of elitism, self-righteousness, self-congratulation and contradictions.
If there is any sense at all in saying that the Munros are being ‘bludgeoned and raped’(!?) then he carries a fair responsibility.
Is he seriously suggestion that he himself isn't totally obsessed with the numbers game?
There can't be many hill-lovers who want to climb the Cairnwell seven times.
And what is a ‘worthy Corbett’ and a ‘bastardised Munro’?
No doubt in time Hamish will edify us on the subject of bastardised Corbetts.
I can't believe that the vast majority of serious Munro baggers aren't also keen to explore Quinag, Suilven, Ben Loyal, Arran, etc. etc., even if only in due course.
Hamish should remember that we don't all live on the doorstep.
He also unconvincingly defends some of the gormless changes and omissions in the '84 Tables; a question of replacing anomalies with anomalies.
I for one will be pleased if Foinaven is over 3,000 feet and therefore rises in popular esteem.
The poor old Munros.
They've vastly increased the number of dedicated hillwalkers who now appreciate the aesthetic and scenic wonders, and challenges, of the remoter Highlands and islands.
That will never do.
They belong to Hamish Brown.
I was most irritated by Hamish Brown's article on the Munros in the December issue.
He writes: ‘The Munros aren't just being climbed they are being bludgeoned, they are being raped.’
One of the reasons for this state of affairs is the publicity that has been given to the hills by him and numerous other writers of magazine articles and books over the past 20 or 30 years.
The proliferation of this literature has so simplified going into our wilderness areas that readers are literally taken by the hand.
When I started stravaiging about the bens and glens more than 50 years ago, I had never heard the name Munro applied to a hill.
Now all the world and his wife seems to have heard of them!
Hamish goes on to criticise ‘list ticking, the silly done 'em all tally.’
He credits himself with having approx 2,311 Munros.
He must have a computerised brain to have absorbed all that information over a period of years without having compiled a ‘silly tick list’ himself.
He also accuses Munroists of having a ‘blinkered attitude’ to their surroundings as they head for their chosen objective.
I recall Hamish in one of his writings saying that as he walked along on the way to his next objective he was reading a paperback novel — how more blinkered than that can you get!?
Come off it Hamish.
Write what you know about admirably — the hills.
Don't try to analyse the motives and thoughts of the rest of us.
And the outlook is…expensive
I feel it is high time B/T were called to account over their disgraceful policy of charging premium rate for calls to mountain weather forecasts like Climbline and Mountaincall.
Your readers may not be aware of it, but although BT state ‘…calls to these services are charged at the premium rate of 36p per minute cheap rate and 48p per minute at other times’, it actually costs twice that amount when you dial from a payphone!
From my experience, a large proportion of (necessary) calls to these services tend to be made from payphones in remote locations, often involving a considerable detour from one's route.
I have found that as much as £2.50 needs to be spent just to obtain the outlook for the next day.
Also, on many occasions, I have telephoned as late as 7.15pm only to hear ‘today's’ forecast — at a cost of some 50–60p — but with no hint of when it will actually be updated with the outlook for tomorrow.
This is particularly frustrating, since much crucial planning is determined by the outcome of having obtained a sound forecast of the likely weather conditions for the day(s) ahead.
What is of greatest concern, though, is the impact of this exorbitant charge on personal safety.
All experienced hillwalkers are well aware of the dangers of venturing onto the hills without being properly equipped and prepared.
A good weather forecast is a vital element of this preparation, and by effectively pricing the service out of the reach of many hillwalkers' pockets, compromises in safety are bound to be made and unnecessary risks taken, leading to accidents and perhaps (in extreme conditions) loss of lift.
Paying a fair price for a high-quality service is one thing, but being held to ransom and ripped off is just not acceptable.
The providers of the Climbline service, advertised on the Contents page of Climber & Hill Walker , comment on the issues raised by Mr Kidman.
Newstel Information Ltd offer a wide range of telephone information services on the premium rate network, from specialist weather forecasts to racing tips.
This is a commercial venture from which we aim to make a profit.
In the case of Climbline, weather forecasts are supplied by Oceanroutes (UK) Ltd, one of the world's leading meteorologists, and we get avalanche reports from the Scottish Mountain Safety Group and snow and ice conditions from various climbing contacts.
Because of the high cost of providing and gathering this information, Climbline would not exist were it not a premium rate service.
I am concerned that your correspondent rang Climbline at 7.15pm only to have to listen to that day's forecast.
The problem is that we don't get the following day's forecast until 4pm and sometimes it has to join the queue for updating.
However, I agree that it's unreasonable to expect people to pay good money for a forecast that is no longer relevant and we shall look at ways of eliminating this problem.
I can understand the annoyance at the high cost of premium rate calls from telephone boxes.
Unfortunately, the prices are determined by BT, not us, and the only advice I can offer is to make calls to Climbline from a private phone.
Your correspondent's criticisms have been taken on board and I assure you we shall do our best to iron out the problems raised.