

MICROMODULE TO DO ALPHA MULTICHIP MODULES ON DIAMOND SUBSTRATE
The Cupertino, California-based MicroModule Systems Inc management buyout from Digital Equipment Corp (CI No 1,993) has been given a $1.2m US Advanced Research Projects Agency subcontract to build a series of DEC Alpha RISC-based multichip modules using diamond substrates.
The subcontract is part of a prime contract awarded to Norton Diamond Film Inc, and calls for a two-year development programme, with an optional third year.
The goal is a practical, affordable and manufacturable diamond multichip module capable of handling the thermal management problems of current and next-generation high-power microprocessors, which increasingly exhibit the properties of furnaces and microwave ovens.
MicroModule Systems has two tasks under the contract — to develop a high-density copper-polyimide interconnect process on diamond.
The manufacturing process developed will then be used to build a functional diamond multichip module with two or more Alpha RISC microprocessors.
It is planned that the module will use three-dimensional static RAM packaging for the large cache that will be needed.
The thermal properties of diamond are seen to make it an attractive substrate material for chips that get excessively hot, enabling silicon circuits to be packed much more tightly than on other substrates.
IPL CHALLENGES IBM WITH 9337-COMPATIBLE 7737 DISK ARRAY
IPL Systems Inc, Waltham, Massachusetts is taking on IBM Corp with what it claims is the first 9337-compatible  disk array subsystem for AS/400 users.
The 7737 Disk Array offers users a choice of RAID implementations in one unit, with RAID 0 and 1 implementations available immediately and RAID 5 planned for the third quarter.
By pressing a button on the front display panel, users can choose the IBM 9337 mode they want to emulate, and the level of protection they require and the 7737 can be configured for full compatibility with IBM's 010, 020, 110, and 120.
Changing from one configuration to another does not need further hardware.
It costs $42,000 fully configured.
INTEL SEEKS BAR ON TWINHEAD IMPORTS OVER PATENT
Intel Corp has found another patent that it thinks is being infringed, and has asked the US International Trade Commission to investigate the import from Taiwan of Twinhead Inc's Slimnote notebook computers, and put a ban on them.
The machines use either a Cx486 or Am386 as the CPU, but the issue appears to be memory-management technology used when iAPX-86 architecture microprocessors are combined with external memory and used with  paging software such as Windows or Unix.
APPLE EXPLORES JEDI OBJECT TECHNOLOGY FOR SYSTEM 7
Apple Computer Inc is not putting all its object-oriented eggs into the Taligent Inc basket, US PC Week reports.
Instead, the company is investing in alternative object-based technology for System 7 and other environments.
The company's key development is Jedi, a framework built on System 7 that is claimed will provide more comprehensive application-linking capabilities than Microsoft Corp's Object Linking and Embedding.
The company aims to extend Jedi beyond System 7 to other environments, including Windows itself, and is expected to arrive as a product late this year or early next.
Jedi grew out of an earlier development effort that led to Apple Events, Apple's application-messaging infrastructure, and AppleScript.
‘A venture like Taligent is inherently risky.
We would continue to enhance System 7 even if Taligent were a sure bet,’ said Chris Espinosa, Taligent business manager at the Apple Developer Group.
Moreover Apple, and its partner in Taligent, IBM Corp, have been downplaying expectations for the Taligent environment.
The Taligent offering is a 32-bit operating environment being built from scratch around a new object model.
The full-blown Taligent operating system is not due until mid-1995 or later.
‘Taligent won't replace 32-bit operating systems until the end of the decade,’ said Richard Guarino, IBM's assistant general manager, strategic development.
PC-XWARE IS ‘FIRST FULL X EMULATION FOR WINDOWS’
Network Computing Devices Inc pretty much has the dedicated X-terminal business sewn up, and the Mountain View, California company is now moving in on the personal computer X Window System emulation business with launch of PC-Xware, a single software package that it claims provides full X terminal functionality on personal computers for the first time.
Its case is that full functionality previously depended on users integrating functions from separate vendors.
Designed for machines running Microsoft Corp's Windows, PC-Xware is a direct conversion of the company's NCDware 3.0 software.
PX-Xware includes 32-bit X server functionality, fully integrated terminal emulation, local and remote network protocols, and multiple local window managers — at $545.
It also offers the facility to manage and configure personal computers running X Window centrally and remotely.
Designed for 80486- and Pentium-based machines, it is also designed to support Windows NT when it becomes available.
As well as Microsoft Windows, there is the option to use Network Computing's Motif-like NCDwm as the local window manager, saving on network and processor bandwidth.
It has full VT320 emulation for access to character-based applications on networks, and has the TCP/IP stack licensed from NetManage Inc, and the XRemote protocol for high-speed serial communications.
Out next month, and can also be had with NetManage's Chameleon for $735, ChameleonNFS at $800.
MAI UNITS IN CHAPTER 11
MAI Systems Corp's CLS Software Inc and Brooke Acquisition Corp units have followed their parent into Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.
MAI owns 100% of voting securities of Brooke, which in turn has 100% of CLS.
CLS lists liabilities of $2.6m and assets of $5.7m; Brooke holds debt from the purchase of the hospitality business of Computerized Lodging Systems Inc, and lists liabilities of $5.5 million and no assets.
Brooke Group Ltd has 82.3% voting securities of MAI Systems.
AS/400 ARCHITECTURE MODEL IS THE KEY TO IBM's PLANS TO SAVE THE MAINFRAME
By Hesh Wiener
Later this year, we expect, IBM will provide details of its most important development for large systems in several years: a database co-processor.
IBM might even be able to put the machine into volume production during 1993 but may settle for a system to offload CICS terminal handling to start with.
But either way, its offering of a database engine will have an enormous and far-reaching impact.
There will be great debate surrounding the engine and many questions will be raised that cannot be answered except in terms of likelihood.
So the first and possibly best result of the expected IBM announcement will be a renewed interest in the future of large systems.
Pundits who have insisted — with the great assurance that is a constant companion of shallow minds — that the demise of the mainframe is imminent, will be forced to do a bit of dancing.
The co-processor using groups of small engines, they will explain, is not a mainframe at all and in fact evidence that the mainframe is a gone gosling.
The simple truth is companies with large central data processing facilities will still need these unpleasant, draughty, noisy rooms.
An issue that will soon become far more pressing than arguments over corporate real estate is the future of large systems database management programs.
Some of the best software technology comes from independents who must be very clever indeed to withstand IBM's DB2 and IMS.
The widespread assumption about IBM's forthcoming engine — and one to which we subscribe — is that it will be a machine designed to support one software scheme only.
That software will be DB2 with SQL capability (or, if you prefer to think of it in other terms, SQL with an accessible DB2 engine).
It is too early to say whether IBM's competitors in the database arena will be able to adapt their products to the new hardware at an affordable cost.
A retreat by these vendors to the market defined by systems smaller than those likely to get the engine — to 9121s, for instance— would be a temporary solution at best .
If IBM has any sense (which is in itself a topic worthy of serious consideration) it will offer versions of its engine for the entire ES/9000 range; should it do so, the 9221 version might be nothing larger than a circuit board or two that fits in a standard rack.
Ultimately, if IBM can offer a range of efficient CICS platforms and database engines, the applications processor(s) in a large system might become autonomous machines with a technological life of their own.
An example of this has been evolving at IBM for many years with the AS/400.
While the computer systems may reside in a single cabinet (plus some outboard boxes for disk drives), within the AS/400 are terminal support units based on fast general-purpose microprocessors, disk and tape controllers using comparable technology, an intelligent memory subsystem, one or more applications processing engines and a DBMS that owes its power and economy to hardware and microcode.
It is not too soon for mainframe customers to start thinking about the new course on which IBM will soon embark.
Although there may not be terrible penalties for taking a cautious approach to new and untested technology, it would be imprudent to make excessive investments in the hardware and software that is now offered by IBM and its ilk.
This essay appears in the May 1993 edition of Infoperspectives International, published by Technology News Ltd, 110 Gloucester Avenue, London NW1 (C) 1993 Technology News Ltd.
SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT NEWCOMER OPENVISION TO FIGURE IN COMMON OPEN SOFTWARE ENVIRONMENT PLANS
OpenVision Inc, the unusual nine-month-old Pleasanton, California start-up with $25m in funding and a $12m revenue stream, which launched its unusual systems management concept at the end of last month (CI No 2,158), has picked up friends in high places.
The company and its 15 systems management products, which will be integrated as Open V*OPSS by the end of the year, may become central to the Common Open Software Environment's systems management efforts.
Unix System Laboratories Inc president Roel Pieper, a member of the COSE anschluss, predicted that Unix System Laboratories Inc's partnership with OpenVision will ‘be able to drive the COSE effort in systems management forward’ by establishing common tools and technologies.
OpenVision came to its debut armed with a licensing agreement with Hewlett-Packard Co, a reseller agreement with IBM Corp and Sun Microsystems Inc and on-going discussions with the Open Software Foundation, Tivoli Systems Inc and Unix Labs about technology exchanges, and a chair on X/Open's network security committee and working relationships with Informix Software Inc and SHL Systemhouse Ltd.
OpenVision's technology is aimed at managing large geographically dispersed networks of heterogeneous computers with the degree of control comparable with that expected by mainframe users.
Its system is derived from an architecture that integrates disparate products and applications around an event-driven core providing an automated ‘alarm’ system  activated in anticipation of a user-defined problem and takes immediate action.
The product strategy is combined with a fixed-price package of services that provide users with a ‘no-shelfware’ commitment that OpenVision's products will not gather dust but will be successfully installed and functional within a predictable budget.
PASS THE TEABAG — ER — PENTIUM
Last week, when Unigram.X broke the news that Intel Corp wouldn't be able to deliver Pentium in any serious numbers before October, we had some trouble identifying the five pet companies that will get what can be had of the scarce chips.
As it turns out they are Compaq Computer Corp, Dell Computer Corp and NCR Corp (as we said), NEC Corp and Hewlett-Packard Co.
The shortage of Pentiums is so bad that those that have them are said to be ‘tea-bagging’ them — moving their precious chips from system to system to prove to customers that their box works, then quickly back into the safe.
SPARCSYSTEM VIDEO CONFERENCING
Paradise Software Inc has a new $1,000 single-user TCP/IP based stand-alone video conferencing program for Sparc boxes fitted with Parallax's XVideo-24SVC SBus board.
An NIS Domain licence goes for a one-time fee of $25,000.
It says video or a maximum 640 by 480 pixel rectangular region of the screen can be sent in near real time.
Users can adjust frame speed, image quality and window size, giving control over how much data is sent over the network.
Video messages can be recorded to the hard disk and forwarded via the Unix mail subsystem to parties who cannot attend conferences.
WORDPERFECT OUTLINES ITS PLANS FOR THE WORKGROUP MARKET, SHUNNING GLOBAL GROUPWARE-ENABLING
Wordperfect Corp outlined its plans for the workgroup market this week and shied away from the ‘applets with everything’ approach described by Microsoft Corp last month (CI No 2146).
While Microsoft's plans call for the groupware-enabling of all its applications so that they work together, Wordperfect thinks this is fundamentally misguided.
Well it would wouldn't it?
Wordperfect already has an integrated workgroup application — Wordperfect Office — which incorporates messaging, scheduling and workflow functions.
But Daniel Sumner, UK product marketing manager says that Office is actually moving away from the applet approach rather than towards it.
So where previous versions of the package have consisted of linked applications, version four, which the company is still hopeful that it will get out by the end of June, is essentially monolithic.
This has been driven by the users according to Sumner, who dislike the mess and complication of involved in linking and managing multiple applications.
However, not everything is being bundled into Office, the company's other great hope is Wordperfect InForms, an application for creating, and electronically distributing fill-in forms.
For the time being Wordperfect isn't going to compete head-on against Lotus Development  Corp's Notes product.
Instead it has announced a ‘strategic relationship’ with Lotus, the first fruit of which is a mail gateway between Office and Notes and direct database support so that InForms can use data held in the Notes database.
Early this year the company struck a deal with Novell Inc to develop a version of Office as a NetWare Loadable Module to run on NetWare 4.0 servers.
This is due to appear towards the end of the year, but in the meantime the two companies have extended their relationship so that Office will be sold through all Novell reseller channels.
Wordperfect is also primping its own channels, with a worldwide certified partners programme for value-added resellers, systems integrators, developers, consultants and trainers.
But most welcome for the channel will be the news that Wordperfect will not be setting up its own consultancy arm a la Microsoft and Lotus.
In Wordperfect's estimation the resellers usually make up to five times the money from installation and integration as from the actual product sale.
NOW GRESHAM TELECOMPUTING TARGETS TRANSACTION USERS THAT WANT TO DOWNSIZE FROM ICL MAINFRAMES
Warsash, Southampton-based Gresham Telecomputing Plc now has a client-server interface for its TPS transaction processing system for ICL Plc Series 39 VME mainframe version users wanting to downsize.
The server software provides secure and controlled access to TPS managed data from applications running in non-TPS environments, the company says.
And the client software provides access to mainframe batch, Multi Access Computing and TP sessions on other VME machines so making the system available to machines not running the service.
Access is available to Unix, VMS and Windows clients via Gresham's DataServe software.
The server software for a system based on an ICL Series 39 DX 130/10 is £2,800; clients on the same kit are from £2,100.
Around 276 sites presently use TPS.
O2 TECHNOLOGY TO PUT ITS OBJECT DATABASE ON ALPHA FOR DEC FRANCE
O2 Technology SA, the Versailles-based object-oriented database start-up, this week announced an agreement with Digital Equipment France to implement O2 for the full line of Alpha AXP workstations and servers running DEC OSF/1.
‘The interest of Alpha is its performance, and software like ours demonstrates the performance of the machine.
A 64-bit architecture changes everything; its a super machine,’ said Francois Bancilhon, managing director of O2.
Bancilhon says the agreement is initially for France only.
‘The people at DEC France are very positive.
We will be doing joint marketing; right now, we're looking at attacking some new sectors together, such as geographic information systems,’ he said.
He added that O2 is about to finalise an agreement with Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG, for ‘some kind of commercial cooperation in Germany.’
Siemens Nixdorf has already started implementing O2 for its remarketed version of Silicon Graphics Inc's workstations, he said.
MICRO FOCUS EXPLAINS ITS AGREEMENT WITH IBM TO BRING MVS PL/I PROGRAMMING DOWN TO OS/2
Under its PL/I agreement with IBM Corp's Programming Systems unit (CI No 2,166), Newbury, Berkshire-based Micro Focus Plc will deliver MVS PL/I emulation under OS/2: it has licensed the PL/I compiler and debugging technology will market it with a PL/I version of the Micro Focus ADMVS MVS emulation development environment from September.
The company worked closely with IBM Santa Teresa Laboratory in San Jose to develop a highly integrated MVS PL/I application development environment for OS/2, which will support the Micro Focus IMS, CICS and DB2 options.
PL/I for ADMVS has the look and feel of TSO/ISPF and provides an integrated environment for MVS PL/I development under OS/2.
PL/I application developers can browse, edit, allocate files and data sets, compile and interactively test programs, run job streams using MVS JCL, and execute utilities.
The menu panels enables all of the functions performed on a daily basis under MVS to be done under OS/2, Micro Focus says.
It includes support for EBCDIC format, 370 integers, ISPF editing, ISPF PDF, JCL and ISPF Dialog Manager under OS/2, and ‘unique’ features invoke appropriate pre-processors when compiling IMS, CICS and DB2 PL/I programs.
IMS and CICS testing and management facilities for OS/2 can be accessed directly from ADMVS panels.
The PL/I for ADMVS compiler adds a number of new functions, new compiler options, diagnostic facilities and subroutines which can increase productivity by simplifying many common programming tasks.
Program interrupts or exception conditions that occur at run time can be detected by the hardware, the operating system or other software, or PL/I for ADMVS itself, the company says.
Using these facilities, users can handle these exceptions to write applications that provide non-stop operation, Micro Focus claims.
There will be an upgrade offer to PL/I for ADMVS for users of IBM PL/I Package/2 Version 1.
No word on price.
NEC GOES AFTER THE BUSINESS MARKET WITH ITS LATEST LINE OF RISC UNIX WORKSTATIONS
NEC Corp announced nine new models of its NEC Superstation 4800 series of workstations and SuperServer UP4800 series of servers.
The new models also run the new System V.4.2 release of Unix System V, a world first according to NEC.
The machines have been priced competitively, bearing in mind the Japanese pricing of Sun Microsystem's Classic and IBM's Powerstation, and the launch was timed on the same day as the announcement of new machines in DEC's Alpha series.
NEC has begun to differentiate the ‘48 series’ of workstations (named to distinguish but create associations with the Japanese standard PC 98 series) into three categories.
The ‘48-Lite’ series of desktop machines comes with a colour screen and is aimed at the business market and it includes the new 78 MIPS, 27SPECint92 EWS4800/110LT which comes with NEC's own 1,024 by 768 pixel colour thin film liquid crystal diode screen and is priced in the base configuration at $12,272 and the similarly-rated EWS4800/310, which is the lowest priced Japanese version of System V.4.2 on a desktop RISC workstation, the diskless version being priced at $5,272 and the stand-alone configuration selling for $6,618.
The ‘48 Trad’ series includes three new models: the 4800/320 — with a 1,024 by 768 pixel display screen and 30% improved cost-performance, the 130 MIPS, 42SPECint92 4800/330 — which is targeted at multimedia applications — and the 130 MIPS, 60SPECint92 4800/360; the Trad line includes the previous generation 4800 models.
The ‘48 Server’ series includes the new models UP4800/605 and /615, low-priced servers (starting from $14,425) with 32Mb memory and 1Gb storage.
The UP4800/625 is targeted at small to mid-size transaction processing environments such as local banking systems and on-line order processing, while the high-end model UP4800/635 is based on a 67MHz R4400 chip and is an expandable configuration.
Modular software
The performance of the server versions range from 98 to 130 MIPS and 32 to 60 SPECint92.
The operating software is available in modular fashion, with Encina having been selected for the transaction processing software, on the basis of its position as the de-facto transaction processing standard, as NEC sees it.
NEC says its new focus on the business market instead of the scientific and engineering market is down to the 36% growth in the latter market.
Last year NEC shipped 14,200 of the EWS4800 workstations, which was 120% up on normal sales for the previous year — excluding an extraordinary order for 6,000 units from Daiwa Securities carried over from the 1991-92 fiscal year — and anticipates growth to 20,000 shipments this financial year — growth which is stable in value terms, according to NEC.
This time NEC used a US industrial design firm, Ideo Inc, for design of the exterior of the products, but denies that this presages any move to sales of the workstations in overseas markets.
NEC said that initially in markets outside Japan it would look to sales through OEM channels — it currently has OEM relationships with Compagnie des Machines Bull SA, and Stratus Computers Inc, whose fault-tolerant systems it buys for sale in Japan.
FUJITSU SHOWS OFF TECHNOLOGIES DEVELOPED WITH SINGAPORE…
Fujtisu Ltd is to demonstrate advanced information and communications systems at Asian Telecom 93, to be held in Singapore from May 17 to 22.
The exhibition will include various technologies on which Fujitsu and the Singapore government have been working as part of the IT2000 plan, Singapore's comprehensive computing plan for the twenty-first century, which include south-east Asia's first B-ISDN service.
B-ISDN field trials, conducted jointly by Fujtisu and Singapore, began in October 1992.
One of the applications demonstrated will be an intelligent desk consisting of a videophone and B-ISDN workstation mounted on a desktop, designed to provide access to multimedia databases and medical information services such as transmission of X-ray photographs and Computerised Tomography Scanner images.
Other telecommunications equipment demonstrated will include Synchronous Digital Hierarchy optical transmission systems and Fibre Subscriber Loop optical subscriber transmission systems, as well as a compact all-in-one desktop digital microwave radio system; and Fujitsu's cellular phones and Poquet Pad pen computer, as well as the multimedia FM-Towns personal computer.
…
AND SIGNS TO MARKET THE SEQUELINK SYSTEM FROM GNOSIS
Fujitsu Ltd and Gnosis Pacific, a subsidiary of Gnosis NV of Belgium, have signed an agreement under which Fujitsu will distribute Gnosis's Sequelink software through Fujitsu marketing channels in Japan.
Sequelink provides a tool for linking personal computer users with information on one or more central databases in a Unix environment.
The agreement is something of a coup for the Belgian because it is the first instance of a Japanese computer company marketing Sequelink directly.
HITACHI SHOWS OFF PROTOTYPE WORKSTATION-BASED AUTOMATIC RETRIEVAL SYSTEM FOR VIDEO PICTURES
Multimedia is bursting out all over, and Japan is right in there pitching.
Hitachi Ltd has developed an automatic high-speed retrieval technique for video pictures, which is designed to run on a workstation.
This development builds on technology that came out of a research project sponsored by the Ministry of International Trade & Industry, Friend 21.
The technology enables the reading-in of video pictures as digital data into the computer, high-speed analysis, and then retrieval and editing of the stored frames.
Hitachi says it has already done a lot of work on the application of image recognition techniques, including the development of a method of automatic Table of Contents generation, which uses the detection of changes in colour distribution to distinguish different frames, thus making possible the automatic analysis of camera work.
The prototype system consists of a workstation with video input equipment (laser disk, video tape and broadcast tape); it was demonstrated at Interchi ‘93 International Conference on Computer Human Interfaces in Amsterdam, Holland.
BATTERED BY THE RECESSION, A PENSION FUND SHORTFALL, REGULATION AND RIVALS, BRITISH TELECOM DIPS 36%
Britain's largest company, British Telecommunications Plc, has posted its second annual consecutive drop in profits for the year ending March 31 due to hefty redundancy charges, but is cautiously optimistic that the worst may now be over.
Pre-tax profit fell 36% to £1,970m, well below analysts’ forecasts of £2,500m.
The group cut its workforce by 39,800 to 170,700 during the year.
Some 31,700 took voluntary redundancy and a further 5,400 disappeared as the result of disposals.
But BT now feels the quality problems reported in 1992 due to its staff exodus have been rectified.
The redundancy programme cost the group a total of £1,034m this year, including £550m charges for incremental pension benefits to ‘early leavers’.
Still, Vallance said staff cutting had already translated into a 8.1% fall in gross personnel costs during the year.
The £550m mentioned above was charged against profits for the year following an actuarial valuation of the company's main pension fund as it stood on January 1 1993.
The valuation was undertaken to determine the future pension charges to group accounts.
Fund £750m in the red
Unfortunately, the fund was found to be £750m in the red, with assets of £13,440m covering 95% of liabilities, compared with asset coverage of 109% at March 31 1992.
Vallance attributed the shortfall to three main factors: the cost of providing benefits to former employees during the year; the impact of recession on returns made on the fund's investments — property in particular; and a drop in dividend growth due to the Government's proposed advanced corporation tax on future gross dividend income, as announced at its March 1993 budget.
But ‘to show our commitment to our employees’, especially in the wake of the Maxwell pension fund crisis one would imagine, Vallance said the group took ‘the positive decision’ to fork out £800m during the coming year to cover the deficit.
But profits were further hit by £132m losses due to the disposal of BT's interests in four subsidiary companies as part of its strategy of focussing on core activities, and a £56m premium paid on repurchasing bonds held by the UK government.
In total, this led to a 40.4% drop in earnings per share.
But Vallance said if the above items were excluded, then earnings would actually have risen slightly.
And fourth quarter earnings, if calculated on the same basis, would have increased 11.4%.
Although he said there was ‘no mechanistic link between earnings and dividend’, the aim being to strike a balance between pleasing shareholders and retaining enough cash to fund operations, he claimed the board decided to recommend an 8.3% increase in final dividend payment to reflect ‘BT's underlying performance and financial strength’.
This brings the year-end dividend to 15.6 pence.
But analysts also said if the dividend had been cut, it might have made investors nervous about the July BT3 share flotation, when the government intends to sell all of its remaining 22% stake in the group.
Despite turnover being virtually flat at £13,242m, Vallance said that BT had been successful in controlling operating costs.
Before redundancy charges, these fell 1.3%, but after adjustment for the disposal of the businesses mentioned above, costs actually increased 0.8%.
While it intends to press ahead with its policy of getting rid of 15,000 staff a year over the next two years, finance director Barry Romeril said redundancy costs would be cut by half.
He expects direct payments to be some £250m for 1993, while a further £250m will go on the pension fund for early leavers.
Operating profit for the year fell to £2,450m from £3,400m last year again as a result of redundancy charges.
While payments made to telecommunication operators increased 7.1% because of an increase in outgoing and transit international calls and the weakness of sterling, revenues actually generated from international calls were flat at £1,859m due to price reductions on both incoming and outgoing calls.
But Vallance said the group would continue with its special offers as they were very popular with customers.
Inland call turnover remained virtually unchanged at £5,095m due to negligible volume growth, ‘reflecting increased competition and the state of the UK economy’.
Telephone exchange line rentals grew 5.5% to £2,233m mainly as a result of price re-balancing increases in September 1991 and January 1993, and to a lesser extent due to growth in customer lines — there was a 1.8% rise in the number of residential lines and a 1.8% increase in business lines.
Furthermore, Vallance said, the modernisation of the London local exchange is now complete.
Revenues from customer premises equipment, adjusted for the effects of sold operations, dropped 5.7% to £996m because of‘the continued de-pressed state of this competitive market’, although the decline slowed in the fourth quarter.
Other sales and services turnover, again adjusted, rose 2.9
’ DESKTOP IV VINDICATES BULL’— PACHE
Commenting on US government's final award of Desktop IV to Zenith Data Systems, Compagnie des Machines Bull SA chief executive Bernard Pache said ‘A strategy is valid if it results in success.
The success of Desktop IV, is an unequivocal response to those who doubted Bull's long-term viability.’
‘It constitutes an element of credibility for the multi-annual plan that I am going to submit to our shareholder in order to consolidate our recovery.’
VENTURE FUNDING
Oberon Software Inc, Cambridge, Massachusetts developer of the SynchroWorks visual programming environment for developing business applications, has won $4m in venture funding from Toyo Information Systems Ltd, an Osaka-based systems integration and software development company.
Oberon will use the additional funding for beta testing and completion of product development and to expand its domestic and international distribution networks and consulting and technical support programmes in preparation for a product launch in the autumn.
The SynchroWorks system, initially designed for Sun Microsystems Inc Sparcstations, is claimed to offer the benefits of object-oriented technology and the ease-of-use of visual programming, without requiring the user to know object-oriented languages.
SHARE & BOND ISSUES
Auspex Systems Inc, the Santa Clara, California developer of dedicated Network File System servers, got its initial public offering of 5m shares, 2.66m of them new, away at $12 a share, and plans to use the $30m or so net proceeds for working capital.
Lead underwriters to the initial public offering were Goldman Sachs & Co and Hambrecht & Quist Inc.
Texas Instruments Inc, Dallas plans to redeem 3.7m of the 11.1m outstanding of its $2.26 depositary shares in an exchange of 0.6452116 of a common share and 34.5278 cents in cash for each depositary share, including accrued and unpaid dividends.
BCE Inc's Bell Canada unit plans to redeem $115m in outstanding US dollar-denominated bonds ahead of maturity dates.
The bonds include a $50m First Mortgage 4.85% bond, series AA, maturing on September 1 1995; a $28m First Mortgage 4.85% bond series AB, due September 1 1995; and a $37m First Mortgage 6% bond, series AF, which is due to mature on October 14 1996.
The $50m issue will be redeemed at par, the $28m and $37m issues at a price equal to 110.50% of the principal plus accrued interest.
Nokia Oy, Helsinki says that it is increase its capital base with an international placing of about $100m of new preference shares; no details yet.
COMPANY RESULTS
Arrow Electronics Inc has reported first quarter net profit up 94% at $18m, on turnover up 45.6% to $551.4m.
Net per share rose by 44.7% to $0.55.
Autotrol Corp has reported first quarter net profit up 35.6% at $626,315, on turnover down 4.2% to $8.4m.
Net earnings per share, adjusted for a 5% stock dividend paid in September 1992, rose 40% to $0.21.
Comparisons are with made restated figures.
Cadmus Communications Inc has turned in third quarter net up 12.6% at $1.2m, on turnover up 6.7% at $50.1m; net profit for the nine months was up 15.4% at $3.2m, on turnover that rose 5.6% to $146.4m.
Net earnings per share rose 11.1% to $0.20 in the quarter, and 15.2% to $0.53 in the nine months.
California Amplifier Inc has reported fourth quarter net profits up 34% at $840,000, on turnover up 50.2% at $10.4m; net profit for the year to February 27 was up 92.9% at $3.1m, on turnover that rose 73.4% to $35.8m.
Net per share rose 33.3% to $0.16 in the quarter, 93.5% to $0.60 in the year.
Centigram Communications Inc has reported that second quarter net profits rose 143.2% at $1.1m, on turnover that rose 34.4% at $14.4m; mid-term net profit rose 332.5% to $2.1m, on turnover that rose 34% at $27.4m.
Net earnings per share rose 120% to $0.22 in the quarter, 320% to $0.42 in the half.
Cisco Systems Inc saw third quarter net up 99.3% at $46.3m, on turnover up 88.6% at $172.4m; net profit for the nine months was up 106.9% at $118.2m, on turnover that rose 93.9% to $443.8m.
Net earnings per share, adjusted last time for a two-for-one stock split paid in March 1993, rose 100% to $0.36 in the quarter, 104.4% to $0.92 in the nine months.
CMS Enhancements Inc saw third quarter net profits of $83,000 against losses of $1.2m last time, on turnover down 45.4% at $15.7m; net profit for the nine months stood at $195,000 against losses of $7.6m last time, after $4.5m restructuring charges last time, on turnover that by fell 37.2% to $55.2m.
Net earnings per share amounted to $0.03 in the quarter, and to $0.07 in the nine months.
Cognex Corp has reported first quarter net profit down 0.7% at $2.1m, on turnover that rose 13.8% to $8.8m.
Net earnings per share remained at $0.24.
Cognitronics Corp has reported first quarter net losses of $379,000 against profits of $602,000 last time, after $471,000 charges due to the cumulative effect of an accounting change and $283,000 losses from discontinued operations this time and $45,000 losses from discontinued operations last time, on turnover up 19.8% to $5.1m.
Comparisons with restated figures to reflect discontinued operations.
Filenet Corp has reported first quarter net profit down 88.2% at $237,000, on turnover that rose 0.02% to $34.7m.
Net per share fell by 88.9% to $0.02.
Intera Information Technology Inc has reported second quarter net profits of $828,000 against losses of $4m last time, after $1.5m losses from discontinued operations and $1m restructuring charges last time, on turnover up 12.9% at $19.1m; mid-term net amounted to $1.5m against losses of $3.9m last time, on turnover up 7.7% at $37.5m.
Net per share was $0.15 in the quarter, $0.27 in the half.
Landmark Graphics Inc saw third quarter net profits of $1.9m against losses of $3.2m last time, after $3.4m restructuring charges last time, on turnover up 17.5% at $23.6m; net profit for the nine months was up 40.8% at $2.7m, on turnover that fell 6.8% to $61.7m.
Net per share were $0.18 in the quarter, and rose 44.4% to $0.26 in the nine months.
Microcom Inc saw fourth quarter net losses of $3.6m, after $3.2m charges related to litigation, against profits of $999,000 last time, on turnover down 16.6% at $16m; net losses for the year to March 31 stood at $10.7m, after $4.3m restructuring charges last time, on turnover down 6% to $69.4m.
Network Equipment Technologies Inc has reported a fourth quarter net loss of $15.5m after a $17m charge for costs of acquisition of Adaptive Inc and restructuring charges, against a profit last time of $1.4m, on sales up 8.9% at $57.3m; net loss for the year to March 31 was $11.1m, down from an $11.2m loss last time on sales up 21.0% at $218.8m.
Varian Associates Inc has reported second quarter net profits up 19.2% at $9.3m, on turnover up 3.3% at $325.3m; mid-term net rose 3.2% to $15.9m, on turnover down 0.4% at $616.6m.
Net per share rose 24.4% to $0.51 in the quarter, 7.5% to $0.86 in the half.
The 1992 figures were reported at 13 and 27 weeks and the 1993 figures at 13 and 26 weeks.
British Telecommunications Plc has reported net profits for the year to March 31 down 40.2% at £1,220m, after £1,030m charges for voluntary redundancies, on turnover that fell 0.7% to £13,240m.
At the pre-tax level, profits fell 35.8% at £1,970m.
Earnings per share fell 40.4% to 19.8p.
MINIGRAMS
Stock options are not much use as incentives if the price at which they are exercisable is dauntingly out of reach, so IBM Corp is offering a new stock option plan for mid-to-senior level executives — chairman Louis Gerstner offered the plan due to concern ‘about keeping managers at IBM and motivated’: the plan is aimed at the tier of about 1,200 managers just below the most senior level, will offer new options for old ones that were exercisable at prices ranging from $89 to $169; the new options are exercisable at $47.88, and managers will have to swap anywhere from 2.5 to 10 old options for one new one, depending on the original option price; the options are exercisable after two years and the price must rise 50% above the $47.88 level to $71.82 and stay there for 30 days; only 50% of the options can be exercised the first year, and 25% for each year after, but the terms do not look particularly attractive.
Digital Equipment Corp yesterday unveiled the DECpc MTE line of two 80486-based personal computers, starting at $2,650 and $3,100: they include a 32-bit EISA bus and VESA VL bus and are claimed to be the highest-performance 80486 machines available; they are Pentium-upgradable and offers a PCMCIA peripheral card option for data sharing with portable computers having PCMCIA.
Sources at Compagnie des Machines Bull SA say that, in the multi-annual plan, chief executive Bernard Pache is likely to outline further potential partnerships and cost-cutting measures, adding that despite the tough tone, it is difficult to imagine that the new government will refuse all further financing for Bull, letting it run the risk of receivership and the dumping of 30,000 workers, at a time when France's biggest concern is retaining and creating new jobs.
Hauppauge, New York-based Standard Microsystems Corp is cutting the recommended retail price of its Token-Ring network adaptors to $400 from $600, saying that using its own semiconductor technology makes it possible to cut prices while continuing to add features and maintain margins on the adaptors.
Ottawa-based Bell-Northern Research Ltd, 70% majority-owned by Northern Telecom Ltd, opened an $80m lab at its Ottawa research and development complex: the 600,000 square-foot facility is its fifth lab there.
Xerox Corp says scientists at its Palo Alto Research Center have developed two flat-screen active matrix liquid crystal diode displays that offer image quality similar to a laser-printed document: the colour and black-and-white displays were originally designed for Xerox research and development and are not available as commercial products yet, but applications could affect office automation, desktop publishing, and engineering workstations, the company suggested.
The European Commission has decided that the state aid offered to Digital Equipment Corp at its Scottish plant in Ayr conforms with Community rules, the Irish Department of Enterprise & Employment has had to admit: in a letter to the department, Brussels said ‘The Commission, with regard to information provided by the UK authorities, considers the regional aid granted to the Ayr plant is in conformity with Community rules and the aid received is within the limits approved by the Commission for this region’; the Irish government had asked for a review of state aid to DEC after it decided to transfer some operations from Galway to Ayr.
NEC Corp expects personal computer shipments in 1993-94 to increase by 10% to 1.37m units as a result of the government's increased spending on computers for schools and public institutions: according to Reuter, NEC sees its personal computer sales rising in the second half of the fiscal when public institutions start to introduce the machines; in the year to March, NEC's personal computer shipments were down by 5%.
Telefonica de Espana SA now says it will fight the court ruling ordering it to sell one or other of its holdings in Chile's two main telecommunications companies — and appeal to international law if necessary: Telefonica has 43.6% in Compania de Telefonos de Chile SA and 20% of Entel Chile SA, and has been told to sell one within 18 months.
The Time Warner AxS arm of Time Warner Inc has bought a 50% stake in MetroComm Inc, builder and operator of a fibre optic competitive telephone access network in Columbus, Ohio on undisclosed terms; the company will be known as MetroComm AxS and the alliance the first step in a Time Warner programme to enter the long-distance access business.
Seymour Cray is still hopeful of bringing his crippled Cray Computer Corp safely in to land, and this week told shareholders that the pay-off will come not with the Cray-3, but with the Cray-4 the company is developing —‘People who predict that things can't be done — I guess I don't have time for them,’ he told shareholders sternly —‘That's the challenge that I'm willing to accept in trying to do things that can't be done’; the Cray-3 was launched last month, a decade after Cray started work on it, but the Cray-4 is expected to offer twice the performance at half the cost, and the company hopes to demonstrate it by year-end; it says it has enough cash to fund operations into September and says it is working with two investment banking firms on fund-raising strategies.
TGV Inc, based in Santa Clara, California, signed an agreement with Munich-based Tekelec Airtronic GmbH, under which Tekelec will resell MultiNet, TGV's TCP/IP software for VAX/VMS users, and MultiWare, TGV's communications software to give NetWare users access to OpenVMS resources; Tekelec has annual sales of over $40m, with seven sales offices and 120 employees.
Philip Chappell, celebrated as a champion of rights of the individual investor, has died of a brain tumour at the age of 63: he was chairman of ICL Plc through the firm's gathering financial crisis of 1980 and 1981 after the retirement of Tom Hudson and resignation of managing director Geoff Cross.
Its hard to see that there will be much demand for it at that price, but AT&T Co has introduced a phone called Picasso Still Image Phone, which enables people that both have one to transmit television-quality colour still images over standard phone lines while still talking to each other— but it costs a cool $3,300 for one; Picassos will be installed at 39 Marriott convention hotels under an agreement with Washington, DC-based Marriott Corp and AT&T is looking into co-operating on image technology with Eastman Kodak Co — the phone, designed mainly for advertising, design and  photography agencies, will work with the Kodak's Photo CD system.
Orem, Utah-based WordPerfect Corp says its WordPerfect 6.0 for MS-DOS will be released on June 28 and that customer demand for it is already reaching record levels: the latest beta version will include drag-and-drop text, scrolling Button Bars and separate set-up options for the text mode and graphics mode; the thing will be $500.
Sprint Corp has decided to standardise on Microsoft Corp operating systems, applications and technical support for all Sprint Corp units: the ‘long-term, multimillion dollar’ agreement involves software for all Microsoft Windows and MS-DOS operating systems as well as the Macintosh systems at Sprint.
Storage Technology Corp's automated tape libraries can now be directly attached to Tandem Computers Inc NonStop Cyclone and CLX 800 boxes.
Fremont, California-based Video Seven Inc is to become a wholly-owned subsidiary of its principal technology provider and minority shareholder, graphics accelerator board manufacturer Spea Software AG, which will buy the remaining stock of Video Seven from Glenwood Capital; terms were not disclosed but Glenwood will become a shareholder in Spea under the agreement.
The opening of the European Community telecommunications markets needs to be controlled, otherwise manufacturers could suffer, Georges Paricard, chairman of French telecommunications industry body SIT, told the lobby's annual conference — if deregulation was done in an uncontrolled way, telephone operators would be reluctant to invest for the long term, leaving equipment makers deprived of orders.
Roy, Utah-based Iomega Corp will market its Tape250 minicartridge drives under the Memorex name as a value-added tape back-up system to be sold through Memorex Telex NV retail channels: Memorex Computer Supplies will package the tape drive with a pre-formatted MRX2120 minicartridge tape, Norton Backup software for both MS-DOS and Windows, and a screwdriver for $320.
Denton, Texas-based Scott Instruments Corp has won a development and distribution agreement with Silicon Graphics Inc for its speech recognition systems for workstations but terms weren't disclosed: speech-aware Silicon Graphics workstations, expected to be available in the second half of the year, will respond to spoken commands.
IBM Corp's IBM Multimedia Publishing Studio has formed a software publishing and development alliance with its Japanese counterpart, the IBM Multimedia Creative Center in Tokyo: the two will develop and market CD-ROM titles for wide-ranging markets in Japan and the US, including business, education, public information and the arts.
Stamford, Connecticut-based General Signal Corp signed a letter of intent to sell its Integrated Solutions business to the company's management on undisclosed terms: the Andover, Massachusetts company provides support services to semiconductor manufacturers that use General Signal's microlithography equipment and also provides third party sales and support services.
The Webster Research Center of Xerox Corp has teamed up with Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory to investigate the behaviour of atoms and molecules on the surface of microelectronic materials: the three-year, $2.5m project is funded jointly by Xerox and the US Department of Energy through a co-operative research and development pact.
Dell Computer Corp is to offer specially priced, custom-configured personal computers to employees of the American Airlines unit of AMR Corp: the 115,000 American employees worldwide can now buy Dell machines pre-installed with the software and peripherals needed to get onto and use American's Sabre air reservation and flight system.
Nippon Telegraph & Telephone Corp's NTT Mobile Communications Network is to split itself into nine regional units: its present headquarters in Tokyo will become the group's parent company, which will wholly own the equity of the eight subsidiaries, and the move is intended to improve efficiency and competitiveness in the fight with its biggest domestic rival Daini Denden Inc, which has no unit in Tokyo and Tokai area, which together account for half the population.
Fremont, California-based Cirrus Logic Inc says it has received two shareholders' class action lawsuits alleging it violated US securities laws; in the usual phrase, it dismisses them as without merit and intends to contest them vigorously.
One hesitates over publicising these things for fear of sparking imitations, but you're going to read about it somewhere so it might as well be here — over the past few weeks it has become clear that setting up telescopes to watch people tapping their numbers into automatic teller machines and then scavenging for discarded receipts bearing the account number is a really outdated way of defrauding banks and their customers — these days, you set up a bogus teller machine of your own and record the card details as the customer keys in the number: in the latest instance, a gang in Manchester, Connecticut set up a mobile teller machine in the Buckland Hills Mall Associated Press reports, sabotaged the other machines in the shopping mall to encourage people to use it, and later wheeled the machine away and debriefed it on all its card secrets, using the data to make up counterfeit cards which were subsequently used to withdraw cash from the accounts in the New York area; moral — stick to machines you know.
Danvers, Massachusetts-based PictureTel Corp is cutting prices on its M-8000 bridge product family: it says it will offer a fully H.320 version of its M-8000 Multipoint Bridge starting at $45,000 for the M-8600 with three ports: the M-8600 is for customers with only a few videoconferencing systems and limited requirements for linking a large number of sites on the same call; the H.320 standards-compliant version will ship in the autumn.
Apple Computer Inc is teaming up with trading house Uchida Yoko Co Ltd to expand its business with Japanese schools, Reuter reports from Tokyo: Uchida, which specialises in office equipment and school supplies, aims to sell 3,000 Macintosh personal computers to schools in the year from July, taking advantage of the fact that in Japan's supplementary budget unveiled in April, the government plans to increase spending on computers for schools and other public bodies — it is expected that $1,800m will be devoted to buying over 300,000 machines for schools by 1996, with NEC Corp and Fujitsu Ltd, the latter with its FM Towns multimedia box seen as the main beneficiaries.
Bagshot, Surrey-based consultancy OutSource International Ltd is to establish and manage a network of UK resellers for Transputer-based massively parallel database systems builder White Cross Systems Ltd: the aim is to generate some £20m in revenues for White Cross over the next three years; OutSource is recruiting UK resellers through its ChannelSource Europe arm, and they will target medium sized customers in the finance, retail and insurance sectors; European White Cross channels in France, Germany, Italy and Switzerland are set to follow.
Our perception of  spermatozoa was changed forever by Woody Allen's impersonation of one in Everything You Wanted to Know About Sex, and University of Pennsylvania are giving substance to his fantasies, putting the poor little tadpoles through an arduous obstacle course to step up the process of survival of the fittest: according to Prodigy Services Co, the mad scientists have created a new class of silicon chip that can be used for analyzing sperm samples and providing a venue for fertilisation; the technology uses microscopic obstacle courses inside a silicon wafer to weed out unhealthy sperm, and has been used successfully to fertilise a mouse egg; the chips are etched with a virtual theme park of twisting channels, forests of columns, and other features designed to ensure only the strongest of sperm reach their goal, with some passages so small that only a single cell can pass; the researchers have not yet applied for approval to test human fertilisation using the chip, but say that could happen within the next 12 months — Brave New World, or the embodiment of virtual sex.
FIVE YEARS AGO
On May 13 1988, Computergram Number 928 reported that Hewlett-Packard and Northern Telecom put 50 staff into joint networks operation * * * Samna bought Z-Soft for $4m * * * Commodore showed 68030 board, Unix for Amiga * * * Prime cut 700 jobs * * * Hoskyns would pay £13m for Insight.