

HITACHI DATA UPSETS IBM's 3990-9 PLAN WITH DISK ARRAY NEXT WEEK
The moribund mainframe market is about to wake up to a flurry of developments in the storage area, with Hitachi Data Systems Inc preparing to announce a Symmetrix-type disk array for mainframes on May 25, and IBM Corp following up a week later with launch of the 3390-9 disk drive, which is now expected to be accompanied by a new 3990-4 controller.
The Hitachi array is expected to use quirky 6.5’ disk drives and is pitched at a market Hopkinton, Massachusetts-based EMC Corp has made its own with its Symmetrix product, which Gartner Group reckons may be taking as much as 10% of the current mainframe disk market.
EMC is said to have plans of its own to bring out a new generation of Symmetrix, and is certainly not daunted by the hot breath of competition — it just announced a two-for-one stock split to be effected via a scrip dividend.
Its shares are currently trading at $33 on the New York Stock Exchange, and you don't split your shares if you think that negative news is about to cause the price to go into a tailspin.
The IBM announcement had been expected this month, and the delay is thought to have been occasioned by the need to respond to the Hitachi announcement.
The new controller is expected to improve performance but not add functionality; a controller capable of handling arrays is expected later this year.
Hesh Wiener of Technology News of America comments that IBM is having to price current drives at less than half of list, and will make a success of the new ones only if it lists them at or below current street prices.
INTERTAN SHUTS UP SHOPS ON CONTINENT; 1,000 TO GO
While its former parent, Tandy Corp, announces plans to open a second SuperCenter computer store in Sweden (CI No 2,167), InterTan Inc, the company that owns the Tandy name outside the US is pulling back sharply after losses became unsustainable.
It is abandoning all its operations in continental Europe by closing 92 stores in Belgium, 210 in France, and its Brussels headquarters and warehouse.
The process is expected to be completed June 30 1994.
Operations will then be confined to the English-speaking world — Canada, the UK and Australia.
It sees a pre-tax hit of $70m to $80m against figures for the current quarter to cover costs of inventory liquidation, leases, payroll and lay-off of 1,000 staff, fixed assets disposal, and operating costs.
Continental units lost $14m on sales of $140m over the last nine months.
NAKED  AGGRESSION : GE, GM MULL JOINT PC PROCUREMENT
In the most naked exercising of user power yet, General Motors Corp and General Electric Co Inc are discussing combining their personal computer procurement to screw vendors down to even better terms than are currently available in today's climate of bitter price war, the Dallas Morning News reports.
The two industrial giants are separately probably the two largest buyers of personal computers in corporate America, and in alliance could drive the prices they get to below cost; the proposed alliance would also set stricter terms on speed of delivery and on quality of service.
The Dallas daily says that General Motors and General Electric have met several times in recent months to examine ways to increase their influence over the likes of IBM Corp, Compaq Computer Corp, Dell Computer Corp and Apple Computer Inc, quoting executives involved in the talks and industry analysts and the pact could create a consortium with a requirement as many as 100,000 desktop personal computers annually.
HEWLETT-PACKARD TO BUY THE BT-DU PONT BT&D VENTURE
Continuing to shed businesses that it no longer regards as core, British Telecommunications Plc is getting out of optoelectronic components.
With its partner in the venture, E I du Pont de Nemours & Co Inc, it has agreed in principle to sell its Ipswich-based BT&D Technologies Ltd joint venture to Hewlett-Packard Co on undisclosed terms.
The venture is currently owned 60% by du Pont, 40% by British Telecom, and was formed to exploit technology developed at its Martlesham Heath Laboratory.
Over the next few years, fibre-optic components based on BT&D's long-wavelength high-speed optoelectronics technology will become increasingly important, Hewlett-Packard says, adding that combined with its ‘own technology and manufacturing and marketing expertise, these products will enable high-performance communications to be widely deployed throughout the world’.
BT&D employs about 455 at the Ipswich facility, which houses headquarters, semiconductor fabrication, components manufacturing, research and development, and sales and marketing operations, and 35 in the US and Japan.
REUTERS PAYS £70m FOR EFFIX
Reuters Holdings Plc has bought Effix Holdings SA, French designer of dealing room workstations and software for £70.5m.
The software is used by Reuter on its Triarch 2000 system.
Effix is the holding company of Effix Systemes SA, a software marketing firm where Reuters paid £2.9m for a 35% stake in 1992.
SOFTKEY TO REVERSE INTO WORDSTAR TO CREATE $90m-A-YEAR COMPANY
WordStar International Inc is effectively engineering its own takeover in a merger agreement with SoftKey Software Products Inc of Mississauga, Ontario under which SoftKey holders will end up with 75% of the equity of the enlarged company, which will retain WordStar's quote and be headquartered at the word processing software pioneer's headquarters in Novato, California.
The combined annual sales of the two for their most recent fiscal years was $90m, and the partners reckon they are creating one of the largest software publishers in the consumer, home office, and small business markets, offering over 100 titles for Windows, Macintosh, and MS-DOS, and will market in over 50 countries.
To satisfy Canadian tax authorities, SoftKey shareholders will be offered either 3.6 WordStar shares or 3.6 new SoftKey non-voting shares each later exchangeable for one WordStar share with full voting rights.
SoftKey brass are in the ascendant: president Kevin O'Leary will be chairman, chairman Michael Perik will be chief executive; WordStar chief Ron Posner will become a director.
KONTRAX LOSES FIGHT FOR LIFE…
Kontrax Group, the Hungarian computer distributor and telecommunications giant, initiated bankruptcy proceedings on behalf of its six key component businesses after five of its 23 creditors rejected the debt restructuring and cost-cutting programme.
In a pre-scheduled address to an international banking conference attended by the Czech and Slovak finance ministers where he was to have delivered a lecture on setting up direct sales operations in Eastern Europe, Kontrax president Gabor Dixco told an embarrassed audience that the global recession, poor financial management and lack of support from the banks were to blame for the company's collapse.
Disco said ‘We may have made some mistakes in our business plan when we chose to go for growth.
All steep growth patterns will go with a negative cash flow and a condition for this is loyal dedicated banks and loyal employees.’
Disco added ‘It is natural that a young growing company will not bother with bureaucratic controls and they often have weaker and smaller management — especially in Eastern Europe.’
The fall of Kontrax is bad news for Mirror Group pensioners — Maxwell Communications Corp Plc owned 30% of the firm, for Compaq Computer Corp — which will now have to try to retrieve its first consignment of personal computers destined for the company from Hungarian customs authorities, and Disco himself, who opted to build his flat on top of the multi-million dollar Kontrax office building.
Kontrax had secured the consent of most of its creditors and received ‘strong support’ from the banks before the impasse (CI No 2,148).
The main thrust was to consolidate the company's $53m debt into a low interest syndicated loan and a bond that would not begin to mature for two and a half years.
It had hoped that under 100 of its 360 staff would lose their jobs, hoped that many would stay in work as employees of Kontrax's 15 dealers, which were wholly-owned but were to have been sold off as franchises under the scheme.
Kontrax began life as a photocopier distributor in 1988, founded with 675 Forints of capital — just $75 — and reported sales of $81m in 1992.
…
AS CONTROLL HITS THE SKIDS
As Kontrax lost its fight for survival, it emerged that another Hungarian computing giant, Controll Rt, has also hit serious financial difficulties.
Controll was Hewlett-Packard Co's partner in the country until last summer when Hewlett-Packard exercised its right to buy out its joint venture with the firm, subsequently stripping Controll of its distribution functions.
Controll spokesman Andras Hajdu said that the firm was now negotiating with creditors.
Hajdu refused to disclose the amount of the firm's debts, its revenues, or its current staff count, saying only that it was ‘in the middle of a re-organisation.’
Since last summer, Controll has been acting as a dealer for Hewlett-Packard Co, Compaq Computer Corp and Philips Electronics NV.
HEWLETT-PACKARD CELEBRATES BIGGEST INSTALLATION IN EASTERN EUROPE AT HUNGARIAN STATISTICS OFFICE
Hewlett-Packard Co and the Hungarian  Central Statistics Office have formally signed an $11m contract for the replacement of the Office's IBM Corp 4381 mainframe-based computer centre with an open system.
The deal was effectively concluded in November 1992, but had been pending final approval by the European Community, which is financing the project under its PHARE programme.
The Statistics Office will be supplied with a three-processor HP 9000/890 server with 512Mb along with Model 867, 847 and 817 dedicated servers, 50Gb of hard disk storage with optical and Digital Audio Tape back-up, and 210 personal computers and workstations.
Hewlett-Packard will also supply 19 Series 800 servers to the Statistics Office regional branches, each with 2Gb to 4Gb of disk storage, along with another 270 personal computers and workstations.
The systems will run Oracle and use the SAS System, Ami Pro word processor, and SPSS application tools with X25 links to the regional servers.
Hewlett-Packard is contracted to have the system up and running in six months.
Some 18 companies originally bid for contract, with Compagnie des Machines Bull SA, IBM, ICL Plc, IQSoft and VTSoft losing out in the later stages.
Hewlett-Packard Hungary general manager Stojanov Rumen confirmed that the site would constitute the company's largest installation in the country.
He also claimed it was the largest open system to be employed at a statistic office in Europe, and announced that the company planned to use it as a reference site for national accounting offices in both East and Western Europe.
A project to computerise the national accounting system of Romania is currently under way, though Ruman expressed caution regarding his company's chances of winning that account.
The announcement of the deal in the ballroom of the Statistics Office in Budapest was temporarily hijacked by the European Community's ambassador to Hungary, Hans Beck, who used the occasion to dish out European Community tie pins, lecture the local press on the absence of a ‘Hungarian Way’, and launch a fierce attack on Hungary's decision to retaliate with tit-for-tat measures against an import ban on meat products introduced by the European Community two weeks ago following the discovery of foot and mouth disease in Italy.
However Hans Beck also spoke up in defence of the European Community PHARE programme in the face of attacks from local critics, many of whom view it as a means of circulating funds from the European Community to Western economic advisors and consultancy firms, delivering few tangible benefits.
Beck claimed that a stage had been reached where more cash could now be devoted to physical rather than intellectual aid and indicated that funding for the computerisation of Hungarian institutions would increase in priority.
NATIONAL LABOUR ORGANISATION EMBARKS ON A NATIONWIDE NETWORK TO HANDLE BENEFITS PAYMENTS
Lazzlo Kalmar, the director general of Hungary's National Labour Organisation, meanwhile, appeared to confirm that plans to introduce a nationwide computer network to automate the payment of benefits to Hungary's 663,000 unemployed was on hold.
The National Labour Office has already awarded the central server portion of what was originally intended to be a three tier contract to Data General's local partners, Microsystem RT, in a deal estimated to be worth around $1.5m.
Kalmer told Computergram: ‘We hope financial means will be available to install the national network; there are a number of loans we are considering.’
Hewlett-Packard executives, however, confirmed that they did not regard the plan to introduce servers at the 20 regional branch offices as a ‘funded project’ and Hungarian Minister for Labour Gyula Kiss made no reference to the programme in a detailed briefing on Hungarian employment policy delivered to the foreign pass contingent last week.
The National Labour Office, a division of the Ministry of Labour, probably needs to raise several million dollars to complete the scheme as originally specified.
OPTOELECTRONICS RESEARCH AT UNIVERSITY COLLEGE LONDON, SOUTHAMPTON FOCUSSES ON TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Although optical computers may now be a reality, it seems that the new technology is unlikely to replace electronics entirely.
According to Professor Midwinter of University College London, optoelectronics research is instead becoming increasingly focussed on communications and switching applications — from fibre optic cabling through to the internal structure of microchips.
The capacity and speed of optoelectronics make it an ideal means for simplifying switching and routing with optical networking a  possibility for perhaps 10 years time — a prospect that researchers from University College are currently co-researching with British Telecommunications Plc in Harlow.
Meantime at Southampton University, which prides itself on having the largest optoelectronics research group in the UK with 100 scientists, its own fabrication facilities and 35 dark room labs, activities are focussed on a variety of optical fibre, laser and sensor devices.
There is, for instance, the development of acousto-optics — a technique that controls electromagnetic radiation via the periodic changes in refractive index caused by a sound wave — for use in bulk optic and fibre devices.
Optical fibre sensors
Also, optical fibre sensors are being developed for a variety of applications including gas, pressure and strain sensing and water monitoring, while special planar waveguide lasers in glass, crystal and thin films are being researched as a potential medium for integrated optical circuits.
Diode-pumped, solid state miniature lasers are another promising area of research since if sufficiently powered they are capable of driving non-linear optical devices, while the development of fibre lasers is being investigated as an alternative to laser diodes.
There is also work on photorefraction — investigating the properties of certain fibre and structures — and spectroscopy, to help understand better the properties of doped silicate materials and substances like fluorides that are of major interest to developers of solid-state lasers.
On the telecommunications side, research is being carried out into high bandwidths that require high repetition pulses — a rate of 200GHz has been achieved and into Erbium-doped fibre amplifiers, which are a key component for future optical networks.
And, finally, work is continuing into the fabrication of fibres.
The researchers at Southampton use variants of the Modified Chemical Vapour deposition technique that was developed mainly in-house to produce a number of different types of fibres such as polarising, helical core and twin core, along with a range of single and multimode silica fibres for telecommunications, sensing and medical applications.
The University also says that it can supply state-of-the art fibre to other universities and industry across the world in accordance with specific designs, if required.
— Lynn Stratton
HITACHI, HEWLETT TEAM TO EXTEND DISTRIBUTED COMPUTING ENVIRONMENT
Open Software Foundation founder members Hitachi Ltd and Hewlett-Packard Co are to enhance the organisation's one-year-old Distributed Computing Environment.
Both companies have already shipped versions of the software, but both see the need to improve performance.
Hitachi is to contribute its Heterogeneous Data Base Access Function, which provides interoperability between various Distributed Computing Environment and Unix-based databases and Distributed System Automatic Operation Function, which notifies the system manager of, and provides a response for, system failure.
Hewlett-Packard is contributing multi-threaded safe libraries and Distributed Message System Function, a message management system for distributed environments.
The results will appear on both vendors' Unix systems in 1994 — Hitachi is a licensee of Hewlett-Packard's Precision Architecture and is a sponsor member of the Precision RISC Organisation.
The companies view this effort as working towards the success of their co-operation over the Precision Architecture RISC chip and a better range of distributed applications services and tools for their customers in a client-server environment.
Hitachi has been talking about a ‘Unix mainframe’ using the RISC for a couple of years now, but is using a Sparc front-end for OSF/1 Unix on its existing mainframes (CI No 2,144).
MICOM DOUBLES THE PERFORMANCE OF ITS MARATHON SERVERS
The Micom Communications Corp subsidiary of MB Communications Inc, Lawrence, Pennsylvania has announced a new model in its Marathon range of data and speech network servers which is claimed to more than double the performance of the previous products.
The new Marathon 10K is claimed to enable data, voice, facsimile and local network communications over leased lines at speeds of up to 128Kbps.
It does this through a mix of cell relay and fast packet multiplexing, speech and data compression, and facsimile demodulation technology to maximise the bandwidth usage according to the company.
Up to 12 wide area network links are supported, as well as 12 synchronous user channels, 41 asynchronous user channels, eight speech and facsimile channels and two 64-user remote terminal  server Ethernet connections.
Available as both a network feeder and network node — and compatible with the existing members of the family — the 10K enables customers to build networks supporting thousands of users in up to 250 locations, the company says.
The list price starts at £3,945.
The Guildford, Surrey-based UK subsidiary has also announced two new software products, Total Connectivity with data and speech+facsimile switching and new network management software.
The Total Connectivity software, bundled free with the Marathon products and also available as an upgrade, is claimed to offer PABX-like functionality over Marathon-based networks by offering dial-up voice and facsimile capabilities.
The software also provides data switching, enabling terminal and personal computer users to choose the resource to which they need to connect over low speed lines.
The MS-DOS-based NETMan software is claimed to provide a full graphics-based interface for control of Marathon-based networks.
The company says that features include centralised configuration, diagnostics and statistics gathering, and alarm and event reporting as well as simplified installation procedures for Marathon networks.
KENDALL SQUARE GOES TO FRANCE FOR THE RIGHT OBJECT DATABASE FOR PARALLEL KIT
Parallel processing and object-oriented programming are the waves of the future, and so Object Databases Inc, the US arm of Saint Quentin en Yvelines, France-based's Intellitic International SA, is in a mood to celebrate following the news that it has been invited to implement its Matisse object-oriented database for Waltham, Massachusetts-based Kendall Square Research Inc's KSR/1 family of general-purpose highly parallel systems, which run under a parallel version of OSF/1 (CI No 2,162).
The Kendall Square implementation should be ready at the end of the year.
The company is also having discussions with Hewlett-Packard Co and Digital Equipment Corp.
Matisse is claimed to be a production system fit for mission-critical heavy load transaction processing environments.
For the last eight months it has been in use at a $10,000m nuclear reprocessing facility in France with no hiccups, according to US president Jeff Sutherland.
The application captures all sensor readings in real time and stores them for 30 years as required by law.
The Matisse Server Engine will support up to hundreds of users in a client-server environment.
The US National Institute of Standards & Technology has used it to increase performance of robotic factory operations.
It is also in the running to handle a 100-user 5Gb card catalogue at the new French national library up against Sybase, Oracle and Adabas.
Matisse guarantees consistency of data through two-phase locking for data update.
Using object replication, it automatically generates duplicate versions of objects on multiple disks with negligible overheads.
When a disk fails, objects are re-replicated on remaining disks and the system becomes fault-tolerant again with replacing the failed disk.
The Matisse client software incorporates a micromodel for ease-of-use that is claimed to support any data model and includes an object-oriented template for integration with other applications.
MERCURY LAYS BLANKET OF SILENCE OVER ITS PERSONAL NUMBERING TRIAL
Cable & Wireless Plc's Mercury Communications Ltd seems to have run into trouble with its trial of personal numbering announced last August: at that stage it was saying that trials of the technology — which would enable subscribers to use any phone to inform the network of their whereabouts — would begin in the autumn of last year.
Now, however, it is refusing to confirm that the trials have actually gone ahead, saying only that ‘It's taken longer than we anticipated’.
Similarly, it has backtracked on its statement that services are to go live this autumn: the official line is that it is too early to say when they will be available.
Mercury says to expect an announcement in a couple of months.
Vivienne Peters, chief executive of the Telecommunications Users Association, believes that Mercury's reticence may not be because of problems with the trial, but because it wants to keep the plan under wraps in the fear that British Telecommunications Plc will try to steal its thunder by pre-launching a similar service.
PROTEON ATTRIBUTES LAY-OFFS TO ITS PUTTING MANUFACTURING OUT TO CONTRACT
Westborough, Massachusetts-based Proteon Inc puts the need to fire 15% of its workforce — and the consequent $2.7m loss for the quarter to April 3 (CI No 2,156) down to the fact that — in common with most other manufacturers in its area — is now doing little of its own manufacturing but sub-contracts most of it in order to benefit from application of the latest techniques in areas such as surface mounting.
In the first quarter, virtually no manufacturing was left in-house, so the redundancies represent the ‘residual rump’ of this trend, says Alan Swan, its new European General Manager.
Although the next quarter is also expected to be bleak for Proteon — the near-collapse of the absurd European Exchange Rate Mechanism last year has had a poor effect on prices in Europe, causing them to rise — if Swan's track record of success is anything to go by, Proteon's results -at least in Europe — might well be expected to be turned round.
Most recently Swan was business development manager for cc:Mail and Lotus Notes at Lotus Development Corp.
Before that, Swan was at Madge Networks Ltd, where he turned the ailing business round in  spectacular fashion.
Proteon's announcement that it is splitting its business into two divisions (one for adaptor boards and wiring centres; the other for internetworking and intelligent hub systems) is in line with what has been happening internally for some time, says Swan.
The restructuring will enable it to focus better on the two areas of its expertise in both wide area and local networks.
In Europe, Proteon's products are showing good take-up, says Swan, to the extent that the company will start manufacturing in Scotland for the European market.
According to Swan, Proteon has now almost completed its transition from its tenure of the network interface card and dumb hub sector to that of higher intelligence.
SPRINT EXTENDS INTERNET ACCESS
As the latest move in its expansion of Internet access, Kansas City, Missouri-based Sprint Corp has announced connections between the National Science Foundation's US computer communications network, NFSnet, and scientific research networks in 12 countries.
They are Costa Rica, Ecuador, France, Germany, India, Japan, Kuwait, Malaysia, South Africa, Sweden, Turkey and the UK.
Additional connections with Canada, Colombia, Indonesia, Mexico, Peru, the Philippines, Russia and Saudi Arabia are planned for this year.
There will also be enhanced links to Japan and the UK.
The NFSnet links regional networks that interconnect over 1,800 academic and research networks in the US.
In 1991, Sprint provided a managed network that linked the NFSnet with other networks such as the NASA Science Internet and the Energy Sciences Network.
Last year Sprint extended the TCP/IP protocol to commercial customers in the form of SprintLink.
Sprint has also announced demonstration of videoconferencing over the Internet sponsored by the National Science Foundation.
Schoolchildren in the US and the UK were linked over the system as they used their personal computers for discussion of the environment.
TADPOLE SWINGS TO PROFIT, UNDERPINS SHARES WITH PLANS FOR ADR OFFERING
Following Tadpole Technology Plc's flotation on the UK Stock Exchange last December (CI No 2,064) and due to interest shown in its shares in the US, the Cambridge-based company intends to appoint US financial advisors with a view to obtaining a New York listing for its shares in American Depositary Receipt form.
Tadpole's US subsidiary generates approximately 85% of its turnover, while the rest comes from Europe, including the UK.
The UK handles direct sales for most of Europe, excluding France, where Tadpole has another smaller subsidiary.
And the operations in France support and work with the company's reseller community, which bring in the bulk of its European revenues.
For the first six months of its financial year, Tadpole turned round from losses of £1.4m last time to pre-tax profits of £26,800 this.
Turnover rose 93.5% to £8.9m, and the company's order book to March 31 stood at £5.5m.
Deputy group chief executive, J A Woan attributed its success to careful cost control, strong sales of its Sparcbook notebook computer, and a healthy OEM business.
In fact, Sparcbook sales were so good, Woan said, that OEM revenues have fallen as a percentage of group total to 37% in 1993 from 48% in 1992.
Tadpole sells board-level products OEM to the likes of General Electric Co Inc and Polaroid Corp.
In an effort to expand this business further, it has just signed a joint marketing agreement with the Sparc Technology Business Unit of Sun Microsystems Computer Corp, which sells Sparc technology and expertise to third parties, but will focus on higher volume, standard board designs, while marketing Tadpole's skills in complex custom board designs.
Still, the vast majority of Tadpole's profits come from its systems business, including Sparcbook product, portable computers, and fees from licensing deals.
And chief executive George Grey is confident that current growth levels can be maintained, ‘All the group's development projects are on track, including the notebook workstation being undertaken for IBM Corp.
The current indications for those projects due to bring revenues in the next financial year enable us to look forward to 1994 with considerable optimism.’
CST REPORTS BOOMING SALES WITH ITS ACER ALTOS DISTRIBUTION BUSINESS
Leeds-based CST Distribution, the Acer Group Altos arm of CST Group Ltd has reported booming sales figures for the first quarter of 1993.
January sales to UK resellers rose 30% to £290,000 and February saw a record £350,000 turnover.
This was equalled in March with a gain of 45% on the same month last year.
According to CST marketing director Mike Briercliffe, these figures reflect the recent success of value added resellers — both in vertical legal and insurance markets as well as those delivering more general business applications.
Another influence is the year old, mid-range 4500 system which has generated most of the sales; new configurations of the system are due late summer according to Mr Briercliffe.
CST now has a joint marketing agreement with Norwich, Norfolk-based Altos specialist Foundation Systems Ltd.
Other recent signings include Nottinghamshire-based Systems Development Consultants Ltd, Select Business Systems Ltd of Dundee, Scotland, York Computers Ltd and Leeds-based LSI Computers Ltd.
SHARE & BOND ISSUES
IDB Communications Group Inc, the Los Angeles-based international carrier, sold 1.3m shares at $36.50 and will use the $45m net proceeds to reduce long-term debt.
The managing underwriters for the offering were Hambrecht & Quist Inc and Sutro & Co.
OPTi Inc, Santa Clara manufacturer of core logic chip sets for personal computers, got its initial public offering of 2.5m shares, 2m of them new, away at $10 a share and plans to use the $9.5m or so net proceeds to finance accounts receivable and inventory.
The managing underwriters for the offering were PaineWebber Inc and Needham & Co Inc.
L M Ericsson Telephone AB filed with the US Securities & Exchange Commission for a transferable rights issue to buy up to $293.5m of convertible subordinated debentures due June 30 2000.
The offer is being made to US holders of the A and B shares and of American Depositary shares representing the B shares.
Holders will be offered the right to buy American Depositary Debentures of 10 Swedish  kroner principal amount for each share held.
The exercise price is 100% of the value of the debentures bought, payable in Swedish  kroner or in dollars by arrangement with Citibank Citicorp.
The company is also making the rights offering available to holders of American Depositary Shares.
COMPANY RESULTS
Alpharel Inc has reported first quarter net profit up 385.2% at $296,000, on turnover up 38.4% to $1.9m.
Net earnings per share rose 200% to $0.03.
Cherry Corp has reported fourth quarter net profits down 8.3% at $2.1m, after $442,000 tax credits this time and $96,000 credits last time, on turnover up 13.7% at $66.2m; net profit for the year to February 28 was up 119.9% at $10.3m, after $2.5m tax credits this time and $891,000 credits last time, on turnover that rose by 16.4% to $266.2m.
Net earnings per share fell by 10% to $0.45 in the quarter, and rose by 118.6% to $2.23 in the year.
Confertech International Inc saw first quarter net profit up 59.4% at $526,000, on turnover that rose 47.2% to $8.3m.
Net per share rose 40% to $0.07.
CrossCom Corp has reported first quarter net profit up 155.9% at $1m, on turnover that rose by 66.3% to $9.9m.
Net earnings per share rose 75% to $0.14.
Data Race Inc has turned in third quarter net profits up 153% at $1.3m, on turnover up 101.2% at $11.1m; net profit for the nine months was up 158.2% at $3.6m, on turnover that rose 125.6% to $31.3m.
Net earnings per share rose 75% to $0.28 in the quarter, 100% to $0.86 in the nine months.
General Automation Inc has reported second quarter net profits down 40.5% at $477,000 after tax credits of $225,000 this time.
$38,000 last, on turnover down 6.1% at $12.0m; mid-term net profit fell 10.5% at $187,0000 after gains of $450,000 this time, $76,000 last, on turnover that fell 3.1% at $23.1m.
Net earnings per share fell 43% to $0.04 in the quarter, and were flat at $0.02 in the half.
WordStar International Inc reported a third quarter net loss of $10.2m against $25,000 profit last time on sales that slumped 56.8% at $5.9m; net loss for the nine months was $19.5m, up from a loss last time of $4.8m, on sales that fell 40.5% at $23.2m.
Tadpole Technology Plc saw net profits of £41,000 the six months to March 31 against losses of £1.45m last time, on turnover that rose 93.5% to £8.9m.
Pre-tax profits stood at £26,800 against losses of £5.5m last time.
Earnings per share were 3 pence.
MINIGRAMS
Today is Pentium launch day when the likes of NCR Corp, Unisys Corp, Compaq Computer Corp and some two dozen other companies take the wraps off their first Pentium machines, but there is not much point in their making too much noise about it — Intel Corp expects to ship only about 10,000 Pentium chips to customers through June; machines are generally expected to start at about $5,000, but the Wall Street Journal hears that Advanced Logic Research Inc will announce a basic Pentium box for about $3,000; Compaq also plans an $18,000 Pentium version of its SystemPro server.
Ever the traditionalist, AT&T Co chose late Friday to announce that 1,000 jobs are to go at its transmissions systems Merrimack Valley Works plant in North Andover, Massachusetts: 5,000 employees will remain after the big lay-off; AT&T cited reduced demand and improved plant efficiencies for the cuts, which are planned for late August.
IBM Corp on Friday announced that the new AS/400 9406 Models F70, F80, F90 and F95 are now available.
GTE Corp signed a definitive agreement with a subsidiary of Lynch Corp for the sale of its telephone service area in Kansas on undisclosed terms: GTE put 2,300 access lines in Kansas up for sale in January, where it has three employees serving 13 exchanges in the state; after the purchase, Lynch will have 10,750 access lines in five states.
Telecom Australia, which trades off-shore as Telstra, says it has won a licence to build and operate a digital cellular telephone service in New Zealand; Telecom Corp of New Zealand Ltd will also face competition in the cellular market from BellSouth Corp, expected to launch its network next month.
San Antonio, Texas-based Datapoint Corp has hired Edward Enochs Sr, a former executive of rival PictureTel Corp, as director of US Minx sales: Enochs will have responsibility for US sales and marketing of the Minx video communications product line; Datapoint just introduced its Minx Link point-to-point desktop video communications system.
Telefonica de Espana SA is discussing creation of a consortium with US telephone companies to buy a 35% stake in Greek phone company Organisacion Telefonica Elenica SA, OTE; it sees the stake costing $1,000m.
IBM Corp seems to have whipped up as much of a storm around its head with its plunge into digital delivery of music to record stores as Alan Sugar has attracted with his bizarre sacking of Terry Venables as chief executive of Tottenham Hotspur Plc: IBM's joint venture with Blockbuster Entertainment Corp has triggered ‘swift, fierce and almost entirely negative’ reaction from the music industry, the Wall Street Journal reports —‘IBM and Blockbuster made a major gaffe by issuing announcements without contacting the record companies,’said Michael Schulhof, chairman of Sony Corp's Sony USA; Warner Music Group talked of arrogance, MCA Music Group said it had begun working on its own electronic distribution system, and even Polygram, 80% owned by Philips Electronics NV, which also has 6% of Blockbuster, described the announcement as premature.
Rochester Telephone Corp has completed the sale of Statesboro Cellular Inc in Statesboro, Georgia to AllTel Corp on undisclosed terms.
Microsoft Corp announced Release 3.0 of its Visual Basic programming system on Friday: the new release 0 provides access to a wide variety of data sources by integrating the Microsoft Access 1.1 database engine and adds support for Object Linking & Embedding 2.0; it also adds new tools, new controls, greater ease of use and an enhanced custom control standard; it's $200.
MCI Communications Corp said it has gained 10,000 new toll-free telephone numbers since portable numbers were brought in on May 1, including about 6,500 new numbers acquired from AT&T Co: a total of more than 1m commercial 800 numbers were ‘officially freed’ to change.
Intel Corp's request for a US International Trade Commission investigation of Taiwanese manufacturer Twinhead International Corp (CI No 2,168) seems to plunge into a very grey area: the company is claiming that the way the processor interacts with support components to implement memory management for paging software is patented, and that manufacturers using clones of iAPX-86 family chips — Twinhead is using chips from Cyrix Corp and Advanced Micro Devices Inc — are required to pay Intel a royalty of 1% of the wholesale price of their machines for use of the patented technique.
The US Congress has dreamed up the Mary Whitehouse chip, a circuit that the television industry would be required to build into television sets, enabling parents to block out programmes coded for violent content: according to Associated Press, the chip was thought up by Representative Edward Markey, a Democrat from Massachusetts and chairman of the House Energy & Commerce subcommittee on telecommunications — the parent could just push the v-block button on the remote control and keep violent programming out of the home,’ he said  reckoning that if only 10% or 15% of all homes started blocking programmes, broadcasters and advertisers would soon get the message.
Cap Gemini Sogeti SA said turnover for the first quarter of 1993 fell 2.7% to the equivalent of $537m.
New York-based Millicom Inc reached agreement in principle to merge with international affiliate, Millicom International Cellular SA, a Luxemburg-registered company, with the latter the surviving entity.
Beltsville, Maryland-based Micros Systems Inc reports that it has bought a 15% equity interest in Fidelio Software GmbH of Munich, Germany for an undisclosed cash sum with the option to buy the company outright over six years; it also took majority stakes in three Fidelio distribution and support units.
MCI Communications Corp signed a multi-year agreement to use Corning Inc's dispersion-shifted optical fibre it its US-wide long distance network: it says it has already installed dispersion-shifted fibre in routes from Sacramento to Seattle and San Antonio to Austin and will be laying the fibre in a new route between Salt Lake City and Chicago scheduled for completion by year-end; the new cable requires fewer signal boosters, cutting equipment requirements and system costs  while raising reliability of the network.
NEC Corp's Wood Dale, Illinois-based NEC Technologies Inc expects once again to double its sales in 1993 by focusing on its CD-ROM business: the company says it experienced ‘explosive sales’ of CD-ROM products in its fiscal year 1992 to March 31 — its Advanced Media Group, which markets MultiSpin CD-ROM readers, reported revenues of over, $75m, an increase of 135%.
So what does TGV stand for, as in TGV Inc, the Santa Clara company that just signed a deal with Tekelec Airtronic GmbH (CI No 2,168)?
Probably not a lot these days, but at the start, we're told, it stood for Two Guys and a VAX — has anyone signed for the movie rights yet?
FIVE YEARS AGO
On May 16 1988, Computergram Number 929 reported that Computerland demanded indemnity from PS/2 clone suppliers * * * Harris Computer cut 100 jobs * * * Data Switch added IBM channel to T-1 line switch * * * British Telecom took 51% of Holiday Designers * * * DEC cut disk tags 51%.