

NEWS UPdate
FELT WITH SLATE APPEAL
Ruberglas 105 Slates have the easy-fixing advantages of a traditional roofing felt, with the aesthetic appeal of slates.
Their heavyweight glass-fibre base is impregnated and coated with bitumen, surfaced with natural mineral coloured granules, and cut to look like traditional slates.
Supplied by Ruberoid in 1m lengths, they are machined to look like four traditional square slates, or three hexagonal slates.
The strips are simply nailed and glued to the roof, allowing for an overlap between layers.
Colours include green, red, and grey.
Matching strips for eaves, verges, valleys and ridges are also available.
WORK BENCH GAINS VICE
Following the successful launch of the Four Legged Friend work bench, Luna Tools has introduced the Solo speed vice to make the bench even more versatile and useful as an all-purpose workshop tool.
The Four Legged Friend is a compact work bench with an all-steel frame and fold-away angled legs.
The Solo speed vice can be attached to the bench top in any one of eight pre-drilled positions.
It has grooved mdf jaws which open to 160mm; ideal for holding timber, pipes, etc.
Using a pistol-grip principle, the vice can be tightened with one hand.
REEL-APPEAL EXTENSION CABLES — 5 FREE!
A new range of high quality, easy to use Roverpoint extension reels has been introduced by MEM 250v.
There's a choice of five different reels, four of which have three socket outlets which can be used simultaneously (subject to power ratings), all designed with safety as a priority.
Amp ratings are clearly marked on the outer casing, and there's a safety cut-out mechanism on most models to prevent overloading.
Each cable is fitted with a non-rewirable plug, and the fuse can be changed without dismantling it, thus avoiding dangerous repairs.
Roverpoint reels have bright yellow cables, which come in 6, 9, 12 and 18m lengths, and their compact design means they can be neatly stored away.
Available from major d-i-y stores and retail outlets, they are priced from around £11.99 to £21.75.
We've got five Roverpoint reels to give away: send your name and address on a postcard to:.
STYLISH ENTRANCE PANELS
An eye-catching range of thermally insulated plain and glazed aluminium door panels has been introduced by Monarch.
Known as the Jewel in the Crown range, the new panels are designed for use in Monarch aluminium entrance doors, and are available in the same maintenance-free polyester powder-coated finishes.
Strong, rigid aluminium faces on the inside and outside provide outstanding security, and unlike plastic panels, the new designs cannot be melted with a blowtorch or removed by would-be intruders.
Available in two styles — the Emerald and the Sapphire — all panels come in a choice of fully glazed, top glazed, and solid forms.
Panels can also be supplied unglazed, or in a wide range of plain, patterned, leaded, or thermo-ceramic coloured decorative glass.
Matching side panels are also available in the same range of styles, and doors  come with or without a letterplate.
The combination of the new panels and the Monarch door whose features include integral multipoint locking, deadlock facility, and optional built-in intruder alarm, makes for what is probably the most secure entrance door currently available.
IMPROVED IMAGE
The latest design from Pilkington's Tiles heralds a dramatic departure from their usual style.
‘Images’ comes in rich deep colours of blue, black, green and red, and in lighter shades of the same colours.
All feature a distinctive marbled effect on a glossy surface.
Striking contrasts can be achieved by combining two shades of any one colour.
Stunning effects can be created with two classical border stripes — Omega and Greek Key — in either gold or platinum.
CORDLESS DRILLS TO MAKE AN IMPACT
Looking to put more punch into cordless drills, Luna Tools and Machinery Ltd is introducing two new Torque Force impact drills from Ryobi, the TFI-180i and the TFI-230i.
Aimed mainly at the professional market, these new drills will be of interest to the d-i-yer who has a particular need for a powerful cordless impact drill.
The motors have 30% more power than conventional motors, giving drilling capacities of 15mm (⅝″) in wood and 10mm (⅜″) in steel and masonry.
The drills use 9.6 volt and 12 volt battery packs respectively, which can be completely recharged in an hour.
They are supplied complete with a multi-volt recharger, battery pack, and hinged carrying case.
CLEVER TWIST
The new Rotaplug can be wired in seconds — without a screwdriver — and is extremely safe.
The cable cores of the flex are stripped and laid in the correct channels of the plug; the plug pins are twisted to secure the wires; and then the fuse cover is closed.
VENTILATION THROUGH-THE-CISTERN
The Lu-Fan is a completely hidden extraction system for toilet pans.
It is inside the cistern, extracting smells direct from the pan, via the flush pipe, and discharging them to the outside air through the overflow pipe.
The only sign of the system is a touch pad at the front of the cistern.
Installation is claimed to be a simple d-i-y job, and full instructions are supplied.
The major benefit of this system over conventional bathroom ventilation is that odours are removed at source, avoiding the excessive loss of warm air from the room.
The Lu-Fan operates quietly over a period of four minutes, switching off automatically, but it can be restarted immediately if required.
The toilet can also be flushed whilst the fan is in operation.
COMPOST CORNER…
A larger two-stage compost bin has been introduced as part of the Bi-O-bin composting system.
The SO17 is octagonal, with a capacity of about 17cu ft, and is intended for bigger gardens.
Like the smaller SH10, it incorporates Simplefit's ComposTool compost aerator. it is made in vermin-proof galvanised steel, with a corrosion-resistant green polyester finish, and has lids on top and floors to each section.
The twin-bin system enables humus to be kept in one section, while decomposing materials are housed in the other.
Decomposition is accelerated with the ComposTool, which is like a steel walking stick with two paddles on the end.
When pressed deep into the heap and withdrawn, the paddles spread out to disturb, mix, and aerate the decomposing materials.
The bin is about 31in high, 31½in wide and 42in long.
It costs £81.90.
The smaller SH10 bin is £65.90.
INSULATION
Insulation is about saving energy, cutting down on the waste of fossil fuels, and reducing the amount of carbon dioxide we release into the atmosphere by burning them.
It will save you money too.
AS SNUG AS A BUG…
Heat escapes from an uninsulated home in a number of ways — as illustrated here.
Note that the greatest losses are through roof and walls, so these are the major areas to deal with.
Efficient insulation and draught-proofing will cut heat-loss by at least 50%
Thermal insulation aims to reduce heat transfer from a hot area to a cold one, that is, from the warm indoors of our homes to the colder outdoors.
Unfortunately, all the materials we traditionally use in house-building conduct heat to a greater or lesser extent.
Wood is a fairly good insulator, but brick is only average, and glass is downright poor, as anyone will agree after sitting next to a single-glazed window on a cold day.
Insulating homes well has until fairly  recently been a very low priority, both for housebuilders and for the legislators who frame the Building Regulations.
If as much effort had been devoted to providing good levels of insulation as went into other recent advances in building practice, we would all now be living in highly energy-efficient homes, and paying much smaller heating bills.
Left: A shelf set above a radiator under a window will deflect warmth into the room, instead of letting it escape.
This is an OBO Radtop Deluxe radiator shelf by Douglas Kane
Right: Products from the Warmseal range include moisture absorber with refillpack, and a slim above-window or patio door ventilator
However, the latest amendments to the Building Regulations require much higher standards of insulation than ever before and have also belatedly recognised the problems that over-insulation can cause as far as condensation is concerned — both inside the house itself and also within the building's structure.
This means that new houses may cost a few hundred pounds more to build, but will need up to 20% less heating.
This will not, of course, help those people living in older properties, many of which were originally built with no insulation at all .
Over the years various attempts will have been made to insulate houses like these, but these are unlikely to match modern standards, and it will pay you to check out your existing level of insulation, with a view to improving it for the future.
Left: Pilkington Supawrap being laid between joists.
Wear a simple face mask, and tuck sleeves into protective gloves
Below: Note the difference in lengths according to thickness when ordering rolls — ¼in thick, 8m long; 6in thick, 5.3m long
VALUE FOR MONEY
It is important to remember the cost-effectiveness factor when thinking about what type of insulation to install.
Insulation costs money, but can benefit you in two main ways.
It can reduce your heating bills, since your home will waste less heat, and you can maintain the same internal temperatures without burning so much fuel.
The annual saving on your heating bill will therefore pay back the cost of the extra insulation.
the quicker this happens, the more cost-effective the insulation is.
If you are also thinking of replacing your heating system, having better standards of insulation may also mean that you can  specify a less powerful (and less expensive) boiler.
Alternatively, you can enjoy higher internal temperatures than before without increasing your heating bills, but in this case there will be no direct savings, just a greater degree of comfort.
Let's now look at the various ways in which you can improve the insulation of your home, giving each one a rating that indicates how cost-effective it is.
The best (rated 5) will pay for itself in less than a year, while the least cost-effective (rate 0) is worth doing only if you are planning to carry out other major renovation work at the same time.
Rockwool mineral wool in blanket form is an effective alternative to glass fibre.
Vacuum between joists and check for signs of insect attack before applying any form of insulation to the loft
CYLINDER JACKET
The most cost-effective insulation is an insulating jacket for your hot water storage cylinder.
This consists of strips of glass fibre or mineral wool insulation, contained in plastic tubes, and is simply tied in place around the outside of the cylinder.
Buy the thickest jacket you can find — ideally 80 or 100mm thick — and check that it bears the British Standard Kite mark, indicating that it is made to BS5615:1985.
Fit it in place of an existing thinner jacket, and over any shrunk-on rigid foam insulation your cylinder may have.
Even a well-lagged cylinder will still give off enough heat to air clothes if your cylinder is in an airing cupboard.
LOFTY IDEAS
Effective lost insulation comes next in the cost-effectiveness stakes.
Most homes now have some form of lost insulation, as a result of Government campaigns and gradually improving Building Regulations, but in many cases it will be less than the current minimum requirement for new homes, of a 100mm thick layer of glass fibre or a similar insulant.
If you have only a 25mm or 50mm thickness in your loft, it is well worth adding a new 100mm layer of insulation over the top.
The old insulation will in any case have become compacted and inefficient, and may also have been saturated by condensation within the loft space, due to inadequate ventilation.
If this has happened in your loft, it's best to strip out all the old material and lay completely new insulation.
This is likely to be a messy job, involving clearing stored items from the loft before work can begin.
Wear gloves and a face mask, and use a hired industrial vacuum cleaner to suck up loose material once the bulk has been rolled up and removed.
If you are laying new insulation, take the opportunity to put down a vapour barrier of heavy-duty polythene sheeting over the loft floor first, if the plasterboard has no foil face.
This will greatly reduce the risk of condensation, which can saturate the insulation, rendering it useless, and can also cause serious rot in the roof timbers.
It is generally worth having as much as 150mm of insulation in most homes, although the comparatively shallow depth of most ceiling joists means that you may have to lay the insulation across the tops of the joists to achieve the required thickness.
This can pose problems if you use your loft for storage purposes.
It is a good idea to designate part of the lost for this, and to lay boarding on top of the insulation to provide a firm, safe storage platform within easy reach, safe storage platform within easy reach of the loft hatch opening.
The most popular d-i-y materials for insulating lofts are blankets of glass fibre or mineral wool, or loose pellets of vermiculite.
The latter are easier to lay, but you need a thicker layer, of about 150mm, to get the same insulation performance as a 100mm thick layer of blanket, and they can blow about in draughty lofts.
Professional installers may use the same materials, or perhaps special machinery to blow a blanket of loose mineral wool or fire-proofed cellulose fibre into the loft.
Remember that cold water storage tanks, header tanks, and all exposed pipework must be insulated to prevent freeze-ups.
Check that yours are, and fit replacements if they are damaged or missing.
RADIATOR FOIL
Panels of reflective foil fitted behind radiators that are mounted on external walls will reflect back heat which would otherwise be lost through the masonry to the outside air.
They won't save you much money, but cost relatively little to install, and are worthwhile if your house has solid walls.
Don't use ordinary kitchen foil unless you are willing to replace it seasonally, since it tends to tarnish.
Special radiator foils sold complete with self-adhesive pads are better.
INCLUDING EXCLUDERS
Although draught excluders are not strictly an insulation material, they cut heat losses and improve comfort levels.
Installing draught excluders around opening windows and exterior doors is a quick and simple job to carry out.
For hinged windows, the best choice is self-adhesive epdm rubber foam, which unlike earlier foam types, deteriorates only slowly on exposure to sun and rain.
Expect to pay around 50p a metre.
Use nylon brush-strip types of sliding windows.
For door frames, the best choices are metal or plastic extrusions containing brush or flexible wiper seals, which are compressed against the door face when it is closed.
They are usually sold in three-piece door kits, and prices start at around £4 per door.
Finally, for door bottoms there is a wide range of types with brush or wiper seals, also costing from around£3 or £4.
Don't forget to add a letter-box draught excluder (£3 or so) to complete the job.
Take care not to draught-proof rooms too efficiently if they contain fuel-burning appliances, since lack of an adequate air supply could lead to inefficient combustion and a build-up of dangerous fumes.
Check with your fuel supplier if you are uncertain whether your appliances have enough air.
You will also need to provide mechanical ventilation in rooms such as kitchens and bathrooms to prevent serious condensation problems.
ON THE ROOF
If any part of your house has a flat roof that is clearly poorly insulated, you can tackle the problem from above or below.
The simpler option is to put up a false ceiling in the room concerned, with a 100mm layer of insulation and a vapour barrier above it.
Now that the Building Regulations no longer specify minimum ceiling heights in habitable rooms, this is unlikely to cause headroom problems, and it is a simple matter to fit new ceiling joists across the room, supported on joist hangers, and to fit a new plaster board ceiling once the insulation and vapour barrier are in place.
The alternative approach is to insulate the roof on the outside, but this is really worth considering only if the roof covering needs renewing anyway.
The simplest method is to lay slabs of rigid polystyrene insulation on the roof surface, topped by a layer of roofing-grade chipboard or plywood, and a new felted roof covering.
If you have a pitched roof and want to use the loft space for habitable rooms, you need to insulate the underside of the roof slope.
Once of the easiest ways of doing this is to use semi-rigid cavity wall batts — the insulating slabs fitted in the cavities of newly-built houses.
Cut to size, push between rafters, and conceal behind plasterboard lined with vapour barrier.
Note that you must leave an air gap between the insulation and the underside of the tiling battens to allow air to circulate.
If you don't, the battens may start to rot.
CAVITY FILLER
If your house has cavity walls (and most homes built since the 1930s do), you can have the cavity filled with approved insulation material by a professional contractor.
If you plan to have cavity wall insulation installed, start by approaching your local authority Building control Officer for approval.
He will tell you whether there are any restrictions on the type of insulation that can be used (urea-formaldehyde foam is not generally recommended in areas exposed to severe driving rain, for example).
You should also ensure that the product and the installer has approval certificates from either the British Standards Institution (BSI) or the British Board of Agrément (BBA).
You can also contract the Cavity Wall Insulation Association for a list of approved contractors.
DOUBLE GLAZING
Unless you install one of the cheaper d-i-y types, double glazing is not cost-effective from the insulation point of view.
But it can greatly increase comfort levels in cost weather, and can help cut down on condensation too.
If you are planning to have windows replaced anyway for maintenance purposes, you should obviously take the opportunity to have sealed-unit double glazing fitted as standard.
But do check the guarantee period and keep in mind that seals can fail after about 10 years.
Otherwise, it's sensible to restrict the use of double-glazing to rooms such as living rooms and bathrooms where the benefits are of most use.
There are several d-i-y systems available, including the following:
Flexible transparent film fixed with double-sided adhesive tape (about £3 a sq m).
Fixed framed panes which will take acrylic sheets (from £15 per sq m).
Hinged panes (from £20 per sq m).
Sliding panes (from about £40 per sq m).
Sealed units for installation into existing frames (around £25 per sq m).
ON THE BOARDS
The most recent amendments to the Building Regulations have finally introduced requirements for found floor insulation in new homes.
Making improvements to existing, uninsulated, timber or concrete floors is likely to be highly disruptive and prohibitively expensive, and is best done as part of a major renovation programme.
If you have suspended timber floors, you will have to lift the floorboards unless you have a deep crawl space beneath them.
You can then either support loft insulation blanket on garden netting stapled between the joists, or lay rigid polystyrene panels on nails driven into the joist sides.
When you replace the boards, fully close up the gaps between boards, and seal the gap between boards and skirting with flexible mastic.
Take this opportunity to fit pipe insulation to any pipes in the under floor void.
If you have solid floors, the simplest method is to lay rigid polystyrene sheet over the existing floor surface and top it with a layer of flooring-grade chipboard.
However, this will involve repositioning skirtings and built-in furniture, as well as shortening doors and so on.
SOLID WALLS
If you have solid external walls, adding insulation is likely to be disruptive if tackled from indoors, and expensive if done on the outside.
Adding insulation to the inner face of exterior walls involves either fixing thermal board (plasterboard with a rigid foam backing and a built-in vapour barrier) directly to the wall surfaces with a panel adhesive, or putting up a framework of battens with blanket insulation between them, and adding a layer of vapour-check plasterboard on top.
Adding external wall insulation is best left to professional contractors (see box on left).
CAVITY WALL INSULATION
Cavity wall insulation is one of those difficult jobs which has to be left to the experts and, ideally, to make sure the job is done properly, they should be members of the National Cavity Insulation Association.
The association supplies a list of recognised installers, and free advisory literature is also available.
Featured here is an installation using Pilkington glass wool, carried out by Energycare, of Pinhoe, Exeter — both companies are members of the NCIA.
1
A surveyor checks for cracks and gaps, then property is accurately measured.
2
Holes of 25mm diameter are drilled at 135mm centres in mortar joints.
3
A nylon brush separator is threaded down cavity to separate material from adjoining house.
4
The glass-fibre material used for insulation looks like this.
5
it is blown into drilled holes at pre-set pressure and density.
6
Holes are then filled with sand/cement mortar, producing a virtually invisible repair.
Further information from National Cavity Insulation Association (address at end).
INSULATING FROM OUTSIDE
Older homes with solid walls will benefit from external wall insulation, which weather proofs the walls, as well as providing thermal insulation.
But this is not a d-i-y operation.
Choose a system registered with the External Wall Insulation Association.
The system used here was Isporock, from Rockwool, of Bridgend, Mid-Glamorgan) a member of the association.
1
Mineral wool slabs are stuck on to the outer face of the wall and held by special fixing devices.
Reinforcing mesh is fitted around windows and doors.
2
Then a render is trowelled on in two coats.
Further details of this process are available from the External Wall Insulation Association (address on right).
JOBBING NOTEBOOK
LAYING CONCRETE
A fast and effective method of laying an area of concrete is to use Supamix Wet & Roll.
This breaks with convention, needing no mixing of ingredients.
When set, it is claimed to be more crack-resistant and harder than normal concrete.
1
Excavate topsoil from the area to be covered, and add a layer of hardcore.
Spread and ram well down to provide a firm base
2
Tip the West & Roll, direct from the bags, over the area to be covered.
One 25kg bag will cover about half a square metre, to a thickness of 25mm
3
Even out to give a maximum thickness of 50mm.
An old household broom is useful for this operation
4
For a really smooth surface, use a plastering float.
Draw the float across the surface with the leading edge slightly raised
5
Use a watering can with a fine rose attached to apply a small amount of water evenly, until the surface starts to turn a uniform dark colour
6
Using either a solid roller or a special Supamix roller attached to a broom handle, roll the dampened surface lightly.
Progressively increase the pressure to compact the surface.
Unless it rains within two hours, sprinkle with about 3 litres of water per square metre, avoiding direct water pressure on the surface.
An attractive exposed aggregate look can be created by brushing the surface with a stiff household broom about an hour after initial watering and rolling.
In hot weather, cover with polythene to stop water evaporation.
Protect against frost in cold weather
CLEAN POINTING
Repointing brickwork is a simple enough job, but it's easy to stain facing brick by using too sloppy a mix.
Make up the mortar to the consistency of sand pies, so it can be moulded in the hands.
Then surplus mortar will merely brush away.
Should you get mortar on facing brick, use Disclean to remove it.
This is available from most builders’ merchants.
PREPARING FOR WINTER
British weather can play havoc with the fabric of our homes, given the chance.
And the longer faults in the fabric are neglected, the higher the repair bills are likely to be.
So have a winter check now and make sure your home will be weathertight when the wind and rain start in earnest.
1
Start at the top and check ridge tiles.
This is a Redland Dryvent ridge, which incorporates ventilators.
Dry fixing avoids the use of mortar bedding.
borrow a roof ladder for safe access to the roof
2
Check carefully for displaced and damaged slates or tiles, and resecure as necessary
3
Check the flaunchings (the mortar that pots are set into), and treat porous brickwork with a waterproofing solution.
Here, Sylproof was used.
(The repair of stacks should be left to professionals)
4
Examine and repair flashings to ensure they are firmly embedded in brickwork and in close contact with the roofing
5
See that cracks between surfaces such as walls and roofs are sealed.
Here Evo-Stick Flashband was used.
An old wallpaper seam roller is ideal for pressing it in place
6
On large or uneven surfaces, the flashing is best let into a horizontal run of pointing and sealed in with mortar.
It can be bonded to the roof with bitumen rubber roofing compound/adhesive
7
Check for cracks and blisters in sheet roofing felt.
Pare back and seal with waterproofing compound.
Press back in place
8
Extend the life of existing flat roofing by coating with rubberised roofing compound such as Isoflex.
A special primer is available which ensures a firm bond
9
It pays to examine all gutter brackets and clips to ensure no water will drip on to walls.
Gutter sealant may need to be applied to metal guttering, and plastic guttering may need the replacement of perished foam gaskets
10
have a gap-hunt around window and door frames.
Clear out loose and damaged material and fill with exterior sealant, which will remain flexible
11
Check all brickwork pointing.
Crumbling and porous material is best dug out and replaced by new.
This is a common entry point for damp
12
Ensure that external rendering is sound.
Hollow areas, where rendering has blistered away from the wall, are also prone to damp
With all remedial work completed, now is the time to apply protective paints.
See overleaf.
EXTERIOR PAINTING
Our damp climate can play havoc with the fabric of a home once it penetrates its defences.
But today there are decorative paints and protective coatings which can ensure that your house remains dry under the most severe weather conditions.
Before any painting is considered, be sure to detail with any structural problems — as explained on page 13.
All these jobs can be messy, and produce a lot of debris, so be sure to have a good clean-up so that new paintwork is not contaminated.
Now start repairing damaged areas which are to be painted.
1
Here, different timber was used to repair a damaged sill and, in time, the new timber has shrunk away, leaving an ugly gap into which water can soak.
Dig out all loose and damaged timber and strip away old paint
2
Allow the wood to dry, then treat with a primer, such as Weatherproof Preservative Primer, allowing it to soak into the wood
3
When dry, fill the gaps with Weathershield Exterior Flexible Stopper.
This is easy to apply, and it won't shrink when set.
Take it just proud of the timber surface so you can smoother it back when hard
4
When smooth, dust off and apply Weathershield Exterior Undercoat.
Allow to harden.
When dry apply Exterior High Gloss
5
Dig out damaged putty, taking care not to crack the glass.
Treat timber rebates with Weathershield Preservative Primer or, if frames are metal, check for rust, then treat with quick-drying metal primer
6
Apply a bed of new putty — standard for wood, or dual-purpose or metal casement for metal frames.
Hold in the ball of your hand, and dispense with your thumb
7
Use the straight edge of the putty knife to shape the putty.
Apply enough pressure to force surplus putty out of the rebate
8
Lightly smooth with your fingers or with an old paintbrush.
Then leave for a week to surface-harden before painting
9
Rake out all loose or hardened filler from around the edges of frames, then brush the gaps free of debris
10
Now seal the gaps with an exterior flexible sealant, working it deep into the cracks
11
Press and smooth with a wet finger or a wet lint-free rag
12
With all repairs made, painting can start.
As a general rule, start at the top and work down.
Prime all bare surfaces.
Undercoat to add body, or to obliterate an under-colour.
Treat timber cladding before top-coating window and door frames
13
Wherever possible, remove guttering and brackets so the fascia boards can be painted properly.
This is easier with plastic systems, but not feasible with cast iron
14
Loose paint can be removed with a drum sander fitted with a medium abrasive belt.
Be sure to wear a face mask and safety goggles; there could be lead in old paint
15
Clean back to bare wood wherever possible.
Here, all timber was decorated with  Weathershield Exterior Woodstain, which needs no undercoat unless applied to new or bare wood.
It stains and protects in one, allowing the woodgrain to show, but filtering out ultra-violet light and repelling water
16
With the cladding treated, rendered areas, and a long concrete lintel, were coated with Weathershield Masonry Paint.
No stabiliser was needed here
17
On the sunroom walls, chalking off the existing paint calls for a stabilising solution.
Wash the surface clean, allow to dry, and fill cracks with an exterior flexible stopper.
If mould is present, treat with a fungicidal solution, then apply stabilising solution.
This binds the old decoration prior to applying the new
18
Two coats of Weathershield fine Texture Masonry Paint were applied for best effect.
It also contains a fungicide to discourage mould growth
19
All joinery woodwork was treated with the Weathershield Exterior Gloss system.
Remove all door furniture, and where the existing paint is in reasonable condition, apply exterior undercoat and high gloss.
Remember the gloss on its won will not obliterate an under-colour. the undercoat must do this
20
With the undercoat dry, lightly sand, dust off, then apply top coat
21
Finally, all decorative joinery — hardwood door and porch framework — was treated with Weather Shield Exterior Woodstain.
This flexes with the movement of wood and is highly water-resistant.
It filters out harmful ultra-violet rays and inhibits mould growth.
On bare wood, use the exterior preservative base coat first
22 the finished house
BUILDING A WALL PLANTER
A dwarf hollow wall is an excellent construction for dividing a patio from the rest of the garden, and if forms an easy-to-maintain shrub and flower border.
You need a trench for the foundations at least 150mm high.
Compact the base, then lay concrete, using a 1 cement to 5 parts ballast mix.
Make holes through the base to allow for drainage.
1
Spend time getting the first layer dead true.
It will make further courses so much easier to lay
2
Use a mortar mix of 1 part masonry cement to 4½ parts soft sand, and keep the mix on the dryish side so it doesn't slump when blocks are laid on it
3
As work progresses, make regular check for horizontal, and to ensure that both walls are exactly the same height
4
Blocks which need trimming can be cut with a bolster and club hammer
5
First build up the piers and end courses, then the rest of the wall can follow
6
If lighting is to be included, this is the time to lay cable.
It must be protected by conduit
7
The coping stones on top of the wall should be bedded in a stronger mix.
Reduce the sand by a quarter, and again keep the mix on the dry side
8
Lay each stone carefully, allowing for a 9mm thick mortar joint
9
Again, check regularly with a spirit level.
If you need to tap in place, use the handle of your club hammer — never the head
10
Check for level across the piers too, so that all four walls are the same height
11
Some cutting will be involved when fitting the coping on the piers.
Note the mortar buttered on to the end of the slab before laying
12
A final check with a level to ensure the copings are true.
Note the use of club hammer handle.
13
The completed wall, built to a neat curve.
Were walls straight, a builder's line is used
14
With a planter wall, if no holes have been made in the base concrete, leave a few joints open just above the ground level to ensure good drainage
15
for an attractive addition, mount an exterior lantern on each pier.
An extra slab with be required, as shown, appropriately drilled to feed the cable through
FIXING ADJUSTABLE SHELVES
Shelving based on slotted strips has the advantage that shelves can be arranged and re-arranged to suit.
1
Drill and plug one hole in the wall, using the top hole in the slotted strip.
Loosely secure the strip, then use a spirit level to ensure the strip is vertical before marking for other fixing holes
2
Drill and plug the remaining holes and secure strip to wall
3
Locate the second strip to the required width; insert two brackets in matching slots and test a timber across them so you can check with a spirit level.
Check also for vertical on the second strip, then mark for a hole.
Repeat the checking for other holes as for the first strip
4
As shelves are added, use the holes in each bracket to anchor shelf to brackets.
Make sure screws will not penetrate the top surface of the shelf
FITTING A MORTISE LOCK
Before fitting any mortise lock, ensure that you have sufficient depth of wood in which to house it.
On a panel door, avoid the jointing dowels on the centre rail.
A flush door will have a block of wood inserted at a convenient point so there's something solid to cut into.
You will find it much easier to work with the door removed and held firm in some form of vice.
1
Position the lock against the side of the door edge and mark the length of the lock
2
Mark the position of the lock body on the door edge, then scribe a centre mark.
A leaflet supplied with the lock should give its exact thickness.
Mark this either side of your centre line
3
Use a mortise gauge to complete the marking out of the area which will be cut out to house the lock body
4
Bore a series of holes along the centre line.
Mark the bit shank to control the depth, which should be the depth of the lock body, plus the thickness of the face plate.
Make sure you keep the drill bit truly vertical
5
Chop out the waste material to produce a clean rectangular shape.
Then mark the outline of the face plate, scribe with a craft knife, and carefully chisel out the shallow recess
6
Hold the lock with the face plate flush with the edge, and mark the positions for the key and spindle holes.
Drill one hold for the spindle, and two close together for the keyhole.
Clean out holes with a keyhole saw
7
Drill pilot holes and screw down the face plate, then fit escutcheon plates and door handle.
Rehang the door, then mark the position on the door frame of the striker plate.
Cut mortise holes as directed
FITTING A UPVC WINDOW
There are plenty of companies who will fit replacement windows — for a price.
But if you follow instructions carefully, it is possible to fit your own.
The first essential is very careful measurement of the hole to be filled.
If a window has to be tailor-made, you must expect to pay for it if it doesn't fit!
If in doubt, ask the supplier to measure up for you.
Systems may vary slightly, and these will be indicated on your fitting instructions.
But the illustrations here clearly illustrate the stages involved for most upvc windows.
1
This casement window was badly rotted, and its ground floor location and reasonable size made it an ideal subject for first attempt
2
Window openings are rarely dead square.
Take several measurements including diagonals, in millimetres.
Select your style, and order, giving a clear indication of the size needed
3
Do nothing until the replacement window is on site, then check the dimensions.
Then unscrew all opening sash hinges of old windows.
These may be levered off if rusty
4
Try to avoid breaking glass when using a crowbar on the fixed sashes.
Store removed material well away from the work area
5
Use a general-purpose saw to cut through mullions and transoms.
This saw is able to cope with both timber and hidden metal
6
Now saw through each section of the frame, starting with the sides.
A central angled cut will make levering out easier
7
Use the crowbar to prise the frame from the wall.
Pull out any large cut nails you encounter as you go
8
Clean out all debris from the window opening with an old hand brush.
An extra pair of hands from here on will make work that much easier
9
Remove the opening casements very carefully and store, leaving just the main frame.
Remove any protective tape at this stage 
10
Offer the new frame into the opening.
A helper sited inside will make this job easier
11
Check horizontal and vertical levels.
Small packing wedges are used to square-up the frame.
These are often supplied.
Ensure that the frame doesn't lean in or out
12
Fixing devices often allow both frame and wall to be drilled together — but follow the supplier's instructions
13
The spacing of fixings will be advised.
On some larger frames, top and bottom fixings may also be needed
14
Once the frame is secure, replace the opening sashes and check for fit
15
Prepare the frame to receive the glazing units.
This usually involves both temporary and permanent wedges to ensure the glass sits correctly in the frame
16
Carefully insert the glazing into the frame, working from the outside
17
Insert the special beading which holds the glass in place
18
Now, working from inside, cut the security gasket to size and press firmly in place
19
Make sure frame, glass and surrounding brickwork are clean before sealing the gap between frame and brickwork with an exterior grade sealant.
Smooth and press in place with a wet finger.
Any gaps at sill corners can be filled with mortar
20
The final effect.
With experience behind you, you can now tackle the rest of the house!
WALLS
Patterned or plain, wallpaper or paint?
If this is the limit of your choice when redecorating walls, how about trying texture instead?
Make them rough or smooth, or use an embossed paper, perhaps enhanced with a special paint technique.
Where there's a wall, there's a way
As well as the more common paper and vinyl wallcoverings, there is a range of more unusual materials that can be used to great decorative effect on walls.
These create a textured finish for your walls which is unique to the material used.
Relief papers provide pattern with a textured embossing, which is ideal for concealing a wall with an imperfect surface.
metallic foils have a highly reflective surface, and create an impression of light and spaciousness. flock, hessian, grasscloth and cork give warmth and texture; and fabrics like silk create a sense of luxury, which no other wallcovering can equal, though some try to imitate.
Many of these materials are expensive, but they can often be used successfully to decorate just one section of a room or part of the walls: above or below a dado rail for instance; or as wall panels framed with timber mouldings, with a less expensive finish used on the rest of the wall.
The material could also be used just on the back wall of an alcove, to highlight a special collection displayed on shelves in front of it, for instance.
With the exception of relief papers and thick fabrics like hessian or grasscloth, most of these special wallcoverings need to be hung on a smooth and level surface for a satisfactory result.
So it's important to fill holes and cracks in an uneven wall, then hang lining paper to provide a smooth backing.
If the material used is not opaque, the wall should also be emulsioned.
BUYING AND HANGING TIPS
Roll widths and lengths can vary between special effect wallcoverings.
So when buying it is wise to take along a plan of the room with all the essential measurements marked on it.l Material quantities can then be calculated in the shop.
check batch numbers on rolls to make sure each roll comes from the same batch, and that colours will match.
When hanging these wallcoverings it is important to use the paste recommended by the manufacturer, and to check whether the paste should be applied to the back of the material or to the wall.
In most cases where the material has a paper backing, the backing is pasted.
Where there is no backing, the wall is usually pasted, then the material offered up to it.
Some materials also come ready pasted.
Many special wallcoverings, unlike most papers and vinyls, do not match at the edges.
To match up lengths, seams need to be overlapped.
A sharp knife and a metal straight-edge are needed to trim centrally through both lengths at the overlap.
The unwanted side strips can then be peeled away to reveal a perfect seam.
RELIEF PAPERS & VINYLS
The most well-known of these is Anaglypta, a white paper with an embossed relief pattern, designed to be overpainted.
It's often associated with large-scale traditional patterns used in Victorian times, but there's a wide range of smaller-scale geometrics, as well as textures, some of which imitate natural materials like grasscloth, tree bark, woven material, etc.
Anaglypta Original is made from recycled paper, wood pulp and cotton, by bonding two papers together, the top layer being very smooth and white.
The low-relief pattern is embossed through both layers.
Anaglypta SupaDurable is even more hard-wearing, made from a ‘recipe’ of wood pulp, cotton, china, clay and side, designed for use in more heavily used areas like hallways.
It has a deeper relief pattern, as has Anaglypta Dado , also designed to take more knocks and bumps in that vulnerable area below a dado rail.
This is supplied in rolls containing 10 panels, each 36in (914mm) high and 21½in (546mm) wide.
The bottom of each panel has a pattern which can be trimmed if necessary, to fit individual dado heights.
Three types of Anaglypta Vinyls , the Luxury Vinyl, Fine, and Ultra Fine Vinyls, are distinguished by their fineness of textured or patterned detail.
Unlike the other Anaglyptas, they have a flat paper backing, making them easier to apply and also to strip.
The vinyl is applied over the paper base, through an engraved screen, and then the design is ‘blown’ by heating in an oven.
Other types of blown vinyl are made in similar ways, and may include metallic-type paper surfaces with a slightly reflective sheen.
The Anaglypta range includes borders in both vinyl and ‘Original’ types, which can be used under a cornice or picture rail, as a dado to divide two different papers, above a skirting and around a doorframe to ‘frame’a wall, or around a window.
All types of Anaglypta, including the vinyls, should be painted with silk emulsion.
Some look most effective when the relief is enhanced with a technique like scumbling, rag rolling, sponging or spattering.
They will last longer and look better if lining paper, applied horizontally, is used first, especially if walls are uneven and you want to hide the bumps.
Left: Greet every morning with that holiday feeling.
Acorn's Seashore texturing roller gives instant relief to your bathroom walls
Right: Fake it!
With imitation corks and wood panellings from Storey's Touch Down self-adhesive vinyl range, which includes marbles and suedes
Above: Cane your walls for a touch of the exotic.
Lincrusta wallcovering is virtually indestructible, and will probably last longer than your cane furniture!
Follow instructions supplied with each roll carefully.
Allow lining paper to fully dry out; time each pasting so the paste is allowed to soak in for ten minutes before hanging, and if you go over that time, make sure all sections soak for the same time.
Being a natural material, Anaglypta expands  on pasting, and expansion rates will vary with time.
When hanging, don't overlap at all.
Butt lengths up to each other — any slight gaps will be hidden when overpainting.
It's important to work to a vertical plumbline, as with any wallcovering, so that lengths meet exactly.
Don't press seams with a seam roller, especially on the non-vinyls, which have hollow backings filled with glue.
You may get away with light use of a seam roller on a flat-backed vinyl, but don't overdo it!
Smooth over lightly with a soft cotton cloth instead, applying even pressure, but not flattening patterns.
Wipe off any glue at seams immediately, before it begins to dry.
Cut lengths off at ceiling and skirting with a sharp craft knife, angled into corners, for an exact fit.
Then wait at least 24 hours before overpainting, to allow glue and paper to dry thoroughly.
An intricate geometric relief pattern gives interest without being overpowering; and if you change your mind about the colour scheme, it's easy to just paint over it!
Anaglypta Luxury Vinyl
Stylish tree bark impressions add a touch of cool sophistication to a simple but elegant room setting.
Anaglypta Original, pattern no RD54, from Crown Relief Decorations
Lincrusta is the most luxurious and hardwearing of the Crown Relief Decorations range.
Made from resin, whiting, paraffin wax and linseed oil, fused on to a heavy backing paper, then left to mature for two weeks.
It's impervious to water and virtually indestructible.
As well as traditional and modern patterns, it comes in some very realistic looking ‘natural’ effects.
Linenfold looks like old-style vertical oak board panelling, with a lovely ‘wood grain’; and other effects include cane, cord and sea grass matting.
They look even more realistic with a paint effect such as scumbling or graining, which can reinforce a wood effect, give the appearance of embossed leather, or just enhance the texture.
Lincrusta should be hung with special glue, painted with eggshell or gloss, and any paint effects sealed with varnish.
Other relief papers include blown vinyls , which have a smooth backing paper.
They're available in natural white for painting, and in a number of colourways.
The latest trend is towards a light-reflecting or pearlescent background on vinyls, rather like a more subtle metallic.
Another fashion in vinyls is to use this light-reflecting finish, and have patterns highlighted by embossing parts of the  printed design.
This can be very effective in a room where you want to make the most of the light available, but needs a perfectly smooth wall surface.
Wood chip papers are the most popular for giving a light ‘oatmealy’ texture for a very cheap price.
They consist of two layers of paper with wood chips sandwiched between them, and are ideal for hiding minor wall irregularities.
They're designed to be emulsioned over: try using sponging techniques, with two or three colours, to give a deeper textured effect, without much added cost.
FLOCK WALLPAPERS
Here short-pile fabric is used to pick out the main pattern shapes, providing a relief pattern that highlights the design.
Flocks are most suited to traditional surroundings, usually to areas of the house which receive less wear and tear.
Natural fabrics like silk and wool on a paper backing are used to give the velvety finish in traditional flocks.
Tougher are the newer flocks made with vinyl film: these also have a paper backing, but the fibres are of viscose rayon.
Flocks need to be hung on a good wall surface.
Traditional flocks are difficult to hang, as any paste inadvertently dropped on the pile surface is almost impossible to remove without flattening the finish, and scratches and knocks cause permanent damage.
Some vinyl-based flocks are ready pasted, which makes them easier to use.
Because they are heavy, unpasted flocks should be left to soak after coating with a fungicidal adhesive.
Once up, the pile on the flock can get dusty: This can be removed with a vacuum cleaner duster head or a soft brush.
Stains on vinyl-based flocks can be removed with a soft, almost dry sponge and soapy water.
When completely dry, gently brush the surface to align the fibres.
REFLECT ON METALLICS
Metallic papers have a highly reflective finish makes them an excellent choice to give a feeling of spaciousness in a small area.
As they are also washable and waterproof, they're ideal for use in kitchens and bathrooms.
Foils come ready-pasted or unpasted.
When using the latter apply the paste with a foam roller.
Put up lengths in the usual way, smoothing with a sponge, then flatten seams with a seam roller.
Check the design matches very accurately at seams, as any mistakes with be highlighted.
As foil conducts electricity, it's important that this paper is never hung behind a light switch or power socket, or anywhere where it could come in contact with electricity.
Light-reflecting vinyls, which look similar, can be hung in the usual way behind switch or socket panels, but are not suitable for humid areas.
material impressions: Strands of fibre on a smooth paper backing give a natural fabric look to these two wallcoverings from Paper Moon's Mahogany range
HOMESPUN HESSIAN
Hessian provides warm colour and a rough, homespun texture that was beloved or architects in the 50s.
It is idea for use in hall, living and dining room, or study.
A natural woven material, hessian is tough, and comes in a wide range of colours and may be backed with paper or unbacked.
The 900mm wide paper-backed rolls are easier to use.
The paper back is pasted, and the roll put up in the same way as standard wallpaper.
With unbacked hessian, you place a length of hessian onto a pasted wall, then gently press each strip in place with a roller.
It's important  not to stretch the hessian out of shape, as it will remain mis-shapen.
Lengths should be overlapped, and only cut to fit at the ends, as hessian can shrink as it dries.
Use a sharp knife and straight-edge to cut across the top and lower edges, then cut through both lengths at a join, remove offcut strips, and press down.
Right: Add depth and elegance to plain painted walls with a Fablon peel and stick border.
This is Waldorf, in green, used between two dado rails
Below: Subtly speckled tiny ceramic particles form Sables textured wallcovering.
From Osborne & Little's Fardis range
FABRIC COVERINGS
Silk is probably the most luxurious, and the most expensive material you can hang on your walls, creating an effect of subtle careful handling, once in place it provides a surprisingly long-lasting surface.
Silk and other fabrics are specially suited to bedrooms, and can be used flat or gathered.
Fabric wallcoverings come with a paper backing, specifically designed for use on walls, in both plain colours and patterns.
Alternatively, use standard furnishing fabric and match it up to other furnishings in the room.
Unbacked fabrics can be used flat or pleated.
A flat fabric wallcovering needs a good wall surface, and is not easy to hang, as it's important that no paste gets on the face of the fabric which it will stain.
Most standard furnishing fabrics can also be stuck to the wall — paste the wall, not the fabric.
An easier method of installing fabric is to fix it to a frame.
Nail timber battens at the top and bottom of the wall, fix fabric lengths to the battens with a staple gun, then cover the staples with fabric binding.
Gathered fabric can be fixed at the wall top to a curtain track screwed in place, and at the lower edge around curtain wire screwed to the top edge of the skirting.
If you're just looking for matching patterns to co-ordinate with room furnishings, however, there's an increasingly wide range of totally co-ordinated wallpapers and borders available to go with curtain fabrics, bed linen, and even soft furnishing fabrics which can be bought by the metre.
Variety is added by using different pattern scales, so that large florals can be combined with striped patterns, for instance; or colourways may be co-ordinated across a range so that mixtures of patterns and plains can be used.
NATURAL GRASSCLOTH
This attractive textured finish uses natural grasses for its appeal.
The grasses are woven together with cotton to form a mat, which is then bonded on to a paper backing.
Grasscloth is delicate, needs handling with care, and is most suited to light-wear areas of the house.
Use the special adhesive recommended to hang grasscloth, and paste the paper backing.
However the textured topside can easily mark or snag, and paste cannot be successfully removed from it.
It is therefore important to protect the face with a layer of paper placed on the pasting paper during pasting.
Apply grasscloth in the same way as paper-back hessian, smoothing the material in place with soft roller.
Crease in the cutting lines at top and bottom when hanging, but only remove the surplus material when the covering is dry.
WARMING CORK
Cork provides a warm wallcovering that is reasonably tough.
A thin veneer of cork is bonded of a painted backing shows through in places to create a two-colour finish.
Cork-faced tiles are thinner than ones used on floors, and need hanging with care as the face of the work will stain.
Use the special ready-mixed adhesive recommended and hang by butting up one tile to the next.
It can be sealed with several coats of varnish or special sealant in humid areas like bathrooms or kitchens.
FAKING IT
If you don't want to go to the expense and trouble of covering your walls with natural fabrics like hessian, grasscloth, or cork, there's a lot of imitations available.
They rarely look anywhere near as good as the real thing, but they will be cheaper, and easier to keep clean.
Or try the other option: practise your painting techniques on offcut samples of textured Anaglyptas or relief papers (which imitate grasscloth, etc).
You could achieve an effect just as good as that of the real thing, and have the pleasure of knowing that you'd done it all yourself!
And conversely, if you find that you're just not a dab hand at paint techniques, or haven't got the time to find out, there are now quite a few wallpapers available which reproduce the effects, but require not painting: just hang, and you have instant sponged, rag-rolled or marbled walls!
PAINT EFFECTS
TEXTURED FINISHES
A wonderful range of special painting techniques can be used on just plain flat lining paper to give completely individual pattern/colour combinations which give the overall impression of a texture.
Many look even better used on a textured wallcovering, as they heighten the relief design.
SPATTERING. it's the wrist action that counts!
Just flick paint on to the surface with a fully loaded brush.
Make sure floors and woodwork are covered or masked first.
For best effect, use two or three colours to contrast with background.
Dulux Rhapsody spattered with Brilliant White and Painted Lady matt emulsions.
SPONGING.
Very easy technique, which gives soft, dappled effect.
You'll need a natural sea sponge, with well spaced irregular holes, and a paint roller tray.
Choose colours which harmonise or contrast with base coat.
Soak sponge in water, wring out well, and dip into paint, wiping off excess on sloping section.
Starting from top of wall, dab lightly and randomly.
Allow to dry before applying second colour.
Top coat is Goldcrest matt emulsion, from Dulux Definitions range.
Textured paints cover up less than perfect wall surfaces, filling slight cracks and disguising unevenness.
They're applied thickly, with an ordinary large brush, about 1 sq m at a time.
Patterns can be applied before paint dries: experiment with household objects such as hair comb, sponge, or edge of brush.
But texturing rollers give a defined pattern most easily.
Acorn Cascade texturing roller creates bright splashback for basin, and border around window and skirting (left & above); Seashore (right) conjures up rippling water beach images.
Finishes such as Artex and textured paints are usually sold pre-mixed, in white only, though a few paints are available in pastel colours.
They can be painted over once texturing is totally dry: use silk emulsion for areas such as bathrooms or kitchens.
And remember they can be difficult to remove!
NEWS UPdate
FLOOR TILING MADE EASY
If you would like a tiled bathroom or kitchen floor, but have been put off by having to solve the problem of tiling over a wooden floor that could flex and crack, and so shift the grouting and loosen or even split your new ceramic floor tiles, then the answer could be the new Schlüter DITRA matting, available from stockists of Homeslux Products.
Polythene DITRA Matting is said to make a perfect surface for ceramic tiles when laid on to most floor surfaces.
its specially channelled structure absorbs movement of the sub-floor, bridges gaps between wooden boards and cracks in cement screed, and is also waterproof, which is vital in a bathroom.
With DITRA matting, laying floor tiles is quick and simple, because once the sheets are cut to size and laid, the floor tile adhesive can be applied immediately, allowing the tiles to be fixed at the same time.
Although this matting is new in the UK, it has a long record or success in countries where ceramic floor tiles are more widely used.
AMBIDEXTROUS TILE GAUGE
A quick and easy tile cutting and measuring gauge, suitable for use by both right and left-handed users, has been introduced by ECW Tools.
It can be used on ceramic tiles up to 8in wide, and offers and accurate guide to cutting, accommodating angles up to 15 ° and automatically gauging grouting gaps.
Incorporating a tile scorer, the gauge is available mail order for £3.75 inclusive, and can be used in conjunction with any tile cutting tool.
TOOL-FREE CONNECTIONS
Simple hand tightening to give a permanent leak-proof seal is all that is needed to save you time and to connect brassware, like taps and mixers, when using the new Tap Connector from the Speedfit range.
It enables taps to be connected quickly and easily, even in the very confined spaces found in some kitchen and bathroom situations.
Connecting to the supply pipe is even easier.
The pipe is simply pushed home into the fitting, where it is instantly secured, without the need for tools or a blow torch, therefore there is also no risk of fire damage to furniture.
A full product range is offered including trees, elbows and straight connectors, and there is a handy end stop which can be used to blank off pipe ends temporarily.
To provide temporary shut off for routine servicing, such a re-washering, push-fit service valves are also available: the valve can be operated from fully open to fully closed by a quarter-turn screwdriver slot.
Suitable for 15mm outside diameter tubing, the valves can be used on hot and cold pipes.
Speedfit fittings are lead-free, totally safe for drinking water, and are Water Research Centre listed.
AUTOMATIC PASTER
Earlex, who are well-known for their wallpaper strippers, have switched to the other end of the wallpapering process with Autopaster.
This automatic wallpaper pasting machine is suitable for use on any stable working surface, is simple to operate, and helps the home decorator to achieve really professional results.
As the wallpaper is drawn from the Autopaster, a film of paste is deposited on the underside by a central foam-covered roller, ensuring the entire surface is evenly covered.
The trough can be filled with either paste of water (for ready pasted wallpapers).
RAPID ROLLER MIXER
A hand mixer, claimed to produce 25–30kg of concrete in around 30 seconds, has just been introduced by Plysu.
Called the Odjob, and made from recycled material, it is a small but robust polythene drum, with a screw-on calibrated watertight lid, which doubles as a water measure.
The drum is filled with water and mix ingredients, the lid is screwed on, and the Odjob is rolled back and forth for 30–90 seconds to mix the ingredients.
Floors
Floorcoverings withstand a great deal of wear and tear in the average home, and buying the wrong type can be a hideously expensive mistake, so knowing what to put where is very important.
Here is a brief guide to making the right choices.
Absolute walk overs!
There is a wide choice of floorcovering materials on the market, and laying them is well within the capability of most d-i-yers.
Shopping for floorcoverings has never been easier either; all the major d-i-y superstores stock a huge range of sheet and tile materials (plus all the tools and accessories you need to lay them), and if you can't find what you want there, you can always turn to specialist flooring suppliers for help.
They will arrange fitting too if you don't want to do the job yourself.
One of the best ways of deciding which floorcovering to use where is to work around the house, thinking about what each room will need for the best combination of looks, durability, ease of cleaning and comfort, all at a price you can afford.
So let's start by taking a look at what's what in floorcoverings.
FLOORS FROM A-Z
Look at the table on page 35 for a short summary of each floorcovering's properties, with ratings from 1 to 4.
The higher the performance rating the better; so a 4 rating means that the floorcovering is very durable, warm, quiet and resilient underfoot, and comes in a wide range of patterns or designs.
On price, 1 is the cheapest and 4 the dearest.
Carpets consist of fibre tufts or loops, woven or stuck to a durable backing.
Woven carpets are generally the most expensive, and are made by either the Axminster or the Wilton method.
Tufted carpets are made by stitching tufts of fibre into a woven backing, where they are secured by adhesive.
Some cheaper types have a foam underlay bonded directly to the backing; others require a separate underlay.
A wide range of fibre types us used in carpet construction today, including wool, nylon, acrylic, polypropylene and viscose rayon.
Fibre blends can improve carpet performance; a mixture of 80% wool and 20% nylon is particularly popular for providing a good combination of warmth, resilience, wear, low flammability and resistance to soiling.
Left: The Wicker wool/nylon blend from the Stoddard Templeton Variations Tweed range — ideal for access areas like the landing and hallway
Above right: Give a warm, rustic feel to your conservatory with Terracotta floor tiles from Wickes.
Hardwearing and easy-to-clean, the tiles are also ideal for rooms such as kitchens, halls and bathrooms
Right: Create the height of style in your bathroom — this matching wall and floor tile bathroom set from Cristal's classical Coliseum range is also available in green, champagne and beige
Pile length and density affect the carpet's performance as well as its looks, and most carpets are classified to indicate the sort of wear they can be expected to tolerate.
The  pile can be cut (often to different lengths, giving a sculptured effect), looped (uncut and left long), corded (uncut and pulled tight to the backing), or twisted.
A dense pile wears better than a loosely-woven one, which can be parted to reveal the backing.
Carpet widths are described as broadloom (more than 1.8m/6 ‘ft ‘wide), or body (usually up to 900mm/3 ‘ft ‘wide).
The former are intended for large areas, the latter for corridors and stairs.
Most broadloom carpet is in face made in both imperial 12 ‘ft ‘(3.66m) and metric 4m (13 ‘ft ‘) widths; it is bought by the linear yard or metre.
Carpet tiles are small squares of carpet of various types, designed to be looselaid.
Cheaper tiles resemble cord or felt carpets, while more expensive ones may have a cut or shag pile, or even look like expensive velvet-finish carpet, with no joints visible.
Common sizes are 300, 450, 500 and 600mm (12, 18, 20 and 24in) square.
ON THE TILES
Ceramic tiles are small squares or rectangles of fired clay, with a glazed surface that may be plain or patterned.
The thinner types (usually about 4mm thick) are intended for use on walls, while stronger, thicker tiles (about 9mm/⅜in thick) are used on floors.
They come in a huge range of colours and designs, often with matching inserts and border tiles.
Above: Inspired by the traditional floors of country houses across Europe, the Charlecote Rosewood design from Amtico looks like real parquet, and will add a touch of class to a study or living room, but will not cost the earth
Above: Create a dramatic effect in your dining or living room with a Nightshade carpet from Stoddard Templeton's luxurious Gleneagle's range
Right: If your floorboards are even, but discoloured, or if you just want to give a floor the individual touch without spending too much, why not use paint to create colourful patterns and an interesting effect
Below: If you have an old house and want tiles that match its particular period, Old Terracotta tiles from Fired Earth will create a charming atmosphere, but are a practical option in a kitchen.
Other tiles in the Fired Earth range which will create a similar effect include Antique Reclaimed  Terracotta , Florentine, Byzantine, Honey, and Red Terracotta
Ceramic floor tiles are generally laid in special adhesive rather than in a mortar screed.
They are usually 150 or 200mm (8in) square, but rectangles or various sizes are also made, and there are some hexagonal and octagonal types available (the former interlock perfectly, while the latter are laid with small square tile inset between each pair of octagons).
Right: Ideal for areas such as bathrooms kitchens and even conservatories, these attractive cork tiles from Wicanders are easy to lay, and hardwearing.
When buying cork tiles, check whether they are sealed or unsealed.
This could save you a lot of work later
Above: For a dramatic and original effect in a farmhouse kitchen use hand-riven Sumei Slate tiles, from The Merchant Tiler; the variations in the colour of each tile give a ‘lived in’ look
Opposite right: Part of the Eastern Treasures range from Mr Tomkinson, this exotic Sarouk design was originally created by the craftsmen of Persia who wove exquisite medallions and interlaced them with leaves, buds and flowers
Mosaics are tiny pieces of ceramic tile  made in a range of square, round and interlocking geometric shapes.
They are usually mounted on a fabric backing for ease of handling, and are fixed using conventional ceramic tile adhesive.
After laying, the gaps between the individual mosaic pieces are filled with grout.
Quarry tiles are unglazed ceramic floor tiles, usually with a red, brown or buff colour and a pleasant rustic appearance.
They are generally bedded in mortar rather than in tile adhesive; the tile surface is then sealed and polished to prevent dirt from marring the surface.
Common sizes are 100 and 150mm (4 and 6in) square.
Special round-edged version are available for forming steps and skirtings.
Cork tiles are made by compressing the bark of the cork tree into a block, and then slicing it up into thin layers.
A range of different natural shades is available, and some of the cork may also be stained with primary colours during manufacturer.
Tile thickness ranges from about 3mm (⅛in) for plain wall tiles up to around 6mm (¼in) for floor tiles, which are generally denser than wall tiles to resist dents.
The commonest tile size is 300mm (12in) square, but other sizes of squares and rectangles are available.
tiles are generally stuck in place with a contact adhesive, which makes them difficult to remove if you want to change to another floorcovering.
Many cork floor tiles are sold with a protective vinyl wear layer already applied to the tile surface, some with a semi opaque colour layer included under this; cheaper unsealed types need treating with varnish or sealant after laying.
VINYL VENEER
Vinyl sheet flooring is the modern equivalent of linoleum, and provides a smooth, hygienic and easy-to-clean floorcovering that's widely used in kitchens, bathrooms and hallways.
It's made from layers of plastic resins, with a clear wear layer protecting the printed design, and frequently with an air cushion layer between this and the backing, for extra comfort and warmth underfoot.
It's fairly flexible and easy to cut for an exact fit; with adhesive or double-sided tape being used only at seams and edges.
Specialist suppliers may also provide a cold-weld compound to seal joins where it's impossible to lay it in a single sheet.
Vinyl flooring is available in a wide range of designs, including imitations of ceramic tiles, wood, cork and stone floors.
It's sold by the linear metre from rolls 2 or 4m (6 ‘ft ‘6in or 13 ‘ft ‘) wide; the larger width enables seam-free floors to be laid in most medium-sized rooms.
Vinyl floor tiles are squares of plastic composition, with added fillers and pigments, popular mainly as an economy floorcovering in heavy traffic areas, like the kitchen or hallway.
The cheaper types come in a range of plain colours, marbled effects and simple patterns; but more expensive types are available which imitate superbly such finishes as parquet, mosaic, terrazzo and marble.
Compared with sheet vinyl, they are easier and less wasteful to lay in awkwardly-shaped rooms.
Some have to be stuck to the floor with special vinyl flooring adhesive; but many are now self-adhesive.
The latest of the cheaper ranges are also available in cushioned versions, like sheet vinyl, but generally not as thick.
The commonest size for vinyl tiles is 300mm (12in) square, but others are available in the more expensive ranges, including strips in varying widths to use as borders.
Wood floorcoverings come in the form of hardwood blocks, square mosaic panels made up of individual fingers of wood, or planks (often of veneer on a plywood backing).
They are laid over the existing floor surface; most are tongued-and-grooved, so only occasional mailing or clipping is required to hold them in place.
Hardwood blocks are rectangular, and vary in size; 150 × 50mm (6 × 2in) is a common size.
Mosaic panels are usually 300 or 450mm (12 or 18in) square, while planks are generally 75 or 100mm (3 or 4in) wide, and come in a range of lengths to allow joins to be staggered from one row to the next.
Floorboards — tongued-and-grooved planks are generally about 100mm (4in) wide — can also be used as a floor surface, in conjunction with carpet squares or loose rugs.
The surface will need sanding, followed by three or four coats of clear or pigmented varnish or sealant to seal and   protect it, but the end result can be very striking.
you can also reclaim old floorboards for use as a new surface; the hard work of stripping and sealing them is regarded by a floor that has more colour and character than new wood.
Look in architectural salvage yards and builders’ merchants who deal in reclaimed timber.
ROOM-BY-ROOM
In principle there is nothing to stop you from laying any floorcovering you want in each room of your home.
However, custom and the practicalities of life tend to divide the home into three broad areas.
Access areas such as halls, landings, conservatories and stairs need a floorcovering that is able to cope with heavy traffic and maybe dirty shoes.
Ideal choices for hallways, which are often subject to the most wear, are materials with a water-repellent and easy-clean surface — for example, sheet vinyl, vinyl tiles, a woodstrip or woodblock floor, sanded and sealed floorboards, and even ceramic or quarry tiles.
For stairs, where safety is paramount, the best material to choose is a heavy-duty carpet with a short pile, which can also be used on the landing.
Work areas such as kitchens and bathrooms also need durable floorcoverings that are easy to clean and, in the case of bathrooms, that are reasonable water-resistant as well.
Sheet vinyl is a popular choice for both rooms, but tiles of various types can also provide an excellent surface — sealed cork with its warm feel underfoot is particularly suitable in bathrooms.
However, if you want carpet in these rooms, there are extremely hard-wearing kitchen carpets available, with a short nylon pile that is easy to keep clean, and also water-resistant bathroom carpets that give a touch of luxury underfoot without turning into a swamp at bathtime.
Leisure areas — lounges, dining rooms and bedrooms — are commonly carpeted wall to wall.
Don't be tempted to skimp on quality in living rooms, which get the most wear and tend to develop distinct traffic routes between the furniture.
However, there is no reason why you should not choose light-duty types for bedroom use.
Alternatives to carpets depend on your taste in home decor.
Your options include shaded and sealed floorboards teamed with scatter rung, a parquet perimeter to a fine specimen carpet, or even wood ‘look-alike’ vinyl tiles from the expensive ranges, which can be almost indistinguishable from the real thing.
Sheet vinyl or cork tiles may also be worth considering for children's rooms.
REPAIR AND PREPARE
Before you start laying your new floorcoverings, however, you must play fair with your floors.
You can't expect even the toughest floorcovering to look good or last well if you don't take care pre-prepare the floor surface properly first.
Securing loose boards:If you have suspended timber floors — boards laid over floor joists — start by lifting the old floorcovering so you can check that all the boards are securely fixed to their joists, and that they are reasonably flat and level.
Loose boards will creak annoyingly as you walk over them, and raised edges or pronounced warping may show as lines through your new floorcovering.
Use either cut floor brads or large oval-headed nails to secure loose boards.
If you are driving them near known pipe or cable runs, take care not to pierce them; it's best to drive the new nails as close to existing nail positions as possible for safety.
Tackle loose stair treads in a similar way, mailing the front edge to the riser below, and piping glue in at the back.
Hiding gaps at edges:Unsightly gaps often open up round the perimeter of the room, between the skirting and the floorboards, caused by movement in the timbers.
These gaps admit draughts and dust from the underfloor void, and also look unsightly if you are laying thin floorcoverings such as cork or vinyl tiles or sheet.
The best way of disguising the gaps is with lengths of slim quadrant beading, pinned to the skirting and painted or stained to match.
Sanding floors:Where old floorboards are very uneven, or you want to leave them exposed and they are badly stained and marked, hire a floor sanding machine.
This resembles a cylinder lawnmower, and drives a drum to which sheets of abrasive paper are fitted.
A bag at the rear collects the sawdust.
Hire a smaller disc or belt sander for finishing off the room edges where the big sander cannot reach.
Laying hardboard:Covering the existing boards with a hardboard underlay is an alternative to floor sanding, which leaves a smooth, flat surface, ideal for thin sheet floorcoverings.
Lay the boards in rows, with the joints staggered from row to row, and pin them down with hardboard pins, driven in at 150mm (6in) spacings.
Lay separate strips above known pipe runs, and label them.
If you are planning to lay ceramic or quarry tiles on a suspended timber floor, put down 18 or 22mm exterior-grade plywood rather than hardboard, to act as a stable sub-base.
Levelling a solid floor:If you have solid concrete ground floors which are cracked and uneven, you can create a new smooth floor surface hard surface, where is dries to give a smooth hard surface layer only about 3mm (⅛in) thick.
Fill major holes and cracks first.
Non-slip runners:parquet flooring in traffic lanes, such as hallways, will soon show signs of scuffing, however good the varnish used.
So protect these areas with carpet runners.
The only problem is that they slide about on a highly polished surface, so buy some rubberised netting to use as a backing from a carpet shop.
Cut a little smaller than the area of the runner, and sandwich the netting between floor and carpet.
No fixing is required.
SPECIAL OFFERS
MARTEK CHISEL & PLANE BLADE SHARPENER
Martek is well known for its innovative drill accessories, and we are offering two of the most useful products in the company's range this month, both designed to be easy to use, but very precise in operation.
The Chisel & Plane Blade Sharpener has been designed to use with an ordinary electric drill, to give a perfect edge to flat chisels and plane blades.
It consists of a strong moulded plastic housing, which can be clamped to a board or bench, using the slots provided.
The unique magnetic clamp which holds the blade in place has been specially developed and patented by Martek.
It holds the blade at exactly the right angle to achieve optimum sharpness, and it's this that makes the sharpener so quick and easy to use.
The honing stone has been designed to run ‘cool’, which prevents plane blades from overheating and losing their hardness; no water or other coolants are needed.
(Some other high-speed sharpeners are liable to overheating, which softens the blade.)
For badly damaged, chipped or broken blades, a grinding wheel is provided.
Badly blunted blades can also be finished on this before being given a new cutting edge on the honing wheel.
The Chisel & Plane Blade Sharpener is absolutely maintenance-free, is lightweight and compact, and can be used almost anywhere.
As its name suggests, it will also sharpen plane blades to the correct angle.
Replacement wheels are available from the company.
The recommended price for the Chisel & Plane Blade Sharpener is £16.80, but we are offering it for only £13.95, including VAT, and postage and packing, a saving of £2.85.
Use code CPS on the order form.
SHELF-GRIP — THE HANDY WAY TO PUT UP SHELVES
The easy and stylish way to put up shelves in bedrooms, bathrooms and kitchens has been invented by UK manufacturer Cliffhanger.
Anywhere in your home or office could benefit from these unique shelving brackets.
They are made from cast alloy, and consist or a lower lip on which the shelf rests, and a slightly shorter upper lip, which securely grips the shelf using a tension screw.
By adjusting this screw, any thickness of shelf from 3 to 25mm can be catered for, and virtually any material can be used: wood, chipboard, metal, plastic or glass.
The Shelf-Grip is secured to the support medium in the usually way, using the screw and fixing plug provided.
Simply line up the shelf in position, using a spirit level, before permanent fixing for a really professional result.
All you will need is a screwdriver and a drill.
The secret of the Shelf-Grip comes from its unique support design.
Shelves up to 100mm wide can be safely supported.
Some ideal applications include loud-speaker supports, telephone stands, and alcove and ornamental shelves.
You can also position a Shelf-Grip at the end of, say, a glass shelf across an alcove, with a glass window behind it, which makes an ideal display for plant pots.
The Shelf-Grips are usually supplied in twos for up to £5.20, but we are offering three packs of two (a total of six units) for only £13.95, including VAT & postage and packing direct to your door, saving over £1.50.
Shelf-Grips are available in three colours: use order code:
EACH PACK CONSISTS OF ONE COLOURWAY ONLY.
MARTEK TRADESMAN DRILL BIT SHARPENER
The Tradesman Drill Bit Sharpener is based on Martek's famous Professional Sharpener. its strong moulded plastic housing can be mounted on a board or bench, using a standard electric drill or power.
It will sharpen broken and blunted drill bits up to ½in in diameter, and can be adjusted to suit wood, metal and masonry drill bits, fully adjustable between 80° angle and 130° angle for each type.
Two sharpening stones are provided: an aluminium oxide wheel for steel (HSS) bits; and a green silicon carbide wheel for masonry bits.
Four plastic collets are included in the kit: they securely hold the drill bits at the correct depth to avoid over-grinding.
Full instructions for use are supplied, to enable even inexperienced d-i-yers to put the edge back on their drill bits.
The list price for the Tradesman Drill Bit Sharpener is £32.98, but we are offering it for only £28.95, saving you over £4.
Use order code MTS .
DIY ELECTRICAL TEST CENTRE
A well-designed easy-to-use electrical tester, which enables d-i-yers to tackle everyday electrical jobs with confidence and safety, the Multi-Check comes complete with simple step-by-step instructions for a wide variety of tests.
An essential item for a comprehensive tool kit, the Multi-Check has dozens of uses, including checking batteries fuses, appliances, circuits (ac and dc), cables, flexes, car electrics, power tools, toys, radios, etc.
It is also valuable when adding new socket outlets, improving lighting, extending circuits, tracing short circuits and breaks in wiring, installing fixed appliances, and carrying out repairs on a wide range of electrical equipment, including hi-fi, doorbells, toasters, hairdryers, and decorative lights.
The Multi-Check is supplied with a complete set of operating instructions in convenient index card form.
Prices at only £19.95, including VAT, postage and packing, it offers a saving of 30% off the manufacturer's list price.
Use order code MC on the order form.
TESTING
PLYSU ODJOB HAND MIXER
If you've been put off a simple d-i-y job which involves mixing concrete or mortar because it's such a hassle, then the Odjob is for you!
It makes mixing small quantities easy and quick, and leaves hardly any cleaning up to do.
Designed to take a standard 25kg bag of drymix mortar or concrete, you just measure the water in the calibrated lid, pour in the mix, screw on the lid, then roll the drum backwards and forwards.
In 60 to 90 seconds, out comes a perfect mix.
And cleaning?
Just a quick hose down!
It works on the same principle as a concrete mixer, with baffles moulded into the black plastic drum, where they produce a tumbling, corkscrew mixing action when the drum is rolled.
An O-ring seal in the lid gives a water-tight fit, and a handle in the lid makes it easy to carry.
When individual ingredients are used, three stage mixing is recommended.
Most of the water, all the cement, and half the sand (or sand plus aggregate) are mixed; rest of sand added and mixed; then water added as necessary, and mixed again.
But it still takes less than five minutes altogether.
We were impressed with the Odjob.
It certainly lived up to its ‘revolutionary’ claims: it tool all the hard slog out of concrete and mortar mixing.
Using accurate measures and keeping a note of the water used, it gave consistent results, and we found no problems in use.
The Odjob is rolled for a maximum of 90 seconds to mix mortar.
Roll by hand, by foot, even on a table top!
B&D SUPER DUSTBUSTER
Black and Decker has improved its best-selling range of seven Dustbuster cordless vacuum cleaners.
We tested the Super Dustbuster (HC431), which is easy to handle, has an additional power boost, and is designed specifically to clean up after jobs such as wood planing and sanding, as well as being able to pick up broken glass or small nails.
The Super Dustbuster's features include a lock-on button and loop handle, which make it comfortable to hold and easy to use, and because it is so light, it does not present problems when using it above head height.
The chamber is reasonably sized, which means that it doesn't have to be emptied very often when used for small d-i-y tasks, and it will also clean up after bigger jobs such as wood planing.
The two power settings are really useful: normal (1) will pick up lighter debris, such as sawdust; and high power (max) is helpful for tougher jobs, such as picking up small nails, although it won't pick up anything much heavier.
The attachments are an added bonus.
The brush is handy for vacuuming stubborn dust and dirt which may be lodged in a carpet and the crevice tool will reach into awkward corners such as under kitchen units, although it isn't long enough to reach to the very back.
The rechargeable base can be left on trickle charge indefinitely, so that it's always ready to use.
When fully charged, it can be used for about 10 minutes on ‘max’.
The cost of recharging the Super Dustbuster is minimal: it uses less than half the amount of electricity used by a light bulb, so it's good value for money as well as being environmentally friendly.
The Super Dustbuster is compact, and can be left on trickle charge in accessible places
The chamber is large enough for most d-i-y tasks and is easy to empty, but should be regularly cleaned
McCULLOCH BLOWER VAC
This is the first test we have carried out on a garden blower vac.
The machine is probably most familiar when used by local councils to clean grass cuttings and leaves from pavements and footpaths.
However, the American-made McCulloch Blower Vac that we tested cost £120, and is targeted at the private buyer with a large garden.
For the cost, the machine seems very good value, especially with the amount of accessories supplied.
At the heart of the tool is a two-stroke single-cylinder engine of 21.2cc capacity.
To use the Blower Vac in blower mode, a two-piece hard plastic nozzle is fitted to the front.
Also supplied as standard is a nylon webbing harness, and a collection bag for leaves and loose grit etc, which are sucked through the plastic nozzle when in its vacuuming mode.
The motor, although weighing only 5kg, produces a 140mph jet of air — powerful enough to dispose of leaves, soft debris and even small clippings from bushes or trees.
A 16-page manual explains, with the aid of diagrams, how to use and maintain the machine.
To make the machine easy to handle for those perhaps unused to petrol-engined tools, McCulloch has incorporated several useful features.
A ‘spark arrester plate’ is fitted over the motor housing to prevent stray sparks catching dry debris alight.
No sparking was visible during out tests.
Secondly, electronic ignition means low maintenance and easy starting.
With the correct oil/petrol mix, the machine is started rather like a petrol lawnmower.
With the throttle lever on the high-speed setting and the choke fully advanced, the starter rope is pulled and the motor fires.
Four or five pulls were needed to start the new machine when the fuel lines were completely dry.
Re-starting a warm motor only required one pull of the cord, but the instructions give advice if warm starting is a problem.
A small plastic rocker switch underneath the D-shaped handle must be switched to ‘on’ before use.
This switch can also be used to stop the blower motor in an emergency.
The normal stopping method is to let the motor run at idling speed for a few seconds before depressing the ignition switch.
In use, the operator should always wear eye protection and gloves.
Ear defenders may be advisable for long periods of work, but we found the low exhaust tone quieter than that on average-sized petrol mowers.
With the two parts of the nozzle firmly attached by a Jubilee clip to the motor, the blower is ready for action.
A trigger operates the accelerator and produces anything from a gentle breeze to a 140mph gust.
This control was relatively sensitive and made the Blower Vac controllable enough to be used near delicate plants.
If leaves are a problem during the autumn months, the machine can be converted into a garden vacuum.
The 110mm diameter nozzle sections are secured to the side of the motor, acting as an extended air inlet.
An impeller fan, rotating at a maximum of 7,000rpm, sucks air and any loose garden debris up the tube and into the attached canvas bag.
The use sales jargon, the BlowerVac has a very high perceived value, meaning it looks as if you are getting a lot of machine for your £120.
No problems were encountered with the motor, although none would be expected on a short test.
Starting was easy, and the two moulded handles allowed the nozzle to be manoeuvred easily.
Advantages were the vacuum facility (worth the extra few pounds above the price of the blower model), light weight and length of nozzle.
disadvantages were control levers and dials that were too small to use quickly with gloves on, and complex fuel mixing instructions.
In all, a labour-saving device for those with very large gardens.
With the moulded plastic nozzle attached, the Blower Vac can concentrate a jet of air up to 140mph
Idling speed and electronic ignition controls are clustered just above the motor — these could have been larger
To change to the suction mode, the air intake grille is flipped down and the nozzle screwed into place
McCulloch provides a large nylon bag for the collection of leaves and other garden debris
PEUGEOT PC 553 ERP DRILL
Earlier this year, Peugeot replaced its PC range of hammer drills with a higher specification range of percussion machines with confusingly similar code numbers.
At the base end of the new PCs is the 551, a single-speed 550 watt drill with no reverse option.
At the top end is the PC580 RCP, featuring the same motor, but with variable speed, reverse action and torque control.
We tested one of the two middle range drills, the PC 553 ERP.
Those familiar with the old range of Peugeot d-i-y drills will find the new machines very familiar.
The body shell of the two lines is almost identical, and the switchgear is mostly unchanged.
Our drill had variable speed, reverse action and, of course, hammer action.
Standard accessories are a rubberised front handle and a metal-rod depth gauge.
The latter is calibrated in centimetres, but most people will probably only use the rod as a rough guide.
Of more use us the rounded front handle, which twists on to the neck of the body, just aft of the chuck, and serves to hold the depth stop.
A second handle is a very worthwhile extra with a percussion drill, allowing greater control of the drill bit.
A great deal of change has been seen in the power drill market over recent years: cordless models have become more popular, and there has also been a gradual move towards variable-speed percussion models, even by the occasional home improver.
It therefore makes sense to have a good range of such tools in a manufacturer's catalogue.
The 2.1kg PC 553 ERP (all models in the range weigh the same) will certainly cope with everything from shelf brackets to masonry fixings.
A 550 watt motor is larger than average for the non-professional market.
With a variable percussion frequency band of 0–2900 blows per minute, the drill managed to drive a 13mm diameter bit into concrete without too much effort.
It also bored through the entire width of a hard facing brick less than two minutes, the sturdy front handle helping matters.
It was during the hammer tests that the hidden improvements over the old ER range really became apparent.
Noise levels have been reduced by a claimed 20% which was noticeable when drilling in masonry.
The motor is also slightly more compact than the old models, resulting in a better hand-grip position on the back handle.
Variable speed is almost essential if drilling is to be accurate.
Like many other companies, Peugeot has put the revs per minute control on the front face of the trigger.
This is marked A to E (A being the lowest speed).
A speed can be locked in by selecting a dial letter and pressing the Power-on button.
Otherwise, stepless speed increase is possible by simply exerting more force on the trigger.
Our test of the PC 550 ER last year showed the forward/reverse lever to be an awkward design: it was too long, and slightly flimsy.
Unfortunately, this has not been corrected on the new model.
This may be a minor point for the person using the drill purely for drilling, but if you wish to reset the tool in reverse fairly frequently to use as a screwdriver, it may be annoying.
This disadvantage apart, the Peugeot should prove a popular choice in this growing market.
We were genuinely impressed by the noise reduction on this very powerful motor.
The standard side handle was also welcome.
As Peugeot has not pushed up the prices of these new models compared to the old, the PC 553 ERP represents pretty good value for money.
Underbelly of the Peugeot houses the variable speed dial and a reverse/forward lever
Although a large drill, the PC550 ERP can be used for delicate screwdriving work if needed
Noise reduction on the new range is most appreciated during hammer action into brickwork or concrete
The 550 watt motor is more potent than average d-i-y models, and can easily drive accessories
B&D WOODWORKER ROUTER
With the introduction of more and more technically advanced machines by companies such as Black & Decker, it's surprising to test a machine that first appeared on the d-i-y market some 10 years ago.
Then it was in ‘B&D blue’, and now the only visual change is a switch to the black plastic body of more recent models.
Black & Decker was guarded in its response to the question of a successor to this d-i-y workhorse, but do not be surprised to see a new model fairly soon…
For those wanting the versatility of a router now, what can this, the cheapest model commonly available, offer?
Opening the box certainly reveals a very good range of accessories.
Along with the 480 watt machine comes an adjustable fence, wrenches, straight and curved guides, template guide, and even a free straight cutter.
Most recent models of 6mm collet routers now produce around twice the power of this model; this is not so much to speed the work, but more to improve the quality and variety of profiles made by cutters.
Having said this, the Woodworker has a respectable 26,000rpm cutter speed, and it's also fairly light at 2kg.
Cutters are fixed in place by the wrench and tommy bar method.
This is also used on some rival d-i-y machines, and is a cheaper option than a spindle lock, which needs only one tool to be used.
Care must be taken to remove the tommy bar from the collet before switching on the motor — it is all too easy to forget, and the result is a worn motor.
Although the router can make all sorts of accurate joints and decorative edge profiles, many users may find they are most often using a straight 6mm cutter to remove the waste from a groove or mortise.
In other words, the router is mechanically duplicating the hammer and chisel method, but much more quickly.
We tried the Woodworker in this mode, cutting freehand to remove waste in a mortise, and forming repeated grooves with the adjustable fence.
To keep costs down, the tool has no variable speed, so the handles should be firmly gripped all the time as the collet reaches 26,000rpm instantly.
We were impressed by the build quality of the micro adjustable guide.
This would put many routers costing three times the price to shame.
It was wide enough to provide a stable grip on the timber edge, and could be adjusted rapidly.
Using a variety of cutters, the potential of the machine could be assessed.
Good results were obtained with the straight cutter, and simple profiles, such as rounding over and V bits.
Don't expect this router to produce complex edge patterns using one large cutter: more decorative edges can be formed if the user is patient and makes several simpler profiles which can be fixed together.
If you can't wait for a new model, the Black & Decker Woodworker is ideal for the beginner, or for those wanting a second router for lots of small repetitive tasks.
Power is lacking, and the user has to be patient to get results, but it is difficult to complain for the average selling price of just over £60.
A well constructed adjustable fence is one of the Woodworker's plus points
A tommy bar and wrench cutter changing system keeps costs down
Depth adjustment can be pre-fixed with a spring action locking dial
Bearings can burn the wood if the cutter's too large, or if used incorrectly
YOUR SAY
We'd like to hear from anyone who has an interesting story or tip to pass on to other readers.
If we publish your letter, you'll receive £5.
Write to: The Editor,
SOMETHING AFOOT
To avoid having to place soft material under the feet of a loft ladder every time it's used, stick a small piece of foam rubber or carpet underlay to each foot of the ladder.
It can then be used easily without damaging the carpet or other floorcovering.
HELP!
HELP!
A Wolf drill attachment has come into my possession.
It consists of a wood turning lathe powered by a drill, and also a miniature circular saw device.
This is an incredible piece of equipment, beautifully made (if somewhat rusty).
I've tried to trace the manufacturer, but I believe that they have ceased trading.
I have also enquired extensively about a suitable drill to power the attachments, without success, so I am appealing to other readers to help.
Does anyone possess or know which model of drill is needed to power the attachments?
Does anyone have information which would assist in getting this piece of equipment back into use?
I am a pensioner, but would be prepared to make a reasonable contribution to any costs involved.
Ed.
If any readers can help Mr Platt, they should write to the Editor at the address above.
DOUBLE CROSS!
We bought a house on a noisy main road and I fitted homemade, wooden-framed secondary double glazing to the downstairs windows.
The original windows were steel-framed, in a stone mullion setting, and leaked so badly that all the conventional draught excluders proved useless; my secondary double glazing, despite multiple magnetic and spring clips, was being blown out by wind pressure.
It was a cold December, and I could not face removing and straightening the steel frames, not could we afford replacement windows.
Brainwave!
We never opened the outer windows, so why not just seal them with bathroom sealant?
This we did: problem apparently solved by two very smug d-i-yers.
However, we soon stopped smiling when it started to rain and the wind got up; the sealant, which hadn't yet hardened, started to dilute, and one by one the secondary glazing panels were blown in. the wind started to blow bubbles in the gooey sealant, which then floated around the room, only to burst and leave a sticky mess on the carpets and furniture.
For a while my wife and I were helpless with laughter, but trying to clean up afterwards taught us a lesson!
STAR LETTER PRIZE
This month's Star Letter prize winner will receive £50 worth of JB Weld adhesives.
JB Weld is a complete adhesive range which can fix all your d-i-y requirements.
Its innovative Coldweld compound actually etches the materials together: the secret combination of liquid steel and non-toxic chemical hardener result in a product which fixes, fills and bonds any surface to any surface.
JB Weld works on iron, steel, aluminium, bronze, brass, copper, pewter, all woods, ceramics and plastics, and its applications are endless — mechanical, automotive., plumbing, around the home, and around the garden.
it is odourless, resistant to very high temperatures, and does not shrink.
STABLE CABLE
When painting during redecorating, I've sometimes had to remove a telephone cable and staples from the skirting, to make a neat job of it, rather than paint over the cable.
This has often meant having to use pliers and then replacing the staples with new ones.
To solve this problem, I now use the same type of staples, but reverse the nail so that the plastic strip is nailed to the skirting upside down, that is , with the open part of the clip facing upward.
The length of the cable then rests on the staples and can always be lifted off for painting and cleaning.
The staples remain in position for the cable to be put back as required, and certainly look neater.
SANDVIK TOP TIP PRIZE PROP TIP…
This month's Top Tip prize is a selection of Sandvik hacksaws and files.
The frame of the 225 hacksaw is made from chrome-plated rectangular section steel, and is twice as rigid as conventional tubular frames.
It has a die-cast aluminium handle and front grip, and space to store a spare blade.
The 268 minisaw has a rigid, zinc-plated flat steel frame, and a comfortable plastic pistol grip handle.
Its size makes it particularly useful for cutting metals and other materials in awkward spaces.
The six-piece needle file set includes hand, flat, square, half-round and round files.
The Handyman wood file (shown above) is a flat parallel file, with two uncut edges.
One side is a bastard rasp cut, for rough filing or wood, plywood and soft plastics, while the other side is a double second cut for fine filing of metals and plastics.
The Handyman metal file also has two uncut edges.
The bastard double cut side is suitable for rough-sharpening the edges on spades, hoes, mower blades and axes, and the single second cut side is for fine sharpening the edges on these tools, as well as knives and scissors.
Preparing pre-glazed aluminium replacement windows for my house, and working alone, the problem was holding the heavy sashes open while I drilled holes, with the window laid flat on the bench.
Loose props tended to fall out with a movement of the window, so I devised a fixed prop using a crab clamp and a small batten.
The clamp is secured to the window edge, and the batten slipped through the clamp and held with a loose pin.
A series of holes allows for different window sizes.
I flattened the end of the pin, drilled a hole through it, and tied it to the batten with thin cord, to stop it getting lost.
Send us your top tip, and if it's the best of the batch, you'll win a great prize!
TACK TIP
I find Blu-Tack invaluable for holding things in place when hands and fingers just get in the way.
Recently I used it to stick a plastic-coated wire rack to the inside of a kitchen cupboard door while I checked the position of the rack with the door closed.
I then marked the screw holes on the door before removing the rack, ready for final fixing.
SPOT ON Nothing is more frustrating than trying to accurately fix thick brackets in an awkward position.
I solved the problem by adapting a red felt pen.
The hard central nib was pulled out about one inch and inserted through the bracket holes.
This left the fixing positions neatly marked with red spots.
Ed.
Have you solved a problem that has frustrated or infuriated you?
If you have, write and let us know.
HANDY HINT
When undertaking any sizeable d-i-y project, a large number of documents of awkward shapes and sizes accumulate, involves, bills, instructions, letters, etc.
Instruction leaflets, in particular, often seem to be about 2 ‘ft ‘long but only 2in wide!
All these can be difficult to file, so why not try the following: convert all documents to A4 size, using either a photocopier or paste and paper.
Sort the sheets into a reasonable sequence, and place a blank sheet (for notes) between each section.
Then visit your office copying shop where, for about £2, they will insert it all in a plastic ring binder, with dividers before and after each document.
it is worth writing an index and even typing a few pithy words of your own to remind you, and others, of why you did what you did, when you did it!
The result is a durable handy book.
If care is taken with is preparation, and perhaps photographs inserted, you have a ‘house handbook’ to keep for reference or to leave to future owners.
READER'S STORY
CRAFTING PLAQUES
The shaping of copper or pewter foil into three dimensional plaques is an ancient craft.
The subjects which can be chosen for this process are enormous, ranging from tiny flowers on small boxes, to large, long panels showing copies of complex brass rubbings of the tombs of medieval knights and their ladies.
Anniversaries can also be recorded in copper or pewter as a lasting reminder of a special event.
The process of shaping the copper or pewter foil involves the use of simple hand tools, and does not require much physical effort.
Using tracing paper, make a copy of the chosen subject.
Cover a flat piece of hardboard with a single layer of flannelette of similar material.
Place a sheet of copper or pewter, pressing quite hard, so that you indent it.
The copper or pewter sheet is stretched with the hand-modelling tools:
A
The pointed end is used to produce the outline; the curved end for shaping.
B
Has a small flattening rounding end.
C
this tool is specifically for small circular work.
A softer pad is then required for shaping and stretching: put extra layers of material around the base, so that the metal can be stretched in either direction.
First decide whether the shape is to be worked upwards or downwards — once stretched that area becomes ‘work hardened’, and will resist efforts to change its shape.
Only when modelling complete should the background be worked in, using the pointed tool.
To avoid damage to the shaped metal, a filler should be worked into any deep cavity, making sure it does not project above the adjacent level surface.
The work can then be cleaned, polished bright and the surface protected with a final coating of clear lacquer.
Or the three-dimensional effect can be accentuated by giving the plaque a patina.
To do this, first clean the plaque with a grease-removing powder, and ensure that no grease remains on the surface.
It may not be possible to remove the highlights with grease remover, but do not use emery powder — it will leave scratch marks that cannot be removed by polishing later.
If the patina chemical is too strong, dilute with a little water and, if using it for the first time, do a test on a sample piece of copper.
It's important to apply the patina in an open space, because it acts on the copper and produces a most objectionable odour.
The application of the patina produces a thin black film.
Recover the outline and high spots by removing the patina from them with the grease remover or polishing powder.
Then polish with Duraglit and finish with a coating of clear lacquer.
a Marks outline b Shapes the metal c Use the rounded-end tool for small, circular work
The materials mentioned above are available in handicraft shops, or are stocked by:
If you have an interesting story to tell, whether you've built your own house or dug your own pool, write to the Editor at the address on the opposite page, and if we publish it, you could get a cash reward!
COMPETITION
WIN PRIZES WORTH £2,500!
WITH GREAT UNIVERSAL & TRITON
There are 10 very lucky readers who could be treating themselves to a hot, refreshing shower every morning.
If you'd like to win a T70 shower, fill in the entry coupon and send it to us now!
Great Universal and Triton are offering 10 lucky winners showers worth £100 each, and 30 runners-up will each have spend £50 to spend on d-i-y products from the Great Universal catalogue.
Great Universal, one of the UK's leading home shopping catalogues, is packed with ingenious ideas for transforming your house into a dream home.
It's the ideal one-stop shopping option for the d-i-y enthusiast.
SHOWER POWER
Triton showers are extremely economical to use — you can have as many as six showers for the cost of one bath!
Piping hot water is always available whenever you need it, and because it only heats the water you use, it's a great energy saver.
Ten lucky winners will receive a Triton T70 shower which incorporates three of the latest features: a temperature stabiliser, an anti-scald device, and a visual temperature display.
Essential safety devices if you've got children!
The 30 runners-up, with £50 to spend, have a vast array of great products to choose from: drills, cordless screwdrivers, sanders, tools, workbenches, tool boxes, stepladders, and of course Triton showers.
You can order a free copy of the Great Universal Catalogue by ringing Freephone 0800 269396.
By quoting GDYBH or ticking the box on the coupon, you'll receive a 20% discount on your first order!
So enter now!
Runners-up will choose £50 worth of d-i-y prizes from the Great Universal catalogue
GARDENWISE
As time goes by
Give your garden a touch of class and character with a sundial as a focal point, and plant traditional herbs like thyme and lavender around the base.
Even a garden of very modest size can be given a cottage-garden look with this kind of focal point.
Then build yourself a garden bench, where you can sit and dream of times past.
Suggested planting
Make a bench seat
Use this as a guide, adjusting length to suit (1m is practical).
Use 50×50mm timber for framework, 150×25mm boards for seat, 100×25mm for back
Make half-lap joints for the frame, using waterproof glue and rustproof screws.
Cut under-seat braces to right length and angles, then glue and screw into position
Glue and screw the seat and back in place.
Apply a wood preservative that can be painted over or varnished afterwards.
If you find wood hard to sit on, add a few cushions
NEWS UPdate
USEFUL STORAGE RACKS
With space at a premium in most sheds, workshops and garages, the Lee/Rowan range of Sports and Leisure organisers will be of interest to sport enthusiasts.
The company is America's largest producer of wire storage racks (they call them home organisation products).
Apart from the Bicycle Wall Rack shown (price £16.99, plus £2 p&P), there is a Golf Organiser for two golf bags and two pairs of shoes (£15.99, plus £2 p&p), and a Racquet Organiser (£14.99, plus £2 p&p), all available by mail order.
AUTO OPENER
An automatic door opener for all up-and-over garage doors is available from Cardale.
Called the Autoglide, the opener has had its price cut by £100 to £346 (including VAT) just a few months after its launch, making is even better value for money.
The Autoglide can even be used on trackless doors of the canopy variety, which account for 80% of the garage doors installed in the UK, and which conventional garage door openers cannot cope with The Autoglide works on a cable principle, with an advanced electronic control box.
The unit is almost silent, and for safety, reverses at half speed to the open position if resistance is sensed during the closing cycle.
Similarly, the door returns to closed if resistance is encountered during opening.
The transmitter offers thousands of radio frequency coded options for maximum security.
ANTI-RUST FELT TIP
D-Rust is a well-established rust killer which is now available in the form of a felt tip pen.
It is very convenient for touching out small rust spots on anything that need reliable, safe treatment; from garden tools, and wrought ironwork, to toys, bicycles and, of course, cars.
there's no danger of fluid leaks on to hands or clothes.
The pen costs just £2.95 from most good d-i-y car accessory shops or garages.
SOLVENT-FREE TOTAL WOOD TREATMENT
V33 is a low-odour, solvent-free Total Treatment for Wood which has been introduced from France by Kent-based Liveron Waxes. this water-based treatment cures and prevents fungus and insect attacks as effectively as any other treatment on the market, but is much safer as it contains no Lindane, PCP or TBTO.
The treatment can be used indoors and outside, curing and preventing both wet and dry rot, and wood-worm attacks.
LOOK, NO WIRES!
A new self-charging security light that needs no mains electricity will be welcomed by anyone who is put off installing outside lights by the difficulty of wiring the unit.
The Security light by Siemens is supplied with a rechargeable batter that is constantly trickled charged in daytime by a detachable solar panel.
At night, the 6 volt Sensor Light is controlled by a reliable passive infra-red motion detector that will detect a person up to 35 ‘ft ‘away.
When activated, a bright fluorescent light illuminates for up to 60 seconds, or for as long as there is movement.
The Security Light costs £150.
ADVICE CENTRE
HAE
HIRE ASSOCIATION EUROPE
Why buy expensive d-i-y equipment for a one-off job when it can be hired for a fraction of the cost?
Virtually any piece of equipment you care to name can be hired these days — from access towers and cement mixers, to drain cleaners, wallpaper strippers and the humble stepladder.
SAFETY FIRST
There is one big drawback to hiring equipment from any old outlet, though.
We've all read newspaper report of faulty hire equipment which hasn't been properly checked or maintained; a bad outlet could happily send you away with a potential deathtrap.
Electrical equipment with loose wiring, a lack of basic operating instructions, and no advice on essential safety equipment or operation, are all pitfalls associated with sub-standard hire companies.
A good hire shop will ensure that the equipment if loans you is of the highest quality, that staff will show you how to operate is, if necessary, and full operational and safety instructions will be issued as standard.
HIRING WITH CONFIDENCE
Hire Association Europe (HAE) was set up in 1974 as a trade association for the hire industry.
Its original membership only included those hiring tools and equipment, but in 1980 it created two new divisions which allowed companies hiring catering and audio visual equipment to join.
In 1991 the Access Division was added, which allowed those supplying access and support equipment to become members.
The HAE has more than 2,500 member outlets spread throughout the UK, Ireland and Europe, and the association is affiliated to various overseas hire bodies.
Member companies use the distinctive HAE arrow reproduced on this page, and you'll find their telephone number listed in Yellow Pages (or contact the number at the end of this feature for more details).
All members must adhere to a national Code of Practice, and a common contact; and in order to remain within the HAE, members must meet a number of specified Safety Actions.
Member companies are regularly assessed to see that they provide the following:
Written safety instructions should be supplied with all equipment, and staff must understand the importance of issuing these instructions, and also the consequences of failing to do so.
Appropriate Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) should be available, and be issued with hired equipment.
Facilities should be available to demonstrate equipment to customers, and staff trained to give correct and safe demonstrations.
Equipment must be services and tested after every hire, to ensure that it is safe to operate, and the test results recorded.
Accurate, up-to-date records must be kept of tests on all lifting equipment and pressure vessels.
A copy of the test certification should either go out with the equipment, or be available at the point of hire.
HAE AIMS
The association describes its ‘mission’ as the representation, promotion and enhancement of the hire industry for the benefit of members and customers alike.
In practice, this means getting involved with lobbying in Brussels and Westminster on behalf of the industry, and acting as a representative in dealings with Trading Standards Environmental Health and the health and Safety Executive.
HAE customers benefit from a wide selection of leaflets to help them get the best out of their hire equipment: the association provides more than 350 operating and safety leaflets on specific items, and over 200 leaflets giving general information.
The HAE has also been involved in developing the Hire Industry Training Standard (HITS)— a scheme for workplace assessment which leads to a nationally recognised City and Guilds qualification in hire.
In addition to the obvious hire items, HAE centres can provide the equipment for even more pleasurable pursuits than d-i-y, like a family barbecue, and supply lighting, music, and even a bouncy castle for the kids!
HIRE SAFELY
If you're planning to visit a hire shop in the near future, follow these guidelines issued by HAE:
Ensure the company is a member of HAE.
Contact the association direct if you're having difficulties in finding an outlet.
Once you've chosen a company, try to visit the premises to discuss your d-i-y project, and to ensure you'll be hiring the right equipment for the job.
Hire charges, opening hours or delivery/collection times, plus insurance cover for theft or damage while equipment is in your possession, should all be dealt with in advance.
As to take home a copy of the appropriate operating and safety instruction leaflet, so you can familiarise yourself with these procedures.
The hire shop may also have a demonstration video to show you how to use the equipment.
Discuss the use of Personal Protective Equipment to make sure you get the right type, for example, goggles and masks are graded to cope with different tasks.
Order this equipment in advance.
On collection day, ensure that the hire contract details are correct, and that the equipment is clean, and in good condition.
It should also carry a service tag indicating that is has been serviced prior to your hire.
Insist on a demonstration if you're unsure how to operate the equipment.
Check that safety and operating instructions are included.
Finally, if you have a problem with hire equipment,do not attempt to repair it .
Contact the hire company for advice.
HSS HIRE SHOPS
As a member of the HAE, and one of the largest and best known hire companies in Europe, HSS is well-equipped to meet all your hiring requirements.
When hiring tools from HSS Hire Shops you only pay for the actual time the equipment is in use; in addition you have the HAE assurance that the tools you select are regularly maintained, and are in a safe condition.
HSS Hire Shops has 170 branches throughout the UK, and there are plans for expansion in the coming year.
With a product line-up of over 400 items (which is constantly being updated and reviewed) every d-i-y task — from one-room decorating to a full-scale renovation — is catered for.
Customer can locate their nearest HSS branch by telephoning the Freephone number: 0800 28 28 28.
A free hire catalogue will be sent on request, which gives a full description of each product, along with current hire rates.
There's also information on sale items, transport and safety products available for hire.
If you don't have an HSS Shop on your doorstep, simply phone through your order and HSS will arrange a delivery (charges will vary according to distance).
HSS Hire Superstores have been opened in Slough, Cardiff and Liverpool, and there are plans to open more.
HSS Shops can also be found within a number of Sainsbury's Homebases, and B&Q stores.
FINANCIAL
PROTECT AGAINST STOLEN CHEQUES
Few of us worry about security when we write a cheque.
Yet every year, some £50 million is lost through cheque fraud.
The victims are not just big banks, but ordinary people who have to pay bills twice over — or find themselves landed with impressive but worthless slips of paper.
So how can we ensure that we don't fall victim to the cheque cheats?
Take advantage of the new law: Until recently, crossed cheques issued by banks gave little protection.
If you filled one in to read Pay John Smith one thousand pounds, and it was stolen, the thief could sign it on the back with the name John Smith, and then pay it into his own account, which might be in a different name entirely.
Usually, you lost your money, and had to find another £1,000 for the genuine John Smith.
Under the new Cheques Act, you can write Account payee between the lines of the crossing, and your cheque should then be paid only into John Smith's account.
If a thief signs John Smith on the back, and pays it into his own or someone else's account, you will not usually be liable.
You can write in the words yourself, but some banks, like Lloyds, are issuing all customers with Account payee cheques.
If you want to send money to someone without a bank account, say, a favourite nephew, you can delete Account payee and sign the alteration.
If your nephew signs on the back of the cheque, it can then be paid into a parent's account.
Never accept a building society cheque at face value: If you're selling a car (or anything else) and the buyer pays with a building society cheque, don't hand over the car until the cheque has been cleared.
It could be stolen, and you could end up with no car and no money.
Keep your chequebook and your cheque card separate: If you make it easy for a thief to plunder your account by keeping your chequebook and card together, you could be held responsible for the whole amount.
Otherwise, you would be responsible for the first £50 only.
Never give anyone a blank cheque: If you have to pay for something, but don't know the price, write not more than x pounds (in words), and leave only the figure space blank.
the person named can then write in the figures, but only up to the amount stated.
GUARANTEED MORTGAGE
If you are buying a house, watch out for mortgage indemnity (or guarantee) insurance: you will probably be required to take it out if you need an advance of more than 75%.
It typically costs 4 to 75% of the excess, and is usually payable as a one off lump sum.
The amount charged varies from lender to lender.
If you want a 95% mortgage on a £100,000 house, it could easily cost you £1,500.
The Royal Bank of Scotland does not require indemnity cover.
With them, there's nothing to pay.
Indemnity policies protect the lender, not the borrower, so if you failed to keep up mortgage payments and the house had to be sold for less than your outstanding debt, the insurance company would pay the lender the difference, but might sue you for that amount!
PROOF OF IDENTITY
If you want to open a National Savings Investment or Ordinary Account at a post office, you will now be asked to give proof of your identity.
this can be: a valid UK passport; full driving licence; photo-identity card from a well-known organisation or employer; pension or benefit order book issued by the DSS or the Benefits Agency; and, for children only, a birth certificate.
If you're opening a joint account, one of these documents must be shown by each holder.
If the account is for a child under seven, you must identify yourself and produce the child's birth certificate.
RENT A ROOM
Under the government's new Rent-a-Room scheme, tenants and owner-occupiers who let furnished rooms in their only of main home may now be excused tax on rent up to £3,250.
Provided rents do not exceed £3,250 a year, they will be fully exempt.
Over £3,250 a year, you have two choices: you can pay tax on the whole lot, less £3,250, or you can pay tax on the whole lot, less allowable expenses.
A married couple taking in lodgers will be able to decide whether they prefer the whole of the rent to count as the husband's or as the wife's for entitlement to the full relief.
If they wish, it can be split between them, giving each a limit of £1,625.
For more information, contact your tax office.
REGULATIONS
INSPECTION NOTICES
The new Building Regulations, which came into force in June, contain some new rules concerning the giving of notices at the various stages of building works.
They are the notices which you are required to give to your local council's Building Control department, to enable them to inspect your work for compliance with the appropriate regulation requirements.
The main change is that the periods laid down for these notices are now in days instead of hours: two days notice is required for the commencement of building works.
Excavations for, and the concreting of foundations, the laying of damp-proof courses, and of site concrete, and the covering of new drains require one days notice.
The laying of new drains, including any protection that may be needed around the pipes, requires at least five days notice.
Five days notice is also required at the end of the job for a completion inspection.
Another important change is that the time periods laid down for these notices do not commence until the end of the day in which notice is given.
this means that a two-day notice of commencement given on a Monday does not expire until midnight on the Wednesday.
This rule now removes the doubt that often existed about the duration of a notice, when the period started at the time of submission to the council.
Written notice on printed inspection cards or slips, which are often supplied at the time of approval, is probably the most popular method.
However, most councils are flexible on this point, and will accept verbal notice given in person, and also telephone and facsimile messages.
The giving of these notices at the proper times is important because they enable your council to inspect your work, to ensure that it is important because they enable your council to inspect your work, to ensure that it is satisfactory before being covered up.
Don't ignore this legal obligation, otherwise you could be ordered to pull down or open up work for inspection at your expense.
In extreme cases you could even face prosecution.
Finally, do remember that the giving of all relevant notices at the proper times to enable site inspections to be carried out will be important if you want a Completion Certificate from your council at the end.
FIRE PREVENTION
The home can be a dangerous place.
Some 60,000 catch fire every year, killing several hundred people and injuring over 10,000.
So anything you can do to keep your home out of the official statistics really could be a matter of life or death.
There are five main precautions you can take to make your home safe and protect your family from danger: eliminate fire hazards; fit smoke detectors; keep basic firefighting equipment in danger areas; learn what to do if fire breaks out, and make sure that every member of the family knows how to get out of the house.
We look at each one in turn.
FIRE HAZARDS
Here is a checklist of the commonest fire hazards in the home.
Use is to check yours over and eliminate any you find.
Electrical hazards
Don't overload socket outlets, and have your wiring checked by an electrician if it is more than 20 years old.
Make sure electric blankets are BEAB approved, and have them checked by the manufacturer every four to five years.
turn under-blankets off when you get into bed.
Have a residual current device fitted to protect the property from the risk of fire started by an electrical fault.
Kitchen Hazards
Never leave a chip pan unattended; better still, replace it with a thermostatically-controlled deep fryer.
Don't dry tea towels above cookers, or trail appliance flexes across hotplates.
Keep a fire blanket on the kitchen wall in case of emergencies.
Heater Hazards
Always place a fireguard in front of an unattended open fire, especially if there are young children in the family.
Don't dry clothes near to open fires or radiant heaters, and don't use timeswitches to control radiant heaters; they could come on unexpectedly and start a fire.
Above: Only use fire extinguishers in the home if the fire is very small — it's safer to leave fire fighting to the professionals
Right: A First Alert interconnectable smoke detector (£19.99) is a sensible precaution
Furniture hazards
Replace old foam-filled furniture at the earliest opportunity with furniture labelled to indicate that its covers and filling meet the requirements of the 1988 Furniture and Furnishings (Fire)(Safety) Regulations.
In the meantime, consider having at-risk furniture professionally treated with fire-retardant chemicals (curtains and drapes can be treated too).
Smoking hazards
Keep lighters and matches out of the reach of children.
Empty ashtrays last thing at night, and don't smoke in bed.
Storage hazards
Don't store old newspapers or other inflammable materials under the stairs, where they could fuel a fire and cut off your primary escape route.
Store aerosols away from the heat.
Never store petrol in the house.
Escape hazards
Make sure that keys for window and door locks are accessible, and that every bedroom has an opening casement for use as an escape route.
Any room with sealed-unit double glazing and only an opening top light could be a death trap.
WHERE THERE'S SMOKE…
All new homes must now by law have smoke detectors installed.
Since smoke kills far more people than flames, and most fire deaths occur at night, every home should have one — or more.
Alarms cost from about £5 for basic models, to £15 to £20 for types with safety lights and extra test facilities.
Make sure that any you buy carry the Kite mark and meet British Standard BS5445.
Ideally, fit two alarms, one on the landing ceiling and one in the hall.
In a large house with long corridors it is worth fitting extra alarms with an interconnect facility, so if one is triggered the others sound too.
Test the alarm regularly by pressing the test button or blowing smoke into it from a cigarette or candle.
Make a habit of replacing the battery once a year.
FIGHTING FIRE
The only fire-fighting equipment that every home should have is a fire blanket , which should be kept ion the kitchen close to, but not above, the cooker.
Buy one that meets British Standard BS6575.
A fire blanket is the best way of smothering chip-pan and frying-pan fires, and has loops so you can lower it over the pan without burning your hands.
Once the fire is out, turn off the heat source and leave the pan to cool for at least an hour before attempting to move it.
Fire extinguishers for home use are not generally recommended by fire prevention experts, except as a safeguard it you live a long way from your nearest fire station.
If you do decide you want one, ask you local fire brigade's Fire Prevention Officer for advice on which to buy.
Make sure it carries the Kite mark, and find out where you can get it serviced regularly.
ESCAPE ROUTES
Since fires often start at night, and most homes only have one flight of stairs, which may well be unusable, it pays to work out in advance possible escape routes from upstairs windows — ideally one leading on to a flat roof, otherwise one with a flowerbed or grass below, rather than a hard surface.
If you are trapped upstairs by a fire, get everyone into the ‘escape room’, close the door and block any gaps round it with items of clothing or bedding (dampened, if possible) to keep smoke out.
Then open the window and call for help.
Wait to see if rescuers with ladders appear.
If they do not and you are at first-floor level, climb on to the window sill and let yourself hang feet first, facing the wall, before letting go to lessen the height of your fall.
Try to land with knees bent, and crumple as you kit the ground, so your body absorbs the impact.
Then encourage the others to do the same; in most two-storey homes you may well be able to catch ‘suspended’ children in your arms.
In buildings of more than two storeys, wait for the fire brigade, and jump only as a last resort.
FIRE DRILL
Make sure everyone in the family knows what to do if a fire does start, especially at night.
Here are the rules:
Close the door to the room where the fire is.
If you're seeking the source, don't open a door that feels warm to the touch, or you could fuel the flames.
Get everyone out of the house if possible.
Don't waste time trying to gather possessions or save the goldfish — fire spreads very quickly.
Call the fire brigade from a neighbour's house, giving the address clearly.
Tell them whether people are trapped, and if so, where.
Attempt ‘heroic’ rescues only as a last resort.
Don't try to put out fires yourself, unless they are small and you have proper fire-fighting equipment.
GARDENING
ARCH ADORNMENT
You don't even have to a good d-i-yer to erect an attractive arch or pergola in your garden.
Plenty of kits or ready-assembled metal and wooden arches and pergolas are available in garden centres, most of them quick and easy to assemble.
If you buy a metal arch, look for one that is sturdy, with joints with don't pull apart easily, and make sure it can be well anchored into the ground.
With a wooden arch or pergola, predrilled holes for nails and bolts will make assembly easier.
Larch and Douglas fir are good choices of timber — they're less rot-resisting than Western red cedar, but not so vulnerable to mechanical damage.
If the wood is not a naturally durable one, make sure it has been pressure treated to resist rot — better quality ones are guaranteed for well over five years.
Beware of flimsy structures: once covered with a leafy climber the arch will be very heavy, and offer a lot of wind resistance.
No visible means of support for a perfect frame of clematis montana Rubens
Rosa ‘Albertina’: just the job for a scented surround on arch or pergola
An arch is ideal where the garden is divided into sections perhaps with hedges.
you can even use on by the front gate, but use a restrained climber such as a large-flowered clematis, not a thorny rose!
And a pergola doesn't have to lead somewhere; you can use one to provide shade and colour over a patio, or to form an arbour where you can sit and enjoy the fragrance of scented climbers.
Climbing roses are always popular for cladding arches, but you need plenty of headroom, with uprights for enough apart for thorns not to be a problem.
Choose a scented rambler like ‘Albertine’ or ‘Dorothy Perkins’, or the thornless climber ‘Zéphirine Drouhin’(all pinks), although they're rather prone to mildew; or almost evergreen roses such as‘Albéric Barbier’, ‘Emily Gray’, and ‘Félicité et Perpétue’.
Clematis are also a good choice — try growing them with a rose to extend the period of interest, but make sure neither is too vigorous a grower.
Vines such as the purple-leaved Vitis vinifera ‘Purpurea’ are a good choice; and huge leaves of V coignetiae (Japanese crimson glory vine) are especially bold.
For a year-round foliage plant a variegated Persian ivy;Hedera colchica ‘Dentata Variegata’ has large leaves generously splashed with yellow and grey.
And for winter interest, try training two winter flowering jasmines (Jasminum nudiflorum ), one each side of an arch, to meet at the top.
GROWING PLANTS UNDER TREES
Many spring-flowering bulbs do well under deciduous trees, but if you want something to provide permanent ground cover choose from the relatively few plants that tolerate dry roots and poor light.
Some of the best are suggested below.
Now is a good time to plant, so plants can become established before they have to cope with a dense canopy of leaves and dry soil in the summer.
Water regularly at first, until they are growing and spreading happily.
They'll take at least two years before they become fully established then very little maintenance will be needed.
CONTINENTAL FLAVOUR
Garlic is well-known for its health-giving properties, but did you know that it's every so easy to grow?
While you're clearing away old bedding plants, just push a few cloves into the soil, about 4–6in apart, with tips just below the soil.
When they start growing, some of the green shoots can also be used like spring onion tops, in stews and salads.
For a perennial plant with a milder garlic flavour, sow Chinese chive seeds now in a sheltered spot or cold frame.
Transfer to the main garden in spring, when additional sowings can be made.
Leaves can be used raw, and in cooking.
BOXING CLEVER
Most summer displays in handing baskets, window boxes and containers will be past their best now, and can be taken under cover, or used to house winter/spring displays.
You can provide a framework for winter and summer boxes with perennial plants like conifers, which give height and shape; small-leaved decorative ivies, which soften edges and can add colour with variegated leaves; or one of the variegated vincas such as v minor Aureo-variegata or v major Elegantissima, which have the added bonus of blue flowers from March.
Bressingham's catalogue (available from newsagents) includes a wide selection of dwarf and slow-growing conifers, as well as winter-flowering heathers — try the white-flowering scented variety Silberschmerze.
Grey-leaved cinerarias will continue through the winter, so save any you may have.
For flower colour, plant groups of winter-flowering pansies, and interplant with early flowering spring bulbs like snowdrops, crocuses and miniature daffodils.
If you have anywhere to overwinter the geraniums from your boxes (or pelargoniums, to give them their proper name), don't just throw them away.
Take 3in tip cuttings from overlarge plants, and keep in a frost-free greenhouse, conservatory, or windowsill.
Most varieties supplied by garden centres grow a little too large to make ideal houseplants if you just take them in for the winter, but many dwarf and miniature types are ideal for deep sunny windowsills.
They bloom virtually all year round, and some have interesting leaf colours or scents too.
Buying rooted cuttings allows you to try unusual varieties, then propagate your favourites by taking cuttings from mature plants, without much expense.
For a taster of what's available send of the Vernon Geranium catalogue (cost £1).
You'll find 21 classifications, with, for instance, 74 varieties listed under just Miniatures.
Many are illustrated in colour.
HELPING HAZARDOUS PLANTS RESEARCH
Have you ever come out in a rash after working in the garden, and thought it might have been caused by a plant you were handling?
Or had a child who acquired a severe stomach upset after eating berries form the garden, which you didn't realise were dangerous?
Then you may be able to help with a unique research project being carried out by the Royal Horticultural Society, the Royal Botanical Gardens, Kew, and the National Poisons Unit.
Bright berries of pyracantha seem to signal danger: but are they poisonous?
The answer is probably no — but do you know otherwise?
The project aims to sort out which garden plants can be harmful, and to define just how toxic they really are.
Findings will be given to the horticultural trade, to enable a simple system of ‘health warning’ labels to be devised and used in garden centres.
As the first stage of the project, the team is gathering real-life case histories from embers of the public who have had experience of apparently harmful plants.
If you can help, write to:
AUTUMN LAWNCARE
If your lawn goes into winter in good condition, it will be off to a good start next year, so prepare it now.
Keep cutting the grass for as long as it grows vigorously.
Don't let it get too long, or it will be difficult to cut in spring.
Use a lawnrake (a powered version is a good investment for a large area), to help clear moss and prevent a ‘thatch’ of dead grass and debris building up — it inhibits growth and may encourage diseases.
Aerate the lawn if it tends to become waterlogged or growth is very poor.
Any slitter or aerator will do, but one that takes out cores of soil is best.
Apply a high phosphate and potash autumn lawn fertiliser only if the grass is looking jaded (the best time for feeding is really spring, with a high-nitrogen fertilizer).
If it's in food condition, don't bother.
Use a mosskiller if necessary: its presence indicated poor growing conditions, so you should aerate and feed as well.
Aerate the lawn if waterlogging or poor growth is a problem
SEED OF THE MONTH
Delphinium hybridum, Pacific Giants .
Hardy perennial, 5 ‘ft ‘.
Stately back of border plant, flowers from June.
Sow now, or in March in flowering position (Mr Fothergill's)
PROBLEM SOLVER
For free advice on any d-i-y problem, write to: 1: You enclose a valid Free Advice Coupon with each query.
2: Also enclose an sae.
Each separate query must be accompanied by a valid Free Advice Coupon and an sae and each query should be written on a separate piece of paper.
We regret that we are unable to answer multiple queries that do not comply with these instructions.
And we are unable to supply plans for projects.
BUILDING
Second-hand bricks
A 9in (230mm) boundary wall, which has cracked due to settlement, is to be replaced.
As the existing bricks seem sound, can they be re-used?
We want to render the wall and then paint it.
Assuming the bricks are in good condition and that the old mortar can be removed, there is no reason why they should not be used again.
We advise that they should be used damp, but not wet, so that the mortar sticks well.
A good mortar for this sort of work is 1 part cement, a ½ part line, and 4 parts sand.
The secret with this repair of course, is to improve the depth of the foundation first, to prevent settlement from recurring in the future.
CONCRETE
Hot weather protection
Is it necessary to protect newly laid concrete in hot weather?
Yes, as soon as the surface has hardened enough not to be marked, it should be covered with a polythene sheet to prevent it from drying out too quickly.
The sheet can be weighted down with sand or stones at the edges, and it should be left in place for three days, by which time it will be safe to commence subsequent building work.
Snags with ready-mix
Are there any snags in having ready-mixed concrete delivered?
Storage of materials and the effort of mixing are eliminated by using ready-mixed concrete, which is available in two forms.
The traditional type is delivered mixed and ready to lay by a special truck, and it is simply poured directly where required, or it can be poured into wheelbarrows.
But the driver won't help with the barrowing!
The other type, which may be better for smaller jobs, is mixed on the spot in a special truck, which has a mixer at the back.
The traditional ready-mixed trucks are capable of carrying up to 6m 3 of concrete at a time.
Considering that 1m 3 of concrete will make 25 to 30 manageable barrowloads, this is an awful lot of concrete!
Often there is a minimum load that will be delivered, and an extra charge for part loads, so ring wound the suppliers before ordering.
For smaller jobs the mix-on-the-spot suppliers are usually cheaper.
Concrete must be used within four house of mixing, and it is usually easier to keep up with the latter type, which is laid as it is mixed.
Storing cement
How long will cement keep?
Normally, unopened bags of cement, stored in a dry place, on a raised platform, and covered with a plastic sheet, will stay fresh for five to six weeks.
Unused cement from open bags will last longer if it is transferred to well-sealed plastic bags.
Ready-mixed bags
Is it economical to buy dry-bagged ready-mixed mortar and concrete?
The advantage of these dry mixes is convenience, allied to the fact that the mixtures are of consistent quality, and suited to the purpose stated on the bag.
They are ideal for repairs and smaller building jobs, and where there isn't the storage space to keep separate ingredients.
By shopping around and comparing prices it is often possible to save quite a bit of money, but even so, dry mixes always work out more expensive than mixing your own, although they do also cut out the preliminary stages of the mixing process.
It saves throwing away the remains of a large bag of cement, too.
DAMP
Musty Carpet
A musty odour is coming from an old, all-wool carpet.
The floor is timber tongued and grooved boards, and air circulates freely below it through airbricks.
The carpet has not been subject to spillages, animals, etc.
Have you any idea of the cause?
As the carpet has been in satisfactory use for some years, we should not expect it to be the actual cause of trouble.
We wonder if there is some dampness or condensation in the room, which is leaving the carpet not quite dry.
The boarded floor appears to be in order, so perhaps there is some dampness in the walls of the room, especially if one wall is north-facing.
If so, external treatment with a clear silicone water  repellent could be helpful.
We should, however, be inclined to suspect condensation on the outside wall.
This can be dealt with by striking a balance between heating and ventilation in the room.
Also check you damp proof course: if it has been breached by soil, or a new patio being built above it, it may have become ineffective.
You will then either have to remove the offending material, or have a new silicone damp proof course injected to replace it.
FENCES
Which way round?
Does the ‘good’ or ‘bad’side indicate who owns a boarded boundary fence?
It's up to the owner to decide which way round to have the post and rails, although he must erect them on his side of the boundary.
It is usual, though, for the owner to have the posts and rails on his side, with the smooth ‘good’ side facing the neighbouring property.
Erecting the fence in this way does have the practical benefit of making it difficult to climb into the property — the rails which give useful footholds, being on the inside.
The deeds of the house may indicate who owns and is responsible for the boundary fences, otherwise neighbours may be able to settle the matter by mutual agreement.
FLOORS
Laying wood panels
How should floors be prepared for laying a wood floorcovering?
All wood floors suitable for d-i-y installation can be laid directly on to floor boards or concrete floors, assuming that they are level and, in the case of concrete, that there is a damp-proof course to stop any damp from reaching the floor.
One company recommends laying its own make of cork lining paper or roll cork below the planks for better heat installation, and most manufacturers recommend a sheet of underlay below their wood floors (to be tucked in behind the skirting boards) if there is any possibility of dampness occurring.
Wood floors of all types need to be laid on a perfectly level floor, so you may need to completely cover it with hardboard, or in more extreme cases, chipboard, before laying the floor.
These need to be screwed or nailed to the floorboards below.
Flooring-grade chipboard can also be used to completely replace badly worn or damaged boards.
New boards
Do I have to condition new floorboards before laying them?
If you are replacing a few boards in an existing floor, and have brought them from a timber yard, don't come home and fit the boards straight away.
It's extremely doubtful that they will have been stored in ideal conditions, and even if they have, the ideal conditions of the timber yard do not correspond to those of your own home — there's bound to be some shrinkage as they dry out in the higher temperatures.
Store the boards for at least a few days, ideally in the place where they are to be laid, but at least somewhere with a similar temperature.
You then won't have to deal with the problem of gaps between floorboards later on.
GARDEN STEPS
Concrete repairs
How can chipped concrete steps be repaired?
Chipped or crumbling garden steps are not only unsightly, they are also dangerous to walk on.
To repair concrete steps, remove loose material using a cold chisel, cutting back the concrete to leave as square on edge as possible.
Dampen the surface, then paint it with pva adhesive.
Place a length of board, well supported on bricks, etc, along the front edge of the step, to support the repair.
Fill the damaged area with a cement/sand mortar to which pva adhesive has been added during mixing.
Keep the repair covered for at least three days, then the board can be removed.
GARAGE DOORS
Keeping out the elements
How can an up-and-over garage door be draught and weatherproofed to prevent wind and rain blowing into it?
The garage is going to be used as a workshop.
There is little that can be done down the sides of the door, beyond checking that the weatherstrip provided (usually a rubber flap or brush strip) is in order.
At the top, you could screw a batten inside the frame, arranged so that the door closes against it.
You could, if required, then fit a draught-strip to the bottom.
This strip is the kind used at sides and top of the usual hinged door.
At the bottom, you could form a tapered sill, in hardwood or concrete, against which the door would close.
You could then attach a brushtype draught seal to the door itself, fixed with self-tapping screws or ‘pop’ rivets.
If you used a hardwood sill, you could fix draught-strip to it instead of the door.
GATES
Sagging troubles
How do you cure a sagging gate?
If the gate is sagging but the posts appear firm, the diagonal brace may have loosened.
Wedge the gate into its correct position and secure the brace with waterproof adhesive and galvanised screws.
If you are fitting a new brace, the top should be at the latch side of the gate.
Fixing a post
How can a gate post be fixed to a wall?
I've tried large screws into wall plugs, but they don't hold.
Gates exert considerable pressure on posts, particularly on the hinged side.
Ideally, gates should be hung on study posts, set well into the ground.
Where this is impossible, such as against a house well, where there is often a concrete apron adjacent to the wall, the only secure way to fit the post is to screw it into the wall using large expanding bolts, such as Rawlbolts.
For security, use three evenly spaced bolts per post.
If a suitable masonry drill is not available, use a hammer and star drill to make the holes for the bolts in the brickwork.
The holes in the post should be countersunk, so that the heads of the bolts lie flush with the surface.
MIRRORS
Re-silvering
Is it possible to obtain the materials to re-silver a mirror?
Re-silvering is a specialist art, and since mirrors are cheap enough to replace if they get damaged, few people will want the fuss and expense of mending them unless they are very large.
If the problem is confined to bald patches in small areas, a smooth price of silver paper may be all that's needed.
Place the foil over the damaged portion at the black of the mirror and keep in place with sticky tape.
Wall mounting
How do I overcome the problem of an uneven wall when fixing a mirror?
If you want to use a mirror on a wall that isn't flat, you will need to mount it on blackboard, chipboard or plywood about 9mm thick.
To do this, fix horizontal battens on the wall, parallel with the skirting.
The battens should be screwed loosely into position and then checked to see if they present a flat vertical surface.
Law areas can be raised by packing out with small pieces of wood behind the batten, and high areas can be planed down.
When the structure is flat, tighten up the fixing screws.
The board is then cut to size and screwed on to the battens.
Seal all surfaces with at least two coats of gloss paint (not vinyl), and allow to dry for  at least 72 hours before the mirror is fixed.
If the wall is reasonably flat you can fix the board directly to it.
PAVING
Mortaring joints
Is it best to grout with mortar between paving slabs?
It is not essential to do this, but grouting with mortar will prevent unsightly weed growth forming alter.
The mortar for grouting should be only very slightly damp, so that it is crumbly, but forms a ball when squeezed in the palm of the hand.
Use a 1 part cement to 5 parts sharp sand mixture (as used for bedding slabs).
Work the mixture into the cracks using the edge of a builder's trowel, brushing away the surplus, and choosing a dry day to do the work, so that the surface of the slabs is not smeared with cement.
PONDS
Liner repair
I am going to install a pond.
In case of damage, which type is easiest to repair?
Butyl liners can be repaired successfully with a patch and special adhesive (it's rather like repairing a puncture in a cycle inner-tube).
Repair kits are available from pond specialists.
Pvc liners can also be repaired with a patch (possibly an offcut) and one of the pvc adhesives that are widely available.
Cracks in glass-fibre ponds can be repaired with a repair kit sold for car bodywork, but you will have to remove the pond to do this.
PLUMBING
Removing basing taps
Is it possible to unscrew the retaining nuts to remove two 20-year-old basin taps, set in hard putty, without cracking the basin?
It's quite common when changing old basin taps to end up with a cracked basin.
There's no way that we can guarantee success, but it should be helpful to follow this technique: cut off the water supply to the basin, and disconnect the tails of the taps from the water supply pipes.
This is usually done easily enough.
Disconnect the basin waste, lift the basin from its brackets or pedestal (or both), and place it upside-down on the floor.
Apply penetrating oil to the thread of the tap tails, and leave for at least an hour to allow it to soak in.
Now, while steadying the tap spouts with a cloth and spanner to prevent the taps from twisting, try to turn the back-nuts with a special basin spanner.
if it doesn't work first time, re-apply easing oil, wait and repeat.
STAIRCASES
Refixing handrails
Handrails most often come loose when the wallplugs fail at the point where they are fixed to a wall on a bracket.
Either replace with larger size wallplugs and screws, or move the bracket slightly to one side and refix.
Make sure you've fixed into solid material behind plaster — use longer screws and wallplugs if not.
Handrails fixed directly to the wall can be most easily refixed securely with window frame fixings, as you can do this without removing the whole rail.
Buy the correct length to go through handrail and plaster and into solid brick, block or stone behind.
Using the recommended drill bit size, drill through the handrail, then change to masonry drill to go through the wall.
Insert the fixing and screw in tight.
VENTILATION
Trickle air flow
I want continuous ventilation in a bedroom and have decided on a trickle ventilator.
How are they fixed?
To provide continuous ventilation, ‘trickle’ ventilators can be fitted into the head of a window frame.
these are non-electrical (and therefore silent in operation), and can be adjusted from fully open to fully closed.
To fit a trickle ventilator, you drill a series of holes in the window frame and screw the ventilator in place.
WALLS
Stone cladding
Is it reasonable to cover a complete exterior wall with some stone tiles?
Because of the weight of the tiles, you have to be particularly careful if you're thinking of covering whole walls — there have been instances of large sections of tiles coming away from a wall because they haven't been properly fixed.
As a rule of thumb, any tile which weighs more than a in thick ceramic tile should be additionally fixed with a mechanical fixing.
A simple solution is to use small angle brackets which support the tile but are not actually fixed to it.
These are held to the wall with a screw and wall plug, and are then covered with mortar so that they don't show.
WOODWORK
Sash cramps
I intend to start making furniture as a hobby.
Could you advise me on the best type of sash cramp to buy?
For holding together large frameworks which have been glued up, they are indispensable.
The simplest version has a straightforward bar, whereas a more robust type has a bar with a T cross section.
A variation on this theme is the versatile pipe cramp, where the main longitudinal member is a tube rather than a bar.
A slip and lock mechanism allows quick movement of the holding brackets along the steel tube, and a threaded turnscrew gives the facility for a final tighten-up.
A keen and committed cabinet maker will use sash cramps regularly, and so their original price will long be forgotten.
Another food, and inexpensive way to cramp together large carcasses or frameworks is to buy cramp heads.
In essence these are sash cramps without the longitudinal bar.
It's your job to provide an alternative to the steel bar by cutting a length of timber instead.
This needs drilling to receive the steel pegs on the cramp heads.
Use hardwood if possible because it is less likely to deflect under load, but a softwood bar is usually adequate when dealing with short lengths.
Two sets of cramp heads and a selection of timber bars will cover all sorts of circumstances.
Diary
ALL BLOCKED UP
Extracts from the diary of a working supervisor of a small building company, with useful tips on all sorts of building problems.
How green is your valley?
This isn't a political or geographical question, and I'm not going to ramble on about environmental issues.
The thing that I'm concerned about is your roof before the winter sets in.
Moss and lichens grow only where the air is clean, which is a good sign in some ways, but moss can block gutters and valleys, eventually presenting all sorts of other problems too, particularly in heavy rain.
Gutters will overflow, often by no means gently and valley water can back up under tiles and underfelt, until it spills over into the room below.
Valleys and gutters are usually self-cleaning.
Because of the circumstances under which most replacement gutters are fitted, however, they may not join up as beautifully as you'd like, which may mean that they need more regular cleaning — but don't rush to criticise your builder — it probably wasn't his fault if he had to join up to existing work.
The worst problem is that the combination of silt, moss and leaves, along with a few chippings washed off of flat roof, can cause soakaways to get blocked, thereby reducing the flow at times when it's needed most.
this is just the job we had to tackle — unblocking a soakaway.
The worst problem is often finding the thing before you can even start.
There's the rainwater pipe disappearing into the path, but which way, and how far?
The regulation distance that a soakaway must be from the nearest building has increased over the years.
This possibly presenting a problem, which isn't that common, would be minimum of two to three metres away, but where exactly?
You can't go digging at random, leaving behind mounds of earth until you find the right spot; you just have to hope that it hasn't subsequently been covered by path, patio or drive, and has been sited in the most likely place — under the lawn.
Some sites can be detected by eye, with a tell-tale slight depression or different shade of grass pointing you in the right direction.
But a well-constructed soakaway would leave no clues.
Then probing is the simplest method of location.
Unless of course, you're a dab hand at water divining — something I've not attempted yet!
A soakaway should have a minimum of 150mm of topsoil on a concrete cap.
Many have been constructed with just polythene over hardcore when the building inspector wasn't about, but either way, when probing with a garden fork of thin steel rod, you probably won't be able to penetrate deeper than about 200mm.
To avoid being misled by stones and tree roots, several probes should be made in a small area.
After locating the main area, continue your exploration in the direction of the rainwater pipe, until you find the edge of the soakaway and pipe entry.
Our young labourer Kevin, whom I've not mentioned for a while, gets the strenuous pick and shovel jobs.
He began digging for the pipe, which was expected to be about half a metre down.
The lead-in pipes are either pvc or concrete, sometimes encased with a weak concrete mix.
With any excavating job you can avoid creating a blot on the landscape for months after by slicing the turf off in strips, so that it can later be relaid.
I find it easier using low-angle chops with a spade instead of a shovel, as it cuts more uniformly.
Kevin dug a hole to a couple of inches below the pipe, where ha wanted to cut through it.
and large enough for a bit of extra elbow room.
With plastic pipe, you only need a hacksaw, but concrete ones need special pipe cutters.
he could have easily used a disc cutter, but they're not easy of pleasant to use in situations like this.
Concrete pipes are only 5 ‘ft ‘long, with about 20in extending into the hardcore.
Kevin had exposed the connection with the previous pipe, so the easiest thing to do was to carefully break the pipe at the connector, and cut the other end about 100mm away from the hardcore.
Pipe cutters consist of a long pair of handles, with a very heavy bicycle-chain-type construction with cutting wheels in the centre.
The wheels aren't sharp, so there's no danger of cutting yourself.
You use them, the handles must be fully opened, and the chain placed squarely around the pipe, with the wheels on the point where the cut is to be made.
The chain is connected to the handle at the tightest position, the handles pulled together — and hey presto— you've made a clean cut!
Now Kevin could reach in and start to pull out the debris causing the blockage.
It's usually good rich stuff, ideal for the flower beds, so that's where it was dispatched.
The outside diameter of the most common make of concrete pipes changed about 12 years ago, from the larger version which was cream coloured, to a thinner, much stronger pink pipe.
They can be connected only by using a stepped coupling, so Kevin was unable to re-use the original connector.
Old couplings usually stick tight, and the easiest way to remove them is to take them apart, using one or two small screwdrivers to prise off the end cover ring, which releases the pressure, and then remove the barrel, synthetic seal and cover ring.
The thin plastic flange in the centre of the connectors must be removed with a pair of pliers, to enable it to slide completely over the new, smaller piece of pipe, which should be cut 10 to 20mm shorter than the measured gap.
Chamfer the cut edges of pipe to allow easy fitting of the coupling — a few gentle taps with a hammer to chip away the edge is enough.
Non-mineral oil products such as washing-up liquid or vegetable oil are acceptable lubricants.
Kevin slipped the two connectors over the thinner pipe, and supported the weight with soil and stones, while he slid the connectors over the larger sections of pipe to complete the repair.
After backfilling, he neatly relaid the turf.
Standing on a strong board laid over it, a heavy tool such as a sledge hammer or pickaxe can then be used to bang on the board and flatten the turf, leaving little sign of disturbance.
Next month — making a garage pit.