

ARGUMENT AND IDEOLOGY
Quakers, evangelicals inside and outside the Church of England and Rational Dissenters and Unitarians all articulated a powerful abolitionist and emancipationist appeal over more than half a century.
The fundamental dynamic driving towards reform in these three religious-intellectual traditions differed subtly but the appeal demonstrated considerable coherence and continuity from earlier to later phases of antislavery.
From the late 1780s onwards, often fierce dialectical conflict with pro-slave trade and pro-slavery spokesmen was central to the intellectual experience of the antislavery movement.
In controversy abolitionists found arguments in common whatever their religious affiliations.
The deployment of particular arguments both in response to their opponents and when they went beyond those limits, revealed a family resemblance in fundamental ideas.
Antislavery success, it was assumed, would be a large step towards creating a proper moral order in the world and from that could be expected to flow greater social and political harmony.
Such a moral order was legitimate since it was consonant with the dictates of Providence or, in different intellectual terms, expressive of the natural order progressively opening to the minds of Enlightenment intellectuals through scientific investigation and freedom of thought.
The very capaciousness of the idea of proper order as well as the changing dialectical requirements of controversy meant that absolute agreement on fundamentals was unnecessary.
Indeed part of the attraction of the picture of the world abolitionists presented, that is, a contribution to the success of their appeal , was that their world-view or ideology was capable of accommodating differences of emphasis and expression while recognisably having the same basic shape.
Quakers, evangelicals and Rational Dissenters could reach a similar commitment by their own intellectual and theological routes and  understand it as having somewhat different implications for desirable social and political arrangements.
The same considerations of ideological convergence in broad terms and participation in public controversy encouraged the development of antislavery argument after the Napoleonic Wars in directions only lightly indicated in the early stages of the anti-slave trade argument.
Especially important were the growing certainties of liberal political economy and the theme of antislavery as expressing the national interest and, as an important moral component, the sense of national duty the British people owed the world and themselves.
What were the dynamics within the religious-intellectual traditions which committed some adherents to public action for reform and provided theological rationales which sustained antislavery over many years?
To begin with Quakerism, Friends taking the initiative against the slave trade in the 1780s drew on the colonial American Quakers Benezet and Woolman.
The groundwork of a powerful testimony and action against the trade in slaves was laid by their writings.
This result might seem puzzling given the conventional characterisation of most Friends in the eighteenth century as quietist ‘following their habit of attending religiously to their internal impressions’.
But the truth is more complex; it is difficult to find a hard and fast line absolutely distinguishing quietists from other Quakers.
If quietism entailed abnegation of the self the better to experience the Light Within, it could also imply a moral optimism about the future.
The future Quaker abolitionist, James Cropper of Liverpool, accepted the necessity ‘for a humble, dependent state of mind naturally arising from the knowledge of the superior wisdom and goodness of the will and ways of God to our own’ and found gloom about the future banished.
Cropper's implication that in this way God's concerns became a man's own and, potentially, were the basis for activism in the world, indicates the difficulty of reading the language of quietism in a purely passive way.
Elizabeth Fry was more explicit about spiritual direction.
The power she experienced descending upon her had its value in ‘the sensible and constant direction of the Spirit of God in men’.
Nothing short of this ‘can really help forward the cause of righteousness on earth’.
God's presence understood in this way led to moral teaching or particular action on behalf of righteousness.
In Mrs Fry's case this meant prison reform, but also, at least formally, antislavery.
The self-abnegation of Friends, emptying themselves the better to be filled by the Light Within, did not  then necessarily exclude the pursuit of righteousness in the world; equally, in the outlook of growing numbers of Quakers in the early nineteenth century, this stance could merge with a stress on the experience of grace which aligned them with evangelicals.
It was Mrs Fry's brother, the antislavery Quaker minister Joseph John Gurney, who was a prime source for the absorption of evangelical elements into Quakerism, reiterating the typical evangelical emphases on Christ's atonement and the centrality of the biblical message.
Full absorption of the meaning of the atonement allowed the Spirit to work the conversion of the sinner.
When the converted attained the faith they were no longer merely formal Christians and were predisposed to work for a righteous world.
This tendency was not unchallenged amongst Quakers but its impact was substantial, perhaps predominant, in the Yearly Meeting by the later 1820s.
It was the clear differentiation of ‘real’ from ‘nominal’Christianity which was the most obvious point of convergence between Gurney-influenced Quakerism and evangelicalism inside and outside the Anglican Church.
‘Real’ Christianity, in Clarkson's words, depended upon ‘a total change of heart or of mind so as to produce a corresponding change of Life ’.
This transformation could only occur in the heart of the individual if, anguished at his sinfulness, he recognised his complete reliance upon Christ for assured salvation and then attained utter conviction that Christ's redeeming grace had infused him.
The ‘real’ Christian was then able scrupulously to follow the scriptures as a divine standard and guide through the contending opinions of men.
In this way evangelicals understood the individual to achieve a right relation with God and to do so within a providential order in the world.
Despite disagreement over the extent of providential intervention in the flow of human events evangelicals had no doubt that ‘there is a God who governs the world and intimately directs all the concerns of his rational and immortal creatures’.
It was a conviction which promised moral and spiritual progress.
One other element however was essential to provide the dynamic for righteous action by evangelicals; certainty of God's government was combined with conviction of free human will and agency.
Not only could the possibility of salvation be rejected, both James Stephen and Clarkson affirmed, but men and women had sufficiently free will, ‘to render us justly responsible…for all the sins we commit in this our state of trial’.
Equally, for the regenerate, free agency effectively imposed the duty of good works in the world; they had the capacity to overcome ‘the  pleadings of passion or inclination’ or interest and act in accord with God's wishes.
To act in this way furthered the Kingdom of God through the expression of man's benevolence.
Neglect of opportunities to act on such feelings, Granville Sharp believed, was ‘as great an offence before God as if we had denied assistance to Christ himself ’.
Benevolence contributed to harmony within God's order.
Slaveholders fostered misery amongst their slaves; they clearly did not act upon the precept of loving their neighbours.
Yet, as Sharp expressed it, Christ taught ‘that all mankind , even our professed enemies …must necessarily be esteemed our neighbours…so that the same benevolence…is indisputably due,under the Gospel , to our brethren of the universe ’.
The related evangelical image of humanity as one ‘great family’ similarly incorporated the imperative of proper order within local and national communities, though it was far from meaning that the existing pattern of society was left untouched.
It also indicated the slave trade as a peculiarly appropriate object upon which many evangelicals could exercise their benevolence since it constituted a burden of individual and national guilt and in its international character provided a way of extending and giving reality to the notion of mankind as a family.
The third religious tradition in antislavery, Rational Dissent, increasingly expressed in Unitarian ideas, came into open conflict with the other two traditions at the end of the eighteenth century.
Unitarian tendencies were found amongst some Quakers in both England and Ireland in these years and the Liverpool abolitionist William Rathbone's sympathetic treatment of them led to his disownment by the Friends and the passage of his family to Unitarianism.
Wilberforce attacked Unitarians as lacking fixed religious dogmas and was attacked in turn, along with other evangelicals, for promoting irrationality in religion precisely through dogmatism about the divinity of Christ and the Trinity while also stressing the reality of the Devil and Hell.
Rational Dissenters themselves exemplified a variety of doctrinal positions derived from their commitment to individual enquiry in matters of belief.
Some followed Priestley in his necessarianism which envisaged all mental and moral life, since it was derived ultimately from matter, operating according to natural laws.
Within that structure men's own actions and decisions were necessary to link cause and effect and any properly considered action must have an effect on the system of moral life.
Necessarianism was thus not fatalistic but optimistic in its concern for  properly effective motive, encouraging constant effort.
Other Rational Dissenters held back from Priestley's particular arguments but shared with the Priestleyans an urgent commitment to influencing moral life through advocacy of ‘great and universally allowed principles of religion and morality…in all their boundless and beneficent application to the concerns of public and private life, of national and individual conduct, of politics, literature, art, philosophy and the condition of society’(W. J. Fox).
The common imperative to activism amongst Rational Dissenters drew upon the conviction of an ordered universe revealed progressively through rational investigation and scientific enquiry.
This is less distant from the other religious traditions discussed than might be supposed.
The cumulative revelation of an ordered universe convinced most Rational Dissenters, following Newton, that greater understanding brought them closer to God through familiarity with His design.
Like Quakers and evangelicals, Rational Dissenters relied upon the characteristic of human benevolence to underpin their advocacy of ‘great and universally allowed principles of religion and morality’ and to act them out.
Combined with their conviction of man's capacity for utilitarian calculation of the effects of his actions, or, in Priestleyan terms, properly judged motive, this was an outlook able to be squared with the Quaker and evangelical pursuit of righteousness.
As Cookson has noted, in this sense Christianity fitted man's propensities and the revelation afforded by the Bible complemented man's reason and his progressive moral inclinations.
In respect of a common activist orientation towards achieving a providentially sanctioned order in the world, based upon faith in man's capacity for moral progress, the tensions between Rational Dissent/Unitarianism and the other religious traditions in antislavery reform were of secondary importance.
What themes emerged in public argument against the slave trade and how do they relate to the basic concern with good order and the imperative of action to achieve it?
The arguments contained in The Case for the Oppressed Africans (1783) issued by the Friends in advocacy of abolition set useful signposts to the general lines of persuasion adopted for the following twenty years.
The Quakers anticipated results from the claim that abolition was required by ‘justice and humanity, but is also consistent with sound policy’.
It was the duty of the government to bring ‘terror to evil doers’.
The penalty for failure to do so was likely to be dire because not only individuals but nations were chastised for their  sins, and can it be expected that He will suffer this great iniquity to go unpunished?’
These arguments suggest the importance of the direct appeal to feelings of humanity but also their link to religious-based ideas of justice.
Equally the portrayal of the trade in slaves as opposed to sound policy suggests a complementary appeal to traders themselves, associated interests and politicians, to those whose sense of personal, community or national interest screened out the appeal of justice and humanity.
It was a point which opened up a line of argument opposing the ‘true’ national interest of abolition to the false claims of the traders of national necessity for what they were doing.
Yet it was also to emerge that for some antislavery controversialists ‘impolicy’ itself arose from abrogating the natural order in the form of the laws of liberal political economy; consistency and principle together would bring greater prosperity.
Finally, the question of national guilt and its expiation was to have a long history in relation to abolition and emancipation involving a definition of national interest as meeting national duty by observing the religious conception of proper order in the world.
From the late 1780s onwards evangelicals contributed substantially to the pamphlet literature against the slave trade.
As Wesley had done, and as Rational Dissenters very frequently did, they alluded to the natural rights of all men.
But a more characteristic evangelical understanding of how the slave trade abrogated God's good order stressed the interposition by trader and slaveholder of a harsh human power between God and some of His creatures.
This intervention ignored the fact of creation as a ‘comprehensive system of goodness, in which all men and women, Africans included, influenced by ‘communicative goodness’ were to be ‘instrumental in promoting each other 's happiness’.
All were in this sense brethren and capable through redemption of striving to abolish sin.
Not only did trader and master subvert that sense and render the victims of the Middle Passage ‘incapable of deriving any benefit from Christianity’ but slave trading and slavery were a context conducive to sinfulness by loosening constraints on passion.
Put in slightly different language slave trading blocked the operation of Christian benevolence arising from man's innate ability to distinguish good from evil and strengthened ‘by various communications of his revealed Will’.
The imperative to act upon the promptings of benevolence was crucial to some notable opponents of the slave trade; its frustration by the traders amounted to disruption of providential means to harmony.
Slave  traders fomented a kind of disorder which was characteristic of relations outside God's rule.
Justice entailed bringing all relations within the ambit of divine order.
This point provides the key to the full meaning of the many arguments in pamphlet form — and on occasion in parliamentary debate — which underlined the brutalities and cruelty of the slave trade.
They were aimed at arousing horror and warm sympathy, leading to action on behalf of their victims.
But they could be expected especially to move a religious audience committed to a divine order comprehending all men.
Cruelty against fellow creatures with God-given souls constituted an unjust and blasphemous misuse of power which could, Clarkson argued, drive a fellow human being to madness, suicide or desperate revolt; to bring on moral disorder ran the risk of provoking psychological and social disorder.
Within all of the religious currents sustaining antislavery, the Bible was taken as a vital revelation of God's will and a guide to right action.
Any attempt to use the scriptures to vindicate the slave trade was thus bound to provoke energetic efforts by abolitionists to controvert the arguments; failure to do so would have yielded an authority to the pro-slave trade position by sacrificing one of the main ways religious reformers had of grasping the essential spirit of the Christian moral order.
The biblical argument over the slave trade and slavery was thus of immense significance but took on particularly sharp controversial form in Liverpool over the Rev. Raymond Harris' (Don Raymondo Hormaza)Scriptural Researches (1788) which tried to ground the legitimacy of the slave trade in scripture.
The local slave trading and mercantile community was loud in its support for Harris' intervention and happy to see, at this early stage of antislavery mobilisation, its interests defended quite as much in general scriptural terms as it was on the broad basis of national interest and community prosperity.
This bespoke greater intellectual confidence than was to be evident at later stages of controversy.
Equally significant, the community strength and religious confidence of the pro-trade argument prompted vindications of the antislavery impulse of scripture across religious traditions.
Abolitionists were alert not only to the particular issue of the slave trade but to the larger need to safeguard their deployment of scripture as a powerful instrument of insight into right and wrong.
Harris tried to argue the consonance of the slave trade with ‘the Mosaic Dispensation and the Christian Law’.
William Hughes and the Unitarian William Roscoe, following Granville Sharp's argument in  the 1770s, asserted the scriptural sanction of slave trading to have only particular application; they tried to bolster scripture as a reliable instrument of antislavery revelation by insisting that Harris' reliance on the Old Testament had to be modified or abrogated by the New Testament.
It required, in familiar language, ‘all mankind are to be esteemed our brethren ’.
The Anglican Henry Dannett provided a further fall-back epistemological basis for vindicating antislavery perceptions of the moral order by arguing that even ‘if scriptural decisions should appear to contradict our ideas of right and wrong we are still bound to follow those ideas because we cannot be so certain that we rightly understand and justly limit those scriptural decisions as we are of our own ideas of right and wrong’.
Individual conscience repaired the weaknesses of individual scriptural interpretation.
It was an appropriately Protestant justification for refutations of Harris (of foreign, Catholic origin, ‘a Spanish Jesuit’) whose reading of the Bible was ‘well worthy of one of the disciples of Loyola’.
Arguments advanced by Rational Dissenters against the slave trade revealed a sense of providential order quite as strong as that of Quakers and evangelicals.
But they drew more explicitly upon Enlightenment ideas and liberal political tradition and so expressed their anxieties about infractions of the right order in language which often sounded more secular.
A reading of anti-slave trade and antislavery tracts by Rational Dissenters in the late eighteenth century thus reveals concern about abrogations of a man's ‘natural right’ to liberty.
A properly harmonious order in the world, the argument ran, depended upon a just recognition of man's God-given constitution, his rights and capacities.
Stress on man's nature and the rights expressive of that nature pointed in some cases to a more radical politics than was embraced by other antislavery advocates.
It was an outlook formed in a number of Rational Dissenters active against the slave trade, by adherence to the ‘Real Whig’ tradition of liberalism, so copiously analysed in recent years.
Central was a commitment to the universality of natural rights and the need to protect them by maintaining balanced systems of government in which concentrations of power were avoided.
Checks and balances required an alert and informed populace.
Analogies with the slave trade and slavery and the movement against them were apparent to such reformers.
The natural right to liberty also began to be combined, though much less regularly than in the 1820s, with the conviction from liberal political economy of the greater efficiency and wealth-creating properties of free labour.
The anti-slave trade committee in Manchester was an apt source of these arguments in 1789.
Though chaired by the latitudinarian Anglican, and radical, manufacturer Thomas Walker, it contained a number of Rational Dissenters in the professions — lawyers and doctors — several of whom had an intellectual bent and were active in the discussions of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society, a significant regional conduit for Enlightenment thinking.
The committee gave the Scots scholar, James Anderson of Monkshill, the brief which led to his Observations on Slavery .
The pamphlet began its argument for the dependence of harmony and order on the recognition of man's true nature by distinguishing man from other animals.
Chiefly he was different by virtue of his sense of ‘self-love’.
When brought into operation it stimulated hope, emulation and friendship, the maturing of the social affections.
At best man ‘idolized by all…feels an irresistible impulse to confer upon them fresh benefits…and he runs on in his magnanimous career with alacrity and joy’.
Slavery and the slave trade, however, denied self-love to the slave, provoking permanent discontent and possible rebellion.
Similarly Joseph Priestley concluded that men were treated as ‘mere brutes’ in the slave trade ‘so that they are deprived of every advantage of their rational nature’.
The enlightened Baptist minister Robert Robinson in Cambridge denounced the trade as an encroachment on natural rights and envisaged its end as the result of a general offensive, congenial to Rational Dissenters, making ‘the natural connection between civil and religious liberty’.
Further, his evident linkage of slavery and the slave trade with the political concerns of the Real Whig tradition was plain in his wish that children should be taught about — the histories of consciences oppressed, property plundered, families divided and flourishing states ruined by exercises of arbitrary power'.
The radical Unitarian, Thomas Cooper, proclaimed opposition to the slave trade as a particular duty of Englishmen ‘who claim Freedom as our birth-right…we are in honour bound to assist in exterminating the most diabolical exertion of political tyranny which the annals of oppression can exhibit’.
It was Anderson in his Manchester pamphlet who most conspicuously at this early stage of the antislavery campaign raised the free-labour argument and implicitly defined its appropriateness to man's nature.
In an argument no doubt intended to be attractive to Manchester's merchants and employers — local abolitionists had specifically asked him to write on the impolicy of slavery and the slave trade — he declared that freedom produced cheaper labour than  slavery.
His reasoning was that the productivity of free workers was greater than slave labour if the labourers were offered sufficient inducement through piece-work and high rates for day labour; the cost of getting the same amount of work done by slaves was greater than the cost of the higher rates offered as an inducement.
A free, contractual basis for labour thus pointed to progress and prosperity.
Priestley concurred and offered explicit references to ‘Dr Smith’.
The dictates of true order properly understood were not only just but superior in terms of interest.
The argument tying increased prosperity to increased freedom was intended to demonstrate to individuals, groups and communities whose interests were involved with the slave trade and slavery that they were impolitic in their understanding of their own interests.
But abolitionists also had to face powerful arguments formulated by slave trading interests in terms of the national interest of the commerce by the mercantilist criteria which underpinned much existing commercial legislation.
The assertions of the Liverpool trader, Robert Norris, can be taken as a representative example.
Sugar production, he argued, was extremely important in the imperial economy and for the foreseeable future plantations would rely upon fresh labour from Africa to maintain production.
As well as commercial prosperity the slave trade contributed to Britain's security by enhancing her naval superiority through the provision of sailors and ships.
And, in an argument utterly characteristic of the mercantilist view of a conflict-ridden world, Norris raised the bogey of the old rival France; he claimed that France's naval power had been so strengthened by her own involvement in the slave trade that if Britain discontinued it not only would her commercial prosperity decline but she would lose naval predominance.
A more insidious appeal to the national interest on behalf of the trade came from those controversialists who appeared to concede much of the abolitionists' case with one hand only to withdraw it with the other.
Granting evils in the slave trade and colonial slavery it was none the less argued that government could more easily influence planters and traders through better regulation than they could control the situation on the West African coast.
Once those involved in slaving recognised that self-interest dictated decent treatment of the Africans natural population increase would occur amongst the bondsmen, making the continuation of the slave trade irrelevant.
Alternatively, in attempts to deprive antislavery of the dynamic of evangelism, it was sometimes argued that the task of evangelising and  civilising Africans, whether in Africa or the Americas, necessitated the disciplines of slavery and the slave trade rather than being a reason for abolition or emancipation.
Progress within bondage had to take precedence over liberation to secure the safety of any eventual freedom.
Decisive action would exacerbate existing evils and undermine Britain's strength.
As the climate of controversy became sharper at the end of the 1780s reformers countered these varieties of the national interest argument both by emphasising the potential for the country in alternative patterns of commerce and production and, more defensively, by trying to reconcile abolition with the nation's interest in security and order.
At this time they operated largely within the mercantilist premises of their opponents.
They believed the existing system worked to the enrichment of only a small number; national benefit could be derived from legitimate commerce with a fertile Africa only if the slave trade did not create misleadingly attractive alternatives.
Numerous products from Africa could give British merchants the opportunity to push Dutch carriers out of supplying European markets and provide in Africa resources for the purchase of British manufactures.
As to British naval power, the slave trade militated against rather than enhanced it through the high mortality of sailors engaged in it.
Further, slave traders helped rather than hindered the power of France by supplying slaves to the booming colony of St Domingue and thus indirectly encouraged the growth of the French merchant marine engaged in carrying colonial produce.
The issue of stability or order at the political and social level, and its relation to the interest of national strength and security was also a significant factor in shaping the particular arguments abolitionists advanced to influence the economic interest groups and policy-makers.
The fundamental stress on proper moral order as the basis of a healthy society could be dangerously two-edged; it could plausibly be turned against the reformers by the assertion that abolition and emancipation would cut off the civilising influence of Europeans on Africans and result in social and political upheaval in the colonies.
Reformers were even more acutely aware of the need for effective dialectical counters on this point as the French Revolution developed an increasingly radical edge and slave revolt overtook St Domingue.
By the early 1790s the argument was conducted in an atmosphere in which projects for reform were presented by their enemies as tantamount to a threat to stability and the preservation of civilised life in Britain.
Abolitionists handled this delicate problem for the efficacy of their ‘persuasion’ or appeal in two ways.
Both before and during the events of 1789–92 in France and St Domingue they distinguished their aim of abolition of the trade from the larger question of emancipation of the slaves.
They acknowledged that if emancipation were eventually to come it would require the moral progress and demographic increase consequent upon a conscious policy of a more equal sex ratio amongst slaves; education and religious instruction; the reorganisation of the work of the slaves to provide a progressive increase in the time devoted to autonomous labour from which earnings could be directed to self-purchase; possibly too recognition of obligations to the former master even after the date of legal emancipation.
All of this was admitted to be long term.
The virtue of immediate or shortly forthcoming abolition of the trade abolitionists proclaimed as an act of justice and humanity which at the same time offered the greatest stimulus to reform of slavery on the plantations.
At the very least it would make it a more rationally and humanely organised system likely to be more productive; at best it would provide the conditions for eventual emancipation should that decision finally be made.
With the experience of revolution in France and her colonies a few of the more enthusiastically radical abolitionists — notably Clarkson and Thomas Cooper — adopted the higher risk tactic of accepting both the virtual inevitability of slave revolt and its justification.
Salvation for the slaveholders lay only in their own willingness to accept abolition and undertake amelioration of slavery on their estates.
Paradoxically, these abolitionists were arguing that fear was supposed to induce reason and humanity and provoke policies which squared reform with stability and both with the interest of the nation.
In one other sense fear was promoted by abolitionists as a motive for demanding abolition in the national interest — fear of divine judgement falling upon the guilty nation as a whole.
It was a fear expressed across the religious spectrum of antislavery and a major source of the conviction, particularly of Unitarians, that the slave trade was a subject not for sectarian difference but for the united opposition ‘of the various denominations of Christians ’.
Divine judgement on a sinning nation was foreshadowed in the growing conviction that the corruptions of unrestrained power in the plantation colonies were beginning to stain the social and political fabric in Britain.
Luxury, too, based upon exploitation of the bondsmen spelled destruction.
The spreading leprosy taints ev'ry part,
Infects each limb, and sickens at the heart.
Simplicity! most dear of rural maids,
Weeping resigns her violated shades:
Stern Independence from his glebe retires,
And anxious Freedom eyes her drooping fires;
By foreign wealth are British morals chang'd,
And Afric's sons, and India's smile avenged.
The struggle to avoid the wrath of divine judgement on the nation and conviction that the crisis of the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars both revealed God's displeasure and offered an opportunity to vindicate the nation's purity, contributed powerfully to substantial ideological coherence over the slave trade, embracing politically a range from the Toryism of James Stephen to the liberal wing of dissent.
The necessary correlative, particularly amongst liberals, before and during the wars was caution about threatening the social order; it would also mark a form of corruption in the Christian dynamic of antislavery.
Robinson expressed it most explicitly:
The execution…of the Saviour's plan required the prudent application of wise and well-judged measures so as not to injure private property, not to disturb civil order, not to expose Christianity to the scandal of sedition, not to obscure the glory of a Kingdom not of this world.
The abolitionist appeal in parliament revealed subtle differences.
In the 1792 debate, abolition is portrayed as in the national interest economically through the liberation of legitimate trade to and from Africa.
In mercantilist terms, the nation would benefit by the protection of mariners from the horrors of the Middle Passage.
Equally parliamentarians spoke of cruelty, inhumanity and tyranny as features of the slave trade and slavery, often providing vivid examples.
It is clear though that familiarity with such an approach was thought to make it less effective in 1806 than in 1972.
But familiarity was not the only factor.
The rhetoric of cruelty and inhumanity in 1792, and more clearly in 1806, aroused ambivalence as to its persuasive effect in parliament, even amongst some abolitionists, because they feared the impact of ‘enthusiasm’ upon their colleagues.
Fox in 1792 and Romilly in 1806 were prepared to take the risk.
They used the language of murder about the slave trade and Fox proclaimed himself an enthusiast for ‘that zeal and warmth which arose from a sense of justice and was that kind which made men act with energy in  a noble cause’.
Other opponents of the trade, however, deliberately distanced themselves from ‘fanaticism’.
In 1792 Whitbread stressed his commitment to ‘a cool and moderate proceeding in the course of justice and humanity’.
In 1806 proponents of the trade, Gascoigne and Rose, tried to marginalise Romilly's attack by portraying it as a form of extremism.
Leading opponents of the trade, however, also adopted a different tone.
Wilberforce doubted that humanitarian zeal had sufficient staying power despite his own and others' expression of it in 1792.
By contrast the interest behind the slave trade created a passion which ‘is cool, collected, steady and permanent’.
The ‘compunctions of conscience are in general of a far more fleeting nature’.
The implications of this change in tone emerged explicitly in Grenville's setting aside of ‘the effusions of a blind and generous passion’ in favour of‘cool judgement’since the issue involved ‘a large portion of the interests of the British empire of which it is your Lordships’duty, as an House of parliament, to take care’.
At one level, then, leading abolitionists in parliament came to the conclusion that the language of practicality, of plausible calculations about population increase in the future in the West Indies if importations from Africa were stopped, were more likely to be effective on their colleagues.
This arose in part from a strong sense of parliament's unique place and function in the political system.
In sharp contrast to his ‘enthusiasm’ of 1792, in 1806 Fox introduced the abolition resolution by reminding the Commons what was owed to its own reputation after its 1792 decision for gradual abolition was not carried through; he appealed to the memory of Pitt and the arguments of Burke; he looked to parliament to speak for the nation on ‘a question in which party feelings, arising out of political connections, can have no share’.
Abolition was to be a vindication of the capacity of parliament to bring about nationally agreed change in difficult times.
Full realisation of the meaning of the partial divergence in styles of appeal between parliament and country requires recognition of at least the limited equation of ‘enthusiasm’ with popular opinion.
It thus posed a threat to the calm, deliberative function of the legislature.
Rose was critical of Romilly for being carried away by ‘heat and popular prejudice’; Romilly himself linked his denunciation of the barbarities of the slave trade with speaking on behalf of the wishes of ‘the people of England’.
Differences in style and content of appeal to a considerable extent mirrored divergent estimates of the virtues of parliament and people, as well as differing assessments of how to win over a self-conscious political class.
By the time of the abolition measures of 1806 and 1807 abolitionists had failed to convince their opponents that they were not also looking forward to emancipation.
West Indians and their supporters were substantially correct in their suspicions.
Much of the attack on the slave trade from as early as the end of the 1780s to the debates of 1806 could equally have been, and was, an attack on slavery.
It was not only to meet the argument of demographic decline if the trade stopped but to avoid the embarrassingly radical charge that they wanted rapid emancipation that antislavery reformers argued the consequence of abolition would be virtually automatic improvement in the conditions of slaves.
And in many abolitionist minds this would ultimately lead to emancipation; slaves would not only gradually become more able to live in freedom but better conditions would so enhance the population of labourers in the West Indies that it would be cheaper to employ workers on a waged basis than as slaves.
There was one significant qualification; emancipation was the ultimate objective.
In 1806 Fox described it as ‘not now and not soon’.
In 1818, even in private correspondence, Wilberforce still envisaged ‘the almost insensible result of the various Improvements’ to be ‘Slaves gradually transmitted into a free Peasantry’.
Initially in the years following abolition most antislavery reformers, though James Stephen was a notable exception, assumed that little if any government intervention was required in West Indian affairs to bring about improvements in slavery; the self-interest of the planters would be sufficient.
Concern with labour productivity, they believed, would lead slave-owners both to behave more humanely and find ways of giving slaves greater autonomy in their labour.
From the antislavery perspective this would also make them readier to assume the responsibilities of freedom.
These calculations account for the enthusiasm with which some reformers embraced and recommended models for the development of self-regulation amongst slaves.
Reformers showed some knowledge of Spanish American provisions of work for wages to allow self-purchase by slaves at a formally agreed price.
But most attention was given, and especially by Clarkson, to the ideas and experiments of Joshua Steele of Barbados.
His activities had been known to some antislavery figures long before, but in 1814 his Mitigation of Slavery was published along with an extensive and favourable account by the Scots abolitionist William Dickson in the form of Letters to Thomas Clarkson .
Clarkson publicised it to colleagues, to American abolitionists and to reform-minded West Indian proprietors like ‘Monk’ Lewis.
Steele's starting point was that slaves as much as all other men were subject to the law of human behaviour which said that conduct could be modified through the deployment of rewards and punishments; the point of his experiment was to offer rewards to his slaves for defined tasks when in the past they had primarily experienced punishment.
He and his later antislavery advocates argued that the results demonstrated the greater efficiency of the work done — a genuine experiment because the whip had previously been removed from overseers and offences amongst the slaves dealt with by a jury of elders amongst the slaves themselves.
Ultimately Steele divided land amongst his slaves for which they paid rent; they received wages for other work.
They had time for their economic activities and were free to choose the form of payment for their other work.
Although Barbadian law forbade emancipation Clarkson concluded
he advanced above three hundred debased field negroes who had never before moved without the whip to a state resembling that of contented, honest and industrious servants and after paying them for their labour, tripled the annual neat [sic ]clearance of his Estate.
Self-interest had been successfully combined with civilising and training slaves ‘to the threshold of liberty’.
The worst effects of slavery — dependence, lack of motive — could be removed even before the end of the institution was agreed upon.
The whole orderly structure of argument and assumption of course depended on slave-owners seeing the force of and benefit to them of these laws of development.
James Stephen did not believe they would ever reconcile their pursuit of profits with policies of amelioration.
It was Stephen who was particularly intent on government and parliamentary intervention via a Registry Bill for West Indian slaves and wanted to create an attractive alternative model of agricultural labour by settling free blacks on Trinidad land under metropolitan government control.
Within a few years other reformers, including Wilberforce and Clarkson, recognised that their belief in virtually automatic improvement in the population and condition of slaves was naïve.
At the very least, if the best conditions for improvement were to obtain, they saw the need to ensure that illegal importations did not occur and that it was valuable to have information which would allow a judgement as to whether the slave population was increasing.
By the early 1820s conviction grew amongst reformers that it was not.
They were now in a position which needed large efforts on their  part, as much in renewing and adapting the antislavery argument as in practical action.
James Losh, the north country reformer, later remarked that after abolition ‘the country at large seemed to settle into a state of indifference on the subject of negro slavery’ or at any rate to accept reformers' own assurances that amelioration would follow from the cut-off of new labour supplies from Africa.
Reformers had to overcome the effect of their own earlier confidence.
The way forward could only be through a measure of government intervention and inevitably it provoked at the time and in its later consequences, or lack of them, sharp controversy which did much to form the particular arguments reformers used to articulate their basic ideological assumptions.
Even so, initially, with the formation of a new Anti-Slavery Society in 1823 (the African Institution had for years primarily acted on the international slave trade), there was no major break in abolitionist ideological assumptions.
James Cropper who was at the centre of the efforts to establish a national antislavery body to work directly for emancipation declared roundly, ‘We have no wild schemes of emancipation…we rather wish the thing may work its own way by the force of faith and the operation of circumstances.’
Activists had the job of implicating West Indian proprietors in the public mind with the lack of progress since 1807 but to do it ‘wisely and prudently’ by seeking ‘to second or to remove the impediments out of the way of the free operation of the Jaws which the Creator has fixed in the nature of things’.
Evidently the attainment of an ordered world consonant with divine laws remained the ideological framework of antislavery.
A relative shift of emphasis however became apparent in the 1820s.
Many, particularly evangelical and women abolitionists, remained primarily concerned with antislavery as the path to true moral order; evidence from local provincial associations will be cited on p.34.
But God's laws ‘fixed in the nature of things’ were as, if not more, frequently understood as the economic laws and the laws of human nature embodied in the doctrines of classical political economy.
The freeing of economic forces to operate, it was believed, would produce developments which spelled the death of slavery and should lead to a prosperous, morally appropriate and stable order.
Finally, in continuity with some elements of the earlier anti-slave trade argument, Buxton, Stephen and Clarkson all saw British pride in the achievement of abolition and the moral stature this accorded the nation, at least in its own eyes, as requiring the step of liberating those who had  been stolen from Africa before 1807 and their descendants since the principle of hostility to man stealing remained the same.
Indeed, not only the earlier act but God's especial blessings to the British nation in the form of a tradition of civil liberties imposed a particular duty on it to act as exemplar to other nations and work for emancipation.
It would be a vindication of the country ‘blessed as we are above other nations with the pure light of Christian truth’.
The force of religious antagonism to slavery was maintained as part of the basis of the antislavery appeal at the level of the national Anti-Slavery Society, at the international conventions of the early 1840s and through local associations as they multiplied after 1823.
Slavery's denial of the full ‘creatureliness’ of human beings, in the words of Leicester abolitionists its annihilation of ‘the dignity which belongs to a reasonable and accountable nature’, constituted one aspect in this religious perspective on its inhumanity.
Its injustice was expressed in its provocation of human pain and disorder as ‘ties of kindred may be torn violently asunder’ and because law in the plantation colonies was no guardian of order for the slave victims.
Moreover, ‘Let this people go’ the Birmingham female reformers asserted, were the words of ‘the voice of reason, of conscience, of revelation’.
Slavery, to Sheffield female abolitionists, was essentially unlawful; human laws could only take away what they could create.
Could they legitimately take from man those primary rights by virtue of which they have their existence, they would destroy their own foundation, break the moral chain, give a chaotic impulse in the universe and introduce confusion, in the works of Him who is not the God of confusion but of order.
The institution, summarised the 1840 General Anti-Slavery Convention, was a violation of ‘the immutable principles of equity and justice, and sinful by the light of revealed religion.
Moreover, it constituted a barrier to carrying God's order to other parts of the human family.
The evangelical missionary impulse was brought to bear in the verse of Josiah Conder's antislavery hymn:
What though of different hue and race,
Brethren by blood, coheirs of grace,
Our prayers, our sympathy they claim,
Their wrongs our sin, their bonds our shame.
More striking by the 1820s than the continuity of the theme of the incompatibility of slavery with a true moral and religious order was  the much fuller expression than at the end of the eighteenth century of the precepts of economic liberalism as part of the antislavery appeal; abolitionists now clearly departed from mercantilist policy assumptions.
One source was the Edinburgh Review tradition, exemplified in antislavery circles by Brougham.
But these ideas were equally powerfully present in reformers of more obvious religious sensibility.
The Quaker Cropper translated those ‘laws which the Creator has fixed in the nature of things’ into a campaign for the superiority of free labour, freer trade and particularly in favour of equalisation of East Indian sugar duties with West Indian in the British market.
The Unitarian William Roscoe was equally in support of economic liberalisation as a way to bring on emancipation.
In terms of an element in their appeal antislavery reformers saw this line of argument as an effort to exploit the material interests of public and policy-makers and even slave-owners and therefore a second order argument only, despite their ability to relate liberal economics to a conception of the natural order of things.
But it was in Cropper's and Roscoe's home town amongst liberal men of religion that agitation of the economic arguments had first substantially begun.
At the time of the new commitment to a national campaign for gradual emancipation, initially understood as compatible with support for Canning's amelioration policy announced in parliament on 15 May 1823, both Cropper and Roscoe in private correspondence adopted the equation between free labour, higher productivity and colonial prosperity.
It was the intellectual or doctrinal basis for antislavery's main economic appeal thereafter.
It soon appeared in public in Cropper's own pamphlet addressed to Wilberforce and in the writing of his and Roscoe's colleague in the Liverpool Anti-Slavery Society, Adam Hodgson.
The interest of Hodgson's argument lay in two things: the pedigree he sketched for his contention about the greater economy and productivity of free labour and the comparative dimension historically and geographically of his argument.
Hodgson wanted to emphasise both the long understood wisdom of his argument — he referred to Pliny as concurring — and the support of some of the best modern minds in Hume, Beattie, Franklin and Brougham.
Comparative land values indicated the superiority of free labour; Steele's Barbados experiment was taken as a success economically as well as morally; evidence comparing hired out slave labour in Virginia with the maintenance of free labour in Pennsylvania indicated the relative cheapness of free labour.
Such inducements to good sense on the part of slaveholders and their political supporters  were underlined by assertions about population increase and rising revenues from the enfranchisement of former serf villages in Poland.
Hodgson believed that the case had been made for an entirely open, competitive labour market in the West Indies.
Resistance by planters was evidence of economic irrationality.
From the point of view of consumers of produce grown by slave labour the advantage was going to be equally clear; supplies of cotton from free-labour sources had begun to enter the British market and were substantially effective in reducing prices.
The point was to get slaveholders to recognise that they would have to adopt ‘the most economical mode of cultivation’.
Leicester abolitionists regarded all of this as ‘classed with the most established maxims of political economy’ while Josiah Conder in a pamphlet bluntly titled Wages or the Whip pointed to what he saw as the disastrous economic effects peculiar to the slave system — exhaustion of the soil, no change in crops cultivated, little rotation, lack of use of livestock and a low level of technology.
These convictions had become sufficiently general amongst antislavery reformers by the mid-1820s that local associations in, for example, Norwich, Beverley, Hull and Whitby all dismissed comprehensively the argument in Cobbett's Register and Blackwood's that labourers in Britain suffered worse material conditions than West Indian slaves.
It was considered self-evident that it was in the general national, indeed imperial, interest to move towards free labour.
Abolitionists did not expect immediate conversion by slaveholders; it was not necessary in so far as they were sure planters could not for long resist the economic imperatives.
It was possible to settle for Canning's amelioration policy which, if it worked properly (and about this there was some scepticism), should itself bring enlightenment to slave-owners as to their own best interests.
This was a position which also continued to express the preference of most abolitionists that government intervention be limited to policy guidelines to be rendered into detailed legislation and implemented by local assemblies and officials except in the Crown Colonies.
But the amelioration policy, filtered through the structures of local government in the West Indies, could only work properly if the case for planters recognising the virtues of a movement towards free labour was urgent.
It was in this context that the Liverpool abolitionists in particular began their campaign for equalising duties in the British market on slave-grown West Indian sugar and free-labour East Indian sugar.
Cropper looked for support from the African Institution for the removal of the West Indians' financial advantage in the sugar trade, privately assuring Zachary Macaulay that the introduction of free-labour sugar was opposed by the planters because they knew it ‘will destroy their System of cultivation, tho’ it can be proved to be the only means of establishing West Indian property on a lasting foundation.
Liverpool abolitionists drew upon Hodgson's investigations in the United States, information from Americans and their own reading in the writings of the political economists to document pamphlet arguments for the equalisation of duties on sugar from free and slave-labour areas.
They claimed substantial effects would follow from the removal of the higher duties on East Indian and Indian sugar and the termination of the 6 shillings per hundredweight bounty paid by Britain to West Indian producers for the export of their surplus to European markets.
The results were predicted to be of two kinds.
Firstly, since free labour was cheaper and more productive than slave labour, East Indian sugar could be sold, if allowed to compete on equal terms, at a lower price than West Indian in both the British and European markets.
This would compel West Indians to produce more economically, and this they could only do by moving towards free labour and engaging the labourers' personal material interests in their work.
Dickson's recommendation of Steele's experiments was seen as an appropriate guide in making the transformation smoothly and fairly rapidly.
If in the process of transition West Indian proprietors experienced temporary losses Cropper was confident that ‘our country will cheerfully grant indemnity’.
Secondly, the opening up of the sugar market was perfectly compatible with an amelioration policy designed to improve slaves' conditions and prepare them to take responsibility for their future freedom.
Lower prices for West Indian sugar, according to American evidence which had been gathered, would encourage the use of more land and slaves in food production; the result would be much better feeding of slaves than under a regime where owners took advantage of artificially high prices for cash crops to maximise profits and imported insufficient food for their labour force.
An increase in the slave population also seemed a likely result of better conditions arising from a redistribution of resources within West Indian economies promoted by market competition.
Davis has indicated the reluctance of the London committee to adopt officially the equalisation policy as a path to emancipation.
It was a policy he presents largely as Cropper's.
The reality was that provincial reformers generally took the ideological initiative away from London on this important point.
What Liverpool abolitionists initially expressed other local associations — in Hull, Norwich and  Leicestershire for example— rapidly adopted.
The London committee's acquiescence in 1825 was in part a mark of the force of provincial abolitionist attitudes.
They were attitudes which permitted no doubt about free-labour sugar driving out the produce of slaves or the consequent steady march towards emancipation through the rigours of the market combined with amelioration.
The gradualist emphasis was explicit and virtually universal up to the mid-1820s.
Mission work to civilise the slaves and the extension of responsibilities to the labourers for their own work were only thought likely to be successful if they were cumulative experiences for the slaves.
Beverley, Chester, Newcastle and Norwich abolitionists all distanced themselves from calls for immediate emancipation.
Beverley and Liverpool reformers in 1824 went to the point of envisaging no substantial changes in the structure of West Indian agriculture with the arrival of emancipation.
Planters could anticipate services from the black population ‘in a better and safe form’ through the conversion of ‘a set of dangerous slaves into useful, industrious labourers’.
Initially after 1823 progress to the proper moral and natural economic order was seen as a gradual, almost automatic business which avoided irreconcilable conflicts.
The insistence that emancipation was in the national interest expressed this.
It was, moreover, a national interest understood as the interest of all.
Slaves were to obtain freedom, missionaries black souls, British consumers cheaper sugar, manufacturers and traders new markets in other sugar producing areas benefiting from the ending of the West Indian monopoly and, did they but realise it, slave-owners themselves were to benefit not only in terms of possible compensation but through being forced to become more efficient and to modernise their operations.
The abolitionist prospectus was one in which everybody gained and nobody lost; conflict was both unnecessary and irrational.
In its combination of sentimental piety and intimations of economic progress the description of the frontispiece to the Sheffield abolitionist volume Negro's Friend (1826) held up the perfect image of success.
Christianity is clearly shown to be both the foundation and the superstructure of the important change.
The sun is arisen and is breaking forth in splendour over the Christian Church (which is founded on a rock) dispersing the clouds of night and illuminating, with his new-born light the benighted land.
A beacon crowns the summit of the highest mountain.
A happy family of  freed negroes occupy the foreground.
The husband and father on his knee is fervently pressing the sacred volume to his lips.
The devout and thankfully expressive countenance of the wife and mother is too admirably depicted to be overlooked or mistaken by anyone as she is occupied with those two most delightful of maternal duties, suckling her infant and teaching her child to pray to God.
The shackles, the whip and the hoe, these emblems of slavery, lie broken and scattered on the ground; while the plough, the sickle and the flail, emblematical of improved and free labour are conspicuously displayed.
The group are shaded and protected by the branches of an aged English oak which, at the same time, embraces and supports a declining West India palm.
A noble vessel leaving the port shews that extended commerce has been the result of the change from slavery to freedom.
The circumstances of the 1820s and early 1830s, however, in two particular respects reminded the abolitionists that not all the elements of the situation could be shaped by them.
The slaves themselves intervened dramatically by rising in revolt in Demerara in 1823 and in Jamaica at the end of 1831 and the beginning of 1832.
Their masters too refused to play their assigned parts; despite some legislation in the islands in accord with Canning's programme, evidence accumulated of slave-owner resistance to the progress of amelioration.
Emancipation was not to arrive without conflict and growing recognition of that truth stimulated a more radical strain in antislavery which took the form of the demand for immediate emancipation.
In the face of slave rebelliousness abolitionists denied that their support of gradual emancipation had anything to do with the Demerara revolt or that ‘rash philanthropy’ had produced slave disorder on earlier occasions in Guadeloupe, St Domingue or Barbados.
Governments which recognised the freedom of former slaves, they argued, had found that they did not abuse it.
Careless talk or dark allegations about the true intent of such moderate measures as the Registry Act by slave-owners themselves in Barbados had brought on the trouble there in 1816.
In the case of Demerara, removal of the slaveholders' symbol of authority, the whip, by government, without adequate attention to the moral education of the slaves, it was implied, vindicated the evolutionary approach of the reformers rather than challenged it.
Speakers at a Beverley antislavery meeting in 1824 did not believe that slaves needed ‘foreign stimulus’ to make them rebel; their own sufferings were sufficient.
Norwich reformers agreed, claiming that amelioration properly carried through made them more long-suffering.
Both local associations pointed unambiguously to slavery itself as the disruptive factor; only with emancipation would ‘a Population of turbulent Slaves [be]converted into one of peaceable Colonists’.
By early 1832 the insurrection in Jamaica had so underlined in many abolitionists' minds the presumption that slavery was the source of social disorder they unambiguously demanded ‘nothing short of the total and immediate Abolition of British Colonial Slavery’.
In fact the growing demand for immediate emancipation had captured organised antislavery at the national level by the spring of 1831.
The rising intensity of immediatism began with Mrs Heyrick's pamphlet of 1824 and developed in step with the conviction that amelioration was being blocked by slave-owners.
Gradualism had failed to secure the collaboration of masters or their agents in educating or providing religious instruction for the slaves.
How long could their own obstruction permit the slave-owners to claim the slaves were unfit for freedom?
By 1830 the speaker at a meeting of Durham abolitionists was part of a formidable chorus when he argued
It was futile to invest him [the slave]with moral dignity while under the weight of slavery…
There was a gulph [sic ]between slavery and freedom which could neither be filled up nor closed over and across which the slave must leap ere he alighted on the other side and found himself a free man.
This amounted to a reversal of the earlier gradualist assumption that a virtually full preparation of slaves for freedom was possible within the structure of slavery.
Only the experience of freedom could now makes slaves fit for it.
The announcement of the success of this conviction within the national antislavery movement came with the establishment of the Agency subcommittee of the Anti-Slavery Society in the spring of 1831.
Its travelling lecturers were required to accept and transmit the proposition that slavery was ‘a crime in the sight of God and ought to be immediately and forever abolished’.
This position appeared to cut through earlier concerns for a smooth transition achieved by education and the inculcation in the slaves of self-reliance.
Liberation, however, did not contradict order.
It was to inaugurate the movement of the freedmen from the private and irresponsible authority of master or steward to proper restraint under judicial power.
The  Agency lecturers, in other words, stressed that the freedmen were to become citizens with responsibilities as well as rights.
The radicals of the Agency committee were as concerned as Buxton in his plea to the slaves on the eve of their emancipation that they ‘by every motive of duty, gratitude and self interest…do their part towards the peaceful termination of their bondage’.
Abolitionists were also therefore demanding direct intervention by the imperial government to end a species of property and override the role of local assemblies with which they had earlier been prepared to collaborate.
This change of outlook was the result of a fusing of perceptions over some years about the character and behaviour of the West Indians as partners in the project of amelioration and gradual emancipation.
The slave-owners had acted in bad faith over amelioration; there were so few exceptions to the ‘state of debauchery and debasement’ of the colonists that reformers were fully justified, they believed, in their condemnation of ‘the present state of corrupted morality and religion in the West Indies’.
Slave-owners of this character, in frustrating gradual reform, had shown ‘language and conduct…such as fall very little short of actual rebellion’.
They had stood out against ‘the general voice of the whole British population’ for emancipation ‘was not a party question; all denominations, whether Whig or Tory, Saint or Radical were united upon this one great point’.
The need for metropolitan government intervention of a swift and direct kind and its ideological justification were contained in this moral and political marginalisation of the West Indians.
Examination of the debate on Buxton's resolutions for gradual emancipation of 15 May 1823, of his resolution for parliament to take up general emancipation of 15 April 1831 (the resolution was interpreted in the debate by other speakers as being immediatist) and, more briefly, of the debate on Stanley's government resolutions for emancipation followed by a period of apprenticeship of 14 May 1833 indicates a clear shift to acceptance of abolitionist assumptions.
The debates also constitute evidence of reformers' realisation of the need politically to isolate the West Indians and an ambivalent attitude to the usefulness of moral condemnation as a way of winning over MPs.
The starting point for the case for gradual emancipation made in 1823, largely by the freeing of children of slaves born after a certain date, was the agreed failure of the expected automatic amelioration of slavery after abolition of the slave trade.
Initially both Baring for the West Indians and Canning for the government tried to limit the effectiveness of the emancipationist case by defining its impulse as  inappropriate for parliament to act upon.
Any measure of change ‘should be dictated by prudence and reason and not by the new lights of enthusiasm and madness’.
Canning equally looked to ‘justice and judgment not impulse and feeling since that is not a ground upon which parliament can be called upon to act’.
The reformers were charged with placing an abstract moralism above the discipline of the historical and present reality of slavery.
Abolitionists underlined their familiar moral attack and claimed the unacceptability of ownership of another human being as the basis for Buxton's wish to free slave children.
William Smith, the veteran Unitarian associate of Wilberforce, in particular introduced a tone of some urgency over the nineteenth century's need to make ‘quicker progress in the annihilation of slavery’.
Buxton proclaimed himself an ‘enthusiast’ and in theory wanted existing slaves freed too.
That was the logic of his moralism, as Canning had pointed out; he met the charge of dealing in moral abstractions by recognising that slavery had damaged its victims and ‘brutalized their minds’.
Existing slaves would have to be carefully prepared for liberation.
Two other features of the 1823 appeal in parliament are to be noted.
Pro-emancipationists indicated their reliance on popular opinion expressed in petitions from the country and went along only reluctantly, and sceptically, with the government's hope for co-operative measures of amelioration by colonial assemblies.
Doubt that the West Indians would do much was widespread amongst parliamentary abolitionists before the experiment even began.
By 1831 the attempt to portray antislavery in parliament as an exercise in abstract moralism was absent.
Buxton, for example, relied on statistical evidence indicating slavery's destructive and freedom's beneficial demographic effects.
He asserted explicitly that he appealed ‘not…to the feelings or the passions of the House but to the stubborn facts, incapable of contradiction’.
He now believed that reference to individual cruelty cases hindered the argument of the cause.
Perhaps he had concluded that the moral argument had been won by antislavery ‘out of doors’ in the country.
By a statesmanlike not an enthusiastic appeal Buxton may have calculated on maximising pressure for policy revision and politically isolating the West Indian interest, believing that they were already on the defensive morally and ideologically.
Certainly by 1831 it was generally supposed on both sides of the Commons that the 1823 approach had failed and that even on its own terms the government was committed to revising its policy.
However to judge by the veteran abolitionist Lushington's intervention in the 1831 debate the powerful demand for immediatism from abolitionists in the country was still somewhat muffled in parliament; he approved of it if understood as, measures immediately brought in now and adopted which might lead to the gradual extinction of slavery'; Buxton had avoided completely talking of immediate emancipation.
What was striking about the instant response to Stanley's emancipation proposals in 1833 was that it came from Howick, until recently in charge, at the Colonial Office, of the emancipation question, and that his strongest dissent arose from the failure of the plan to chart a move as soon as possible directly from slavery to free labour without bothering with an apprenticeship stage.
It was a significant measure of the progress of abolitionist ideology even within the walls of parliament.
The campaign against apprenticeship in 1837–8 required no great dialectical ingenuity or intellectual departures by the abolitionists.
News from missionaries, investigative visits and subsequent writing on the West Indies by Charles Stuart, Joseph Sturge and others provided the kind of detail which permitted attacks on the operation of the system as too little different from slavery to be supported as substantial progress.
In broader ideological terms the Sheffield female abolitionists neatly illustrated the intellectual continuity of the opposition to apprenticeship with the fundamentals of the emancipationist outlook.
They declared their hostility to apprenticeship since they regarded it as a delay in ridding the colonies of slavery.
Only immediate action was appropriate in abolishing a system which infringed divine law.
But if apprenticeship was to work as its devisers hoped it relied upon the interest of freedmen in working for themselves in the time they were allotted and their generosity if their work for their former masters was to be energetic.
Such a situation was inconsistent with the ‘two springs of action which keep the universe in motion —force and incitement ’.
The half-way house of apprenticeship thus accorded neither with God's law nor man's nature.
With the premature end of apprenticeship came abolitionist anticipation of a new era of orderly progress in liberty.
As Birmingham abolitionists expressed it at their celebratory public breakfast in the Town Hall on 2 August 1838, with slaves ‘relying on their own peaceful and persevering efforts for the removal of every vestige of oppression’ and with ‘the continued vigilant aid of the British people, under the blessing of Divine Providence’they foresaw  ‘the progressive development of the glorious results of free institutions and the reconstruction on purer and better principles of the now disorganised elements of colonial society’.
Joseph Sturge, who had assumed a leading part in the fight against apprenticeship, anticipated triumphs on a broader imperial and international scale which would confirm Britain's moral leadership in the world.
He quoted approvingly,
Slaves cannot breathe in England.
If their lungs
Inhale our air, that moment they are free.
They touch our country and their shackles fall!
That's noble and bespeaks a nation proud
And jealous of the blessing.
Spread it, then,
And let it circulate through every vein
Of all your empire, that when Britain's power
Is felt, mankind may feel her mercy too.
The theme of this chapter has been that a great deal of antislavery argument grew out of a fundamental concern for proper order in the world.
Distinct but, from the abolitionist perspective, compatible conceptions of order permeated the reformers' rhetoric; they spoke out of convictions about a moral order sanctioned by Providence and a ‘natural’ order in which Providence was understood through the laws and qualities of God's creation, human, animate and inanimate.
More secular, Enlightenment notions of order harmonised with the idea of natural order, particularly relevantly in the 1820s, in the form of the laws of liberal political economy.
Abolitionists thus aspired to make their actual metropolitan and colonial societies conform more closely to these underlying ideas of order.
Leaving aside antislavery as a convenience for particular interests, an obvious question occurs.
Why did this kind of ideology have sufficient attractions as an appeal or persuasion to inform the language of the many antislavery associations and contribute to widespread popular petitioning against the slave trade and slavery?
The history of antislavery as an ideology coincided in Britain with an era of complex and quite rapid economic, social, cultural and political change.
Such changes generated tensions and ambivalences in society and raised questions about economic and social organisation and its justification; about the quality and character of the relationships between people; about the exercise of power and what kinds of authority were appropriate.
In the broadest sense antislavery took its place with Smithite liberalism and Owenism, democratic radicalism  and anti-Jacobinism as an aspect of a peculiarly intense self-scrutiny by a society conscious of the significant change it was undergoing.
The slave trade and slavery subsumed many of these tensions and ambivalences, giving a focus to the categories of question troubling many English men and women and did so by directing powerful anxieties on to phenomena at some geographical and social distance from most people.
The religious developments sketched in chapter 1 also in part expressed these tensions while providing a framework — without offering simply and divisively political answers — within which anxieties expressed through the issues of the slave trade and slavery could be handled.
The idea of an underlying providential moral or natural order which the earthly order of things should attempt to express, it may be supposed, demonstrated the need for change while offering security and assurance about its legitimacy.
At a time of flux, antislavery struck an ideological balance between mere stasis and the sensed need to overcome a loss of control.
It offered itself also as an ideology of movement against aspects — abolitionists feared and hoped symptomatic aspects — of the established system of the later eighteenth and earlier nineteenth centuries without requiring confrontation with the central features of the metropolitan order.
This may well have provided relief and reassurance to those many antislavery people who were at the respectable fringes rather than the centre of religious, social and political power as well as for different and obvious reasons those who were closer to the centre.
As an ideology of movement antislavery proposed a purification of social morality and socially ordained authority on the assumption that the result would be more stable.
The dangers of both divine wrath and colonial disruption would be diminished.
Antislavery ideology in its economic features may have been an attractive persuasion for paradoxical reasons.
It offered opportunities for the reception and use of the precepts of economic liberalism and thus a break from intellectually old-fashioned mercantilist conceptions of public policy.
It absorbed and demonstrated the relevance of a particularly modern , even insurgent, current of thought; it combined the seductiveness of the intellectually advanced with the supposed certainty of prosperous results.
At the same time, however, liberal political economy in its antislavery guise sought to maintain the link between private motives and public consequences, to check the anxiety arising from perceptions of the divorce between morality and economic development in the era of  industrialisation .
Finally, antislavery promised change which was compatible with, indeed directed towards, the protection and enhancement of the homogeneity, security and strength of the Empire when Britain had to undergo the potentially difficult adjustment to the loss of most of the Old Empire and the crises of the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars with their domestic impact.
Thereafter, as the British recognised their predominant position in the world, antislavery laid claim to putting moral fibre into the exercise of international power and in doing so promised to help sustain that predominance by prescribing as fundamental features of other societies forms of commerce and labour in accord with British values.
MAKING ABOLITIONISTS
Engaging with the world
Like other movements to bring about change in the same period antislavery had to find ways of attracting the attention and gaining the support of those who could advance the cause.
Beginning with efforts to rid Britain herself of slaves, traversing the abolition and emancipation campaigns and the less dramatic struggle to suppress the international trade in slaves and assist liberation in foreign countries, British abolitionists had an exceptionally long history as reformers.
They were compelled to consider the most appropriate forms of action in changing circumstances and practise a great variety of methods to engage the commitment of potential supporters and of both makers and executors of policy.
There are several main questions which have shaped the analysis of antislavery activity in this chapter.
To what extent were the forms of antislavery activity developed in struggle with the organisation and institutional structures of the West Indian interest; did the forms change according to changing objectives?
What was the relationship between different reformers' conceptions of how to bring about change and the methods adopted by the antislavery movement?
How willing were abolitionists to challenge both the accepted ways of acting publicly and by whom the action should be undertaken?
How best is the recurrent tension in the antislavery movement between what will be termed ‘agitation’ and ‘influence’to be understood?
Does the history of antislavery reflect the progressive adoption of more popular forms on social and political activity in accord with a changing balance of forces within the larger culture of nineteenth-century England?
This last problem particularly requires discussion of the recent contention that antislavery petitioning demonstrated a recurrent popular mobilisation, a mass antislavery latent even in seemingly quiescent years which spearheaded dramatic changes in the political culture and had a direct impact on legislature and executive.
It is appropriate to begin with the forms of propaganda adopted to convey the particular arguments and the broader ideological perspectives analysed in the last chapter.
According to Walvin the Anti-Slavery Society alone published nearly 3 million copies of tracts in the campaigning years 1823–31.
Other tracts, printed speeches and sermons and local publications by antislavery bodies in those years and earlier added to the vast quantity of printed material.
Earlier, in the 1780s, antislavery arguments appeared in newspapers and sometimes, as in the case of Thomas Cooper's Letters on the Slave Trade (1787), were republished as a pamphlet, in the Cooper example at the urging and expense of ‘some Gentlemen’, to allow wider, because free, distribution.
In turn Zachary Macaulay's Negro Slavery (1823) was extracted by Clarkson for East Anglian papers and both papers and pamphlet were made locally available.
‘We have three well-frequented news and reading rooms at Ipswich, and every one of these has a ‘’ Negro Slavery'' also.’
In the 1820s, as well as having pamphlets and papers produced under its aegis, the Anti-Slavery Society adopted the writings of other abolitionists if the committee on publications approved the content.
Thus the Liverpool pamphlets of Hodgson and Cropper discussed in chapter 2 received the sanction of the national antislavery body.
Particularly when petitions were being raised in the country large quantities of pamphlets and other printed material were sent out to local activists to help mobilise opinion.
In 1823, in the weeks before Buxton's parliamentary motion of 15 May, material went to ‘38 counties in England, Edinburgh & Glasgow, Dublin & Belfast, Neath for S. Wales’.
The reciprocal relationship between pamphlet and newspaper insertion was only one way in which reformers used both the London and provincial press.
On his early anti-slave trade tours Clarkson secured the support, for example, of William Cowdray, editor of the Chester Chronicle whose readership spread into east and north-east Wales as well as Cheshire.
To take a London example, in 1832 the Tourist became the mouthpiece of the Agency committee.
By the late summer of 1831 so crucial did regular sympathetic treatment in the metropolitan press seem to Thomas Pringle, secretary of the Anti-Slavery Society, that he discussed a plan with provincial abolitionists for the purchase of a part share in the Morning Herald which would also be distributed to country subscribers.
At the point when abolitionists turned to making the emancipation issue a mass campaign they published their own news-sheet, the Anti-Slavery Monthly Reporter (1825–30), followed by the Anti-Slavery  Reporter (1830–3) and thereafter the mark of an antislavery organisation with claims to national standing was a paper of this kind.
Such papers as the Reporter , and the British Emancipator were in part intended to win abolitionists for the emancipation and anti-apprenticeship campaigns.
Ipswich abolitionists in 1828 circulated bound copies of the Reporter .
Allying with the denominational press at the end of 1829 the Anti-Slavery Society allowed copies of the Reporter to be stitched under the cover of the Baptist Magazine .
But the specialist papers were also ‘house’ journals, increasingly so as active antislavery subsided in the 1840s and 1850s.
The British and Foreign Anti-Slavery Reporter in those decades must have been dull or impenetrable to all but the dwindling band of initiates.
There were modest alternatives available to an antislavery readership but they either propounded the outlook of a minority tendency as did the Anti-Slavery Advocate , edited by the Irish Garrisonian Richard Webb in the 1850s, or had a predominantly local circulation as was likely with the short-lived Anti-Slavery Watchman of Manchester produced by the Garrisonian group around George Thompson and his son-in-law F. W. Chesson, or propounded a particular remedy for slavery in the case of the Quaker Richardson family in Newcastle through the Slave 's stress on the free produce movement.
At a more sophisticated level of writing, antislavery was able to infiltrate the pages of the Edinburgh Review through Henry Brougham's own contributions and his influence with Francis Jeffrey.
Similarly, the Westminster Review under the sympathetic direction of T. Perronet Thompson provided space.
These prestigious locations for antislavery discussion were also one way of internationalising the argument.
The circulation of the great reviews in the United States included the South and their antislavery content was welcomed as a boost to their cause by American abolitionists.
As to the involvement of various European states in the international slave trade the old Quaker campaigner, George Harrison, proclaimed the possibilities of inserting material in the foreign press since ‘The Freedom of the Press, now in good Degree established, affords the Opportunity.’
It was subscriptions from Friends through the Committee for Sufferings which contributed substantially to funding propaganda efforts in Europe in the 1820s and 1830s including the translation of existing materials into various languages and the production of new items for European readers.
There was also a belief in the antislavery movement that images were a particularly striking form of propaganda.
Drescher has not  the pervasiveness of Wedgwood's image of the kneeling slave, first designed for a medallion at the time of the 1788 petition campaign but afterwards widely translated to other formats.
The plan of a slave ship issued by Clarkson was also extensively taken up and became an antislavery print.
Its effect was remembered well into the nineteenth century in Birmingham; at that later time the campaigners against apprenticeship in the West Indies reproduced and distributed a magazine plate of a Jamaican treadmill on which apprentices were employed, in the conviction that pictorial representations have a far more powerful influence on the mind than letter press descriptions'.
Large-scale deployment of the printed word and the image was such a powerful feature of the culture of antislavery because reformers could exploit technical developments and geographical expansion in printing, tendencies to specialisation in publishing and the establishment of a coherent national distribution network for books and pamphlets.
All of these took place on the eve of or during the decades of greatest activity in antislavery.
In the early nineteenth century a number of different iron hand presses reached a sufficient stage of development for widespread application in the printing of books and required no great skill or preparation in their use.
Mechanised steam-powered presses, beginning with The Times in 1814, contributed to the expansion of newspaper printing in the 1820s and 1830s and had spread to book printing by the 1850s.
These changes roughly coincided with the progressive mechanisation of paper-making.
Equally important for the print culture of antislavery was the considerable expansion, judged on conservative criteria, in provincial printing presses in the second half of the eighteenth century.
Mitchell has calculated that on average in the 1760s two new towns per year appeared as the source of printed material and that this had grown to an average of seven per year in the 1790s.
Conditions were thus ripe by the height of the emancipation campaign in the late 1820s and early 1830s for the cheap and rapid production of vast quantities of antislavery material and for the expansion and relative cheapness — and consequent probable expansion in readership — of newspapers.
Historians of publishing have also detected some tendency towards specialisation amongst publishers by the 1780s and 1790s and this may have helped the appearance of antislavery writing.
Certainly Johnson of St Paul's Yard, who published antislavery items at the end of the eighteenth century, specialised in liberal and dissenting publications and probably saw antislavery writing in this context.
Calculations based on antislavery titles published year by year in  Britain from 1781, with information on places of publication, offer support to the view that the conditions discussed above are relevant to antislavery's print culture.
The rhythm of publication of antislavery titles is one which matches quite closely parliamentary initiatives, petitioning and some other activities on slavery.
There was a clustering of publication in 1788 and 1789, 1791 and 1792, a lower peak in 1807, a high level of titles between 1823 and 1833 (though with relative dips in 1827 and 1829 and 1831 and 1832), quite high peaks in 1838, 1840 and 1848.
The years picked out up to 1833 reflect fluctuation in the ‘popular’ aspect of abolitionist and emancipationist activity.
1838 coincided with the culmination of the anti-apprenticeship campaign, 1840 with the first World Anti-Slavery Convention in London and 1848 with the high point of the controversy over whether to maintain the West African naval squadron as the main instrument of slave trade suppression.
These correspondences indicate the rapidity with which writers and compilers but also printers and publishers were able to respond to developing events.
During most, but not all, of the years of high levels of antislavery publication a significant proportion of titles (50 per cent in some years) were published in provincial towns or in the provinces and London at the same time.
The later eighteenth century also marks the appearance of national advertising of books and pamphlets through the press and the fixing of a pattern of nationwide distribution through provincial booksellers.
This was a system abolitionists used in the early 1800s.
It seems however to have been supplemented by more informal methods.
We know that Olaudah Equiano spread successive printings of his autobiography after its first publication in 1789 by selling them with antislavery as well as personal benefit in mind to his audiences after meetings.
Clarkson sold some of his writings, including his history of abolition, through a system of subscriptions raised by acquaintances in religious networks, particularly Quakers.
Finally, the national network of antislavery societies auxiliary to the London body which covered the country during the emancipation and apprenticeship campaigns provided channels for pamphlets, prints and papers.
Whatever the methods of distribution and sale were, the evidence on who were the intended recipients of printed antislavery arguments suggests that further distinctions as to types of material and their immediate purposes are necessary.
Printed materials published or distributed to accompany petitioning campaigns, in 1792 and 1823–4 for example, were clearly in the first instance intended to produce as  many petition signatures as possible; the mass of petitions was to be the weight behind the parliamentary initiatives of Wilberforce and Buxton.
General statements of the antislavery case particularly suited this purpose.
Zachary Macaulay's 1823 pamphlet,Negro Slavery , was a good example.
However, from the issue of the 1783 Quaker protest onwards abolitionists sent some of their material directly to persons of influence; in the Quaker case members of the royal family, the principal officers of state and members of both Houses of Parliament.
In 1784 the Friends extended the distribution to people of influence throughout the nation, defined particularly as JPs, clergymen, members of corporations and ‘merchants concerned in the West India and Guinea trades’.
Just as there was no absolute separation of the rhetoric of appeal directed to the country as compared with parliament but some differences of emphasis, so printed material circulated to decision-makers, without ignoring humanity and justice, probably relied more on evidence drawn from Privy Council and parliamentary investigations and focused on questions of national interest and economic benefit.
In post-emancipation international appeals on the slave trade and foreign slavery, issues over which the British government had little, and British abolitionists no direct leverage, circulations were either in the form of general pieties to political leaders signed by such venerable reformers as Clarkson or Christian appeals from antislavery corporate religious bodies to similar organisations, particularly in the 1830s and 1840s to the United States.
print propaganda aimed then to stimulate ‘agitation’ in the hope of shaping or sustaining antislavery public policies ‘by a loud, strong and solemn expression of the public opinion’and establish direct ‘influence’with individuals who exercised power and authority.
In the phases of large-scale antislavery mobilisation within Britain these two purposes were pursued simultaneously, though sometimes using different printed materials.
Beset by relative impotence in the international arena only rarely could abolitionists provide sustenance from ‘agitation’ for antislavery diplomacy or politics as when the 1814 petitions were seen as support for Castlereagh's negotiations on suppressing the transatlantic slave trade at the peace congress.
And on that occasion print propaganda appears to have played only a minor part.
The previous chapter argued that the ideological terms of antislavery were developed in part through contesting a pro-West Indian intellectual barrage, often presented in the rhetoric of national and  imperial interest.
Similarly, an analysis of the organisational and institutional forms adopted by the West Indians and the abolitionists reveals how strikingly they mirrored each other.
Most of the forms of publicity through print discussed in the first section of this chapter were taken up by the West Indians.
Much of their machinery of print propaganda was organised centrally through the West India Committee.
This body originated in an organisational fusion of West India merchant and planter groups in 1775 to face the difficulties posed for traders and producers by the American War of Independence.
The threats of abolition and then emancipation maintained a united West Indian front.
Particularly in 1792–3 and from 1823 onwards, the West India Committee organised and co-ordinated defence and counterattack against the abolition and emancipation campaigns.
They conducted propaganda war through a slave trade subcommittee which spent £2,000 on propaganda in 1792–3, and in 1823 a literary subcommittee, with £1,000 initially to fund favourable articles and pamphlets.
The London-based committee was in contact with ministers, tried hard to persuade the island legislatures to initiate measures of amelioration to make the West Indian position more tenable in British eyes and managed to raise some petitions on slavery's behalf, though few compared with the abolitionist flood.
This pattern of organisation and activity was connected to West India groups in some of the outports.
The Liverpool West Indian and African traders were especially well organised through a committee which instructed Liverpool delegates giving evidence before parliamentary and Privy Council committees, dominated the common council and mayor's office in Liverpool and, by means of local government, funded propaganda and maintained a stream of pro-slave trade petitions.
With the exception of William Roscoe's brief election to the Commons for 1806–7, West Indians also controlled Liverpool's parliamentary representation.
The local MPs formed part of a visible West India group in the Commons throughout the abolition and emancipation periods.
On fairly conservative criteria this parliamentary force numbered perhaps thirty-five in the first half of the 1790s, twenty in 1806 and between thirty-five and sixty in the parliaments from 1812 to 1831, dropping to about thirty in the reformed parliament of 1832.
In addition the upper house seems to have contained a little over thirty peers with West Indian connections in the crucial dozen years after 1821.
The West Indians were alert to any erosion of their parliamentary position even at a time when the principle of maintaining slavery was virtually lost.
In late August  1832 the West India Merchants' Committee still attacked as thoroughly improper the abolitionist practice of pledging parliamentary candidates to immediate emancipation and publishing pledge lists in the first post-reform election.
This system of national, local and parliamentary organisation wielded by the West Indians both provoked and was a response to a structure with many similarities developed by the abolitionists.
The reformers established a succession of central bodies claiming national leadership and co-ordination of the cause and adjacent to political power in London; the Abolition Committee (1787), the African Institution (1807), the Society for the Mitigation and Gradual Abolition of Slavery throughout the British Dominions (the Anti-Slavery Society, 1823), the British and Foreign Society for the Universal Abolition of Negro Slavery and the Slave Trade (the successor to the Agency committee from 1834), the Central Negro Emancipation Committee (1837) and the British and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society (1839).
However, while the condition of struggle with the West Indians remained a constant, at least until 1838, in providing a rationale for national organisations, how they were conceived as operating at various times, and even at the same time by different reformers, varied significantly.
All could agree on the need to secure appropriate action from parliament and government, but how far this required agitation of mass support at different times and how much deference should be paid to the judgement and tactics of parliamentary abolitionists were points of tension both early and late within antislavery.
In June 1788 Clarkson proposed that the London committee promote widespread agitation through forming local committees.
He may have been influenced by the views of the parliamentary reformer Major Cartwright who at this time was on an organisational subcommittee.
In the same spirit the main committee intended a general meeting in London against the trade.
On both of these Wilberforce intervened to modify the idea of local committees and to have the public meeting abandoned.
‘He desired to appeal to the moral feelings of the nation and approved therefore of promoting petitions to parliament; but he distrusted and disowned the questionable strength which might be gained by systematic agitation.’
As an insider, sensitive to MPs' sense of their own constitutional centrality, Wilberforce wanted to avoid causing offence to them.
He approved of Clarkson's travels to secure witnesses for the Privy Council hearings but not as a focus for popular agitation.
By the autumn of 1788 a  number of local committees were established but the process seems not to have seriously breached Wilberforce's guidelines.
In the next few years, however, as later discussion on petitioning will demonstrate (pp.63–7), there emerged in practice a dialectical relationship between ‘agitation’ and ‘influence’, ‘pressure from without’and ‘manoeuvre within'.
With the achievement of abolition in 1806 and 1807 the new objective of the national antislavery organisation, the African Institution, was essentially consolidation of the victory achieved, best advanced by a different balance of methods.
In trying to expand legitimate commerce with Africa so as to provide an attractive alternative for both Africans and European traders to slaving, the African Institution proposed spreading information about African products and making communication easier by establishing written versions of African languages.
Securing the suppression of the foreign slave trade might be achieved in part in wartime by naval power but otherwise was mainly seen as requiring lobbying of and consultation with ministers, communicating with British diplomats and naval commanders for information and to provide stimulus to intervention in particular cases and pressing arguments upon foreign leaders, particularly during the Congress phase of European diplomacy in the years following the defeat of Napoleon.
Striving for influence almost submerged the dialectic of influence and agitation except for the one brief but massive burst of petitioning in 1814 on suppression of the international slave trade.
It was an episode which showed that the conviction of the virtuous power of public opinion had become firmly fixed in the antislavery movement and it provided the source of growing unease about the African Institution by the early 1820s.
Both Buxton and Wilberforce deplored its relative ineffectiveness and inactivity.
Buxton believed that it had lost the confidence and interest of the country because of its practice of negotiating secretly with ministers instead of acting in the open.
The result was that people cared little about slavery.
From this perspective the establishment of a new national Anti-Slavery Society in 1823 proposed a renewed dialectic of agitation and influence, pressure from without and manoeuvre within, extra-parliamentary movement and parliamentary tactics.
It was thus necessary to reanimate local antislavery societies, renew the propaganda war, and once more undertake large-scale petitioning.
Yet even within this dialectic in the decade after 1823 the balance of methods was a source of tension.
How publicly should emissaries  from the national body be encouraged to set up local associations?
Were the London committee and its parliamentary spokesmen showing enough urgency by the early 1830s?
What role should travelling lecturers play in mobilising popular support?
Were they a challenge or complement to parliamentary leaders?
This was the source of the divergence between some of the old committee of the Anti-Slavery Society and the Agency committee.
Emancipation brought the apprenticeship system in the majority of the West Indian territories but, until its operation began to cause ripples of concern in 1835, a mood of satisfaction prevailed amongst many reformers.
As in the aftermath of abolition there were signs of a consolidationist’ outlook at least amongst some of the older generation of reformers and those parliamentarians like Buxton who felt bound to support the legislative compromise solution of 1833.
Clarkson saw the model of the African Institution in these circumstances remaining relevant.
A new national organisation he believed should be on a smaller and more economical scale than required by the struggle up to 1833; functioning as a watchdog over legislation and supplying information to ministers and public its style had to be ‘very prudent and discreet’.
It was clear that Clarkson wanted a fresh start in a style distant from the Agency campaign discussed below (p.62).
By contrast members of that younger and more ‘populist’ group of abolitionists envisaged addressing the universal abolition of slavery through the British and Foreign Society for the Universal Abolition of Slavery and the Slave Trade — reorganised from the Agency in March 1834 — and more permanently with the British and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society (BFASS).
Their methods were to be essentially agitational — employing lectures, insertions in the daily press, travelling agitators in foreign parts and a campaign of publishing.
And in practice, when the issue of ending apprenticeship became more urgent, it was a revival of antislavery mobilisation in the country which was most striking — with publications, local organisation and intervention in parliamentary elections.
The shift in balance in the style of operation embodied in the anti-apprenticeship campaign was revealed in the gathering of a conference of antislavery delegates from around the country in London in November 1837 and their appointment of a Central Negro Emancipation Committee drawn from activists able to be permanently or frequently in London.
This reversal of earlier antislavery history in which London-based committees had sought to mobilise the provinces from their self-anointed  positions of leadership was a sign that an aroused antislavery public expected its demands to override tendencies to parliamentary compromise and to render manoeuvre within virtually irrelevant.
From 1838 onwards the discipline imposed by struggle with the West Indian enemy inside the British political system largely disappeared.
As abolitionist ambitions widened in geographical scope the ability of reformers to effect them declined in respect both to an informed public opinion able to be mobilised and on finding policies which could bring results through the use of practical methods.
These turned out to be the basic difficulties facing the BFASS in the 1840s and 1850s.
Such a different environment for antislavery work gave different meanings to bodies which claimed national antislavery status.
Within Britain, with the unifying factor of a common West Indian opponent gone, one function of antislavery organisation was to make a competitive claim against other tendencies within antislavery to be the true legatees of a triumphant cause.
Sturgeites in the BFASS, Buxton's supporters in the Society for the Extinction of the Slave Trade and for the Civilization of Africa (the ‘Civilization Society’, 1839–43) and British Garrisonians in the British India Society and the Anti-Slavery League all made gestures towards identifying their different preoccupations as legitimate developments in new circumstances of antislavery in its most successful period.
Struggle for the sanction of the aged Clarkson was one indication of this.
Claims to leadership of national antislavery opinion also involved hopes of influencing British government policy where it might make a difference — for example, in negotiations over the continuing problem of slave trade suppression and on particular issues such as American fugitive slaves in British territories or terms for British recognition of the independence of Texas.
Even though active support for antislavery organisations declined after 1840, leaders of abolitionist organisations wanted to be recognised as speaking for a reflexive, if latent, antislavery sentiment.
An interim conclusion is now possible from the discussion of national antislavery organisations.
In the half-century between 1787 and 1838 the overall organisational and institutional forms of antislavery were powerfully shaped by the need for meeting the propaganda and political challenge of the West India interest.
At the height of abolitionist and emancipationist campaigns this involved a mutually reinforcing relationship between ‘agitation’ and ‘influence’, popular mobilisation and political manoeuvre, an extra-parliamentary movement and parliamentary initiative and tactics.
But the  organisational and institutional history of antislavery at this level does not demonstrate any simple linear development culminating in an open,, democratic' style of operation.
The movement recurrently exemplified conflict typical of the wider political culture between more and less ‘open’ styles.
This was a matter both of the outlook of individuals and groups and the product of periodic reassessments by abolitionists of both circumstances and objectives and therefore of the most appropriate forms of activity.
Here is an explanation of the differences between 1792 and the methods of resumption of abolitionism in 1804; the ‘consolidationist’ priorities and methods after 1807; even in part the divergences of 1831–2.
Ultimately however there did emerge an asymmetry in activity between West Indians and abolitionists glimpsed by the West India Committee at the beginning of the emancipationist campaign.
‘[They]act upon a more extensive system and with greater means of influence upon the public mind.’
But abolitionists did not reach that position along a single straight path.
Refinement of interim conclusions based on national antislavery organisation will concentrate first on the elements of agitation in winning over support to antislavery by paying attention to local antislavery committees or societies, types of antislavery meeting and petitioning.
Whether the conception and practice of antislavery organisation and methods expanded resources for change in English political culture should then become clearer.
The following section will then analyse the practice of ‘influence’ in relation to the electoral process, parliament and executive.
Local committees or associations fluctuated drastically in numbers in different periods of antislavery history despite the proclamation of the Liverpool society in 1823 that ‘the present age’, in making the organisational discovery of the local philanthropic or reform association, had made the era noteworthy ‘for the rapid and surprising improvement which has taken place in the moral character and disposition of mankind’.
Local abolition committees spread in 1788 prompted by Clarkson's visits and perhaps by the Manchester committee's circular letter to other towns.
They worked up petitions to parliament while engaging in some correspondence with each other.
These procedures were even more extensive by the time of the petition campaign of 1792.
The culmination of abolition in 1806 and 1807 was much less marked by local committee activity and the African Institution did not expend great efforts on recreating or maintaining a national network of local groups.
A few were deliberately  encouraged, but only where they could further the Institution's watchdog' function.
In 1809 Clarkson went to Liverpool to promote a local committee under William Roscoe's leadership to monitor the observance of the slave trade law in the largest former slaving port.
Similar committees in Bristol and London appear to have been established.
But only with the opening of the emancipationist campaign in the 1820s did local societies again become a major organisational feature of antislavery.
During the course of his national lecture tour to promote petitions in 1823–4 Clarkson assisted in the foundation of about 200 local groups.
That number had risen, according to George Stephen, as a result of the efficiency of the Agency committee system of itinerant lecturers, to 1,300 by the summer of 1832.
The achievement of emancipation from 1 August 1834 clearly indicated final victory to many abolitionists and many local auxiliaries of the Anti-Slavery Society stood down, even as George Thompson who had been an Agency lecturer helped the establishment of new auxiliaries in the mid-1830s in pursuit of universal abolition.
There were signs of reluctance to take seriously the need for revival of activity at the local level to overthrow apprenticeship before its due term under the act of 1833.
Some of this was the product of the growing identification nationally of antislavery with political liberalism and thus fear, as in the case of Canterbury, of seeming to be ‘acting from party feeling only’.
But by 1837 local groups were active again in working against apprenticeship.
The most zealous founders of the BFASS in 1839 were amongst those who had worked hardest to revitalise the local society network in the mid-1830s and so Joseph Sturge, John Scoble and the Quaker banker George Alexander toured areas of the country in 1839–40 to give the new national body the support of auxiliaries consciously orientated to universal abolition.
The truth is, however, that it was much more difficult to maintain interest and organisation in the country for this purpose than for British abolition and emancipation.
In total no more than a few dozen local groups existed at different times in the 1840s and 1850s.
Within this much smaller number of local societies several — notably Glasgow, the Hibernian in Dublin and later the Bristol and Clifton Ladies — repudiated any auxiliary status to the BFASS.
This outbreak of local and regional autonomy appears to have had its origin in hostility to compensated emancipation and the temporary vacuum in effective national leadership in the mid-1830s.
It was strengthened by the impact of American abolitionist divisions in Britain in the 1840s.
Even in the periods of local committee or society expansion, although the groups were intended to draw in supporters to the cause, their operation did not provide unambiguous evidence of the politics of popular mobilisation.
It is clear from Clarkson's History that in the early years of the anti-slave trade agitation local organisations were established through existing religious networks (an example would be the Quaker Lloyds in Birmingham) or contact by Clarkson or others with a small group of prominent individuals who already had an interest in the issue.
On occasion these contacts were accompanied by quasi-public events like Clarkson's antislavery sermon in Manchester at the end of 1787, but by no means invariably.
In the expansive period post-1823 some local groups paid due heed to rank and influence in society; Beverley, for example, had different levels of subscription and those prepared and able to provide a sizeable financial stake were guaranteed additional influence: ‘Subscribers of 10s.6d. and upwards shall be of the Acting Committee of the said Association’.
The Swansea and Neath association announced its social respectability in its president, the Marquess of Bute, and a roster of vice-presidents entirely aristocratic, gentry, and wealthy businessman in character.
Abolitionists assumed that social deference could be a valuable impulse to support for reform.
More striking is evidence of reluctance by local groups to launch out into direct engagement with the public in open meetings.
The Swansea and Neath Society was founded in December 1822 but made no appeal through a public meeting until January 1826; the Manchester Society, although becoming active at the beginning of 1824, issued no report to the public until March 1827 and had only had its first public meeting on 22 March 1826.
It was this sort of situation the Agency committee had in mind in justifying its activities because ‘provincial associations have become inert and inefficient’ with the result that local groups concluded ‘their own individual exertions were too little sustained by those of similar bodies elsewhere to be of real utility’.
It was to break through this impression that Agency lecturers began to address large meetings and out of a groundswell of popular conviction produce affiliated societies of which George Stephen claimed ‘all were well disciplined and eager for work’.
The attitude to public meetings by local antislavery organisations was one test of how seriously reformers tried to mobilise popular opinion.
However, since not all antislavery public meetings were under the aegis of local societies or linked to their establishment, the fact that some abolitionist groups were chary of a ‘populist’ style of  activity before the early 1830s does not exclude democratic implications from all antislavery usages of meetings.
Moreover, the significance of public meetings in the late eighteenth and earlier nineteenth centuries differed according to both their type and the changing general political context.
Some early petitions in 1788 to the Commons on the slave trade came from county meetings held in customary county meeting places.
At these gatherings only freeholders (including gentry and clergy) were allowed to speak and vote; they were usually summoned by the sheriff on the application of a number of freeholders and the county members might often attend.
These meetings had a constitutional if non-statutory status and their use by abolitionists, far from opening the democratic floodgates, put the authority of precedent and the county elites behind them.
Some other meetings in 1788 in corporate towns extended beyond local officials but were not open and general; yet other gatherings were restricted to membership of particular denominations.
Drescher, however, has demonstrated that there were at least twenty-seven public meetings for anti-slave trade petitioning in 1788.
By 1792 the general, public character of antislavery meetings for petitioning was evident even though, according to Clarkson, efforts were made to prevent public meetings in some places.
However, 1792 did not establish for all time antislavery as a movement of popular mobilisation demonstrated in the use of general public meetings.
Even at that point such meetings were touched by the rumbling fear of the authorities of political disorder; after all, as recently as 1779–80 such a hallowed institution as the county meeting had provided the basis for a powerful, though short-lived, movement for political reform under Wyvill's leadership.
By 1794–5 democratic radicals were using public meetings against the war and domestic social crisis in such a way as to constitute in the eyes of the authorities ‘tumultuous petitioning’ and potentially seditious attempts to coerce parliament.
Abolitionists had to face the fact that for many of their fellow countrymen during the next thirty years open public meetings continued to have this resonance.
In the abolition efforts of 1805–7, rousing support deliberately excluded the use of public meetings in both London and the provinces.
The African Institution dealt in business ‘which Parliamentary men alone could manage’ and this did little ‘in the way of creating or organizing public feeling’by meetings or other means.
Davis has noted the unease as late as the mid-1820s of some members of the committee of the Anti-Slavery Society over Cropper's desire to see public meetings addressed by travelling agents  because of the association of such methods with other, divisive reform causes.
In deference to these views Cropper seems to have met groups of ‘influential citizens’ and spoken to clearly defined religious gatherings.
Only in the later 1820s is there clear evidence not only of the pursuit of mass public meetings, as at Liverpool in April 1828, but collaboration in setting up similar meetings in other major centres.
Liverpool and Birmingham, Cropper and Sturge, worked together through these meetings (2,000 at Liverpool) to ‘have a powerful effect on Parliament and they must do their duty’.
Logically, these two provincial Quaker activists were foremost in support of the Agency committee in 1831.
The enthusiastic embrace of large-scale public meetings came from the ‘Young England’ abolitionists engaged in the Agency campaign.
In the previous chapter (p.41) it was argued that this was the period when a major ideological stress of antislavery was its embodiment of the national interest across class and denomination, and such meetings offered dramatic demonstration of aristocratic support (the Duke of Bedford at Woburn), ‘the elite of the town, churchmen and dissenters’(at Dunstable) and caught up audiences, already stirred by ‘an intensity of feeling on the fate of the Reform Bill’, into an almost equally excited interest in emancipation.
The lecturers' meetings became a form of theatre as they encouraged opposition the better to silence it before the expectant crowd.
In the post-Reform Act atmosphere of an impending election the large antislavery meeting could become a collective expression of anticipated triumph.
In Sheffield in July 1832 George Thompson wrote of speaking before ‘Montgomery the Poet — also before Buckingham who is perhaps the most accomplished lecturer of the day — also all the four candidates for the representation of the Town and a fearful array of parsons of all denominations and critics of every grade.
Yet was my success triumphant.’
The unqualified use of the public meeting in the later stages of the emancipation campaign was the product both of an urgency amongst primarily a younger generation of abolitionists and a changed political context.
The campaign for parliamentary reform had drawn the population in, in part through great reform meetings.
Abolitionists were no longer exposed in their use of public meetings; indeed, compared with the disorder which sometimes accompanied agitation for parliamentary reform, large antislavery meetings were able to project the eminent respectability which could be attained by popular reform enterprise.
These developments also reveal a basic change in the conception of  the travelling agent whose existence went back in some form to the beginning of organised antislavery in the 1780s.
Both members of the London Anti-Slavery committee and some of the Liverpool abolitionists who encountered him were doubtful about Clarkson's attitudes and methods in gathering information from participants in the African slave trade.
Currie in particular stressed the need for respectable sources rather than, the lowest class of seamen'; impartial enquiry, the need to find the truth, required informants of integrity.
Encouragement of such careful discrimination was perhaps also reflected in agent Clarkson's other main function in the late 1780s — the establishment of local committees through consultation with influential individuals in communities.
When Clarkson and Cropper in the 1820s once again set about gathering evidence they were more strongly aware that they were fighting a war.
Abolitionists saw themselves less as seekers after impartial truth than partisans whose gathering of facts was defined in military metaphor as ‘a Corps de Reserve against the hottest of the Battle’.
The agents or lecturers became not only dramatic figures in the theatre of the public meeting but combatants, for example on the occasions when Thompson and some colleagues debated the West Indian Peter Borthwick and associates at Glasgow in 1833 and in 1836 the American defender of slavery, Breckinridge.
Both the activities of local antislavery associations and public meetings engendered petitions and the recurrent presentation of large numbers of them to parliament was a striking feature of antislavery history.
There is no doubt that they played a major part in maintaining interest in abolition and emancipation through different phases of antislavery.
They were also an important link between agitation out of doors and influence within the walls of parliament.
Until the restrictions of the 1830s presentation of petitions guaranteed MPs opportunities to raise the grievances on the floor of the House before the business of the day.
The phenomenal rise in antislavery petitions is now widely appreciated: from 102 in 1788 to 519 in 1792, over 800 in 1814 and repeated waves of hundreds virtually every parliamentary session from 1823 onwards, culminating in over 5,000 at the climax of the emancipation campaign in 1833.
Petitioning remained a weapon of agitation against the apprenticeship system up to 1838.
Seymour Drescher's work has recently sought to underline the significance of petitioning by comparison with its role in French antislavery and as a high  proportion of all petitions to the British parliament in particular years.
It is clear that in 1788–92, then in 1823–33 and, with some uncertainty in various localities, up to 1838 petitioning expanded concern with the slave trade, slavery and apprenticeship.
Petitioning grew with local antislavery organisations, circulation of massive amounts of literature and the ideological acceptance of emancipation as a matter of national interest and a component of national identity.
Yet there is a danger of reading too much into petitioning unless it is given a firm context.
Though antislavery petitioning was a very prominent element of parliamentary petitioning in the years mentioned above, they were years in which petitioning as a habit grew remarkably.
Petitions did not begin simply to be pressed on parliament in large numbers on a few issues; the range of grievances expanded in petitioning.
The annual average of petitions in 1785–9 was 176 and rose in 1811–15 to 899, in 1828–32 to 4,656, in 1833–7 to 7,436 and in 1838–42 to 14,014.
Nor should the novelty be exaggerated of abolitionists advancing petitions from a relatively popular base and on grounds of the general interest in 1788 —relatively popular because calculation from Drescher's estimate of 60,000 signatures in 1788 suggests an average of 600 signatures per petition and, with Manchester producing 10,639, some were clearly much smaller than the average.
petitioning on public interest, if not humanitarian, grounds and from a quasi-popular base had recent precedents in the later eighteenth century.
In 1769 Middlesex and London petitioners, concerned with seating Wilkes as member for Middlesex, mounted a general assault, couched in terms of the public interest, against the policies of the king s government.
In 1779 Middlesex petitioners demanded an investigation ‘into the true cause of those misfortunes which have reduced this once powerful and flourishing empire to a state which words cannot describe’.
They initiated a campaign embracing twenty-four counties and eleven of the largest towns and cities in which petitioning was combined with parliamentary initiatives.
Some of the county meetings which originated the petitions contained ‘popular’ elements.
Broad justifications for petitioning were as familiar to both politicians and abolitionists as the sectional interest justifications of the petitions on economic and commercial issues in the 1780s which Drescher stresses because of their contrast with the humanitarian and general interest grounds of the anti-slave trade petitions of 1788.
Moreover, since the 1788 petitions were not part of a movement pursuing significant change in  the political system or attacking the range of government policy, the application of humanitarian and general interest criteria to a question of trade probably appeared relatively innocuous to those who were not directly involved.
Recurrent bursts of petitioning on an ever larger scale played a central part in developing and maintaining the dynamic of anti-slave trade agitation up to 1792 and of the emancipation campaign from 1823.
They do not however provide conclusive evidence through their cumulative impact of a continuously developing popular social movement over fifty years, using the same methods for winning over support.
There was a very long gap of years between the mass petitioning of 1792 and that of 1823–4 with the single exception of the 1814 campaign against the reopening of the French slave trade after the war.
Whether that campaign should be interpreted as a link maintaining popular continuity across years when there was little other popular involvement in antislavery becomes crucial.
The term ‘antislavery’ is itself deceptive; the 1814 campaign was against allowing a defeated enemy to reopen a cruel trade which the British were proud of having ended amongst their own fellow-countrymen.
It occurred at a time when abolitionist leaders hoped for improved treatment of slaves in the West Indies but had not focused on emancipation as an objective and had not specifically propagandised for it.
Whatever it says about an achieved consensus on the slave trade, the 1814 campaign provides no support for a developing popular antislavery which incorporated emancipation.
Even on the slave trade a comparison of the places petitioning in 1792 with those of 1814, despite an increase in the total number, indicates quite sizeable geographical discontinuities in support.
In 1792 519 petitions were raised but forty-eight of them were institutional.
Of the remaining 471 area petitions a number contained signatures from several places; 542 places in all petitioned in 1792.
It is clear that the North of England and especially Scotland contributed to the large advance of 1792 over 1788.
But of the 542 places petitioning in 1792 only 283 also petitioned in 1814 — a ‘persistence rate’ of only 52.21 per cent.
Of the places which did not petition in 1814, although they had done so in 1792, some 40 per cent were in Scotland.
But what of the ‘new’ places, within the larger total of petitions in 1814? 483 of these have been located.
This indicates that, excluding Wales, 76 per cent of ‘new’ petitions in 1814 were from places in the Midlands and East Anglia southwards.
If this is combined with the previous result of 40 per cent of places ‘lost’ in 1814 as against 1792 being Scottish the conclusion is that the 1814 petitioning was not only much more English than 1792 but even much more English south of the North Country.
Since the gap between the two campaigns was twenty-two years this cannot be described as ‘volatility’ in antislavery support but it does indicate a complicated picture of simultaneous large expansion and significant (though quantitatively less) erosion, using the yardstick of petitioning.
This picture of antislavery support is at an early stage of a shift towards the objective of emancipation; the completion of the transition took several more years even for abolitionist leaders.
It would not be surprising if, to gain popular support for emancipationist petitions, reformers had to work very hard.
After several months of touring and organising in 1824 Clarkson claimed 200 local associations and 225 petitions, just over one-quarter of the number gained in one month in 1814.
The implication of the argument is that 1823–4, so far as petitioning to gain mass support was concerned, should be seen primarily as a new start in many places.
One other feature of emancipationist petitioning is now well established.
Reformers often worked through sympathetic religious networks in the localities, the names of members of which were known from earlier years; more important, petitions came increasingly from congregations and denominational organisations of an aroused dissent.
The evangelical antislavery imperative in the 1820s formed a conjunction with a reaction against West Indian treatment  of nonconformist missionaries and powerful leadership in antislavery activism by major figures of dissent: Jabez Bunting and Richard Watson of the Wesleyans, Joseph Ivimey of the Baptists, the Congregationalists Henry Waymouth and John Angell James.
The abolitionists worked hard to maintain this denominational momentum as a source of petitioning and Joseph Sturge noted that they would simply be paralleling the tactics of the campaign against the Test and Corporation Acts.
In a routine way by September 1830 the committee of the Anti-Slavery Society sent for insertion a short notice requesting petitions ‘to the Editors of the provincial Newspapers and of Religious Periodicals’.
In 1833, of 5,020 antislavery petitions the Wesleyans provided 1,953 and other nonconformist bodies 873, though Drescher points out that a higher proportion of signatures came on community petitions.
The presentation of a petition could have a dramatic, if momentary, effect on parliament.
Priscilla Buxton recounted how four MPs brought in the huge rolls of the ladies' petition of 1833 and ‘heaved it on to the table among loud laughing and cheers.
It was soon and very unceremoniously dragged away again by the officers’.
Miss Buxton's last sentence, however, is significant.
By the early 1830s the very ‘glut’ of petitions so held up the normal business of the day that, although an exceptional petition like that of the ladies could make an impression, the House of Commons acted to refer petitions to a committee and deny immediate speech on them on the floor of the House.
Although the campaign against apprenticeship brought a renewal of petitioning, by 1838 the Scots abolitionist William Smeal was expressing his disappointment at how ‘cavalierly’ petitions which had taken so much effort were received by the Commons.
Whether working in an expansive phase in which the techniques of ‘agitation’ were widely used or in a ‘consolidationist’period in which ‘pressure from without’assumed less importance, antislavery needed to maximise its influence in parliament and the administration in order to translate aspiration into policy and ensure that policy was effectively executed.
Alongside whatever direct impact petitions had on MPs, some printed material and very particular kinds of evidence were channelled straight to parliamentarians — especially the results of quantifying aspects of the slave trade and slavery and the direct testimony of witnesses whose authenticity was expected to impress.
In addition, reformers tried to obtain antislavery pledges from parliamentary candidates or MPs and at critical moments called  national conferences to shadow parliamentary deliberations.
In the 1830s this provoked significant tension between antislavery parliamentarians and activists in the country.
By the 1840s abolitionists in England had long experience in less public ways of reaching into the government and its administrative arms.
Consultations with ministers, the provision of information to administrators, direct communication with diplomats and naval officers, all fell within the ambit of less public means of attempted influence and can be most clearly illustrated from the record of the African Institution which has been somewhat overlooked by earlier writers.
The two General or World Anti-Slavery Conventions of 1840 and 1843, held under the aegis of the BFASS in London, tried to influence the British government on some questions of policy.
They helped maintain concern, but ultimately also divisive debate, over suppression of the transatlantic slave trade and whether or not the encouragement of free-labour staples, combined with consumer boycotts of slave-grown produce, could convert slaveholders into emancipators by forcing them to revise their calculations of economic interest.
‘Hard’ evidence of a quantitative kind was never neglected by abolitionists since they appreciated that it was more likely to impress parliamentarians who were conscious of their role as ‘cool’arbiters of the national interest and who consequently distanced themselves from ‘enthusiasm’.
Thomas Cooper provided some basic calculations on the extent of demand for slaves in European colonies in the 1780s, what likely mortality was in Africa to supply the demand and estimates of total imports of slaves since the trade's commencement.
In Liverpool William Rathbone extracted figures from the muster roles which Clarkson used as the basis for the statistics on mortality, disease and desertion amongst seamen engaged in the slave trade and which apparently impressed the Privy Council committee.
Other ways of guaranteeing the reliability of antislavery evidence to MPs and government included appeal to acknowledged experts such as the Scots scholar and historian principal Robertson on the likely ramifications of ending the trade and the personal appearance or signed testimony of first-hand witnesses — naval captains, inhabitants of or travellers to the West Indies and the occasional victim of the slave trade.
Much of this was then recycled to MPs through careful abridgement of the evidence given to parliamentary committees.
In the early 1820s the comparative material gathered from the United States by Liverpool abolitionists was used for parliamentary purposes.
Face-to-face lobbying of MPs was initially adopted by Quakers hostile to the slave trade in the 1780s.
Its appeal for Friends perhaps lay in its resolution of the tension within the Quaker outlook between a perfectionist separation from worldly activities and the moral relativism involved in the direct exercise of power.
At any rate in the spring of 1784 it was Friends who resolved to accompany their delivery of their anti-slave trade pamphlet prepared by the slave trade committee of the Meeting for Sufferings with lobbying of MPs.
In May 1788, immediately after Pitt had persuaded the Commons to agree the slave trade would be debated in the next session, the mainly Quaker members of the London committee, accompanied by Thomas Walker and Thomas Cooper from Manchester who had come to the capital to inspire urgency, formed a deputation to prepare MPs for the forthcoming discussion.
As a result of their conversations they were able to draw up a list of MPs favourable to abolition.
In December 1790 the Quaker committee, which maintained its existence alongside the London body, prompted Friends in the country to lobby their local MPs, particularly those elected for the first time in 1790.
Other, non-Quaker, abolitionists had experience of lobbying as a technique in the 1780s — in the cases of Josiah Wedgwood and Thomas Walker over protection of commercial and industrial interests.
It was a habit which remained a stand-by of abolitionists in the campaigns for emancipation and against apprenticeship; Wilberforce was convinced however that, contrary to the practice of 1790, pressure near the end of a parliament was likely to be more effective as MPs' minds were concentrated by the approach of an election.
MPs were the targets of their local antislavery societies, though in addition reformers concentrated on members in strategic places or prominent enough to command support from some other members of the House.
Thus in 1831 Cropper instructed Edward Prothero, one of the Bristol MPs: ‘he is a nice young man; very willing and open to hear; but a good deal uninformed’.
And in 1836 a deputation of Birmingham reformers saw O'Connell on apprenticeship; they could already assume help from Birmingham and Black Country MPs.
To extract a pledge from candidates for parliament and, at least by implication, make votes conditional upon it, was to go a stage beyond lobbying.
It was also a form of behaviour initially associated with political and constitutional radicalism.
In a political system in the later eighteenth century in which political position and parliamentary place were still largely a function of kinship with, or being in client status to, political notables parliamentary seats were frequently  uncontested to reduce the role of opinion in the political process and to save money.
To attempt to commit candidates to a position at elections was therefore to challenge the main working assumptions of the system.
In the early 1770s it was Supporters of the Society of the Bill of Rights who attempted pledging with only limited success.
In 1779 it was the more radical of the parliamentary reformers and in 1790 it probably told against supporters of the third effort to do away with religious tests that they tried such unconventional methods.
Significantly then, apart from isolated evidence of attempted antislavery pledging in 1792 in the middle of a parliament, it did not become a systematic technique of abolitionists until the culmination of the emancipation campaign in the early 1830s when parliamentary reform politics also triumphed.
In Gloucester in 1831 all three candidates adopted an antislavery stance as a result of being questioned, one going so far as to have ‘cards in his constituent hats with ‘No Slavery’ printed up on them’.
In the post-Reform Act election of December 1832 abolitionists published pledges from over 160 candidates; 132 pledged MPs were elected.
This was the most successful moment of the pledge technique, though it was employed in the 1837 election to end apprenticeship and suggested in 1841 by the BFASS to create a parliamentary bloc ready to abolish slavery in British India.
But in 1837 there is evidence of broader intervention in the election.
In Wellingborough abolitionists used the electoral machinery of the Whig candidate to circulate anti-apprenticeship material and in Gloucester reached the electors with a separate electoral address.
In Leicester a prominent Baptist abolitionist and town councillor, J. F. Winks, targeted the Tory candidate W. E. Gladstone and organised a public lecture on slavery and apprenticeship to highlight the Gladstone family's West India interests.
Despite his action as an individual, Winks recognised the problem of alienating Tory abolitionists.
They existed in significant numbers in the town at a time when there was restiveness amongst some antislavery people at the growing identification of antislavery with political liberalism and the demands of religious dissent.
The 1830s was not only the most successful decade abolitionists in England experienced in their history but also the period in which the fluctuating interaction of agitation in the country with manoeuvre by and within the political class was most nearly resolved into parliamentary and administrative activity as a direct expression of mobilised grass-roots attitudes.
This was the aspiration of increasing numbers of provincial antislavery militants; how closely they approximated  their aim and what tensions it provoked with parliamentary abolitionists, especially Buxton, can be observed in part through examining the use of the delegate conference or convention.
Like the practice of pledging, summoning conventions of delegates to deliberate on public policy, especially if they questioned the legitimacy of political institutions, had a radical pedigree.
The history of the convention in England since the 1770s, however, more frequently indicated its possibilities for focusing ‘pressure from without’ on the political class than it pointed to a fully fledged anti-parliament.
Both in 1780 when a divergence between metropolitan radicals and Wyvill's gentry in the county associations was evident and in 1793–4 with the calling of a British and then an English Convention, the contradictory potentialities of the convention were part of the substance of debate amongst participants.
If the convention as anti-parliament is understood as assuming that the people's wishes must prevail, that the convention better expressed those wishes than parliament and therefore in any contest between the two popular loyalty should be to the convention, as abolitionists employed it in the 1830s, it was closer to a focus for intensifying ‘pressure from without’ than an alternative to parliament.
At moments, none the less, abolitionist conventions challenged the moral, though not the constitutional, legitimacy of parliament.
They escaped the reaction of state authority, unlike the radicals of 1793–4, because they did not pose a direct constitutional challenge, were composed of representatives primarily of the provincial, nonconformist middle and business classes and met in a political context judged less threatening by the authorities.
In what context did abolitionists resort to the convention?
It was adopted by those abolitionists who in a growing mood of frustration had also developed the agency system.
Their frustration arose not only from the belief that amelioration was failing in the West Indies, but from lack of action by the Whig government and the little urgency displayed, in the eyes of many activists, by the London committee of the Anti-Slavery Society and their parliamentary allies.
Thus the conventions expressed a provincial assertiveness and dissatisfaction at both parliamentary manoeuvre and the sense of apartness manifested by Buxton in his parliamentary role.
At the end of 1830 Birmingham abolitionists were so disappointed at the failure of progress towards immediate emancipation in parliament that they floated the idea of a national delegate conference with the London committee to bring stronger action.
Disappointment and frustration began to accumulate  in criticism of Buxton as parliamentary leader of the cause.
He had the difficult task in 1832–3 of reconciling his sympathy for the Whig government with pressing for the sort of positive action on emancipation which was acceptable both to a majority in the political and parliamentary class and antislavery militants in the country.
Buxton revealed his awareness of conflicting pressures and the source of his determination to pursue his own course in a letter to Althorp on the eve of the 1832 motion on emancipation.
However insignificant in myself I am the Representative on this question of no mean body in this country who would be…disappointed and chagrined at the suspension of the question — But further — and this is a consideration far more really influential on my Conduct — I cannot but feel myself the Representative of a Body who cannot speak for themselves and for whom I must act without other guide than my own Conscience.
Buxton's strength was his sense of conscience on behalf of distant slaves but it was also a weakness from the perspective of militants in the country because it resisted dictation from collective antislavery opinion.
He had to rebut charges of acting for the convenience of his political friends.
Worried that the government might retreat from an emancipation measure a convention of 339 antislavery delegates assembled in London in early spring 1833.
Many of them were chosen by public meeting and Cropper and Sturge were prominent in encouraging organisation for the convention in the north and the West Country.
Stanley's government proposals on emancipation in mid-May provoked hostility amongst delegates on the grounds of compensation and the apprenticeship scheme.
Convention delegates marched through the streets of London committing themselves by ‘all legitimate means’ to bring about complete and immediate emancipation.
Buxton was initially in despair at Stanley's proposals but, judging that total rejection ran the risk of abandonment of emancipation, refused to divide the House on the principles of the bill on second reading and hoped for amendment at the committee stage.
Divisions amongst delegates appeared over Buxton's stance; the anger and the grounds for it amongst many provincial militants were clear in the report back to a meeting of the Birmingham Anti-Slavery Society.
Divisions were such that
the old Anti-Slavery Society committee [was not prompted]to  make a vigorous opposition to the grant of Twenty Millions and one parliamentary leader T. F. Buxton felt so much doubt upon the propriety of turning the attention of the country prominently to it that there was on this subject a want of cordial cooperation with those who wished to make use of it to its full extent.
A second convention met in July 1833 and in an effort to improve the bill had a delegation denounce apprenticeship to Stanley's face and managed to unite behind a Buxton amendment that apprenticeship should be for no longer than was required for the welfare of the slave.
The amendment was lost by only seven votes; Stanley reduced the length of the intended apprenticeship terms.
On everything else delegates felt a sense of ‘dissatisfaction and complaint’.
In response to continued encouragement from the localities they protested until the final passage of the legislation in August.
The next antislavery use of the convention was in 1837–8 as a weapon to push parliament to end apprenticeship.
It constituted an even clearer expression of provincial mobilisation and disregard for parliamentary initiative and manoeuvre than 1833.
Growing conviction that apprenticeship was essentially slavery by another name came to a head with Joseph Sturge's return from an investigative visit to the West Indies in May 1837.
After urging measures upon the virtually comatose London committee of the Anti-Slavery Society he concluded urgent action would not follow ‘unless the friends of the Cause in the Country exerted themselves without waiting for information and instructions from London and that many of our friends in London would be strengthened by a spontaneous movement in the Country’.
Spontaneity was given organised form on 11 October when antislavery delegates from Bath, Bristol, Exeter, Gloucester, Taunton, Devizes and Westbury met at Bath and resolved to work for the end of apprenticeship by August 1838.
Encouraged by the resolutions of the Bath meeting Sturge summoned a conference in Birmingham on 25 October of delegates to the 1833 convention and opponents of slavery from all the Midland counties.
They proposed a convention of delegates to meet at Exeter Hall on 14 November 1837.
Significantly no places within 10 miles of London were contacted about the convention and a delegation from the old Anti-Slavery Society was only suggested at the last moment.
In practice it soon withdrew.
Given that, in 1837, Buxton initially opposed an immediate move against apprenticeship it is doubtful how much deference would  have been shown his leadership by the convention, but he had anyway lost his seat at the recent election.
The delegates, again often chosen by public meetings, saw themselves as the aroused mass of principled antislavery, cutting across the political and religious differences of their communities.
After their initial meeting they reconvened in March 1838 and lobbied parliament heavily.
So intensive was this that Lord Holland concluded MPs from ‘populous’ constituencies were intimidated.
A quasi-national meeting in Birmingham on 19 April maintained morale and a third meeting of delegates convened in Exeter Hall on 19 May.
Delegates were divided into sixty lobbying groups which tackled a majority of members of both Lords and Commons.
When Sir George Strickland's motion (having no force of law) for complete emancipation was passed on 22 May but the government reversed the decision, delegates posed ‘the Philanthropic and Christian Public’ whom they represented against such parliamentary manoeuvring.
They published voting lists of the relevant divisions and denounced unsympathetic MPs as ‘unworthy of the support of a free and Christian people’.
The attempt to convey the moral illegitimacy of the government's and parliament's continuation of apprenticeship was fierce.
In fact, unknown to the convention, the pressure they exerted had much to do with the Colonial Secretary Glenelg writing to the colonial governments, even before the Strickland motion, to encourage local decisions to dispense with apprenticeship; the system came to an end in the summer of 1838.
Abolitionists successfully used the convention drastically to reduce the freedom of parliamentary action and to claim that it was more representative of national opinion than the legislature.
Much of the substance of Wilberforce s supposition as to the effects of aroused opinion in the country on the legislature had finally come to pass a half-century later.
One reason why some of the most energetic of antislavery activists in the 1830s resorted to the mass public meeting, the public lecture, the organisation of vast petitions and the delegate convention was that they lacked the easy personal access to ministers and administrators which an earlier generation of antislavery leaders possessed.
Buxton retained that access into a period when almost no other prominent active antislavery leader had it, though in accord with changing times, he saw the usefulness also of popular mobilisation.
In contrast Sturge reflected in 1841 that he and fellow activists were not now in favour in High Quarters here'.
Their more popular style of public activity was a measure of their marginality in relation to the  political class.
In antislavery's earlier years Wilberforce's close connection with Pitt has been well documented and his and Stephen's collaboration with Grenville to bring about the abolition legislation of 1806 and 1807 is established.
Within the framework of the activities of the African Institution Stephen and Zachary Macaulay had a considerable impact on the formulation of legislation and policy for the suppression of the slave trade and its execution.
Stephen in particular had a strong sense of British power through the country's naval forces to end the international slave trade, ‘to compel other powers to renounce it too’.
Personal and institutional links between reformers and government were supported by the ‘Saints, and their associates in parliament.
George Stephen remembered how as a youth he heard ‘many a semi-domestic debate as to the extent to which parliamentary manoeuvring could be successfully carried out with the ministerial benches’.
Deficiencies, so far as British subjects were concerned, in the anti-slave trade laws were able to be documented through a network of correspondents in Liverpool (particularly William Roscoe), Bristol and London and abroad.
Such information formed the basis of interventions by the African Institution to draft new legislation and push it through parliament (the Slave Trade Felony Act of 1811).
The network centring on Macaulay as secretary of the African Institution also provided evidence and argument which persuaded the Admiralty to order naval vessels to act against foreign slave traders, even to the point of illegality.
But the African Institution went further; it directly contacted the naval officers concerned with enforcing the anti-slave trade laws
respecting the provisions of the Legislature on this point and the manner in which these provisions have been eluded, as well as to point out the pecuniary advantages [the system of bounties which the abolitionists had themselves promoted]which would accrue to them from a vigorous enforcement of the Abolition Laws.
As early as 1812 the African Institution was also in regular communication with civil officers on the West African coast.
It was monitoring by abolitionists which prompted the seizure by customs officers of a Spanish vessel fitting out at Gravesend for entry into the Cuban slave trade.
The antislavery body also claimed effective access to government on the aspect of anti-slave trade policy which complemented suppression; after pressure over some years for the  British government to reduce discriminatory duties on commercial products from West Africa originating with information by Roscoe, duties on cotton wool, ginger, coffee and palm oil were lessened.
Not surprisingly, the active members of the African Institution saw themselves not simply as a successful pressure group but as something like an unofficial arm of government.
Despite these links, however, reformers in the African Institution could not always get what they wanted.
One such area was the treatment of slaves and administration of justice in the West Indies.
Scandals in Nevis and Tortola were publicised by the African Institution but Whitehall was reluctant to challenge the constitutional convention which consigned such questions to the colonial authorities.
A more oblique approach, a project of the elder James Stephen, was to create a central registry of slaves intended not only to provide evidence of the extent to which the anti-slave trade legislation was being evaded, but to illuminate the demographic trends within the slave population and indirectly the conditions and treatment of the bondsmen.
About 1815, Clarkson made the assumption explicit that Great Britain had a right to see her colonies managed on principles, and a morality not contrary to her own.
But once more an effective mechanism for translating the conviction into practice was thwarted by the British government s tenderness for West Indian constitutional susceptibilities.
Stephen was close enough to his fellow evangelical, the Prime Minister Spencer Perceval, to be allowed to draft an order in council for a registry in the Crown Colony of Trinidad in 1812.
But the succeeding Liverpool administration was more cautious.
Stephen felt compelled to try to force the government's hand in extending the registry.
Persuaded by him, Wilberforce introduced a bill for a registry in 1815 to cover both crown and legislative colonies.
It met such opposition in Jamaica that Wilberforce was persuaded to withdraw it and settle for registries by colonial legislation.
Stephen left parliament disillusioned; virtually all the colonies passed legislation by 1820, and although it was unsatisfactory in some respects to the reformers they were constrained by the existence of the legislation.
The final example of failure by reformers in the African Institution period, despite their access to ministers, ambassadors and political leaders of foreign governments, was in getting agreed international action to suppress the slave trade through the international congresses of powers from Vienna to Verona, 1814–22.
Personal approaches to Talleyrand and Tsar Alexander I were combined with priming the Foreign Secretary, Castlereagh, so that the Foreign Office  circulated British representatives in foreign capitals to obtain allies for suppression.
The Duke of Wellington, both when ambassador in Paris and later as representative at the Congresses of Aix-la-Chapelle in 1818 and Verona in 1822, was enlisted in the campaign and in 1814–15 Clarkson and Macaulay, in 1818 Clarkson and in 1822 William Allen all spent time at the congresses meeting political leaders and arguing for defining the slave trade as piracy under international law.
The difficulty lay in the inability, not the unwillingness, of British political leaders to persuade the French or the tsar to act decisively.
The African Institution had to accept defeat on collective action and hope for efficient bilateral arrangements between Britain and other powers.
Finding the institutional means to strike at the slave trade and slavery internationally posed even greater difficulties for those abolitionists of Joseph Sturge's generation who were more distant from the centres of political power in Britain.
The habit of this dominant Quaker in the BFASS of arranging deputations to ministers and approaching kings and emperors brought even less of a result than it had in earlier generations.
There was widespread scepticism about such methods of making reformers out of rulers.
It was a context in which British antislavery, peace and temperance reformers (there was a considerable overlap) all devised another institutional instrument — the general or international conference or convention.
The Anti-Slavery Conventions in London in 1840 and 1843 were mainly Anglo-American in membership but also drew delegates from western Europe and some free blacks from colonial territories.
The meetings encouraged exchange of information and perhaps boosted morale.
The British found a role as recent emancipators in advising others, though they had to acknowledge the continued participation of British capital and goods in the slave trade and the possession of slaves by British functionaries abroad.
They and their closest American collaborators asserted the superiority economically as well as morally of free labour systems as central to the international emancipation campaign and sought to purify slaveholding societies by purifying Protestant denominations and missionary enterprise of slaveholders.
All these policies were enthusiastically adopted in the fellowship atmosphere of the conventions; the problem remained of persuasion and enforcement outside.
The conventions issued addresses to both peoples and rulers of western European empires and to southerners and Christian denominations in the United States.
No doubt they hoped that their pleas and arguments would receive  attention.
They were also hoping by these means to avoid causing resentment at infringement of separate national sovereignties which would be a possible result if they enlisted the aid of the British government.
But since response from ministers by the 1840s was extremely circumspect the reformers were probably making a virtue of necessity.
They rarely succeeded in making an antislavery question into a diplomatic issue, though they occasionally tried to exploit an existing issue for antislavery purposes.
After 1838, therefore, neither ‘agitation’ nor ‘influence’either separately or together provided very powerful instruments for achieving antislavery ends.
Shortage of funds and opportunities for popular mobilisation as well as‘outsider’ status in relation to leading public men were the disabling features of antislavery in the 1840s and 1850s.
There remained one other tactic in these years, which had an earlier antislavery history too, designed to provide a role for individual abolitionists in England and convince them that they were contributing to advancing freedom internationally; it was the tactic of economic boycott of slave-grown raw materials or goods produced from them.
By the 1840s it was mainly American-grown cotton which was at issue and a tactic largely adopted by Quakers.
Some supporters of what became known as the free produce movement none the less had earlier experience of boycotting West Indian rum and sugar.
Though not entirely restricted to Friends, it was an approach particularly appealing to people in whom quietist instincts remained strong both before and after the direct political involvement exemplified by the election of Joseph Pease to parliament in 1832.
One interpretation of the intermittent energy which Joseph Sturge put into the free produce movement in the 1840s is that it constituted an attempt by a Friend who had launched out into public and even political life to maintain links with more traditionally quietist brethren who none the less looked for greater perfection in the world.
As a mechanism for weakening the slave trade, British colonial slavery and American slavery, the abstention from slave-grown produce was marginal in giving reality to abolitionist arguments about the ‘impolicy’ of the trade and in no way qualified, despite the evidence it provided, the later reflexive ideological commitment of abolitionists to the superior efficiency of free labour.
Throughout its fluctuating history in antislavery it remained a badge of ‘purity’ and a mark of earnestness.
It did however reflect a sense of Britain's central role in a world-wide economy and permitted individuals to believe  they could contribute to a good cause without relying upon government or becoming enmeshed in politics.
As such, and as dealing with questions of household consumption, it was a form of activity doubly appropriate for women.
By the 1820s they were especially prominent in the campaign for abstention.
Even then the older amongst them could look back to the early 1790s when debate about, and the practice of, abstention from slave-grown colonial sugar was claimed by Clarkson to have drawn in about 300,000 families.
It was Clarkson's response to the stubbornness of West Indian legislatures over amelioration in the mid-1820s to encourage ladies' antislavery associations to promote abstention as a superior alternative to the use of force by the government.
James Cropper went further in hoping for, but failing to do anything about, improving the quality of free-labour East Indian sugar as an alternative for British consumers if it was allowed to compete on fairer terms with West India produce.
The Sheffield Ladies' committee canvassed the East Indian alternative in the town and reported ‘grocers have stated the demand for it has been doubled since the commencement of the canvass’.
But, in the case of cotton, balancing the evil of consumption against the possibility of widespread loss of employment in Lancashire caused some perplexity.
These doubts were still widely encountered at the time of the 1840 Convention but a debate there and at the 1843 meeting stimulated the search for a reliable supply of free-labour cotton to reduce dependence on the slaveholders of the American South.
Provincial tours and propaganda by Sturge, Alexander and Scoble identified the BFASS with the free-produce tactic and prompted a flurry of interest in 1845–6.
Encouragement and promises to aid in supplying free-labour cotton came from American Friends and Elihu Burritt took up free produce as one of his reform themes during his recurrent visits from the United States.
But, as disappointed abolitionists in the country reported, adequate supply remained crucial.
So too did the quality of goods manufactured and their relative dearness — given supply difficulties and lack of bulk orders to manufacturers.
These problems were never entirely overcome and fluctuations of enthusiasm in the use of the economic boycott/free-produce tactic depended on temporary external factors rather than permanent solutions to the difficulties.
Free produce, like antislavery generally, received some publicity from the visit of Mrs Stowe and her husband in 1853 but ebbed in popularity when the Richardsons of Newcastle who had been prime propagandists for the movement had to withdraw in 1854.
Voluntary personal  abstention continued in a modest way through to the end of American slavery but plans positively to develop free-labour cultivation in the American South, India or West Africa came to little in the 1850s and the  British government never gave any serious consideration after equalisation of the sugar duties beginning in 1846 to a policy of discriminating in favour of free-grown produce.
Overall, within the culture of antislavery economic boycott and free-produce activities worked much less significantly as a way of drawing in support than as a mark which some abolitionists chose to display of their antislavery identity.
It can now be concluded that while initially forms of antislavery activity were in considerable part shaped by the struggle against the West Indians, they moved beyond these limits and assumed some of the characteristics of a popular movement.
Yet even when‘agitation’ played a large role, until the 1830s — and even then the traditional view was maintained by an older generation of abolitionists — it was seen as giving strength and support to parliamentary initiatives, backing to ‘influence’over political leaders and entailing deference to the consensus of the leaders of parliamentary antislavery.
That relationship was eroded in the 1830s and the main parliamentary associations of antislavery organisations in the 1840s and later were clearly with radical and strong reformer politicians.
Militants in the country became increasingly impatient of parliamentary manoeuvre and calculation because they became more critical, particularly as to the position of the Anglican Church, of both Tory and Whig politics.
Riding a numerical surge of dissent, provincial abolitionism came to distrust even an antislavery politics practised with any ease within the confines of Westminster and Whitehall.
This is not to say that the emergence of more popularly-orientated styles of activity expressed a displacement of sectarian religious feeling but antislavery none the less did become an important channel for religious feeling which looked to a broader moral enhancement of English society and in turn that had to involve the full-hearted commitment of a myriad of individuals and groups.
The evidence reviewed in this chapter does not however demonstrate even in the earlier agitational aspects of the anti-slave trade campaign that antislavery took up radical methods and challenged the normal modes of bringing about change.
Certainly abolitionists used techniques which had a radical pedigree — this was a source of Wilberforce's concern — but most of them did not tie them to programmes of large-scale reconstruction of the political order and  sought to portray the economic change involved in abolition and emancipation as a smooth transition to a more profitable state of affairs.
Nor did they continue to deploy the full panoply of radical techniques in moments of perceived social and political crisis.
In this way radical techniques became reformist techniques.
BEING ABOLITIONISTS
Harmony and tension in the internal Culture of antislavery
Looking back from 1808 Clarkson had no doubt of the enormity of the task which had faced him and his collaborators a little over twenty years earlier.
The slave trade may be considered, like the fabulous hydra, to have had a hundred heads, every one of which it was necessary to cut off before it could be subdued.
And as none but Hercules was fitted to conquer the one, so nothing less than extraordinary prudence, courage, labour and patience could overcome the other.
The heroism portrayed as necessary to triumph over the slave trade drew upon a sense of working in harmony with fellow reformers, fired in part by an ideologically convergent commitment and of acting upon that commitment in similar ways.
The first part of this chapter begins with the structural factors — especially the religious, family and community links — which drew and held abolitionists together in that sense of fellowship.
These structures were informed by common elements of personal and group experience and knowledge.
When the antislavery movement as a movement began to have a history, the writing of it by participants or writers dependent upon the perspective of participants contributed to a unifying consciousness central to which was a veneration of the heroic first generation who in their functional and religious diversity confirmed the possibility of unity in common endeavour.
A purpose of Clarkson's History was thus not only to delineate a common pattern of consciousness but to promote it as a contribution to energising the internal networks of antislavery for future struggles.
The first section also suggests that a cohesive consciousness could be registered in the construction and development  of antislavery rituals and occasions and iconographic expressions or visual representations of a common antislavery identity.
None the less, the necessity to reach out to others — to make abolitionists — even from a strong sense of a mutually supportive movement could contribute to tensions and conflicts between individuals and groups of reformers, as the previous chapter indicated.
Lines distinguishing different groups and generations could not be completely erased by the building of a sense of common commitment and endeavour.
What was a contribution to harmony in one context could become a support for disharmony in another set of circumstances.
Religious networks could make for a unified effort or become the vertebrae of different segments of reformers whose conflicts were expressed in organisational diversity and competition.
In the form of the consciousness registered in the antislavery celebrations of the 1830s, manifestations of a triumphant unity could betray evidence of very different senses of who had primarily achieved the triumph and how.
Similarly, post-emancipation abolitionist accounts of antislavery history, in their strategies and silences, indicate colder considerations of priority in the cause, status and the relative significance of different contributions which both reflected a changed context and added to tensions of sect and party within antislavery.
These themes form the substance of the second part of the chapter.
There it is also argued that it is from the legislation of emancipation onwards that the tensions and forces making for conflict grow significantly stronger than the cohesive factors sustaining antislavery culture.
A subordinate theme from the late 1830s remains a striving to restore a commonality in antislavery, involving a conscious mediation between a weakened common antislavery identity and loyalty to separate circles and reform interests.
But the need openly to handle such divergent pressures when their earlier expression had been largely submerged by common and complementary work to be done and the high excitement of periodic achievement, was itself a mark of the decline of a cohesive internal culture of antislavery.
At the level of national antislavery leadership the Clapham Sect illustrated the dense personal texture underlying co-operative activity in combining close friendships, ties of kin, connections by marriage and, with the exception of William Smith, attachment to the evangelical wing of the Church of England.
The Thorntons were kin of the Wilberforces; Gisborne was a close friend of Wilberforce and married Babington's sister while Babington himself married a sister  of Zachary Macaulay.
James Stephen the elder took Wilberforce's sister as his second wife and in the next generation James Stephen the younger — the under secretary at the Colonial Office in the crucial emancipation period — married a daughter of John Venn, the rector of Clapham.
In the early decades of the nineteenth century the creation of Anglican evangelical networks in the country in the form of clergymen active in parishes, energising lay commitment through a plethora of activities, including antislavery, became noteworthy.
Thornton patronage in Colchester placed the Rev. William Marsh there in 1814 and in the following years an evangelical connection was established across southern East Anglia.
From 1829 Marsh was translated to Birmingham to a diocese under the direction of the first evangelical bishop in the Anglican hierarchy.
Marsh's appointment was but one aspect of an evangelical ‘saturation’ of pulpits in the city in the 1820s and 1830s.
A member of the Spooner family, connected to Wilberforce by his marriage to Barbara Spooner, became Archdeacon of Coventry with responsibility for Birmingham and had close links to the evangelical Calthorpes, landowners and philanthropists in the city.
Antislavery, temperance and other favourite evangelical reform endeavours became an everyday part of evangelical activity.
Readers of Annan's classic essay are equally certain to know of the elaborate interconnections in the Quaker world of philanthropy and reform.
Kin and marriage ties in the eighteenth and earlier nineteenth centuries bound together such antislavery families as the Gurneys, the Frys, the Hoares, the Hodgkins, the Foxes and the Barclays.
Marriage also connected the Gurneys to the Darlington Quaker dynasty of bankers and philanthropists, the Backhouses, who in turn were cousins of the Peases.
Their senior branch of railway promoters and philanthropists produced the first Quaker MP Joseph Pease as well as marrying back into the Gurneys.
A junior branch through Joseph Pease, the India reformer (uncle of the MP) provided one of the main strands of support for American Garrisonian abolitionism in Britain, in the form of Elizabeth pease Nichol and her connections.
At this level Friends linked antislavery in the north-east, East Anglia and the West Country together; local Meetings of Friends provided the organising framework and fellowship for Agency lecturers in many places in the 1831–2 campaign of mobilisation.
Marriage perhaps played a less important part in the network of Rational Dissent in the late eighteenth century, though Josiah Wedgwood did become a relation by marriage to Sir James Mackintosh and thus in touch with the world of Brougham and the  Edinburgh Review .
More evident were the personal and intellectual connections of prominent ministers and scholars and the friendship of educated liberal families clustered round a particular chapel or linking one congregation with another.
Although the chapel communities of Rational Dissent, largely identified with Unitarianism by the early nineteenth century, were fiercely proud of their constitutional autonomy, there was a framework of cultural institutions which drew them together in book societies, college trusts and publishing networks.
The circle of Norwich families centred on the Octagon Chapel added friendship to common intellectual and literary interests.
These embraced the daughter of the famous Octagon minister Dr John Taylor, Susannah, the Opies, the Barbaulds; the antislavery poetess Mrs Barbauld was an Aikin daughter and made a link between antislavery and the liberal political journalism of her father and brother in the Annual Review .
The Martineaus were also part of this cultivated group for whom antislavery was an aspect of their general liberalism.
Such a circle as the Octagon, despite its special qualities, was connected with a broader network.
In visiting Susannah Taylor whenever he was on circuit in East Anglia the barrister and antislavery literary journalist, Henry Crabb Robinson, was in part resuming the connections of his youth.
His friend William Pattisson had been a pupil at Rochemont Barbauld's school near Diss and, although an Independent, was familiar with the Octagon circle.
Pattisson and Robinson after their ‘Jacobin' youth in Norwich maintained their friendship into more conservative middle age and bound together the remnants of the Norwich network with reform-minded nonconformity in the chapels of Suffolk, Essex and parts of Cambridgeshire.
The Roscoe-Rathbone circle in Liverpool constituted a somewhat similar predominantly Unitarian intellectual-literary-reformist complex.
Circles centring on prominent individuals could maintain and encourage common antislavery feeling.
Like the Robinson-Pattisson connection they could also easily cross lines of religious affiliation.
One such emanated from the friendship of Thomas Clarkson and the popular, and antislavery, poet Bernard Barton.
A network extended to draw in sympathetic local Anglican clergymen in their part of Suffolk, Arthur and Jane Biddell (Clarkson's agent, a wealthy farmer and his wife) and, via Mrs Biddell's membership of the Ransome family, to the Quaker iron manufacturing and philanthropic family in Ipswich.
Cross-denominational association of this sort in particular localities was not uncommon and could be reinforced through collaborative  reformist and philanthropic action as in the common efforts for moral and civic improvement of such Quaker and Unitarian families in Birmingham as the Cadburys, Lloyds, Kenricks and others.
At the level of national leadership in antislavery the separate networks sketched above were structurally linked by the mediating roles of individuals or by marriage.
Clarkson remained an Anglican and an evangelical but was extremely close to a host of Quaker reformers.
William Smith's friendship with Clapham was strong enough to license their toleration of his Unitarian views and he kept them in touch with more liberal and heterodox elements.
The Liverpool Quaker, James Cropper, married a daughter of Zachary Macaulay and after her death the widow of her brother, H.M.
Macaulay, while another Cropper married a son of Lord Brougham.
Perhaps even more than in the case of energising Anglican evangelical clergymen like William Marsh, in the ranks of evangelical nonconformity the powerful leadership of some ministers shaped the attitudes of chapel communities and led them into collaboration across denominational and church/chapel lines.
Within the lively political and religious life of Leicester in the 1820s and 1830s the Baptist Mursells, father and son, shaped a commitment to missionary work and its support, antislavery and political liberalism and launched the young Congregationalist Edward Miall on his notable career in journalism and reformist religious politics.
Davidoff and Hall have recently underlined not only the strong conception of ministerial leadership possessed by John Angell James at Carr's Lane in Birmingham —‘We occupy a very public station; like the angel standing in the sun we must be seen’— but demonstrated his ability to lead his chapel in alignment with Anglican reformers to work for antislavery, temperance and projects of moral benevolence within the community.
These examples suggest that while antislavery could not become an explicit test of membership of chapel communities it did in many cases become a norm of memberships and of a minister's identity.
The heavy congregational and denominational petitioning in the last years of slavery suggests this; so does the image of ranks of black-coated nonconformist ministers at the antislavery conventions of the 1830s.
Antislavery thus had a further institutional base but it was thereby also vulnerable as regards united action to the outbreak of warfare amongst religious parties.
Chapter 2 offered a short discussion of how a number of antislavery reformers derived an intellectual orientation towards reform from the different religious traditions sustaining antislavery.
Yet even when this is added to the evidence of bonding and enabling structures of family, kin, friendships, religion and community sketched above, something is missing.
That element is the emotional quality in the commitment of many individuals to the cause, a quality which contributed noticeably to the tone and texture of the internal life of the antislavery movement.
The first generation especially in the history of organised abolitionism could not derive the quality of their commitment from pre-existing norms or groups.
Individuals in that generation of whom we know most seem to have grappled uncertainly with how to deal with their growing understanding of and revulsion from the slave trade; sometimes it was almost to their own surprise that they arrived at a commitment sufficiently deep to devote a major portion of their time and energies to the cause.
It was not that evangelicals or Quakers or even more rational Christians doubted their ultimate dependence on Providence.
A number of the earliest abolitionists, however, experienced a difficult and anxious passage before they recognised the particular role providentially required of them.
In the case of the elder James Stephen's commitment to antislavery, it came after the experience of working in the West Indies as a lawyer, but more precisely, that experience helped direct into antislavery the expression of his gratitude ‘for the infinite mercy of God’ in extricating him from the depths of sin brought on by sexual passion and setting him on the path of prosperity and happiness.
His language, in the remarkable autobiography about his young manhood written for his grandchildren, plays on the language of enslavement and emancipation.
At length these bitter fruits of sin, and a sense of dependency on his providence for the averting those dreadful consequences with which others were imminently threatened, brought me to the repentance and gave me a victory over those guilty passions by which I had been so long enslaved.
He then heard my earnest indefatigable prayers and by a train of events the most impossible and unexpected released me from the cruel bondage in which the enemy of my soul had bound me.
The result was ‘peace and happiness’ and a commitment to antislavery work.
Clarkson's account of his entry into his antislavery role stressed the long period of crisis in which he indecisively debated with himself and James Ramsay what to do.
‘At length I yielded…in obedience I believe to a higher Power.
And thus I can say that both on the  moment of this resolution and for some time afterwards I had more sublime and happy feelings than at any former period of my life.’
These pioneers had the happy assurance of providential selection for their tasks.
Later abolitionists exemplified in Buxton and Cropper, though it might have seemed easier for them to adopt antislavery as a routine, not only maintained vital feeling in their commitment but possessed sufficient accompanying serenity —‘we have more than human help’— to accommodate setbacks and ‘to triumph over the storms which surround them’.
Appropriately the imminent passage of the emancipation legislation at the end of Wilberforce's life provoked in him feelings so strong that he wrote ‘I have not time to open the Stopper of ye jar that hardly prevents the bursting forth of my [joyful?]feelings abt.
Emancipation’.
In the language of religious contemporaries abolitionists were people who experienced and expressed ‘christian joyousness’, secure in ‘the divine authority of our principles.’
It was the basis of a security which never allowed even the more worldly of them, like Brougham, to take seriously the possibility of ultimate defeat.
Even when the obstacles seemed great there was ‘no room for despair’ and ‘we may indulge the gratifying and cheering reflection…we may…in reality be on the very verge of its attainment-.
The 1 August 1834 Wardlaw proclaimed a Jubilee day: ‘Thousands that had slept in servitude awoke independent freemen…it was the sound of the Jubilee trumpet that awakened all the ecstasy of emotion’.
The joy Wardlaw celebrated with his fellow reformers extended beyond the former slave as its object; the colonies which had been blighted by an ‘offended God…frowning in vengeance’ were to be transformed into prosperous lands.
Britain itself had escaped retribution; Africa would assume its full role in the spread of Christian truth and the British example, awakening American emulation, would result in the two countries jointly shaming the rest of the world into ending bondage.
In this version, abolitionist joy anticipated a qualitative transformation of history.
Amongst Unitarian abolitionists an emotional quality in antislavery commitment was also present but it may often have had different origins from the antislavery of Evangelicals and Quakers.
Unitarians were very conscious that they too had suffered discrimination; they were a group who, because of their heterodoxy, were ‘everywhere spoken against’.
This gave them sympathy for the victims of the slave trade and slavery and, as the abolitionist John Bowring stressed, formed a strong bond of union between them.
In  the revealing words of one antislavery minister, he and his fellow Unitarians were theological negroes'.
In consequence they hoped for fellowship with others in the cause with particular ardour.
The Unitarian minister and editor Edwin Chapman underlined that desire to overcome separation when in his thanksgiving sermon on Emancipation Day in 1834 he proclaimed that it was the Christian principle evinced by all the sects and parties which had brought on the victory.
In commemoration of the end of apprenticeship in 1838 John Relly Beard looked on behalf of religious liberals as much as had the evangelical Wardlaw to the ‘genius of Christianity’ producing future success in the US and the wider world.
The dangers of routine and passivity to the often joyful and serene spirit which infused abolitionists grew greater as direct British targets for the cause largely disappeared from the late 1830s onwards.
When ‘scarce anything [was]more likely to mar a…man's reputation than to be thought opposed or indifferent to the cause of abolition, but when slavery was a distant and foreign institution, the urge to respectability could predominate over the vital flame in antislavery.
While the drama of the mass mobilisation phase remained, however, with its engendering of collective determination and the warmth of fellowship, rank-and-file abolitionists could shake off ‘coldness and opposition’ and ‘Be steadfast.
Be active’.
A feeling commitment was also the continuing outcome of the rigorous self-scrutiny religious men and women undertook as a matter of course and especially in retrospect at the end of the year.
The change of the calendar was a time to repair faults and omissions and vow rededication.
Abolitionists provided themselves with a collective equivalent to the practice of personal scrutiny in their annual meetings.
Leaders not only brought supporters up to date with the position of the cause but resolutions took the form of reiteration of basic commitments as well as referring to current developments.
But the meetings could have greater resonance than this suggests and provide powerful reinforcement of a sense of fellowship.
The 1824 annual meeting of the Anti-Slavery Society offers an appropriate example.
The report was able to recount what had been done in the first year of effort of the newly-organised national campaign for emancipation but to stress continuity through reliance on the circulation of pamphlets by Wilberforce and Clarkson; reformers were ‘thus enabled to proceed under the conduct of the same veteran Champions who had first led the battle against the African Slave Trade and who had pursued it to its final extinction’.
James Stephen provided  encouragement at signs of progress in the operation of amelioration measures in the Crown Colonies but required recommitment from the representatives of the cause in the work still to be done, particularly in pressing change upon the legislative colonies.
The range of speakers called upon seemed consciously designed to stress Christian collaboration within the movement and equally its vitality across generations.
In addition to Stephen, Wilberforce represented Clapham and the Anglican evangelical veterans; William Smith registered Unitarian liberalism and William Allen the Friends as components of the movement.
The young T.B.
Macaulay, like Baptist Noel earlier in the meeting, consciously took upon himself the mantle of a new generation ‘who, although they have not contributed to your past success, are ambitious to participate in your future labours…the good cause shall not therefore want fresh champions, nor, if it must be so, fresh martyrs’.
It was almost superfluous after the ‘loud cheering which lasted several minutes, for Calthorpe to assure his fellow abolitionists that victory was certain if other members of the new generation descended from old advocates of the cause showed similar energy.
Such occasions were constructed to confirm the high value of the cause, to energise the ranks and maintain and strengthen the internal links in the movement.
They did as much if not more for the internal cohesion of antislavery as in impressing the outside world.
The gatherings were devices to construct a sense of a vital present for the movement linked by the 1820s to a successful past and with the potential for a triumphant future.
Abolitionists thus presented themselves to the world and to each other as part of a continuous progress despite the significant disjunctures in the movement's history discussed in the last chapter (pp.65–6).
Important additional sustenance for this cohesive ‘myth’ of antislavery came in the deployment by abolitionists of their own history prior to the main drive for emancipation.
To substantiate this point it is proposed to offer brief readings of aspects of both Thomas Clarkson's History and Prince Hoare's Memoirs of Granville Sharp Esq .
which drew heavily not only on Sharp's papers but accounts and memories of him by fellow abolitionists.
Clarkson believed that a narrative of abolition produced not only ‘the most pleasing and grateful sensations’ but that lessons relevant to future success emerged.
Encouragement to reformers to maintain their commitment would bring its reward since ‘no virtuous effort is ever ultimately lost’ but such effort depended upon ‘a union of wise and virtuous individuals’who recognised the providentially sanctioned nature of  their cause.
Virtually the whole of the first half of his first volume was devoted by Clarkson to discussing individuals and intellectual and religious traditions whose contributions to antislavery converged in unity in the organisation of the committee of 1787.
It was a body defined in terms of its unity and perseverance, bringing together all the
classes of which I have been giving a history…a committee which labouring afterwards with Mr. Wilberforce as a parliamentary head did, under Providence, in the space of twenty years, contribute to put an end to a trade which…was the greatest practical evil that ever afflicted the human race.
Collectively its dedication, despite all difficulties, constituted an unimpeachable example.
Each individual abolitionist demonstrated the victory of the better over the worse side of his or her nature, of ‘pure power’ over interest, but some particular individuals elicited especial admiration and reverence.
Abolitionists began to create their own pantheon of heroes, veneration of whom contributed both to longitudinal solidarity over time and horizontal solidarity between groups.
Of Sharp, taking his lead from Wilberforce, Prince Hoare wrote ‘there are few who will not find him to have been one [a hero]and who would not exult in possessing among the members of their family such a relative’.
Clarkson stressed Sharp's priority in the cause and his unwearying employment of talents and substance.
He was also presented as exemplifying the qualities for unifying supporters of philanthropic activity, ‘a churchman in faith, in charity a universalist’.
Clarkson's narrative revealed his own perseverance and commitment until exhaustion and financial difficulty overtook him in 1794 and Hoare fastened upon Clarkson's continuing ‘zeal’.
If chronological and organisational priority were attributed to Sharp and Clarkson, Wilberforce emerged unambiguously as the third member of an heroic triumvirate whose efforts crowned with success the struggle for abolition.
The moment when he was drawn in as parliamentary leader was ‘an event…which gave preponderance to the scale of African freedom’.
His talents and character perfectly qualified him for his role and his motives expressed ‘an awful sense of his duty as a Christian’.
Divisions between them abolitionists saw, unlike later, as being purely functional; the cause was harmonious.
Such heroic examples, concluded Brougham, looking both backwards and forwards in 1822, permitted reformers to have confidence for the future.
This early writing by abolitionists on their own history also gave  them assurance that they were vindicating their country.
Clarkson and Hoare interpreted Sharp's success in the Somerset case as ‘restoring the beauty of our constitution’ and preventing ‘the continuance of our national disgrace’.
Collectively antislavery showed ‘no country has shone with more true lustre than our own’.
At a time of ‘awful crisis, when constitutions of kingdoms are on the point of dissolution the stain of the blood of Africa is no longer upon us’ thus removing ‘a mill-stone about our necks, ready to sink us to perdition’.
Abolitionists marked their respect for their heroes in both more and less personal forms.
Clarkson and Wilberforce, partly because they lived for so long, frequently sent off autographs with motto attached and Clarkson received and met requests for locks of his thinning hair.
Antislavery medals, work bags, albums and china also circulated, sometimes no doubt bearing images of the heroes.
At the time of the 1835 emancipation, as also at the cessation of apprenticeship in 1838, abolitionists enacted rituals of triumph and unity, though it was significant for the future that they now acknowledged differences and, ironically, different abolitionists performed different rituals indicative of unity.
On 1 August 1834, after attending the wedding of his daughter Priscilla who had been such a tireless assistant to her father, Thomas Fowell Buxton and his gentlemen associates attended a ‘grand public dinner’ to celebrate the end of slavery with toasts and speeches.
But the Buxton clan also saw emancipation as a family triumph.
On Emancipation Day Buxton was presented by his family with a seal, salver and vase — the two latter inscribed with the motto ‘Safe and Satisfactory’.
In a flurry of further presentations Louisa Hoare handed to Buxton's wife, Hannah, a small silver cup commemorating her partnership with her husband in the abolition of slavery, while the uncles and aunts handed to Priscilla an inscribed small waiter to commemorate her role.
At a celebratory meeting at West Bromwich abolitionists passed a resolution of gratitude to Buxton while the city of Plymouth conferred its freedom upon him.
For many abolitionists emancipation was celebrated by raising Buxton to the pantheon of heroes.
Birmingham on 1 and 2 August 1838 saw a celebration to mark the end of apprenticeship.
It did not lack its central figure, for Joseph Sturge was prominent, but he was located in the events in relation to enlightened nonconformity and the power of provincial community rather than gentry family and parliamentary class.
Gifts were part of the occasion too: 3,500 children gathered in the Town Hall on the morning of 1 August, 3,000 of them from the Baptist Sunday schools  and the rest from the  Lancasterian and Infant Sunday schools, and were each given a booklet commemorating the end of apprenticeship.
On the front of the booklet was the picture of a white man giving instruction to blacks and inside prominence was given to missionary work, particularly that of the Baptist mission to the West Indies.
Sturge's role in ending apprenticeship through his visit to the West Indies was picked out.
After a service of thanksgiving the children were given a ‘substantial meal of bread and beef’; to observers ‘the whole scene was one highly creditable to the philanthropy and liberality of the people of Birmingham’.
After the meal the children marched in procession to a patch of ground where a foundation stone for new school rooms in commemoration of emancipation was laid by ‘the friend of the negro, the friend of the children and the friend of man, JOSEPH STURGE Esq.’
That evening and the next day there were speeches in which Sturge and Birmingham received particular notice.
The celebration in the following year on 1 August was even more explicitly designed to allow the younger generation to experience being abolitionists.
Tickets were distributed by William Morgan, Sturge's colleague, through Sunday school teachers.
It is considered of the first importance that young persons should receive correct and permanent impressions on this subject and to assist in securing that object it is intended to exhibit a model of a SLAVE SHIP which was recently captured upon the coast of Africa.
The deliberate juxtaposition of these rituals of celebration has been done to suggest that the 1830s were years of transition in antislavery culture in which occasions of unity indicated growing divergences within the ‘movement culture’.
Thus when Clarkson spoke movingly to the gathered World Convention of 1840 he was intended to symbolise continuity and provide in what he stood for a unifying focus.
Benjamin Haydon's painting of the scene was planned to reinforce this:
In the centre is Clarkson, in his own natural attitude concluding his speech.
Behind, beneath and about him are the oldest and dearest friends of the cause — whilst a liberated slave, now a delegate, is looking up to Clarkson with deep interest, and the hand of friendship is resting with affection on his arm, in fellowship and protection.
At the 1843 Convention Haydon's picture was hung at one end of the  room; above the chairman was a portrait of Clarkson and opposite it ‘A Scene on the African Coast’.
Yet in 1840 it was Joseph Sturge, having emerged as the leading figure of one faction of abolitionists, who guided Clarkson to and from the platform; Haydon's picture represented an exclusion from full recognition in the movement of some elements, especially women, on ideological grounds, and in 1843 some abolitionists refused to attend the Convention, implicitly denying Sturge's BFASS the right to claim the antislavery heritage.
It is now time to deal more directly with the tensions evident in the internal culture of the movement; they were never entirely absent but the strains they imposed became increasingly hard to manage in the 1830s.
By that decade different religious and social elements had become prominent in antislavery from those who had taken the initiative in earlier years.
Traditional leadership of the kind provided by the landed classes had never been significant in antislavery.
Mercantile, commercial and professional elements of the middle stratum with a sprinkling of manufacturers and, at a more local level, tradesmen, artisans and dissenting ministers were the sort of people who were active.
Initially, if they belonged to the Church of England, they were likely to be of the evangelical tendency so disturbing to comfortable Anglican parsons and laymen.
Many of them were not even that but nonconformists of both evangelical and rational and liberal kinds.
The years 1806–7, however, marked the triumph of social as well as political respectability as more socially prominent names became associated with the African Institution and antislavery more generally.
Political leadership of the cause remained, into the 1830s, in the hands primarily of the upper echelons of the Anglican middle class but mass support depended upon the activism of evangelical dissent down to and including the artisan class.
By the 1830s, however, much of the old leadership was dead or retiring; Stephen died in 1832, Wilberforce in 1833, William Smith in 1835, Zachary Macaulay in 1838, Cropper in 1840 and Clarkson was in his seventies.
There became room for younger, different, mainly nonconformist leaders to assert themselves, not necessarily by parliamentary means.
As these opportunities appeared, so at the same time the lines of religious party and sect hardened.
Even within Anglican evangelicalism fissures appeared.
Older, Clapham Sect- Christian Observer evangelicals who had always believed in the necessity of good deeds in the world for forming the true Christian heart, increasingly in the 1820s and 1830s regretted amongst younger ‘ranters and ‘noisy professors’, followers of the histrionic Edward Irving, a relative complacency about public activity beyond the conversion of individual souls.
James Stephen regretted the paucity of active evangelicals combining true religious piety with cultivation ‘in heart and understanding’.
It was a lament which registered the weakening of a moderate, socially philanthropic evangelicalism in the face of the more strident and ultimately more bigoted brand associated with Irving and Drummond outside the church and the Recordites within it.
This awareness contributed to the sense evangelicals in the Clapham tradition had of disorder within the church whose position itself appeared threatened by economic, social and political change.
The obvious questions for churchmen were how best to improve order within the church and how to impress the church upon society.
Whether their inclination was to enhance the symbiotic relationship of church and state or, for those of them tending towards support of Tractarianism, to reunify the church by distancing it from the state while reinforcing respect for its ordinance, hierarchy and ‘Catholic’ traditions, nonconformists were likely to perceive either process as antithetical to their status, rights and interests.
Their numerical expansion, elaboration of denominational and educational institutions and practice of evangelical united front philanthropy gave many of them the confidence to undertake an increasingly militant struggle for equality of religious status under the law, culminating in the case of a growing number of advocacy of disestablishment as the logical end of the voluntaryist principle.
An aroused evangelical nonconformity, however, in turn alarmed and alienated many of the religious liberals amongst the Unitarians and those Friends resistant to enhanced religious authority through creed, and in the office of ministers as a result of evangelical tendencies in their own Society.
In these years the Unitarians were forced out of the Dissenting Deputies and had to fight for control of their chapel property against other dissenters; tensions and fractures recurrently emerged within the Society of Friends.
In such a climate the emergence of provincial nonconformity within antislavery imposed severe strains on the cohesion and common assumptions of the movement.
Even in 1831, at a moment of mass mobilisation, George Thompson on tour encountered conflict between dissenters in Dartford and then in Faversham confronted such distance between church and chapel abolitionists that he doubted the possibility of a  lecture which could draw in cross-denominational support.
Sectarian tensions within antislavery also provided the terms within which hostility to, or criticism of, individuals or groups of abolitionists were expressed.
As John Scoble, with his intolerantly rigid evangelical attitudes, rose to become a prominent administrator and organiser of antislavery bodies, he became a target as a sectarian who had apparently denounced one liberal-minded Quaker reformer as ‘degenerate’ for suggesting that the heathen might be treated with mercy.
He left the impression on Richard Webb of ‘a selfwilled, tyrannically minded, narrow-souled, clever bigot’.
Indeed in Webb's opinion, by the beginning of the 1840s sect, party and worldliness all undermined the antislavery movement as a whole.
Touch church or touch party in your antislavery efforts and all their zeal for the slave would be scattered in the twinkling of an eye…
The London Committee [of the BFASS]could not help being what they were…
They loved titles and titled people — they are no non-resistants and their vision is clouded by wealth and worldly importance — though there are many kindhearted and munificent men among them.
From less radical perspectives than Webb's also the religious and political zeal of party seemed at the root of controversy within antislavery.
The venerable Clarkson, for many reformers the remaining patriarch of the movement, was not exempt by 1838–40.
There is no doubt that in earlier years Clarkson's relations with some of the Claphamites had occasionally been strained.
In terms of Henry Thornton's antithesis between reputation and religion and the need to sacrifice the former to the latter if it aided the antislavery cause, Clarkson had sometimes seemed too attached to reputation.
He was also for much of the middle part of his life financially sufficiently insecure to look to the personal aid and patronage of others, including Claphamites, from whose psychologically stabilising intimacies he was excluded.
His importunities at times embarrassed or irritated Wilberforce, Stephen and Macaulay who all also doubted his judgement on some issues.
They may have believed too that he appeared too prominently in his own History — the desire for reputation again.
However, these occasional tensions had been kept private until Robert and Samuel Wilberforce chose to make some of them public in the life of their father they published in 1838.
In the view of private and public critics of the Wilberforce sons there was more than filiopietism at issue in their charge that Clarkson claimed leadership  in the cause when their father was entitled to it; they suggested Clarkson had been to all intents and purposes a paid agent of the Abolition Committee.
Sara Coleridge saw the Wilberforce sons claiming antislavery for their brand of Clapham evangelicalism against Clarkson's historical interpretation which had literally offered a diagram of numerous branches contributing to the cause.
The Evangelical party will perhaps continue to exalt their hero as partially as parties always do — but the members of it will act thus only so far as they are possessed by party spirit, rather than by the pure spirit of the doctrines which they hold in common with their so-called Catholic opponents, whom adversaries style popish.
Henry Crabb Robinson equally perceived a party spirit at work but, noting the younger Wilberforces' drift away from their father's associates, defined it differently.
‘Highly Conservative in politics, they are also High Churchmen’; their sectarian spirit focused on Clarkson because, although a churchman, he had been an apologist for Quakerism and in earlier days as an enthusiast for civil as well as religious liberty ‘he belonged to a very liberal class’ and showed support for the French Revolution.
Clarkson himself, his wife and old associates such as William Smith and Henry Brougham did not rest on the charge of sectarian and party spirit but reverted to the earlier image of the antislavery movement as effectively integrating the diverse roles of individuals and groups into a successful unity.
Specifically Wilberforce and Clarkson were presented as reliant upon each other 's efforts respectively in parliamentary tactics and debate and in the provision of information and witnesses.
Clarkson had pre-dated Wilberforce in organised work against the slave trade and had taken the initiative, it was generally agreed, in raising the issue with him.
But Clarkson himself stressed Wilberforce's suitability, for the conduct and management of the antislave trade affair-as head of the parliamentary effort.
The clinching argument for Clarkson himself, however, and probably for many of the older generation of abolitionists, was the providentialist one.
This powerful combination and union of men and measures' could not have prevailed ‘if God had not bestowed His blessing on the work’.
It followed that no individual should boast of his role ‘but be thankful that he has been permitted to be useful’.
This was the fundamental ground of the strong emotional dislike of older abolitionists for internal polemics in the  movement and distaste for any derogation from a transcendent commitment to the cause.
The younger James Stephen in essays in the Edinburgh Review in 1838 and 1843, later republished and expanded in Essays in Ecclesiastical Biography (1849), took up the tradition of abolitionist historical writing on antislavery and was joined in it by his younger brother, Sir George Stephen, with Anti-Slavery Recollections (1854).
Both were evidently embarrassed by the attack on Clarkson and yet both betray a shift away from the interpretation of the antislavery movement as integrative and inclusive.
James Stephen would not allow an exaggeration of Clarkson's contribution but saw the historical memory of antislavery preserved in the names of Wilberforce and Clarkson ‘not by any human caprice or fortuitous accident but by the selection and appointment of the Master they served’.
Similarly circumspect, George Stephen granted Clarkson priority in time but underlined how Wilberforce's prominence enabled him to make a public issue of the slave trade in a way Clarkson could never have done.
Clarkson for many years, though, acted as Wilberforce's ‘abolition walking stick’.
This evenhandedness in relation to individuals was, in the case of both writers, however, set within an emphasis on the predominant contribution of Clapham to antislavery.
James Stephen saw abolition in 1807 as having world-wide consequences as well as setting in train ‘by slow but inevitable steps’ the extinction of British colonial slavery.
‘The mainsprings’ of these developments ‘as far as human agency is concerned’were found in the Clapham sect.
Antislavery history thus entailed building a monument to the sect.
George Stephen, moreover, agreed with his brother that, at least in the earlier stages of antislavery, exceptional individuals rather than reform associations shaped the movement for change.
While James devoted considerable space to William Wilberforce and less to the elder Stephen, Macaulay and others, George especially underlined the work of his father and Macaulay who were, he claimed, the only long-standing abolitionists who had had direct experience of the effects of the slave trade and slavery and who were portrayed as replacing Clarkson as the ‘crutches’ of the parliamentary antislavery leadership by the 1820s.
That leadership itself fell to Buxton, he argued, as a protégé of Clapham.
George Stephen was not so poor an historian as to refuse credit to other parliamentarians such as Lushington, Brougham and Denman who could not be accounted Claphamites, nor to nonconformity in the  country, nor to Emmanuel Cooper the Quaker for his work in the Agency nor Cropper and Sturge for their financial support of the Agency.
Two further features of his narrative, none the less, register that it was composed in the changed atmosphere of ‘late’ antislavery.
Developments in antislavery — both the spread of local associations and the splitting off of the Agency campaign — were portrayed as only occurring when they were functionally necessary and productive of minimal conflict.
At the same time they were consistent with a Clapham-style leadership.
The African Institution, when the time came for public agitation, was unfitted for the task because of its direction by ‘men of rank and high position’.
It was Macaulay, in the George Stephen account, who, through the Anti-Slavery Society, substituted the power of association.
The effective creation of an urgent mass antislavery opinion, however, was dependent upon the efforts of the Agency committee and its lecturers.
But after the first somewhat angry alienation', apart from Macaulay who remained doubtful, the honesty of the old antislavery leadership and of the Young England Agency men enabled them ‘to play successfully into each other 's hands.
They worked separately but they worked harmoniously together’.
The Agency committee was not hostile to Buxton, except for some occasional attenders, and Cooper and the working core ‘maintained their faithful allegiance to the leaders to the last’.
This was a rather partial view of the critical phase of the antislavery movement but it presented a satisfactorily smooth expansion beyond the ‘aristocracy’ of antislavery to the successful incorporation of provincial respectability in an essentially religious endeavour and led by Claphamites and their heirs.
The second feature of George Stephen's narrative which gave it a markedly ideological cast was its distancing of the movement from the kind of radicalism and militant nonconformity of the 1830s and 1840s many of his readers associated with antislavery.
One of the major objectives of the account was to reapportion credit within the movement since much of it had been misappropriated by those who had done little or only appeared after emancipation in 1834.
Whether as a direct result of this or not, the treatment of the antislavery agent and later rhetorician of radicalism, George Thompson, was noticeably cool; he was eloquent but lacked education and was thus in ‘entire ignorance of the tone of that high society from which the great bulk of our parliamentary men are taken’.
He had been a ‘lamentable failure’ as Radical MP for Tower Hamlets between 1847 and 1852.
By contrast Stephen thought the Rev. Baldwin had been much more  effective as an agent being ‘connected by birth with the higher orders’ and because, as a religious man (which by implication Thompson was not), he lectured from the heart.
More remarkably, George Stephen was virtually silent on the later antislavery commonly associated with aspects of radical politics and militant nonconformity.
The cause was defined as essentially terminating in 1834; the BFASS was thus marginal to the tradition of antislavery; it was conducted, with few exceptions, by ‘men utterly unknown in the great Antislavery battle’.
Even Sturge, whom Stephen cast in a minor role in the heroic days, had been ‘so headstrong in his peculiar notions of right and wrong’ that he had embarrassed the Young England abolitionists in the 1830s and such ‘eccentric principles’as his pacifism had, in Stephen's judgement, led the BFASS into error by opposing the continuation of the squadron policy in West African waters in the 1840s.
The BFASS, let alone its more radical critics, was in effect portrayed as a late and illegitimate claimant to membership in the line of antislavery bodies.
This was history whose tendency was neither cohesive nor energising.
Rather it attempted to lay the movement to rest.
With such evidence of divergent religious feeling, and at a time when antislavery was no longer disciplined by the immediate and agreed task of overthrowing colonial slavery, it is not surprising that organisational pluralism became a feature of the reform culture of abolitionists.
This was a tendency reinforced by the impact of American abolitionist divisions in Britain from 1840 onwards.
The different bodies mentioned in chapter 3 followed different routes to the objective of a free-labour world.
They were not only evidence of disagreement amongst abolitionists but perceived by contemporaries to have different religious and political characteristics.
Buxton initiated his Civilization Society in part because he feared that to wait for antislavery principles to permeate foreign societies of slaveholders, which he believed to be BFASS policy, ‘would cost us half a century, and that implies the sacrifice of twenty five millions of the human race’.
Equally, however, Sturge found the Civilization Society's policy ‘inadequate to meet the case but as it involves a violation of my peace principles I can take no part in it’.
Abolitionists who had earlier given their commitment to an integrated movement still hoped to avoid open conflict despite these tensions.
Clarkson wanted to co-operate with Buxton and J.J. Gurney to ‘, endeavour to preserve harmony between the two Societies’ and indicated his ecumenical support for other organisations advocating black improvement and different lines of attack on slavery: he mentioned Oberlin  College, the Society for Free Negroes in Canada and the British India Society (BIS).
Gurney, engaged in starting auxiliaries of both the Civilization Society and the BFASS in Norfolk, urged influential figures in the county to support both.
Buxton and Sturge both wished each other 's efforts well and hoped they would be complementary.
Such hopes, however, were likely to be fragile.
Buxton's group was associated with ‘great names’ and, in some eyes, predominantly Tory.
The Civilization Society more deliberately went out for bipartisan support and one result was that the six Conservative MPs who belonged to only one antislavery body chose to give their support to it.
In attempting to maintain a broad political base and in holding together the traditions of moderate evangelical Anglicanism and moderate dissent the Buxton group sought ‘a Wilberforce station’ but in changed circumstances.
Those circumstances included the increasingly expressed distaste of more extreme evangelical Anglicans for collaboration with nonconformists and a tendency of such people towards Toryism.
Buxton, perhaps despite himself, grew anxious not to alienate Tory support, even if that meant silencing more liberal voices.
In effect the Clapham tradition was no longer a viable model in the Civilization Society by 1840.
Some evidence has already been offered in this and the previous chapter of the rise of provincial radical dissent within antislavery; much of it was channelled into the BFASS from its beginnings in 1839.
To one old abolitionist in 1840 the annual meeting of the BFASS was ‘only composed of whig radicals’ and marked a break from the political and religious ecumenicism of the antislavery tradition.
Despite Gurney's effort in Norfolk, in a number of other localities local abolitionists could not find enough support for two organisations and BFASS supporters argued against auxiliaries for Buxton's society.
The British India Society had no longer a life than Buxton's group (both were defunct by 1843) but its brief existence indicated further fragmentation in the internal culture of the movement.
Its adherents were often politically radical and had religious outlooks tending to the liberal or antinomian.
At its core were Joseph Pease of Darlington, head of the junior branch of the philanthropic and entrepreneurial family, and his daughter, Elizabeth.
With her father she matched sympathy for disaffected working men with devotion to the cause of West Indian freedmen, American slaves and the indigenous population of India.
George Thompson gave his rhetorical gifts to the cause for a time.
But the BIS can also be seen as the project of a dissident  Quakerism which led Elizabeth Pease Nichol to leave the Friends on her marriage; the Peases found collaborators in the Dubliner Richard Webb whose contempt for the ‘form and conventionalisms’ of British reformers has already been indicated and his Unitarian associates such as James Haughton.
That the BIS was a mixture of unconventional religion and radical politics was further underlined by the support of Garrison and his emissaries from the United States; British India development as a way of undermining British dependence on American cotton was equally for them part of a package, which included association with ‘moral force’ Chartists and hostility to evangelical ‘sectarianism’in antislavery in the form of the BFASS, a view they held despite Sturge's middle-class political radicalism.
American abolitionist divisions translated to Britain had a lingering power in the 1840s and 1850s to maintain organisational friction between the London committee of the BFASS and provincial groups faithful to Garrison and hostile to the British national organisation's links with the evangelical circles of Lewis Tappan and his associates in America.
Yet, loyalty to distant American factions apart, religious enmities in Britain helped split abolitionists and also had much to do with the conviction of anti-BFASS radicals that the Antislavery Reporter gave a distorted and very partial view of the antislavery scene in both Britain and America.
It contributed to the decision of the Unitarian Dr John Estlin to fund the alternative Anti-Slavery Advocate , edited by Webb and beginning publication in 1852.
It would, however, be too simple to portray antislavery after the late 1830s as purely a scene of contending sects more concerned with maintaining their own kinds of purity than achieving anything practical.
All abolitionists in the 1840s and 1850s recognised their organisational weakness and the barrier to influence created by the widespread assumption that the main task of British abolitionism was completed.
The different antislavery bodies provided much weaker foci for antislavery identity, whether they were local or national in aspiration, than the overarching organisation of the heroic days of the movement.
Thus paradoxically organisational loyalties as such were less likely to be the source of permanent, unchanging estrangement of abolitionists from each other.
There was some room for individuals and groups to experiment with limited co-operation across factional lines if they could temporarily forget their religious and sometimes political differences.
This in turn was possible when abolitionists were provided with the occasional opportunity, by factors exterior to the small British antislavery world, to break through the torpor and  indifference of opinion and mobilise popular enthusiasm of a kind not seen since the 1830s.
The rousing campaign for free trade in the 1840s impinged upon many abolitionists especially when proposals to equalise and reduce duties on sugar entering Britain, whether it originated in free-labour or slave-labour economies, were put forward.
The result was not merely a blurring but a confusion, of normal factional loyalties.
The BFASS divided between a Sturgeite majority advocating a continued discrimination in favour of free-labour sugar and a minority, mainly of West Countrymen, for complete free trade in sugar.
Some anti-BFASS radicals, especially the Dublin circle of Webb and Haughton, supported the majority position but some of their usual British allies in support of the Garrisonians assumed their normal stance hostile to the Broad Street committee of the BFASS.
More positively, both the BFASS and most of its critics in England and Scotland, though not some of the more circumspect Scots abolitionists, sounded off powerfully against the Free Church's financial reliance on southern slaveholders after its break from the Church of Scotland in 1843.
The great occasion, however, of commitment to the cause transcending factional divisions came with the opportunity provided by Mrs Stowe's visit to Britain in 1853 after the enormous impact of Uncle Tom's Cabin .
From the Peer to the peasant the whole country seem boiling with indignation’ recorded the Edinburgh Quaker, Henry Wigham.
Although initially the visit revived divisions over attitudes to Garrison and his ideas, so great was antislavery enthusiasm that abolitionists of all kinds took the occasion to publicise the nature of American slavery and raise funds throughout the country for Mrs Stowe to employ against the southern system in the way she thought best.
Mrs Stowe's impact through her book also produced the Stafford House Address from the aristocratic coterie around the Duchess of Sutherland and Lord Shaftesbury.
Its inadequacies as an antislavery statement produced remarkable agreement across the range of abolitionist sentiment.
The new young secretary of the BFASS, Louis Chamerovzow, described the aristocratic group as one whose antislavery feelings ‘had not simply been re-awakened but in many instances actually created by Mrs. Stowe's work’, distancing such newcomers from those who had laboured long in the cause.
The Broad Street group, the radicals in Bristol normally critical of the BFASS, and Harriet Martineau, attacked the Stafford Mouse preference for an amelioration policy in America as a retreat from the fundamental principle of immediatism.
Whatever their other differences, good middle-class reformers would not countenance such ideological backsliding or remain passive before fashionable aristocratic interventions.
The reawakening of interest in slavery prompted by Mrs Stowe's writing and her visit to Britain thus encouraged some co-operation, or at least recognition that parallel action based on elements of agreement was taking place amongst different groups of abolitionists.
One other factor converted this blurring of factional lines into a quite serious attempt at mutual reassessment of their relations by these groups; a younger generation of reformers, particularly personified in the secretary of the BFASS from 1852, L.A. Chamerovzow, and George Thompson's son-in-law, the journalist Frederick Chesson, were willing to try to overcome the hostilities inherited from the previous generation.
They lacked any direct involvement in the origins of those hostilities and were clear-eyed about the depleted resources with which they had to work to arouse a usually indifferent public.
Chamerovzow's succession to the long-serving John Scoble, particularly detested by critics of the BFASS, was itself conducive to aspirations for better relations, hopes which Chamerovzow built on by undertaking as editor of the Anti-Slavery Reporter to report abolitionist efforts in Britain and America whoever undertook them.
Signs of the times appeared in a number of different places.
J.B. Estlin, the Unitarian friendly to the Garrisonians, responded from Bristol to Chamerovzow's openness and in April 1853 gave his support to the BFASS, though Richard Webb remained sceptical of the possibilities of real co-operation.
Mary Estlin's Bristol and Clifton Ladies' Anti-Slavery Society also warmed to the changed tone of Broad Street although they had broken from them barely a year earlier.
Another inveterate opponent, William Smeal, still secretary of the Glasgow Emancipation Society, told Chamerovzow that he was willing to organise a meeting in Edinburgh during a peace convention to discuss a movement towards unity in antislavery ranks.
At that meeting it was concluded that while a future conference on unity had to be based on a recognition that some differences of emphasis would always exist, they need not disrupt harmony.
Thompson, making a tour of the Lancashire cotton belt, continued to regard himself as independent in late 1853 but promised Chamerovzow, ‘My exhortations shall be to unite upon broad principles for a common object.’
In the same year in both Leeds and Manchester stumbling efforts were made to overcome distrust and form new antislavery organisations uniting all adherents.
The case of Manchester is particularly  significant because, although the project started well, failure foreshadowed unsuccessful efforts to establish a single organisation nationally.
A preliminary meeting in Manchester in October 1853 got the support of the BFASS committee; when an inaugural gathering was held Sturge and Thompson spoke from the same platform and it was resolved that the Manchester Anti-Slavery Union should become an auxiliary of the BFASS.
The common ground Chamerovzow sketched out was a commitment to working for the importation of free-labour cotton for the Lancashire mills and a shared desire to isolate American churchmen who were not firmly antislavery.
Thompson in turn deliberately recalled the days of an integrated and successful movement by praising Sturge's work a generation earlier with Wilberforce and Clarkson.
All seemed set for an experiment in unity.
Within a few months these hopes were dashed when a majority of the Manchester committee insisted on recognising an American evangelical, the Rev. Fred Hemming, as an official agent to raise money for the anti-Garrisonian abolitionists in America although he only had the general support of Lewis Tappan and apparently regarded the Garrisonians and their British sympathisers as ‘infidel abolitionists’.
The result was a schism by the Thompson-Chesson group and the formation by them of the short-lived North of England Anti-Slavery and India Reform League.
The American factor and the continued strength of a spirit of religious intolerance had proved decisive in Manchester and in 1854 they were equally to be central in the failure to find a single national organisational focus for antislavery commitment.
An anniversary meeting in Manchester on 1 August 1854 showed willingness to attend a unity conference in London in November although it was under the aegis of the BFASS.
The Estlins hoped that at best a merger of the BFASS and others could be achieved.
Their fellow liberal Unitarian, S.A. Steinthal, however, thought the old Broad Street leadership, ‘these orthodox gentlemen’, were as intolerant as ever to reformers of his persuasion ‘but to others they are all light’.
The Glasgow Emancipation Society greeted the conference with hope but also the requirement that the antislavery platform should be of the ‘broadest and most Catholic principle’ avoiding ‘sectarian feeling and jealousy’.
In other words, different elements in antislavery approached the London conference with various doubts and some hopes but with fundamental positions unaltered.
The conference was broadly enough based to include both Samuel Gurney and the intemperate American Garrisonian, Parker Pillsbury, but although the BFASS committee supported a resolution encouraging American abolitionists of all ‘persuasions, it refused to eat enough of its past words to single out for particular mention the American Anti-Slavery Society, associated with the Garrison's ‘heretical’ notions.
Thompson encouraged acceptance of this compromise since in private talks with Sturge he became convinced that in return its critics would get most of what they wanted from the BFASS.
Manoeuvring by the Unitarian from Liverpool, Francis Bishop, got a statement from Chamerovzow that no resolution repudiating the American Anti-Slavery Society was on the books of the BFASS.
Thompson stressed that the sine qua non of future co-operation was that ‘no man's or woman's cooperation is to be accepted or rejected by a reference to his or her peculiar religious or non-religious, political or non-political views’.
He appears to have believed that this had been conceded in substance ‘by the admission of all sects and all sexes, unquestioned to the Conference’.
He implied, in other words, that the BFASS had been brought a long way since its restrictive outlook had so divided the 1840 World Convention.
Others, notably Webb and the Unitarian minister William James from Clifton, were more concerned with the failure to get open sanction of the American Anti-Slavery Society; to obtain, that is, a repudiation by the BFASS of its own past conduct.
This reflects the almost total concern with American abolitionism of some reformers as well as a liberalism about religious matters which regretted even the refusal to allow the unbeliever Joseph Barker to speak at the earlier Manchester conference.
Such radicalism demanded too much, because there was little popular momentum to be gained from harmony through compromise, once the first flush of enthusiasm engendered by Mrs Stowe passed.
Estlin now withdrew from the BFASS, demonstrating for one last time his use as a barometer of sentiment in intra-reform relations.
Thompson, Chesson and Chamerovzow remained personally friendly but a later effort at co-operation in 1859 between the BFASS and Thompson's London Emancipation Committee produced more recriminations.
The result was that at the end of the decade British critics of the BFASS, few as they were, tried to draw together once again.
They reasserted their support of the American Anti-Slavery Society, sought links between their local groups and accepted the logic of being a minor adjunct of a movement whose dynamic lay in another country.
Even as other abolitionists refused that logic they were unable to find any means of reasserting the vitality of the emancipation cause and of recovering an integrated antislavery  culture such that loyalty to their identity as abolitionists took precedence over religious and political differences.
Only with the impact of the American Civil War did many abolitionists again transcend their local conflicts.