

CHAPTER THREE
The Opening Gambits
The high hopes for a new morality in Europe espoused by the Resistance movements, and which had included European union as a top priority, seemed to be dashed by the outbreak of the Cold War and the failure of the first postwar governments to include integration on their policy agendas.
Yet the idea of union did not die.
To many, the postwar economic problems of the continent demanded a substantial element of very close cooperation.
A myriad of associations campaigning for some form of political and economic union proliferated across all the democracies and across most political party persuasions: for example, the United Europe Movement in Britain, organised by Churchill; the Catholic Nouvelles Équipes Internationales and the Socialist Movement for the United States of Europe in France, but both with some following in Belgium and Luxembourg; and the Europa-Bund in Germany.
The federalist urge remained strong, and in 1946 was consolidated internationally with the formation of the European Union of Federalists, which brought together groups in Belgium, Britain, France, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands and Switzerland.
As opposed to the past, many of these groups and some of their ideas found a wider audience among people with political prestige or in positions of political authority.
In September 1946, for example, parliamentarians from several countries came together in an International Committee for the Study of European Questions, which published a report in favour of union.
The influential European Movement, which came out of the Hague Congress of 1948, had among its patrons such politically diverse personalities as the Conservative Winston Churchill, the ex-Socialist premier of France, Léon Blum, the Christian Democrat premier of Italy, Alcide de Gasperi, and the prominent Belgian Socialist, Paul-Henri Spaak — senior statesmen whose presence reflected the widespread appeal of the idea across political party divides.
The new postwar constitutions of France and Italy (and later that of the new Federal Republic of Germany) included clauses which allowed for the possibility of the abrogation of national sovereignty in favour of supranational authorities.
TOWARDS THE HAGUE CONGRESS
Even though ferment was widespread, motivations for seeking a more integrated Europe varied from country to country, and were coloured by national perspectives.
In Germany, for example, it was seen as a road by which a reconstructed German state could win rehabilitation and acceptance from its neighbours as an independent, equal and responsible partner — an attitude which, for example , was to lie behind much of the foreign policy strategy of Konrad Adenauer, the first leader of the Federal Republic of Germany, in the 1950s.
In Italy integration was viewed as a counterbalance to the possible domestic instability that could arise from the presence of a large and hostile Communist Party.
Many in France saw it as a route by which French prestige and French leadership within Europe could be restored.
But for most states and governments the crucial question was whether Britain would become a committed member of any European organisation.
The Nordic states were reluctant to enter into any kind of commitment, but would perhaps have been willing to follow a British lead, while in France and the Low Countries British participation was regarded as an indispensable guarantee of security against both a resurgence of German militarism and the shadowy threat of the Soviet Union.
While the United States, by virtue of its major input into Europe after 1941, may have been a European power, it was not and could not be a European state.
During the war Britain had provided the European lead and because of its wartime role was believed to have the reasons and the opportunity to effect some kind of unity.
Britain's importance was not just a matter of the political prestige gained during the war.
It was also economic: for example, after 1945 British steel production was more than two-thirds of the combined total of the other European members of the future OEEC, while its coal output nearly equalled that of all the other West European states.
Both inside and outside Britain the hopes of European federalists in 1945 had been focused upon the charismatic wartime leader, Winston Churchill.
It was widely believed that Churchill had been converted to the European cause during the war, and that he had kept the flame of union alight.
It was he who had dramatically proposed an Anglo-French Union in 1940 just before the fall of France.
Throughout the war he had returned to the theme of Europe: in a 1943 broadcast, for example, he had emphasised the need for a Council of Europe that would possess an effective network of working institutions, including a common military organisation.
Consequently, federalists were shocked and disheartened by the 1945 British general election, which removed Churchill and his Conservatives from power.
While Churchill might still agitate for union, it was doubtful whether the new Labour government of Clement Attlee would display any enthusiasm for it.
Churchill did continue to argue for European integration.
In a major speech delivered in Zürich in 1946, he ranged widely across the whole subject of integration, arguing that it was imperative to establish a United States of Europe.
This speech was his most significant review of the question since losing the premiership.
It helped to spur federalists to greater efforts, and inspired the creation of new organisations devoted to the European cause.
The British Labour government watched this activity cautiously.
The prime minister, Clement Attlee, and his colleagues were not anti-European, but they were opposed to any kind of integration, though the Foreign Minister, Ernest Bevin, had made it clear from the outset that he was in favour of more cooperation, especially around an Anglo-French core, and by 1947 was even indicating an interest in some kind of customs union.
But the burst of enthusiasm, which had support in several European governments, was too strong to be denied entirely.
Still under the aegis of Churchill, the various organisations agreed in December 1947 to establish an International Committee of the Movements for European Unity.
The Committee's task was to make arrangements for a congress of all those interested in union, to impress Europe with the vitality and necessity of the cause, and to seek some institutional structures of a European organisation.
Hopes were high because it seemed that Britain might be prepared to modify its position: note had been taken of a speech made by Bevin in the House of Commons on 22 January 1948 when he commented that the idea of unity was  undisputable and that ‘the time is ripe for a consolidation of Western Europe’.
But whether Bevin wished to go beyond the kind  of cooperation he was currently pursuing in the security field was a moot question.
In due course the International Committee completed its arrangements, and the Congress of Europe was held in The Hague in May 1948.
With several hundred delegates from 16 states, including a group from Germany led by Konrad Adenauer, as well as observers from the United States and Canada, the Congress was an impressive display of the widespread interest in and enthusiasm for the idea of unity.
Most political persuasions bar the extremes were represented, along with many influential political leaders.
Most significant, perhaps, was the absence of a strong British Labour presence: indeed, the party executive had frowned upon participation, dismissing the Congress as a body composed of ‘unrepresentative interests’ that could not effectively advance any successful and workable form of integration.
The demands and arguments put forward at the Congress had all been heard before.
Delegates wanted a European assembly, a charter of human rights, and a European court.
The Congress itself was too unwieldy and too disparate to achieve any practical measure of success.
It concluded its deliberations with a series of ringing statements on the desirability of a united Europe, with some common institutions, within which ‘the European states must transfer and merge some portion of their sovereign rights so as to secure common political and economic action for the integration and proper development of their common resources’.
Apart from the rhetoric and the generation of adrenalin, few practical measures were adopted.
One, however, was the decision to establish a European Movement which would have a National Council in each country, to carry on the debate and pressure governments.
This decision was welcomed by the United States, and in 1949 an American Committee on a United Europe began to give financial assistance to the European Movement.
Even though Churchill was appointed as one of the presidents of the Movement, it was at this point that British leadership began to disappear from the unity movement.
THE BRITISH VIEW
Churchill himself had not been notably concerned with translating the general principle into practical realities.
Moreover, his speeches had not been fundamentally concerned with ‘Britain with the continent’, but with ‘Britain and the continent’.
Rather than regarding  an Anglo-French Union as a core of European unity, Churchill believed that the essential beginning was reconciliation between France and Germany.
In his famous Zürich speech, for example, he had argued that these two states ‘must take the lead together’.
But he then went on to indicate that Britain would not necessarily be part of the new Europe when he said ‘Great Britain, the British Commonwealth, mighty America, and I trust Soviet Russia…must be friends and sponsors of the new Europe and must champion its right to live and shine’.
In short, there was not much in the end that separated Churchill from the official British position.
Like many British politicians, he had accepted European unity as a valuable ideal.
But Britain did not have to be part of that unity; it could only be associated with it.
Indeed, the basic British attitude had been summed up admirably by Churchill himself many years earlier when he wrote, in an American periodical in 1930, ‘We see nothing but good and hope in a richer, freer, more contented European commonalty.
But we have our own dream and our own task.
We are with Europe, but not of it.
We are linked, but not compromised.
We are interested and associated, but not absorbed.’
For at least a further two decades that was to be the reality of an intransigent British position.
And yet the various integrationist movements, brash or hesitant, in the 1940s looked to Britain for leadership, and clung to the hope that Britain would be absorbed, not least because of concerns over security.
Even Jean Monnet, the mover of much that was to occur in the future, saw Britain as the nucleus of a European Community.
On the other hand, British political leaders gave priority to what Churchill had called their own dream and their own task.
These had two components: the commitment to the Commonwealth, and the notion of a special Anglo-American relationship.
It was a mistake to regard the development of European integration after 1945 as the outcome of a continuing debate between Britain and the continent: all points of view could be found in all countries.
Yet in a way it is a simple but effective means of analysing the subject since for much of the postwar period Britain was the leading spokesman for a particular point of view.
Based upon an interpretation of the past Britain tended to give high priority to defence and security.
The official policy was to establish a number of mutual aid pacts with other European democracies, a line that was shared by France until 1948.
In the end the only one was the 1947 Treaty of Dunkirk with France.
Its justification was primarily military — a guarantee of aid in the face of any future German aggression and, for Britain, the beginnings of an alliance against the Soviet Union — though it  did provide for bilateral economic assistance and cooperation, and, indeed, a standing economic committee was established.
As we have seen, by 1948 the British government seemed to have modified its attitude, and many thought the time to be more propitious for attempting to pull Britain more firmly within the European orbit.
But it soon became apparent that Britain still preferred little more than an effective interlocking system of treaties along the lines of the Treaty of Dunkirk: increasingly, if these were initiated, they would be little more than holding operations until the United States shared in the defence of Western Europe.
In pursuance of his objectives, Ernest Bevin took the lead in negotiating a cooperative arrangement with France and the Low Countries.
The result, the 1948 Treaty of Brussels, was a 50 year pact ‘for collaboration in economic, social and cultural matters, and for collective self-defence’, which Britain saw as a practical basis for cooperation, but not union.
Bevin reiterated a warning against what he regarded as excessively ambitious hopes of integration.
The Dutch Parliament thought otherwise, and urged its government to pursue a federal association of states with more vigour.
As for the Treaty of Brussels, the general direction of its affairs would be intergovernmental in nature, the responsibility of a committee of the national foreign ministers.
It seems clear that Britain at least did not envisage any institutional structures beyond this, yet some form of framework would have been necessary if all the objectives of the treaty were to be properly fulfilled.
Bevin did have a view of Europe, but it was a limited one conditioned by pragmatism and scepticism.
Progress should be slow and cautious, and not be out of step with Britain's other major foreign policy concerns, the Commonwealth and the United States.
He saw the Brussels agreement being extended eventually to cover the whole of Western Europe, but each step would have to be thoroughly explored, and the overall character would have to remain at the level of intergovernmental cooperation.
Within a short space of time, however, there were already signs that the Brussels structure was running away from the British idea.
The enthusiasm aroused in the other four members by the time of the Hague Congress was one indication that Britain was in danger of becoming rather isolated.
Another was a change of heart in France.
As Britain concentrated more on integrating the United States into a western defensive system, France began to see integration as a way of increasing its own influence within Europe, especially over the future of Germany.
At the Congress of Europe, ideas and views had ranged from those favouring a weak form of federalism to  those demanding a fully sovereign supranational authority.
Even within the non-union camp, the British idea of a loose grouping of European states in close association with the United States faced opposition from those who argued for a ‘third force, essentially a cooperative European security arrangement without American participation: General de Gaulle had already made it clear in 1946 that he favoured this path.
Despite British disapproval, ardent federalists hoped to utilise the Brussels Treaty as a springboard for their ambitions, encouraged by the changing attitude of the United States, now seemingly desirous of a stable and effective Western Europe.
Throughout the remainder of 1948 Britain attempted to stick to its position.
It again resorted to the previously tried formula of a counter-proposal that might serve as a compromise.
The suggestion was that West European foreign ministers should form a semi-permanent committee that would meet at regular intervals to discuss problems of common concern.
Britain wished, however, to exclude defence and economic affairs from the brief.
The former would be the province of the Atlantic military alliance that Britain hoped the United States would create, while the latter were held to fall under the purview of the body established to administer the Marshall Plan.
It seemed clear that anything more than a purely intergovernmental system of consultation and cooperation would be deemed undesirable by Britain.
But the force of opinion against Britain and its supporters, notably Ireland and Scandinavia, was already gaining strength throughout 1948, under the stimulus of the Congress of Europe.
Churchill's proposal made at The Hague for a European Assembly had been taken up with vigour by the newly formed European Movement.
In July the International Committee of the Movements for European Unity agreed to ask the national parliaments of Western Europe to lend their voices to the argument.
More importantly, however, some national governments swung more firmly in favour of the idea.
In July the prime minister of Belgium and a committed Europeanist, Paul-Henri Spaak, stated that he supported a European Assembly and announced that he had asked the European Movement to consider plans for such a body.
At the end of the month a new government in France, with a strong pro-European cast of ministers, including Robert Schuman at the foreign ministry, contacted the other members of the Brussels Treaty, urging the establishment of a European Assembly.
A proposal from Italy in the same month went further, to argue that OEEC should take the lead in the matter.
A few weeks after receiving Spaak's invitation, the European Movement responded with a memorandum on the details of the proposed assembly.
In early September Belgium and France stated that they would place the memorandum on the agenda of the forthcoming meeting of the Permanent Committee of the Brussels states.
In October Britain had to yield to the pressure and agree to endorse the establishment under the Brussels Treaty of a study commission on the feasibility of an assembly.
The Labour government, however, still regarded the whole trend with almost unmitigated hostility, and showed its distaste by sending only a low-grade delegation to the study commission.
At subsequent meetings Britain attempted to divert the discussions towards its favoured position of a permanent committee of foreign ministers.
This was not at all what the supporters of union wanted, but they were willing, in order to lure and placate British opinion, to accept such an intergovernmental structure alongside an assembly.
This two-tier compromise was the essence of the study commission's report issued in January 1949.
Even so, the British delegation, under instructions from London, reserved its position.
Eventually, after further compromises to meet British objections about the public nature of the ministerial meetings, the foreign ministers of the Brussels states issued a communiqué on 29 January 1949 in favour of a Council of Europe ‘consisting of a ministerial committee meeting in private and a consultative body meeting in public’.
The British strategy had been, in Bevin's words, to ensure that the proposed structure would be ‘as little embarrassing as possible’.
In view of the past it is not surprising, and in view of the future it is significant, that Britain still preferred to remain aloof from Europe.
These developments were not simply a confrontation between Britain and Europe.
Other states shared the British unease.
But whereas integrationist sympathies were widespread in many continental states, they had little purchase in Britain, especially within the ruling Labour Party.
Notwithstanding the British unhappiness, the proposals were accepted at the meeting of foreign ministers in London, where Britain had a final victory in defeating a proposal from France and Italy that the new body should be named the European Union.
The Statute of the Council of Europe was signed as the Treaty of Westminster, one month after the establishment of NATO, on 5 May 1949 by representatives of 10 states, and arrangements were made for the organisation to establish permanent offices in Strasbourg.
Its supporters regarded it as a happy augury that on the same day  the Soviet Union finally called off its blockade of Berlin.
With its aim of achieving ‘a greater unity between its Members for the purpose of safeguarding and realising the ideals and principles which are their common heritage and facilitating their economic and social progress’, the new body became Western Europe's first postwar political organisation, one which immediately and daringly claimed that it would work for ‘an economic and political union’.
The Council of Europe has remained Western Europe's largest organisation.
The original membership of 10 — Belgium, Denmark, France, Britain, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, Norway and Sweden — had grown to 18 by 1965.
Greece and Turkey joined in 1949, Iceland in 1950, the Federal Republic of Germany in 1951 (with the Saar region, disputed between France and West Germany, having associate status until its reunification with West Germany in 1956), Austria in 1956, Cyprus in 1961, Switzerland in 1963, and Malta in 1965.
After the collapse of their authoritarian dictatorships in the mid-1970s, Spain and Portugal were also admitted to membership.
POLITICAL ASSOCIATION: THE COUNCIL OF EUROPE
In August 1949 the Consultative Assembly of the Council of Europe held its first session in Strasbourg.
Federalists and functionalists alike regarded it as a great achievement and a decisive breakthrough in the fight for a united Europe, and immediately set out to make the new body a more effective organ of integration than was apparent in its charter.
They had two primary objectives: to develop some semblance of supranational authority, and to strengthen the Assembly vis-à-vis the Committee of Ministers.
For, despite the resounding phraseology, the creation of the Council of Europe had not in any degree diminished national sovereignty as represented by the ministers.
In the last resort the aims of the Council were to be achieved by ‘discussion of questions of common concern and by agreements and common action in economic, social, scientific, legal and administrative matters and in the maintenance and further realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms’.
Defence was excluded because it was controversial, given the presence as founder members of two states, Sweden and Ireland, which still professed a policy of neutrality.
The Council's aims were still very generalised.
In effect, while it had a wide field of reference, at the same time its ability to do things was severely limited.
Any international body could minimally agree to a framework of discussion and agreement.
In many ways the Council of Europe was little more than a continuation of the traditional format of cooperation, transcribed to a bigger stage, and could not itself move forward to a supranational or federalist future.
This is not to say that it would not encourage efforts at more intense integration: indeed, this was to be one of the major concerns of the Assembly.
Within the Council there were no surprises or novelties about the Committee of Ministers: with each state having one vote and a veto, it became little more than an intergovernmental conference of foreign ministers meeting twice yearly.
In 1952 it adopted the practice of permitting deputies to stand in for the ministers: the deputies soon became permanent features, attending to all business except that deemed to be symbolically important.
Most decisions have required unanimity, thus allowing reluctant members the right of a veto, though a loophole does allow members to pursue a policy without requiring the assent or cooperation of the others.
This was not used directly until 1956, with the creation of a European Settlement Fund.
The most radical innovations towards integration that were to come later were initiated outside the framework of the Council and its Committee of Ministers.
In that sense the Committee has not been a true executive body; but nor was it designed to be.
In relaying decisions to the member governments, it has only been able to recommend.
Committee members could go their own way whenever national concerns dictated a strictly national path.
The Assembly, on the other hand, has been more adventurous and imaginative almost from the outset.
At its first session in 1949 Paul-Henri Spaak became president.
He presided over the first of a series of discussions on how the Council could further the cause of integration.
Its members, since 1951 nominated by the national parliaments, themselves displayed a tendency in many debates to cluster around political party identity rather than nationality.
But the Assembly itself was very much a talking shop; it simply did not acquire powers that matched its proclaimed functions.
The basis of its existence was deliberation.
It was the Committee of Ministers which had the ability to determine budgets, decide on employment in the secretariat, and rule on applications for membership.
At first, the Assembly could not even decide upon its own agenda: it was only after the first session in 1949 that the Committee of Ministers agreed not to exercise its right to draw up the Assembly's agenda.
It was permitted to offer only recommendations to the Committee of Ministers, without bring able to bind the latter in any way: quite  often, the Committee simply chose to ignore or reject Assembly recommendations.
Just as the Committee was not a true executive, so the Assembly was not a true legislature.
Partly because of these restrictions on action and scope, the relationship between Assembly and Committee has often been uneasy and strained.
The divergent views simply reflected their different interests.
By and large, the Assembly became populated by people who went to Strasbourg because they were interested in Europe and unity, while ministers have represented national governments to which they are responsible.
One frustrated delegate, the leading French politician, Paul Reynard, could assert in exasperation that ‘the Council of Europe consists of two bodies, one of them for Europe, the other against it’.
Despite the introduction of a liaison committee in 1950, little common ground appeared between the two sides.
All of this frustrated the Assembly, whose major proposals involved the notion of greater European unity.
On the other hand, there were people like Spaak and the Italian premier, Alcide de Gasperi, who were prepared to accept things for what they were, to see the Council of Europe as a first step in the right direction, not an end — and a direction which they believed to be merely inevitable.
The tensions exhibited by the Council of Europe must be attributed not only to its structure, but to the forces which determined it.
The dual design had been influenced greatly by the negative British attitude, with the pro-Europeans reluctantly compromising as much as possible in order to ensure British membership.
Britain's willingness to compromise had been far less marked.
But the essential conflicts within the Council were not so much between the unevenly matched Assembly and the Committee of Ministers as between national perceptions of the desired shape of Europe.
While France, Italy and the Low Countries were interested in developing common political institutions with a supranational flavour, Britain and its Nordic supporters wanted only the traditional form of intergovernmental collaboration.
The sides were set, and national positions determined, in a debate that was to continue well into the future.
It was this seemingly irreconcilable cleavage that effectively meant that the Council of Europe was in no position to advance by and in itself the concept of European union to any great length.
The failure of ambitious projects within the Council was evident by the time of its second session in 1950.
Despite being buoyed by the attendance of a West German delegation mandated to support the establishment of a supranational federal authority, the federalist argument went down to decisive defeat.
This had several far-reaching  effects.
First, any illusions that people may have had about Britain were soon dispelled: Britain still refused to accept anything above a loose intergovernmental structure.
The effort to placate Britain came to an end.
In the future, attempts to achieve a modicum of unity would go ahead regardless of the British position.
Second, it tended to downgrade the Council of Europe, which came to be regarded by ardent Europeanists only as a symbol of unity and of better things to come.
By its success in limiting the scope of the Council of Europe, Britain effectively destroyed it as a potentially powerful engine of integration, but in so doing lost whatever control of the situation it had had.
In May 1950 the Assembly, almost as an act of desperation, sent a list of recommendations to the national parliaments, bypassing the Committee of Ministers.
The treatment of these recommendations illustrated the gulf that was growing within Western Europe.
They were positively received in the parliaments of the six states that were to take the initiative in integration in the following decade.
The British parliament, by contrast, just reiterated the view that the Council should be merely a meeting place for discussion and ideas, while in Scandinavia the recommendations were not even debated.
The Council of Europe nevertheless survived and within its limited competence has reason to be proud of the work it has done since its inception.
One of its major concerns has always been the securing and protection of fundamental human rights, and it sought to build further upon the UN Declaration of Human Rights of December 1948.
The European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms was launched in November 1950, with 12 states immediately appending their signatures.
The Convention eventually came into force in September 1953, when it received the necessary 10 ratifications.
Ironically, Britain was the first state to ratify the Convention, while France, for example, did not do so until 1974.
In order to reinforce the obligations of the Convention, the Council fostered the establishment of a Commission in 1954 and a European Court of Justice in 1959, which was to have a deep and direct impact upon ordinary European citizens in the years to come.
Although rarely hitting the headlines, the Council continued to work to achieve integration in restricted and less controversial fields.
It sponsored the European Cultural Convention of 1954 and a European Social Charter in 1961.
It sought to achieve some form of policy coordination in other, more economic sectors: transport in 1953, civil aviation in 1954, and agriculture in 1955 (though the latter was essentially organised within the context of OEEC since Switzerland and Portugal, not then Council members, were also participants).
It similarly exerted itself to establish working relationships with other international organisations, so much so that the Council of Europe became a kind of central clearing house for cooperation and coordination, with the Assembly (renamed the Parliamentary Assembly in 1974) receiving and discussing annual reports from other European bodies, such as the European Community and the European Free Trade Association, from OECD, and from several UN agencies.
The first serious challenge to the Council came with the creation of the European Coal and Steel Community.
However, the six states that joined in this new venture were strong supporters of the Council and saw no incompatibility between the two bodies.
The Council still remains the organ with the broadest spread of democratic membership: it is the West European body which perhaps will benefit first from the revolutionary changes or-1989 in Eastern Europe precisely because of its more ‘bland’ nature: in 1990 Poland signified its desire to join the Council.
Because of its spread of membership, it has retained value as a forum where a wide range of ideas and views can be aired for discussion.
It is this which has helped to prevent it from being completely submerged by later developments.
perhaps the major significance of the Council of Europe rests in the fact that it was the first European organisation with a political flavour.
As such, it was an important milestone on the road to the closer association of the European Community, a facet acknowledged by the European Union of Federalists which reported that the Council ‘marked the beginning of a real and organic cooperation between the nations of Europe’ and ‘the end of the illusion that the aim of European unity can be achieved without political machinery on a supranational level,.
EXPERIMENTS IN ECONOMIC INTEGRATION
The honour of establishing the first postwar economic arrangement belongs to Benelux, a grouping of Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg.
An agreement to come together as an economic unit was reached by the exiled governments in 1944, though the scheme did not envisage any political arrangements.
After the war they began to tackle problems of harmonising the three domestic economies, an essential step towards the projected customs union.
The latter was to be achieved through the abolition of internal customs duties and the introduction of a joint external tariff on all imports into the three  countries, and the unification of excise and other tax rates.
Progress was slow, and delayed several times.
The war had had a differential impact on the economies, with Belgium much less adversely affected than the Netherlands.
These differences were compounded by other national interests.
Eventually, however, the common external tariff and the abolition of internal customs duties were introduced in January 1948, but this did not fulfil the initial optimism.
Each state still retained a large measure of protectionism against the others, and complete free trade still remained as far away as ever.
Indeed, the excise duties remained so markedly different that tax controls on the borders between the Benelux states had to be maintained.
It is fair to say that by the time of the establishment of OEEC progress in Benelux had more or less ground to a halt.
Its experience demonstrated the difficulties of establishing an economic union even in such a compact and relatively homogeneous area as the Low Countries, where there was also a large degree of consensus on the project.
Nevertheless, Benelux did advance further than other proposals for economic union, such as that toyed at in 1945 and again in 1948 by France and Italy, and perhaps it offered valuable lessons that could be learnt by future attempts in the same direction.
The other major attempt at economic cooperation, albeit much less ambitious, took place in Northern Europe.
In earlier years a great deal of lip service had been paid in Scandinavia to cooperative efforts, up to and including economic cooperation; but the several discussions had been infrequent and without any tangible results.
It had been the Nordic states which had drawn back from the full implications of the Oslo and Ouchy Conventions of the 1930s.
In 1946, however, they agreed to establish a Scandinavian Committee for Legislative Cooperation.
Its objectives were to be quite ambitious: to vet proposed national legislation and to submit proposals for new legislation in such a way that conformity of objective and practice would be achieved, and also to ensure a coordinated joint Nordic view at international conferences.
This was not meant to be any kind of supranational authority, but under the aegis of cooperation some conformity of legislation was achieved as well as some joint initiatives, one of the first being the establishment of Scandinavian Air Lines (SAS) in August 1946.
During the discussions on the Marshall Plan, Norway proposed in July 1947 that a committee ought to be established to consider possibilities of economic cooperation.
The following February, Denmark, Iceland, Norway and Sweden agreed to create a Joint Nordic  Committee for Economic Cooperation.
This body was to explore the possibility of the elimination of internal tariffs within Scandinavia, the construction of a common external tariff, and cooperation on labour and production developments.
To some extent the work of the Committee was affected by the arguments in 1948 over a common Scandinavian military alliance.
Nevertheless, it did manage to report in January 1950 in favour of the abolition of internal tariffs, the creation of a common external tariff, and a broad customs union built upon large-scale and specialised industrial production.
By then, however, Norway, with the weakest and least industrialised economy of the three major states, was beginning to get cold feet and insisted upon appending a minority report saying that it could not, given its current economic situation, contemplate joining a customs union.
Denmark seemed to be interested in going ahead in conjunction with Sweden, but the latter was not willing to consider this.
In the face of Norwegian opposition, the Joint Committee was forced to conclude that the ‘difficulties are so significant that they cannot at present be solved by the participating countries’.
But even though what was being contemplated was regionally restricted, it nevertheless went far beyond what these states, following the British line, had been willing to accept at the European level.
With the failure of these discussions on economic union the Nordic states were left with the limited form of cooperation to which they had agreed in 1946, and also with Uniscan, a loose, consultative structure they had entered into, albeit reluctantly, with Britain under the latter's urging, but one which would involve little more than a multilateral attempt at coordinating economic policies.
Uniscan was not complex, but simply based upon consultation at the highest bureaucratic level, with occasional ministerial meetings.
While it survived, it served a useful function in obtaining agreement on some economic questions such as currency convertibility and capital transfers.
Uniscan could persist throughout the 1950s without much difficulty since it in no way threatened national independence.
More significant for Scandinavia was its retreat in 1950 back to limited and relatively non-controversial sectoral coordination at the regional level.
For example, the states coordinated their laws on citizenship in 1950 and on communications in 1951.
This pattern, on eschewing economic matters, was to culminate in the formation of the Nordic Council in 1952.
However, just as the Nordic states abandoned the idea of close economic integration, the theme was taken up in new developments elsewhere which, if they had a role model in mind, were to be based upon the more intensive ambitions of Benelux rather than the loose  informal formats ultimately favoured by Britain and Scandinavia.
With the declaration of the Schuman Plan in May 1950, European union was to acquire a new momentum and dimension, one that would proceed on a narrower front with the involvement of only a few countries, and in policy terms with a much more specific focus than that held by those who dreamed of European political federation.
CHAPTER FOUR
THE EUROPEAN COAL AND STEEL COMMUNITY
During the first two years of the Marshall Plan the West European economies responded to the injection of American aid, and production rose steadily.
While the administration of the Marshall Plan through OEEC was giving Western Europe a first lesson in economic cooperation, it was clear to the dedicated disciples of a united Europe that neither OEEC nor the Council of Europe could have anything more than a limited application.
Given the diversity of membership within both organisations, neither was likely to metamorphose itself into a different and more integrated organisation.
OEEC demonstrated how easy it was for policies of coordination to clash with national wishes and interests.
Even those governments that were in the vanguard of the urging for greater union were guilty at times of dragging their heels when OEEC proposals and policies seemed likely to have an adverse effect upon the national economy.
Nevertheless, throughout 1950, France, seeking to push Western Europe beyond OEEC and the Council of Europe, resisted measures agreed in OEEC for the liberalisation of trade.
In the same year Italy set a new higher rate of customs duties just before a scheduled meeting of GATT was due to discuss tariff reductions.
However, these irritations perhaps paled into insignificance when compared to the British position.
It was Britain more than any other country which had placed a stamp on all European discussions about integration since the war.
That was to change rapidly: 1950 was to be the year when efforts to build a united Europe with British participation came to an end.
If unity were to be achieved, a different path had to be sought.
What was needed was the necessary stimulus.
That was provided by the French foreign minister, Robert Schuman, who in May 1950 cut through all the objections and hesitations  within the European debate to propose a pooling of coal and steel resources.
THE SCHUMAN PLAN
Schuman's proposal was that coal and steel resources in Western Europe should be pooled and administered by both the national states and a new supranational authority acting conjointly, with the purpose of gradually eliminating all tariffs in these heavy industries.
But the Schuman Plan was not just economic.
Behind it lay two political motives: first, to see the Plan as the first step towards an effective political integration, and second the political conviction that stability and union within Western Europe rested ultimately upon a rapprochement between France and West Germany.
And indeed this was how Schuman's declaration began: ‘the French Government proposes that Franco-German coal and steel production should be placed under a common High Authority in an organisation open to the participation of the other countries of Europe’.
In response to a question put to him shortly afterwards as to how many participating countries he thought would be necessary to make the proposed structure viable, Schuman simply stated, ‘if necessary, we shall go ahead with only two’.
There was, in fact, nothing particularly novel about the proposal.
The choice of industries and the scheme itself had been partly influenced by two recent publications, one emanating from the Assembly of the Council of Europe and the other from the UN Economic Commission for Europe.
Both publications had made similar recommendations.
The point was that both industries were experiencing particular problems in several countries: an acute coal shortage and an oversupply of steel.
The specific plan announced by Schuman had been drafted by Jean Monnet who certainly did see it as only a first step in a chain that would ultimately lead to political integration.
After a long career in public service, Monnet had been appointed as head of the French Planning Commission.
His experiences there in grappling with the problems of planning the postwar development of the French economy had made him increasingly convinced that effective economic planning was beyond the capacity of any single state, but would depend upon intense cooperation between states.
There was a further reason which particularly affected France.
The Cold War had effectively decided what was to be done with Germany.
In 1949 two German states had emerged from the territory of the old Reich.
While France was content for Germany to remain divided, it was concerned about its new neighbour, the Federal Republic of West Germany, not least about the rapid economic growth that had occurred there after a major currency reform in 1948.
The Schuman Plan had been sold to a French government that was worried about the future political, military and economic potential of the new West German state in part as a means of keeping a check on that potential.
For its part, West Germany was unhappy about the restrictions that had been placed upon the economic development of much of its heavy industry by the International Ruhr Authority, an organisation set up by the Allies during their military occupation of Germany: the Schuman Plan offered a way to eliminate the Authority while still satisfying West Germany's neighbours about its intentions.
Monnet's original report had drawn particular attention to the fact that West Germany could easily be expected to produce steel at a cost far below what France could manage.
While there was, at least for Monnet and Schuman, an altruistic motive behind the scheme, it is clear that France found the idea attractive because it offered a better way than the International Ruhr Authority of binding the new West Germany to external control while it was still relatively weak.
Schuman achieved the maximum dramatic effect by announcing his proposal at a press conference rather than as a governmental report.
Even so, he had taken the precaution beforehand of secretly informing both the United States and West Germany of his plans.
Neither had been expected to raise objections.
The United States was still pressing for close cooperation, while the West German Chancellor, Konrad Adenauer, had on several occasions already suggested some kind of Franco-German cooperation.
There were several reasons why Adenauer pursued such a line of argument: it might be a way of helping the new West German state to achieve equality in the international order; it might placate West German annoyance over the role of the International Ruhr Authority; and it might in time offer an opportunity for West Germany to regain sovereignty of the coal and steel producing Saar, which still remained in French hands.
It is noteworthy that Schuman did not contact Britain in advance of his announcement.
Not surprisingly, Britain was annoyed at being excluded from any consultation.
However, it is highly dubious that Britain would have adopted a stance different to that it took in response to Schuman's public declaration.
For the Schuman plan  had implications beyond a simple coordination of coal and steel production.
It claimed that ‘The pooling of coal and steel production will immediately provide for the establishment of common bases for economic development as a first step in the federation of Europe, and will change the destinies of those regions which have long been devoted to the munitions of war, of which they have been the most constant victims’.
The declaration went on to state bluntly that ‘Europe must be organised on a federal basis’.
This was hardly music to Britain's ears: the Labour government had vigorously resisted all such overtures since 1945.
In some ways the idea of a coal and steel community took off because people committed to some form of common future for Western Europe occupied positions of authority in several countries: Schuman, Monnet and others in France, Adenauer in West Germany, Alcide de Gasperi and Carlo Sforza in Italy, Paul-Henri Spaak in Belgium, and Joseph Beck in Luxembourg.
However, even though many enthusiastically endorsed the creation of a supranational authority, there was still concern about how much power such a body might have.
Consequently, there were counter-proposals that within the new organisation there still should be some kind of authoritative institution that would represent the interests of the participating states.
Britain had been content with the intergovernmental structure of OEEC.
Indeed, it had even baulked over the European Payments Union for five months until it gained complete assurance that it would still be able to retain sole control over sterling as an international reserve currency.
Hence it was not surprising that Britain declined the invitation to join the proposed coal and steel structure, ostensibly because it was unwilling to accept beforehand the principle of a new and binding supranational authority.
Yet it was precisely to avoid the kind of obstructionism that Britain had indulged in in the past that participation in the new structure was made conditional upon prior agreement to the principle of a supranational authority.
While some British officials were interested in the Schuman Plan, the Labour Party rejected it as something that would limit its ability to strive for democratic Socialism in Britain ‘and to apply the economic controls necessary to achieve it’.
In the House of Commons, Clement Attlee reiterated that it would be impossible for Britain ‘to accept the principle that the most vital economic forces of this country should be handed over to an authority that is utterly undemocratic and is responsible to nobody’.
There might have been an economic argument for Britain to stay out, but the decision was quite clearly taken on political grounds.
Otherwise, it could have followed the Dutch example.
The Netherlands had been happy to accept the supranational principle in advance, but insisted on retaining the right to withdraw from the discussions should it prove impossible in its eyes for the ideas to be turned into economic practice.
In 1951, with the coal and steel discussions still going on, the British electorate returned Churchill and the Conservatives to power.
But there was to be no reversal of the British attitude.
The Conservative Party continued the Labour practice of remaining aloof, though never actively criticising attempts at European union as long as they did not threaten what Britain conceived to be its own vital interests.
In that sense Britain was not an active opponent of the new attempts at sectoral economic unification that in the early 1950s began with coal and steel.
On the other hand, however, the absence of Britain from the new developments marked the beginning of a new and decisive phase in European integration.
Britain was not entirely alone in its refusal to become involved in the Schuman plan.
It was backed by its traditional allies from the debates of previous years.
In the event it was only those six states in which agitation for closer political and economic integration had been strongest in the 1940s, with political support at the highest level, which entered into the discussions that led to the establishment of the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC).
The foundation of the ECSC marks the first significant step towards European union that went beyond being merely consultative and intergovernmental in character.
Its architect, Jean Monnet, hailed it as ‘the first expression of the Europe that is being born’.
It set the tone of the renewed debate which in the coming decade was to divide Western Europe even further, at the same time as setting in motion a groundswell that eventually produced the European Community.
THE ECSC: ESTABLISHMENT AND STRUCTURE
Even though they had all agreed beforehand to the principle of a supranational institution, the six states of ‘little’ Europe — France, West Germany, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg — faced nine months of hard bargaining after they formally began negotiations in June 1950.
In the process, the ideas that had originally been expounded by Monnet were substantially modified.
The most important factor, perhaps, was the changing status of West Germany.
In the very month that the Six began their discussions, war broke out in Korea.
In the process of reviewing its global commitments, the United States stressed even more the importance for the free world of a strong West German state.
Insofar as this affected the ECSC negotiations, it gave West Germany a far stronger hand and enabled its negotiators to resist some of the French demands, especially those which were aimed at a deconcentration and decartelisation of West Germany's heavy industries, and to pursue more urgently its own point of view on the future of the Saar.
Oddly enough, it was the United States that acted as an important intermediary in these arguments.
Finally, the ECSC Treaty of Paris, designated to last for 50 years, was signed by representatives of the six states on 18 April 1951.
After lengthy debates in each national parliament, ratification took a further year to complete.
The treaty was complex, with 100 articles and a considerable number of additional annexes.
Despite the time that had elapsed from Schuman's original declaration to ratification, the ECSC succeeded in escaping from the drawing board relatively easily.
Undoubtedly, the essentially non-problematic process was aided by the fact that the Six had been able to agree upon the basic objectives in advance — the economic objective of a common market and the political one of some kind of supranational authority — as it was also by the fact that the discussions were mainly conducted by experienced bureaucrats in closed sessions.
Behind all this, however, was the fact of the strong Christian Democrat presence in all six governments throughout the crucial 1950–52 period.
On the other hand, the ECSC proposals were supported by most political parties throughout the Six, though for different reasons.
Only in the Netherlands and Luxembourg can we perhaps speak of a party consensus on the reasons for support.
There was some opposition in Belgium, focused mainly on worries over the fate of the country's old and inefficient coal mines.
Italy accepted that there would be economic disadvantages, though in the negotiations it successfully managed to gain some important concessions for its own steel industry: but the economic worries took a clear secondary position to the political factors which were the major motives for Italy's participation.
Ironically, it was in the two countries, France and West Germany, which Schuman had seen as the hub of his scheme that the most vocal opposition was expressed.
In West Germany the leader of the opposition, Kurt Schumacher, and his Social Democrat Party rejected entry on nationalist grounds, arguing that by binding the country so closely to western states which were also members of a  military alliance led by the United States, Adenauer was making the possibility of German reunification even more difficult and remote.
In France the concept was assailed by the powerful extremes on both the right and the left: Charles de Gaulle's contemptuous dismissal of it as a directionless ‘mish-mash’ was matched by the ideological opposition of the Communist Party.
The broad support that the ECSC Treaty did receive was perhaps possible because, despite its complexity, it was rather inchoate: because it was couched in rather vague and ambiguous terms, it could be interpreted in different ways.
In that sense, ECSC was a child of a specific coalition of interests and a conjunction of specific events.
It came into being on the groundswell of the earlier federalist enthusiasm, while still being sufficiently limited and pragmatic to be deemed feasible by senior politicians who themselves were keenly interested in fostering moves towards greater and effective cooperation.
As later events were to prove, there was no guarantee that those constellations would persist over time or even continue to support moves towards integration.
The general objective of the ECSC Treaty was to foster ‘economic expansion, growth of employment and a rising standard of living’ in the member states through the development of a common market in coal and steel.
In order to ensure a more appropriate distribution across the states of production, prices and a rational pattern of modernisation, the treaty schedule called for a five-year transitional period of two distinct stages.
The ECSC would first have to dismantle tariffs and other trade restrictions.
Only then could it move on to establish a free common market.
Such an ambitious programme, which could have at least some negative consequences in the member states, could be achieved only under the supervision of a supranational authority with the necessary powers to determine what the policies of the member states ought to be.
The overseeing institution was to be the nine-member High Authority.
Its members were to be nominees of national governments: while all the states were to be represented, not more than two members could come from any one state.
In practice the three larger states were to have two nominations each, the others only one.
The term of office of the commissioners was to be six years: it would be staggered, with one-third retiring every two years, so as to provide some degree of continuity and collective memory.
In fact, its membership proved to be highly stable.
Jean Monnet was appointed as the president of the High Authority, and his resignation from the office in June 1955 was the only occasion before the setting up of the much broader  European Economic Community in 1957 when there was a change in the membership of the High Authority.
The High Authority seemed to have a wide brief on fiscal matters such as taxes and levies, as well as upon production and restrictive practices.
Its authority to work for the removal of all barriers to the free movement of coal and steel rested on a wide array of actions, ranging from non-binding recommendations to binding decisions.
The latter could be reached by a majority vote among the nine: unanimity in the High Authority was not to be necessary.
Its decisions could be positive, by directing investment or controlling both prices and production, or negative, through punishing those who ignored its decisions.
Hence, the significance of the High Authority was its ability to influence the national coal and steel industries without being countermanded by national governments.
Perhaps it was only because of the narrow range of human activities which fell within the orbit of the ECSC that the member states had been willing to cede potentially substantial powers to the body which was the fundamental supranational element of the new organisation.
Yet the High Authority was far from being a sovereign body.
It was paralleled as an executive by a Special Council of Ministers which, while bound in some important respects by High Authority decisions, could nevertheless attempt to moderate the supranationalism of the latter.
The Council had been insisted upon by the Benelux countries which, notwithstanding their strong commitment to the cause of integration, wanted a body whose purpose would be to watch over and defend the national interests of the smaller participants.
The members of the Council were drawn from the national governments and had the task of counterbalancing the High Authority's supranationalism.
On the other hand, while the High Authority required the support of the Council in, for example, any attempt to limit output because of overproduction or when seeking an equitable distribution of supplies during a shortage in output, the Council of Ministers was inhibited to some extent because the national governments did not directly finance the ECSC.
Funding was received by the High Authority from a tax levied upon coal and steel production directly from the firms concerned.
A further restraint upon the High Authority, though less potent or practicable, was to be provided by a Common Assembly of 78 members (18 from each of West Germany, France and Italy; 10 each from Belgium and the Netherlands; and 4 from Luxembourg), the first international assembly in Europe with legally guaranteed powers.
In terms of the ultimate political objective of integration, the Common  Assembly was designed to be the repository of ultimate control.
This, however, did not materialise.
The Assembly was not a true legislative body.
Its significance rested upon its ability to censure the High Authority and to demand its collective resignation, a blunt sanction that was never to be applied.
Two further checks on arbitrary High Authority action were to be offered by the avenues of organised opinion and law.
The treaty established a Consultative Committee whose task it was to advise the High Authority on all aspects of its work.
This committee was composed of representatives of producers, employees and consumers; it too, however, could not be much of a check on High Authority action if the two bodies moved on to a collision course — something, in fact, which never occurred.
Potentially more important, and significant for the further advances on European integration that were yet to come, was the decision to establish a Court of Justice.
The Court, consisting of seven judges drawn from all the national judiciaries, was to have the task of ruling on the legality of any High Authority action on the basis of complaints submitted by either national governments or industrial enterprises.
While this could be a check upon the High Authority, it could also be a check upon individualistic action by national governments.
There would be no appeal against the Court's decisions; by rooting the whole ECSC structure in the last resort in the rule of law, the drafters of the treaty introduced a concept which was to be of tremendous importance for European integration as a whole.
THE ECSC IN OPERATION
At the outset the ECSC tended to move cautiously so as not to jeopardise expansion of the European ideal by alienating public opinion.
This was reinforced by the tendency of national governments not to handle unpopular decisions if they could be transferred to the High Authority for action.
While in the longer run this practice perhaps strengthened the High Authority in its relations with the member governments, the caution it induced in the High Authority, along with the ambiguity of the treaty, made for some slow progress.
The High Authority met for the first time in the autumn of 1952, and immediately set about trying to turn the principles of the Treaty of Paris into practical results.
Six years later, when the launching  of the European Economic Community with the same six member states had in a sense superseded the ECSC, the Authority could make a reasonably positive report.
While many restrictive practices and problems remained, trade had increased within the heavy industries of the Six.
The question has to be asked, however, if this was due to the activities of the ECSC or if it was merely a consequence of the sustained economic boom which affected the whole of Western Europe.
The fact of the matter is that in terms of setting up some kind of economic common market, much of the groundwork had already been done.
Benelux, for instance, had already moved forward to setting up a low common external tariff with no internal tariffs.
Again, in terms of the quantitative restrictions that had bedevilled trade in the past, many of these had already been swept away or modified by OEEC.
The more serious difficulties, present at the outset, were political in origin.
It was symbolic, perhaps, of the deep-rooted nature of national instincts that the ECSC could not agree upon a single language in which to conduct its activities.
West Germany objected to French being the single language of the organisation, and the net result was that the ECSC had to operate with four official languages.
Similarly, there were disputes about where the new body should be physically located.
France already had the Council of Europe in Strasbourg, and it was accepted that because the Common Assembly of the ECSC would be drawn from those attending the Council of Europe, the new assembly should also be located in Strasbourg.
No consensus was possible on the other ECSC institutions, and in the end it was agreed, as a provisional measure only, to place the High Authority and the Court of Justice in Luxembourg, a temporary arrangement that in effect became permanent.
The High Authority soon discovered that to use legislation to eliminate tariffs and quotas was not sufficient to generate a common market.
Each of the member states had a host of other discriminatory practices that effectively distorted trade patterns.
It was these which made progress relatively slow, and which on occasions even led the High Authority to bow down to views expressed in the Special Council of Ministers even where under the treaty it had undisputed authority to act.
The net result was that the High Authority, and hence the ECSC, did not seem to have any grand strategy for the future in terms of planning and coordinating coal and steel output.
It did launch a general economic survey in 1953, but this was at the request of the Special Council of Ministers, itself responding to national government  worries about a slump in demand.
But the survey led nowhere, and was never repeated.
Rather than producing a brave new economic world, the ECSC and its High Authority had constantly to wrestle with national objections and intransigence.
It had, for example, to struggle with West Germany's complaints about a High Authority decision to allow French steel to be sold within West Germany with a lower level of taxation than that placed upon its own steel being sold in France.
Again, by 1955 Belgian coal and Italian steel still enjoyed substantial national protection three years into the ECSC operation.
At the end of the transitional phase, French government discrimination and obstruction in its subsidisation policies meant that to all intents arid purposes France's coal industry still remained outside the common ECSC structure.
France persisted in operating a policy of cross-subsidisation where profitable coal mines subsidised those making losses, and where in any case the profitability of the whole industry depended upon generous governmental support — both policies which directly infringed the conditions of the ECSC treaty.
And it was only in 1961 that the ECSC won a victory over a French licensing system that discriminated against imports of coal into the country.
Despite such problems of national differences and policies, the ECSC experiment could claim some success, albeit only a partial one.
By 1956, for instance, it had been able to overcome discriminatory practices in transportation rates and costs.
Overall, it could by the end of the transitional phase claim that it had changed the basis of economic competition by removing many restrictive practices and that it had eased some of the pain of economic decline by its policies towards those aging coal and steel plants that were coming to the end of a useful life.
By 1958 much trade discrimination had been eliminated, and both production and the volume of trade had greatly expanded.
It could argue that while it still had to struggle with the painful problem of modernisation in much of the coal industry, its economic statistics compared favourably with those of other countries.
On the other hand, the limitations of the supranational institutions and the unwillingness of member states totally to set aside their own national interests were starkly exposed in 1959.
The immediate cause was a mountain of surplus coal, generated by two mild winters and a slowing down of economic growth: coal stocks had quadrupled from 7 to 31 million tons since 1957.
Initially, the High Authority took no action, believing that the problem would only be temporary.
It was eventually spurred into action when the majority of the member states  began to take unilateral action to control imports of coal into their own territories, so obviating the whole object of the common market since the new controls also applied to imports from other ECSC states.
At the same time, Italy, which had to import some 90 per cent of its coal needs, preferred to buy cheaper, mainly American, coal on the open market rather than deal with its ECSC partners.
In March 1959 the High Authority declared that coal overproduction was such as to constitute a state of ‘manifest crisis’ as that term had been defined by the Treaty of Paris.
Only the Special Council of Ministers, however, had the right to declare such a state of crisis.
The ECSC rules required a qualified majority in the Council for such a declaration, something which proved to be impossible.
The Authority's proposals had involved the imposition of import controls and production quotas.
These were resisted by Italy and the Netherlands which were happy with the low level of world prices, and by West Germany which preferred to protect its own coal industry through subsidies — a route which, under the Treaty of Paris, the High Authority was forbidden to consider.
At the extreme, France, which since the late 1940s had been widely regarded as the leader of European integration, even denied that the supranational bodies had the right to acquire and use emergency powers.
But since the ECSC had been created, the faltering Fourth French Republic had collapsed in 1958, and France was then governed by President de Gaulle, determined to raise the status of France as a state and nation: it was a foretaste of the French attitude that was to affect integration in the next decade.
The High Authority, and through it the ECSC, suffered a loss of prestige: the supranational agencies, after all, had been established precisely to handle that kind of crisis.
It was an indication of the great difficulty the European idea would have in achieving concerted action in even a single economic sector, and suggested that the recently established and broader European Economic Community of 1957 would not find it easy to secure its broad objectives of common policies and a common market.
Out of the disarray into which the ECSC had fallen, the High Authority attempted to move forward to a general agreement on energy, but it was not until April 1964 that the Council of Ministers eventually agreed to a document.
While the High Authority hailed it as an energy equivalent of the common agricultural policy to which the new Economic Community was committed, the document essentially confirmed the superiority of national interests.
It essentially involved the coordination of existing national practices, especially on subsidies, and any element of a jointly financed common policy under the direction of the High Authority was simply absent.
The High Authority returned to the attack in 1966, seeking some kind of common agreement on levels of production.
While West Germany, for example, was willing to go along with the proposal (but only if there was a joint system of ECSC subsidy financing), the net importers of coal within the Six — France, Italy and the Netherlands — were totally hostile to the notion of national contributions to a joint financing policy.
Once again, the High Authority had to admit defeat, and withdrew its proposal.
The economic record of the ECSC was therefore rather mixed.
It had, however, not been intended to be just an economic body.
For people like Schuman and Monnet, it was to be the first unit in an interlocking sectoral integration that would ultimately fulfil the dream of political integration.
The key phrase was spillover.
In a functional sense, spillover was founded on the belief that contemporary economies were based upon a tangle of interrelated sectors.
Once one economic sector could be integrated, the complexity of modern economies would, force other sectors into similar structures and developments.
More important, perhaps, was the notion of political spillover.
This was based on the assumption that once supranational institutions had been set up in one economic sector, interest groups would look to that political level for the realisation of their demands, and that in time the groups would begin to appreciate the value to themselves of integration.
And again, because of the nature of the modern economy, these groups would in turn lend their support to pressures for further integration.
In retrospect, the ECSC did not seem superficially to have achieved much in the political direction.
The ECSC had not conditioned the European public in favour of supranationalism, nor had the key interest groups in coal and steel, whether the industries were publicly or privately owned, emerged as a vanguard of European integration.
The ECSC, moreover, as the 1959 crisis had amply demonstrated, had not established an unambiguous authority over national governments and parliaments.
Nevertheless, it had, on the credit side, generated a European ambience and presence.
No matter how inadequately, it was a working European operation, with a physical location, to which non-members had to pay regard.
Non-members like Britain, for example, found it useful and necessary to maintain permanent delegations in Luxembourg accredited to the High Authority.
And by its very existence, the ECSC could add some impetus towards arguments for integration, particularly through an alliance of High Authority and Assembly.
Far from restraining the former and acting as a watchdog, the  Assembly constantly urged the High Authority to make even greater supranational efforts.
Within the Assembly itself, political formations were beginning tenuously to emerge along political party lines, a practice encouraged by the official recognition of, and payment of administrative expenses to, transnational party groupings.
Equally important in building a framework for the future was the role played by the most anonymous of the ECSC's institutions, the Court of Justice.
Almost from the beginning, it was involved in hearing complaints relating to the operation of the ECSC.
Nearly all the cases that came before the Court were appeals by national governments and industries against decisions of the High Authority.
What was significant was that the vast majority of these appeals were rejected, and that while the Court had no means of enforcing its opinion, its verdicts were accepted, if not immediately implemented.
In that way the Court was perhaps the institution which most successfully stamped its imprint upon the ECSC, and in so doing built up a body of case law, an authority, and legitimacy that could serve as foundations for the future.
The ECSC also served to stimulate other developments.
In the late 1940s integrationists had tended to desire a single federal political system, which at some point would entail a single act of abrogation of national rights to a supranational authority, whose precedence over the former national states would be constitutionally defined.
The ECSC was not, and was not intended to be, that type of institution.
Its method of integration was to be more gradual, retaining for long the right of national veto.
What was needed, and what perhaps lay behind its inauguration, was an atmosphere of mutual confidence among its members, and especially between France and West Germany, which was to be produced through tackling together a list of specific problems by stipulated deadlines.
As the barriers fell, the institutions would move on, with the consent of all participants, to a further list of commitments.
While this pattern was reproduced only imperfectly in the ECSC and while a timetable of functional spillover might have taken an unconscionable time to achieve, what in the end counted for the ECSC was that it did provide an atmosphere of mutual confidence among the leaders of the member states — despite the disputes, none contemplated leaving the Community — and that this helped to pave the way for the creating of the European Economic Community in 1957.
With the establishment of the latter, some immediate rationalisation affected the ECSC.
A single  Common Assembly and Court would serve three distinct communities, the ECSC along with the new Economic Community and Euratom.
The High Authority, however, survived as a distinct body until 1965 when it was merged with the other supranational executives.
CHAPTER FIVE
THE ROAD TO ROME
The ECSC was meant to be the first of several organisations integrating economic sectors, brought about by functional and political spillover.
The six members of the ECSC, however, showed little inclination to rush matters.
Despite their support for the ECSC, the member states seemed wary about losing sovereignty and their own political control over an important industrial sector, and were loath to allow the High Authority to exercise its full constitutional competence.
These reasons partly explain the imperfect development of the ECSC during the 1950s.
However, the Treaty of Paris had confirmed and inflamed the enthusiasm of those whose dream was a united Europe; several ideas about similar schemes were advanced almost before the ink had dried on the Treaty of Paris.
However, while these ideas were based upon the projected outcome of the ECSC, they did not originate within that organisation nor from any kind of collaboration among its constituent members.
They were to be sponsored by the Council of Europe and, to some extent, by OEEC.
In November 1950 the Council endorsed the idea of ‘specialised authorities’, something which the OEEC also favoured.
In the discussions which had led to the creation of the ECSC, other economic sectors such as transport and agriculture had been highlighted as being ripe for similar developments.
It was transport which became the first post-ECSC target.
But transport networks spread far beyond the Six, and any meaningful cooperation would have to include all or most of Western Europe.
This was the thinking which lay behind the Bonnefous Plan, named after Edward Bonnefous, who was the main architect in the Council of Europe for a European Transport Authority linked to the Council.
Given the wide diversity of views within the Council about the nature of economic cooperation, let alone its political implications, it was not surprising that if anything positive was to come from the idea, it would be little more than a minimalist option.
That indeed was the case, with the appearance of another loose intergovernmental structure, a Conference of European Ministers of Transport, which could only suggest and advise — though it did have some success in persuading ten states to sign a convention on cooperation and coordination of their rail networks in 1953.
Agriculture was also a popular theme for discussion in the Council of Europe.
Perhaps the first significant initiative came from France, although the Dutch politician, Sicco Mansholt, had already drafted a plan for agricultural free trade that would benefit Western Europe as a whole, but especially the cost-effective Netherlands agricultural industry.
Late in 1950 the French Minister of Agriculture, Pierre Pflimlin, announced at the Council of Europe — and proposed later in March 1951 to the non-member states of Austria, Portugal and Switzerland — something which amounted to a second Schuman Plan, in that it contained similar ultimate objectives: a common market directed by supranational institutions.
Again, it fell foul of the divergent views within the Council of Europe on integration.
By the time the member states were ready to discuss it in March 1952, the document under consideration had been so diluted from the original scheme as to present no dangers at all to national authority control over agriculture.
Even so, the proposal failed to progress any further.
The Council of Europe, backed by the OEEC, ran into similar problems in the first half of the 1950s over proposals on the health, postal services and communications sectors.
While some cooperation and coordination in a specific sector might be possible, as long as the hope was to embrace the whole of Western Europe in its ambit, any scheme could only be minimalist.
If the sectoral approach and spillover were to achieve any great potential, they could only do so on a more limited front — that is, by the six states which had already agreed to the supranational principle by forming the ECSC.
Yet the Six themselves did not seem prepared to launch any further sectoral integration, at least in the short run.
Indeed, the initial experiences of the ECSC had led some to argue that rather than pursue a sector by sector strategy, it would be far easier and more logical to plan for the integration of whole economies.
In that sense, the sectoral approach was already being rejected: ECSC might well have been its end rather than its beginning.
That the sectoral approach was to receive a new lease of life was due to events beyond the control of the Six, or even Western Europe.
And the focus of the new interest was not to be on  those sectors originally envisaged as targets, but on the unlikely and controversial issue of defence.
FAILED COMMUNITIES
During the initial negotiations over ECSC, the international climate changed for the worse as conflict broke out in Korea in June 1950.
It was inevitable that the war in Asia would affect politics in Western Europe, most obviously in the military sphere.
Korea had not just intensified the Cold War with, for example, analogies being drawn between the partitioned Korean peninsula and the divided nature of Germany; it also placed an extra burden on American resources.
The United States, faced with an allocation problem, began a review of its defensive commitments that led it to the conclusion that in the event of a military confrontation with the Soviet Union in Europe, the resources it could commit to the fledgling NATO alliance would be insufficient.
Seeing no need why it alone should be expected to make up the deficit, it requested its allies to increase their defence expenditure.
The European response was negative.
The United States then argued that if the European members of NATO were unwilling or unable to strengthen the alliance, then this would have to be achieved by permitting West Germany to rearm.
On 12 September 1950 the United States formally proposed West German rearmament within NATO.
With increasing persistence it continued to argue that West Germany should be brought into the western defensive system with its own military forces.
The West German government was not averse to the idea of rearmament.
Konrad Adenauer had already suggested that West Germany should be allowed the means to defend itself, and that the surest way of winning the population over to a massive commitment to democracy was to give it a stake in the responsibility of defending Western Europe.
Otherwise, he argued, many Germans might be seduced by the lure of a neutral, but unified Germany which would inevitably be susceptible to Soviet influence.
Although it was hardly disputable that a West German contribution to NATO would be invaluable, especially as the other European members did not wish to, or could not, meet the new levels of requirement set by the United States, the American demand caused consternation and an agonising evaluation of its consequences in the capitals of Europe, and nowhere more so than in Paris.
After 1945  France's primary objective had been the prostration of Germany.
It had continued to seek to absorb the Saar even after the formation of the West German state, and relations between the two countries, collaboration in ECSC notwithstanding, were not entirely cordial.
In many ways France was content with a divided Germany.
A rearmed West Germany merely served to revive all the old French fears about security.
But to all West Germany's neighbours, the idea of a German military force only a few years after the defeat of Hitler s armies was still repugnant.
On the other hand, it seemed obvious that the United States would not back down — and Western Europe was still heavily dependent upon the United States.
The European problem was not to oppose the American proposal adamantly, but to find some compromise that would both satisfy the United States and assuage European fears of a revitalised German militarism.
The shackling of a West German military contribution to NATO would have to be achieved by placing it under non-German control.
Moreover, whatever the course adopted, it would have to receive the blessing of Germany's traditional enemy, France, for it to have any chance of success.
An alternative was already available: the idea of a European army.
This had first been mooted by Konrad Adenauer in 1949.
In August 1950, shortly after the outbreak of the Korean War, France had advocated the idea of a European army in the second session of the Council of Europe Assembly.
The idea was strongly opposed by Britain, and quickly vetoed by the Council of Ministers.
Nevertheless, this was the route that France chose to follow as an answer to American pressure, since one of the underlying assumptions was that it would preclude a distinct German army under a separate German command.
It became known as the Pleven Plan, named after the French premier, René Pleven, who took an outline drafted by his earlier mentor, Jean Monnet, and laid it before the French Parliament on 24 October 1950.
The Pleven Plan, like other suggestions that had recently come out of the Council of Europe, followed the outline and objectives of the Schuman Plan very closely.
The proposal was accepted in principle by the French National Assembly, and in calling for a ‘common European army’ with a European ‘minister of defence’, it was to be the basis of discussion about the establishment of a European Defence Community (EDC).
Given Adenauer's earlier views, it was to be expected that an EDC would be supported by West Germany, though there was considerable opposition within  the country, especially by the opposition Social Democrat Party, to the whole notion of rearmament.
By contrast, the initial American attitude was cool.
But the American High Commissioner in West Germany and the American commander-elect of NATO lent their voices to the idea, and the United States quickly became an important supporter of the project.
However, West Germany would levy a price for its involvement: the agreement of the Western Allies formally to end their occupation and to give full sovereignty, including control over foreign policy, to the West German state.
The other important state to win round was Britain.
Pleven hoped that Britain would join the project: indeed, much of the French support for the EDC was predicated upon the necessity of British participation.
When Churchill, who had supported the earlier Council of Europe proposal, returned as premier in October 1951, many hoped that that participation would now be forthcoming.
Only one month later, however, the new Foreign Secretary, Anthony Eden, firmly announced that Britain would not become a member of the EDC.
The Conservative government preferred to follow the Labour route of seeking to expand the 1948 Treaty of Brussels to incorporate Italy and West Germany.
The British rejection weakened the force of the proposal and was probably a factor in its slow progress.
Britain's traditional supporters fell into line, and Pleven's blueprint was taken up only by the six states of the ECSC.
Even so, it was not until 27 May 1952 that sufficient of the detail had been thrashed out for the representatives of the six countries, meeting in Paris, to be able to sign the treaty establishing the EDC.
The EDC was to be a military organisation, but for many it was also to be a further step along the road to European integration.
In addition to a common army, there was to be a common budget and common institutions.
Indeed, in some ways the EDC treaty went beyond the ECSC in that Article 38, which had been included at the insistence of Italy, required the Common Assembly to study ways of establishing federal institutions along with a popularly elected legislature.
At first glance it seemed that the vision of Monnet and Schuman of gradual sectoral integration binding the participants even closer together was one important step nearer realisation.
However, the EDC may superficially have followed the sectoral pattern of the ECSC, but its fundamental implications were different.
First, its supranational executive, a Board of Commissioners, would have considerably less leverage than the ECSC High Authority against the national representatives in the Council of Ministers.
Unlike the ECSC, the whole concept had been modelled as a body in which  Britain might participate: this may partly account for the diluted supranational element.
Second, unlike the ECSC, it was not to be a partnership of equals.
The EDC had been suggested and was designed as a means of preventing West German military parity.
West Germany was to be the poor relation, with all its military units being placed under the integrated command structure.
The other EDC members would allocate only a proportion of their armed forces to the European army.
Additional protocols reinforced the French desire for guarantees against West Germany.
The mutual defence link with NATO was stressed again.
France also persuaded the United States and Britain to join it in a joint declaration that a threat to the EDC would be treated as a challenge to their own security, and that this would be symbolised by the two Anglo-Saxon countries agreeing to station troops on the continent.
A final protocol sought an agreement between the EDC and Britain, whereby the latter would agree to provide military aid to any one of the EDC states should it come under attack.
In many ways, these additional protocols reinforced the impression that for France the EDC was designed as a guarantee for itself against possible German aggression as much as it was to be an anti-Soviet organisation.
Even if it had survived, it is a moot point how long this bias would have been tolerated by West Germany.
Notwithstanding these problems, there was reason to believe in late 1952 that the push towards integration had passed a critical threshold, and so could only go forward at a much faster pace.
The ECSC and EDC, it was believed, would finally consign the shibboleths of nationalism to a tardy grave.
Having accepted that previous attempts to build a comprehensive Western Europe had failed through the efforts to incorporate Britain into the design, there was now a widespread conviction that a multi-purpose unit could be fashioned by the little Europe of the Six.
A principle source of the new enthusiasm was a problem raised directly by the EDC concept itself, a dilemma summed up by Konrad Adenauer on his first visit to the United States in April 1953, when he said in New York that a European army without a correspondingly unified European foreign policy would be rather illogical.
This was welcome news to those who sought a federal Europe, for the federalist implications of the dilemma were very clear: a European army would need European political control of a type that could not be provided by the EDC institutions.
It was evident that in neither the ECSC nor EDC could the supranational agencies have powers commensurate with their responsibilities: the ECSC was already giving indications of the resilience of national governments.
This was the reasoning  which led to discussions on the possibility of a European Political Community.
Article 38 of the EDC treaty, with its federalist implications, offered a way forward with its statement on the role to be played by the projected Common Assembly.
Paul-Henri Spaak, back as premier of Belgium, suggested that since the EDC Assembly did not yet exist, the Assembly of the ECSC could turn itself into an ad hoc EDC body specifically to consider a more wide-ranging political cooperation.
This procedure was accepted by the foreign ministers of the other five states, serving in their capacity as the Council of Ministers of the ECSC.
Accordingly, the ECSC Assembly, enlarged to give it the number of representatives the projected EDC Assembly would have, was invited on 10 September 1952 to consider and report within six months on the feasibility and structures of a European Political Community.
This it duly did, accepting, though not without some strong opposition, the draft of a working party on 10 March 1953.
The opponents of the draft within the ad hoc assembly were primarily on the left.
The West German Social Democrats were hostile to the whole concept, as they were to the EDC and West German rearmament, while some French Socialists were unhappy about the proposals on how the new structure would relate to Britain.
But this did not prevent assembly acceptance of the plan.
The European Political Community was not to be just a third community, but nothing less than the beginning of a comprehensive federation to which the ECSC and EDC would be subordinated.
The draft treaty of the Political Community, with 117 articles, was presented in Strasbourg on 10 March 1953.
Its institutional structure was to be complex and far-reaching, with a European Executive Council, a Council of National Ministers, a Court of Justice and a popularly elected Parliament.
The rapid progress towards integration which seemed to be occurring also, in December 1952, led the Dutch foreign minister to write to his counterparts that the extent of political and military integration currently under consideration should be accompanied by an equally extensive economic integration — in short, by a common market.
His suggestion was welcomed, and two months later the six foreign ministers passed it on to experts for their consideration.
The European Political Community was not, however, in its outline to be the kind of federation that federalists had wanted.
The supranational principle was diluted by the retention of an executive body representing national interests, and the extent of responsible government would be limited.
It was perhaps more of a confederal  scheme than a federal one.
Even so, it was a problematic proposal, and the publication of the draft treaty proved to be the high watermark of European union in the early 1950s.
The pace and enthusiasm flagged considerably when attention had to switch from abstract or grand designs to the nitty-gritty of practical details.
In the upheaval that was to come during the next 12 months, only the ECSC seemed to have avoided the scrapheap.
A withdrawal from the frontier of full integration was noticeable in the further discussions of the six countries in the latter half of 1953, when the topic was debated only in very general terms.
That, however, was due not just to the complexity of turning the Political Community treaty into reality, but to the problems that the Six were facing in getting the EDC off the ground.
Despite its implications, the great argument was not over the Political Community, but over the EDC, for the former stood or fell with the ratification of the latter.
The EDC treaty had not been ratified by any state when the proposed Political Community treaty was published.
There were still arguments over the additional protocols insisted upon by France.
Without them there was little hope of French approval; if they were retained, there were serious doubts about their acceptability to the other signatories.
Eventually, West Germany and the Benelux states ratified the treaty early in 1954, though in the former this was only after a prolonged political battle in which the Social Democrat Party took its opposition to the EDC all the way to the country's supreme court.
In Italy an ailing Alcide de Gasperi also faced formidable opposition, but fortunately was never obliged to put the EDC to the test, preferring instead to postpone the potential confrontation until after France made its decision.
Thus the fate of the new Europe hinged upon France, the original sponsor of the EDC.
France had never at heart been enthusiastic about the EDC, regarding it at a minimum as perhaps a lesser evil: fundamentally, it did not want West German rearmament.
Schuman had not wished to introduce the measure in the French Parliament after the treaty was signed in 1952 because he feared that he could not guarantee its success.
In the following two years French governments repeatedly reaffirmed their support for the EDC, but did not submit the treaty for ratification.
In addition to their fears that ratification would fail and perhaps also their own doubts about the enterprise, French governments argued that ratification must await agreement by their proposed partners on suggested modifications to the treaty, as well as upon a clarification of the British attitude.
All were merely delaying tactics designed to  conceal the basic French distaste for West German rearmament and the weakness of French governments.
The British attitude had long been clear: the 1951 Conservative government had continued to follow the line laid down by the previous Labour foreign minister, Ernest Bevin, who said in the House of Commons in November 1950 that Britain preferred an expansion of the Treaty of Brussels to serve as the basis of military cooperation within NATO, but would not object to the EDC were it to be established.
The other interested party, the United States, was totally unsympathetic towards the domestic French ramifications of the treaty, and ultimately showed its impatience with the threat of an ‘agonising reappraisal’ of policy should France delay the rearmament of West Germany and the strengthening of NATO much longer.
But the problem was not an easy one for France.
Since 1950 the pro-European parties had declined in strength in the legislature, and even without the EDC dilemma, governmental survival at the best of times was problematic.
In addition, France was increasingly concerned about the deterioration of its economic position, particularly with regard to that of West Germany.
Since 1951 the West German economy had greatly expanded, while in France a deficit had persisted.
The French economy was so weak that in 1953 it had to renege on an OEEC agreement of two years earlier.
One of the problems of the economy was the level of its resources that were being sucked into the long-running colonial war in French Indo-China, a war which France could not win and one which was effectively concluded by the humiliating surrender in May 1954 of the cream of the French army at Dien Bien Phu.
The inexorable course of this colonial war meant that many people in France, especially within the army, were not prepared to entertain anything that entailed France giving up military sovereignty.
But something still had to be done about the EDC and its ratification.
From its inception until 1954 the EDC treaty hung like a sword of Damocles over French politics, albeit only one of many problems that afflicted government.
The political parties of the narrow and fragmented centre of the political spectrum, from which all governments had to be drawn, were agreed only on the fundamental issue of preserving the Fourth Republic: they had, as it were, reserved their right to disagree on everything else.
The consequence was inertia; no controversial issue could ever hope to be resolved satisfactorily, so governments, preoccupied with survival, merely tended to forget about them or postpone them to some indeterminate future date.
It was Dien Bien Phu which offered a way out of the dilemma.
It helped bring to the premiership Pierre Mendès-France, a member of the influential Radical Party and a man of energy who commanded considerable personal loyalty.
In order to inaugurate his declared policy of economic renewal, Mendès-France had first to remove from the agenda the two pressing crises which had crippled French political life: Indo-China and the EDC.
On the EDC Mendès-France at first followed the route of his predecessors, seeking to persuade Britain to reconsider its refusal to join the EDC, and arguing with his partners for a dilution of the supranational element in the proposed structure, especially where it could affect the French military contribution.
Like his predecessors he failed to make any headway.
The United States continued to be irritated, while Britain's response was that even if France sabotaged the EDC, it would not prevent West German rearmament.
Two of his prime ministerial colleagues, Adenauer and Spaak, reflected the view of the other five when they insisted that any further French delay over the EDC could not be tolerated.
Accordingly, on 30 August 1954, Mendès-France submitted the EDC treaty to the National Assembly.
The submission, however, was not accompanied by any governmental endorsement or comment, bar the statement that Mendès-France did not regard it necessary to resign if the motion was defeated.
In other words, the treaty was simply introduced as a hindrance that had to be disposed of before other business could be tackled: the vote, negative as expected, was in fact not on the treaty itself, but on whether it ought to be discussed.
This procedural tactic was the burial ceremony of the EDC, and a setback for both the plans for a more effective Western defence system and the hopes and ambitions for a more united Europe.
The rejection of EDC also meant the fall of the even more ambitious European Political Community, which had as yet not advanced beyond the stage of a draft treaty.
The EDC concept was perhaps too idealistic to have had great hopes of concrete achievement, and in its implications for European integration perhaps something of a paradox.
The sensitive area of defence should more realistically have been one of the last spheres for the renunciation of national sovereignty, with a solid background of integrative experience and mutual trust behind it.
But in any case the concept of supranational defence integration had not been as carefully considered and researched, and its potential participants fully persuaded of its value, in advance as had been the case with the ECSC.
Indeed, the efforts of people like Monnet were still focused more strongly upon the negotiations over, and  the consolidation of, the ECSC.
The EDC was treated almost as an afterthought.
WESTERN EUROPEAN UNION
The damage done to the cause of integration was severe.
Only the ECSC survived, but even it did not entirely escape the shockwaves.
Jean Monnet announced his decision not to seek re-election as President of the High Authority.
He planned to pursue integrative schemes as a private citizen and it was thought doubtful whether he could achieve the same effect in that capacity.
Almost simultaneously de Gasperi died; his successors were not able to stamp the same authority on Italian foreign policy.
At the same time, Schuman ceased to be central to French foreign policy.
The forces of federation and supranationalism were in disarray, and at the time it seemed natural to conclude that the whole momentum of European integration was lurching to a halt, in particular because the EDC debacle had opened up a rift between France and West Germany.
The two states had, despite the EDC, succeeded in signing a bilateral cultural treaty in 1954.
But in February 1955 France complained bitterly that the agreement had been infringed by the West German decision to make English the main foreign language to be taught in all schools.
In its turn West Germany criticised France's economic stance, particularly what it regarded as protectionism and obstruction to freer trade between the two states.
Above all, however, the major bone of contention was the fate of the Saar, something which might have been settled if the EDC and the Political Community had succeeded.
The small region, with its coal and steel resources, had not been treated by France as part of its zone of occupation after 1945.
Instead, in 1947 it was organised as a politically autonomous territory in an economic union with France, and treated almost as a colony.
West Germany's support in 1952 and 1953 for the Political Community had in part been predicated on the idea that it could resolve the Saar issue: the territory was due to become a separate ‘European’ area.
It is, however, likely that the Europeanisation of the Saar could, for West Germany, only be a temporary measure.
The region was overwhelmingly German in character, and in a sense its problem would have to be resolved before Franco-German relations could return to a more normal footing.
As a result of a referendum in the Saar in October 1955, when 96  per cent of the electorate voted against Europeanisation in any shape or form and for incorporation with West Germany, France bowed to the inevitable.
One year later the Saar was handed over to West Germany.
Resolution of the Saar question was to be an important factor aiding European developments in the late 1950s.
Despite the blow that the failure of the EDC and the Political Community struck against integration, the first pressing need to salvage something out of the debris was in defence.
The United States had accepted the EDC as part of its strategy: the rejection of the EDC did not mean any amendment to the American insistence upon a West German defence contribution or greater inputs from the other states.
An alternative to the EDC had to be found.
The search was very brief.
All else failing, Western Europe fell back, with British encouragement, upon the 1948 Treaty of Brussels.
In 1955 the new British Conservative premier, Anthony Eden, took the lead in salvaging something from the wreck of EDC.
He took the opportunity to bring forward again the British view that West German rearmament could easily be achieved, and with the necessary level of supervision to quell the worries of France and others, within NATO itself.
And Britain was quite happy for the Brussels Treaty, suitably rephrased, to be expanded to include West Germany and Italy, since it would involve nothing beyond intergovernmental collaboration.
Konrad Adenauer, who saw rearmament as an indispensable part of his own Western-oriented policy of strength, quickly fell into line behind Eden, and the others followed shortly thereafter.
To remove the anti-German emphasis in the original treaty, a protocol was added to the preamble, deleting the statement that one of the objectives was ‘to take such steps as may be necessary in the event of renewal by Germany of a policy of aggression’.
In its place there was a declaration of the intention ‘to promote the unity and to encourage the progressive integration of Europe’.
Having got the kind of structure it had always insisted upon, it seems clear that Britain had no qualms about such a statement being used to promote some version of supranationalism.
On the other side, to mollify France, it was agreed that British participation in the revamped body would involve the stationing of British troops in West Germany unless a majority of its partners consented to their withdrawal; however, Britain reserved the right to do so if an emergency situation elsewhere demanded a redeployment of its military forces.
The new body was to be called Western European Union (WEU).
An independent structure for the organisation was out of the question.
It was too weak to support one, and in any case Britain would  almost certainly refuse to commit itself to anything that smacked of supranationalism.
All that was added to the loose intergovernmental structure of Brussels was a Consultative Assembly, whose function would be performed by the relevant national delegates to the Common Assembly of the Council of Europe.
WEU also took over the social and cultural responsibilities outlined in the Brussels Treaty, but since most of the original military functions had become redundant with the creation of NATO, it was decided that WEU could perform best by being directly incorporated within the broader defence alliance.
Ironically, therefore, the French rejection of EDC resulted in what France, in originally introducing the Pleven Plan, had most desired to avoid: the creation of a separate West German army.
Apart from advancing West German claims for equality, and thereby effectively removing one of the striking drawbacks which the EDC would sooner or later have had to face, the WEU structure achieved no significant results.
It was not, and could not be, a vehicle.
for European integration.
In the 1950s it was only occasionally activated, with nominal headquarters in London; and indeed any proposals on defence that emanated from its Consultative Assembly were invariably ignored by the member governments.
If WEU had a role, it was to ensure the closest possible cooperation within NATO, and although it did play a limited role in the Saar settlement, it remained essentially a paper organisation.
With the handing over to the Council of Europe in 1960 of the social and cultural responsibilities it had inherited from the Treaty of Brussels, it seemed that to all intents and purposes WEU had become moribund.
It was saved from total extinction by two developments.
The first was the division of Western Europe after 1957 into the European Economic Community of the Six and the rest.
In the 1960s once Britain's decision to apply for membership of the Community was blocked by President de Gaulle, WEU did serve as a conduit, no matter how limited, between Britain and the Six.
The second development was the French decision in the 1960s to leave the NATO command structure.
Once the prickly and nationalistic de Gaulle had retired from French politics, France suggested in the early 1970s that WEU might provide a link between it and NATO.
France returned to the theme in 1981, proposing reactivation of WEU as a liaison body.
But it was not until after 1984 and the growing rapprochement and détente between the superpowers that WEU began to re-emerge as a body that could have real value.
It was an excellent vehicle for an emerging West European voice on defence issues as distinct from a NATO position in order (with France still outside NATO) to establish some kind  of common ground at a time when it seemed possible that the two superpowers might actually manage to reach an agreement on levels of nuclear armaments that might not take Western European interests into account.
By 1987 the new spirit of collaboration on defence had developed to the extent where the Netherlands could suggest that WEU was an appropriate body that could, for the first time, seek a common European position on a non-European issue, the long-running war between Iran and Iraq and the deepening Persian Gulf crisis.
In the end, West Germany, constitutionally prevented from deploying its forces outside Europe, agreed to provide additional naval cover in the West European arena as a replacement for the British and French ships sent to patrol in the Persian Gulf.
If WEU has a role to play in integration, that kind of defence collaboration is what it is peculiarly able to do.
It can offer something different from both NATO and the European Communities, in the case of the former because it can concentrate on a European rather than a trans-Atlantic perspective, and in the second because since 1973 neutral Ireland has been a member of the Communities.
This may have been what WEU was originally intended to do, but nevertheless its belated reincarnation in the 1980s could not disguise the fact that its role in the process of European integration has been rather marginal.
NEW DEPARTURES
Despite the mood of despondency that seemed to shroud the whole idea of European unity in the mid-1950s, there was nevertheless a wide array of cooperative bodies in which the European democracies were involved to a greater or lesser extent.
The Council of Europe, the OEEC and NATO had been joined in the 1950s by WEU.
Alongside these were the working examples of a more intense economic integration of Benelux and the ECSC.
Further afield there was a new Scandinavian venture in closer collaboration, the Nordic Council, launched in 1952.
Western Europe had come a long way since 1945.
The crucial question was less whether the integrative urge had dissipated entirely, but more whether an appropriate context could be found for channelling its energies.
World events following the fall of the EDC conspired to make Europeans more aware of Europe as an entity.
The failure of the 1953 and 1956 uprisings in East Germany and Hungary respectively, as well as the abortive Anglo-French Suez expedition of 1956, were further reminders of the contraction of Europe's world role.
A similar lesson was being provided by the surge of nationalism in Asia and Africa, which precipitated the end of the colonial era and which geographically entailed a retreat back to Europe.
Furthermore, with the death of the Soviet dictator, Stalin, and the arrival of thermonuclear stalemate between the United States and the Soviet Union, the new superpower interest in peaceful coexistence, for a while at least, seemed to permit an air of greater relaxation after the tensions of the Cold War.
Taken together, all these factors allowed a greater breathing space for a consideration of Europe, especially as the democracies had entered a period of unprecedented economic prosperity, something which tended to demote the urgency of protection for specific national interests.
One general problem was that the very number of international organisations had divided the democracies and had created several different Western Europes.
All attempts to link the countries more closely together through the Council of Europe, the most appropriate body because of the wide spread of its membership, did not get very far.
On the other hand, it was quite often the same people who represented their countries in the various bodies: when the ministerial organs of the OEEC, Council of Europe, NATO or WEU were examined, the overlapping nature of their memberships was very apparent.
But two other factors were more important than the simple diversity of organisations.
The first was the division that had existed since at least 1948 on the extent to which coordination and integration should entail a formal abrogation by states of some of their national sovereignty.
The most elaborate response for broad-ranging rationalisation had come from Britain in 1952 with the Eden Plan, but this had been a response to Britain's anxiety about what the little Europe of the Six might achieve.
It was aimed at enabling Britain to remain a decisive player in Western Europe without committing itself in any way to supranationalism.
The other factor was the assessment by committed federalists and functionalists of exactly what had been achieved.
Despite all efforts, Benelux had still not acquired its economic union.
In 1955 the three states did accept an agricultural common market, though in the event a further seven years elapsed before it was established.
Scandinavia had had even less success in the numerous discussions on a customs union, and the topic had been given no priority in the plans of the Nordic Council.
Even the ECSC was experiencing problems in sectoral integration, while the other agencies were all merely intergovernmental in character.
While there were, therefore, good grounds for pessimism about future progress, the question of whether integration could proceed beyond a limited sectoral level was answered three years later by the Treaty of Rome.
Protagonists of unity may have been despondent about the loss of the EDC and the European Political Community, but were not routed.
On the other hand, the experiences of the early 1950s had made some of the proponents of unity more cautious, especially in France and West Germany.
However, almost before the dust had settled on the Political Community, voices were raised in favour of further efforts.
Jean Monnet continued to urge further sectoral integration in the fields of transport and energy.
The Benelux states, however, wanted a more decisive effort, and suggested that instead of further sectoral integration to supplement the ECSC, the target should be nothing less than a comprehensive economic community.
Not surprisingly, the indefatigable Paul-Henri Spaak was in the forefront of these arguments for new departures.
Through his active involvement in European institutions — serving, for example, as president of both the Assembly of the Council of Europe and the OEEC — he had been given the accolade of being ‘Mr Europe’.
The ECSC Common Assembly threw its weight behind the establishment of a committee that would explore means of rounding a common market.
Jean Monnet also continued his efforts through the Action Committee for the United States of Europe which he had founded in 1955.
On 18 January 1956 the Committee's Joint Declaration rejected the notion that integration should be confined to only six countries.
Yet it was in those six countries that it enjoyed the greatest influence and where it was able to generate the most support.
Monnet himself seemed to be rather more cautious about going too fast too quickly, and seemed to hanker still for sectoral integration in the first instance, especially in the developing field of nuclear energy, as a strategy which stood a better chance of succeeding in the short term.
The integration cause and its stress upon a broad economic approach were also aided by the current pattern of international trade and by the limitations of the OEEC, which could not sponsor any forward movement without the consent of all its members.
There was, therefore, a legitimate argument that could be used to spawn a common market, membership of which would be open to any willing OEEC signatory.
The lines of division over political unity and economic integration versus association and cooperation had already been clarified and hardened in the previous debates over the future of Europe.
Thus it was not surprising that the initiative to take up again the idea of a common market, first raised back in 1952 by the Netherlands at a  ministerial meeting of the ECSC as a way of combatting the limited effectiveness of both the OEEC and the sectoral approach, as well as Monnet's arguments for cooperation in nuclear energy, were grasped only by the six countries of little Europe.
In mid-1955 the foreign ministers of the Six met at Messina in Italy to launch ‘a fresh advance towards the building of Europe’ and to create a market ‘free from all customs duties and all quantitative restrictions’.
Despite the phraseology, the Messina declaration did not seem to have much impact at the time; it was not seen as a dramatic move towards supranationalism.
But the six ministers did draft a joint proposal for the pooling of information and work on the uses of nuclear energy, and for the establishment of a customs union that would lead to a common market.
The agreement at Messina was attributable in no small degree to the groundwork and preparation of the three Benelux states, especially by the Dutch Foreign Minister, J.W. Beyen.
He, along with Spaak and the long-serving Luxembourg premier, Joseph Beck (who chaired the meeting), were the driving force at Messina: they were, in fact, the three men who in exile had drawn up the plans for Benelux.
At Messina they succeeded in winning the support of Italy for a move towards broad economic integration, triumphing over both a more limited conception advocated by West Germany that fell somewhere between supranationalism and the old sectoral route, and the doubts of France over the whole concept of a common market.
In the end, Messina reproduced much of the original Benelux position on matters other than the broad principle of the common market.
The final document referred also to transport, the harmonisation of social regulations, hours of work and overtime, and the creation of an investment fund.
Paradoxically perhaps, the linking of a common market with nuclear energy helped the cause of each.
West Germany, for example, liked the idea of a common market, but had doubts about the utility of a nuclear energy agency, while France held the reverse position.
The Six agreed to hold an intergovernmental committee, to be headed by the tireless Paul-Henri Spaak, which would consider, flesh out and report back on the various proposals.
Before they disbanded, the ministers had one concrete task to fulfil: to appoint a new President of the ECSC High Authority.
Monnet had resigned in February 1955 in the wake of the EDC failure, but was still in position since the Six had not been able to find a successor.
This they eventually did at Messina — another positive augury for the future, perhaps — appointing to the post René Mayer who was, in fact, an associate of Monnet.
The Spaak Committee met near Brussels between July 1955 and March 1956.
Despite the difficulties that emerged during the discussions, usually over the nature of the common market and its timetable (with France being the main objector), Spaak managed to retain a decisive influence over the direction taken by the committee.
When it issued its first interim report in the autumn of 1955, it was clear that it had narrowed its focus to the two core projects raised before Messina, the Netherlands proposal for a common market and Monnet's ideas for a nuclear energy community.
It is striking, in fact, how much the latter idea seemed at the time to dominate as a first priority.
This, however, may have been nothing more than the fact that nuclear energy constituted a clearly defined and nascent policy sector, and one which, since unlike other policy areas such as coal or agriculture there were hardly any national interests or groups to consider, could quite easily be separated from the rest of national policy making.
In addition, it was widely believed in the 1950s that nuclear fission would be a cheap and increasingly important source of energy in the future.
By setting up a nuclear energy community at the outset, it was believed that it could provide an important impetus towards closer integration.
The Spaak Report was unveiled for public debate in March 1956 in a special session of the ECSC Common Assembly, where only one vote was registered against its proposals (though it should be noted that the extremes of the political spectrum were not represented in Strasbourg).
The Report was also approved by the foreign ministers of the Six meeting in Venice on 29 May 1956.
The Spaak Committee was turned into a conference charged with drafting the appropriate treaties.
This conference worked in Brussels throughout the remainder of the year.
Finally, in February 1957 a series of meetings of experts and foreign ministers was held in Paris, culminating with agreement of the six premiers on the last points at dispute.
The following month two treaties, one establishing a European Economic Community (EEC) and the other a European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom) were duly signed by the Six in Rome and referred to the national parliaments for ratification.
The Six took pains to make it clear that their intention was not to form an exclusive club: Christian Pineau, the French prime minister, was particularly insistent that they hoped other countries, especially Britain, would feel able to join in the initiative.
The most striking feature about the Treaty of Rome, however, was the speed with which it had been reached.
Only three years after the collapse of the projected EDC and Political Community structures, European integration was poised to take a great leap forward.
CHAPTER SIX
THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY
As Paul-Henri Spaak was later to remind the Consultative Assembly of the Council of Europe in 1964, ‘Those who drew up the Rome Treaty…did not think of it as essentially economic; they thought of it as a stage on the way to political union’.
Walter Hallstein, the West German representative at Messina and the first President of the EEC Commission, had earlier stressed the same point: ‘We are not integrating economies, we are integrating politics.
We are not just sharing our furniture, we are jointly building a new and bigger house.’
In other words, the objectives of those who had contributed to the developments that culminated in Rome were ambitious and overtly political.
The Six had reverted to Schuman's view that political union could be achieved in the long run through a sustained effort at economic integration across a broad front.
The sector by sector approach of the ECSC had proved too problematic.
In the end the ECSC was still trying to integrate only one part of complex industrial economies, and could not possibly pursue its aims in isolation from other economic segments.
Euratom would probably have run into similar difficulties even if the EEC had not been in place.
In fact, Euratom was to be the poor relation of the Rome Treaty, slow to begin its work and very soon unable to prevent national interests exerting themselves.
France had been the major supporter of Euratom; as the only one of the Six already possessing a nuclear programme, it obviously hoped to benefit most from the joint funding of the Community and to establish a domination of the nascent industry.
Almost inevitably, perhaps, as the industry developed, national interests asserted themselves.
As early as 1959 West Germany and Italy had begun to build their own industries to prevent France gaining too much dominance in the sector.
Euratom  failed completely to control and direct developments, or indeed to resist governments that wanted to weaken the supranational element in this policy area.
By the early 1960s Euratom had sunk further into decline, suffering an increasing shortage of funding as the member states preferred to give priority to their own national programmes.
When both France and West Germany decided to launch their own fast breeder reactor programmes, Euratom was finally doomed as an effective agent of integration.
After 1967, when it was no longer a separate organisation, it had to be content with only a provisional annual budget.
To some extent, the problems of Euratom were those of a sector which had, especially in France, high political salience.
Because of that prominence, it proved difficult to develop that element of compromise and bargaining which would have been essential for integrative success.
But it also reaffirmed the difficulties of a purely sectoral approach to integration.
The same was not true of the broader European Economic Community, which despite its wider brief demonstrated that it had both strength and flexibility.
In addition, the Six had learnt some lessons from the past, and hoped that the adoption of a long-term perspective would also avoid a clash of economic interest with the OEEC.
Tariffs and trade restrictions were to be reduced only gradually, so allowing the EEC to concur with the world organisation, GATT, to which the OEEC states belonged.
Signatories of GATT could institute tariff changes which might discriminate against third parties only if done over a long period of time, so giving those third parties the opportunities of adjusting to the change without suffering severe economic disruption.
In the shorter term the drive towards integration was aided by a conjunction of political and economic factors both inside and outside the Six.
The EEC, while ambitious, was on the surface less revolutionary than the European Political Community.
It placed an economic dressing over the political goals in the hope that it could accommodate as many interests and groups as possible.
The most favourable circumstance was the existence of governments in the Six which were broadly consensual in their view on integration.
In France it was the pro-European government of Edouard Fauré that endorsed the new structures.
The other five were well aware of the fragility of the Fourth Republic, especially after the 1956 French election, and fearing that the EEC might not happen with a different government in power in Paris, were keen to get things moving as quickly as possible.
On the other hand, this enabled France to gain concessions in the negotiations which, in the words of a National Assembly  resolution in January 1957, would enable France to ‘guarantee [its]essential…economic interests’.
Many French demands, it is true, were modified or rejected, but it is striking how far the other five were prepared to go to accommodate France.
They agreed to assist and aid financially the socioeconomic development of French overseas territories, to align social legislation on holidays and equal pay with that of France (something which would raise production costs in all five countries), to allow France to retain its system of export subsidies and import taxes until it could acquire financial equilibrium.
By contrast, France did have some strong incentives to work with the other five.
The Saar settlement had given a strong boost to Franco-German relations, while those with Britain had deteriorated because of the failure of the Suez venture.
And in particular, the last governments of the Fourth Republic did not want a repetition of the EDC episode.
The other key actor was West Germany where Adenauer's European policy was now supported by the Social Democrats.
The main opposition, in fact, came from some of his ministerial colleagues, especially his eventual successor as Chancellor, Ludwig Erhard, who preferred a broader and looser arrangement.
Most West German interests, however, stood behind Adenauer.
The EEC offered West Germany and its booming economy a huge outlet for its industrial goods, in the same way as it offered France some export benefits for its large agricultural sector.
Within the Community both would have some protection from outside competition.
While some might see in all this nothing more than economic fulfilment, the ultimate political goal, with which the other four signatories were more in sympathy, was already implicit in the Rome Treaty's preamble with its desire ‘to establish the foundations of an even closer union among the European peoples’.
THE TREATY OF ROME: OBJECTIVES AND STRUCTURES
After the fiasco of the EDC, the French National Assembly was generally regarded as being the place where the Treaty of Rome would stand or fall, particularly as the Fourth Republic was entering its final prolonged crisis, with ever weaker governments struggling to survive.
In the event, the treaties easily overcame this potential  baptism of fire; in fact, the French Parliament was the first to approve ratification.
Finally, with ratification by the Netherlands in December 1957, the EEC and Euratom were ready to operate.
The EEC began its existence with an Assembly meeting in Strasbourg in March 1958.
Meeting in the home of the Council of Europe, it brought back memories of that body's inaugural session a decade earlier; the same tangible mood of excitement and sense of history was present.
It called itself the European Parliamentary Assembly and symbolically arranged the seating of delegates by political affiliation rather than by nationality.
The buoyancy of the moment led also to the rejection of the nominee of the six foreign ministers for the presidency of the Assembly.
Instead, the delegates honoured one of the pioneers of integration by electing Robert Schuman to the post.
The immediate general objectives of the EEC, as laid out in the Treaty of Rome, were ‘by establishing a Common Market and progressively approximating the economic policies of Member States, to promote throughout the Community a harmonious development of economic activities, a continuous and balanced expansion, an increase in stability, an accelerated raising of the standard of living, and closer relations between the States belonging to it’.
The new organisation was enjoined to end restrictions such as price fixing, limiting production, dumping, and all elements of protective government aid (for example, subsidies) to ensure free and fair competition.
It was also expected to work for the coordination of economic and monetary policies and the harmonisation of fiscal and social policies, and of law.
Though these objectives were expressed in economic terms, it was clear that a political purpose lay behind them.
This was equally true of the specific objectives listed: a customs union and a common agricultural policy.
Inevitably, because the new organisation was to range over an extremely wide area of activity, the provisions of the Treaty of Rome were necessarily complex, running to 248 articles supplemented by 4 annexes, 13 protocols, 4 conventions and 9 declarations.
In aiming to be more than a mere common market, the Treaty emphasised the principle that the problems of one member state would be the problems of all.
And it did not mention a fixed life-span, with provision for renewal or renegotiation: the Treaty was to remain in force for ‘an unlimited period’.
This meant that it could not be revoked, a view with which, for instance, West German courts have agreed.
Broadly speaking, transformation into a common market was to be spread over a period of between 12 and 15 years, with a stepwise progression through stages of four years each.
The common external  tariff would be based on an average of the existing duties levied by the member states at their national borders, though with some downward adjustment.
There had been disagreements over the timetable: France thought the transitional period was too short, while others wanted even faster movement.
The latter were mollified to some extent by the exclusion from the Treaty of anything that would bar some members from forming a smaller customs union ahead of the EEC schedule.
This provision was directed towards the Benelux states, and was permissible ‘to the extent that the objectives of these regional unions are not attained by application of this Treaty’.
In fact, immediately upon accepting the Treaty of Rome, the Benelux states agreed in substance in February 1959 to a new treaty of economic union, beginning in January 1960 and to last for 50 years, several years ahead of the Rome programme.
As has been indicated, some provisions implied more than a customs union: membership of the EEC meant a commitment to the free movement of both capital and labour, a common investment policy, and the coordination and rationalisation of social welfare goals.
To assist the EEC in these objectives, three funds were to be set up: a European Social Fund to develop ‘employment opportunities for workers’ and to raise their standard of living; a European Investment Bank to further economic expansion through the use of loans and guarantees; and a European Development Fund  targeted upon the associated French overseas territories.
On the other hand, there were several escape clauses within the Treaty which permitted divergence in national policy should a state decide that this was necessary on grounds of national security.
Furthermore, while the main thrust of the treaty had a very clear specification of the timetable and the procedures to be followed, it was rather vague on several other points which were announced only in terms of general principles.
This was true of the declared intention to establish not just a common commercial policy once the transitional period had been concluded, but also of objectives which were to be sought during the transitional phase: a common transport policy, free movement of workers, and a common agricultural policy.
In view of future events it is important to note the absence of detail on agriculture, even though this had been designated a special economic activity which would be handled completely at the supranational level.
The treaty gave no indication of what a common agricultural policy would be other than something that would increase agricultural productivity, ensure a fair standard.
of living for the agricultural population, guarantee regular supplies of produce on the market, and ensure reasonable food prices for the consumer.
Even within these admirable phrases one can detect the difficulties of achieving a common policy: what those principles could produce, if put into practice, would not be free trade, but only a limited liberalisation that would seek a balance between EEC principles and the protection of national agricultural interests.
The treaty would be administered through an institutional framework.
Its institutions were drawn, perhaps not surprisingly, from their ECSC predecessors.
The supranational and bonding element was to be provided by the quasi-executive Commission of nine members appointed for renewable four-year terms by the national governments.
West Germany, France and Italy were each entitled to two commissioners, the other states to one each.
The Commission's primary task would be to recommend policies and to administer the Treaty of Rome.
The Commission was seen as the guardian and embodiment of the European ideal.
Though appointed by the member governments, the commissioners were not to be representatives of national interests.
Upon appointment each commissioner was to take an oath of loyalty to the EEC including ‘neither to seek nor to take instructions from any Government or body’.
The Commission was to have not just the right to initiate and recommend policy to its executive partner, the Council of Ministers, but also the task of ensuring that the provisions of the treaty and policies emanating from the Council of Ministers were carried out by the other institutions and the member states.
It was to be based in Brussels.
Though in 1965 the Commission eventually absorbed the parallel executive bodies in the ECSC and Euratom, it was, despite the high-sounding phrases, to have rather less scope for individual initiative in decision making than the ECSC High Authority.
The reason was that the latter had been given, once and for all, a large grant of power in a defined sector.
The conception of Rome was different: it was a framework treaty covering a wide area, where agreement by the drafting partners (the member states) on everything would not have been possible and probably not advisable.
Nevertheless, although possessing a less extensive grant of power, the Commission was widely expected to be the dynamic element in further moves towards integration.
Paralleling the Commission was the Council of Ministers, the organ of the national governments, which was to carry the main burden of coordinating policies.
Despite the euphoria which surrounded the creation of the Commission, the Treaty of Rome ultimately rested the future of the EEC in the member governments.
Nowhere was  this more apparent than in the complicated pattern of voting that was drawn up for the Council, varying according to the nature and source of the issue under discussion and ranging from simply majorities through qualified majorities to unanimity.
Although the Council was to have only six members, it was to receive 17 votes.
The pattern was one of weighted voting by which states received votes commensurate with their size.
West Germany, France and Italy were each to have four votes, the Netherlands and Belgium two votes each, and Luxembourg only one vote.
On a simple majority requirement therefore, victory could be achieved by any two of the big three if they gained the support of one of the smaller members, or by an alliance of the three large states.
In practice, however, simple majorities were to be applicable only in six very minor and procedural areas.
Most issues were to be decided unanimously, where any one state clearly had a veto, or by a qualified majority of 12 votes from at least four states: this was designed to protect the interests of all states, not just the smaller members.
The complexity was intended to last only for a transitional period.
The treaty anticipated that by 1966 the Council would move to a situation where a simple majority would suffice, as an important step towards a stronger supranational and political EEC.
While it was clear that as long as unanimity or qualified majorities were required, it was possible, as several of the member states were to do, for states to drag their heels and delay a programme.
It was the ECSC experience which had occasioned the acceptance for an interim period of a change in the relationship between the supranational element and the member governments.
It had been learnt that progress could not be made if a member state objected strenuously to a particular part of a programme.
This had especially been true of the larger members.
The EEC structure was designed therefore to bring about a closer collaboration between the Commission and Council.
As in the ECSC, the two executives were to be supported and supplemented by a consultative committee representing the several national interest groups.
This Economic and Social Committee would only be an advisory body, even though it would have to be consulted by the Commission and the Council of Ministers on a wide range of topics and issues.
Its membership, appointed for renewable four-year terms, has grown over the years and has proved, as it was intended to be, a useful sounding board, especially as it quickly subdivided itself into specialist groups of experts on specific topics — in which, in fact, most of the work of the Committee was to be done.
The third major institution of the EEC was the Parliamentary Assembly, which replaced the ECSC advisory body, though with  the membership increased from 78 to 142.
Under the Treaty of Rome its powers were defined as the supervision of both the Commission and the Council of Ministers, including the right to put questions to the Commission and to discuss the latter's annual report, to discharge the annual budget, and to censure the Commission.
The latter was a heavy weapon which has never been used, since it would involve the removal of the whole Commission if an Assembly vote of no confidence gained a two-thirds majority.
Its legislative powers were far more limited, although on paper at least its budgetary powers, with it jointly forming the budgetary authority with the Council of Ministers, appeared rather more substantial.
None of this, however, made the Assembly a legislative authority.
It was not a directly elected body, though it was given the right under the Treaty to draw up proposals for direct elections.
However, such proposals would need ratification by the two executives.
There were, in fact, large areas of responsibility where the Assembly had to be consulted by the Council of Ministers, but its suggestions and amendments could safely be ignored with impunity by the Council.
In short, a European parliament still had to come into existence.
The final major institution was to be the Court of Justice, not to be confused with the European Court of Human Rights set up under the 1950 Convention and based in Strasbourg along with the Council of Europe.
The EEC states were prepared to accept the jurisdiction of the latter court in cases of human rights.
The EEC Court of Justice, however, was set up to interpret the Treaty of Rome and ensure that both the EEC institutions and the member states were fulfilling their obligations under the treaty.
The Court of Justice was to be composed of seven judges, one from each member state plus one other, appointed by the Council of Ministers for renewable six-year terms on the nomination by member governments.
The Court was given the responsibility of handling cases arising from all three Community treaties or from disputes between members.
Its decisions were to be by majority vote, and its verdicts would be final.
However, in the last resort the interpretation of its decisions would depend upon the national governments and the national court systems.
Even so, it was not long before the Court would find against every government and against the Commission.
As the Community shifted away in the 1960s from whatever supranational bias it possessed, this binding role of the Court as, as it were, the ‘guardian’ of the Communities became much more important, both before and after the enlargements of the organisation in the 1970s and 1980s.
In short, the Treaty of Rome created a body, the Commission, that would have the responsibility of initiating policies and of implementing those already agreed upon.
It was paralleled by a Council of Ministers whose main function would be to take action and legislate on the basis of the Commission's proposals.
The Parliamentary Assembly and the Economic and Social Committee were primarily or wholly advisory in nature, with very little checking power, while the Court of Justice could interpret the provisions of the treaty and the decisions of the EEC.
THE EEC IN OPERATION
Inevitably, decision making in an organisation like the EEC would be complicated, especially as the treaty provided for several different kinds of decision.
The Commission and/or the Council of Ministers could formally issue regulations, directives, decisions, recommendations and opinions.
As the term is usually understood, legislation refers to regulations and directives.
These are initiated by the Commission and adopted by the Council of Ministers.
The difference between the two is that whereas a regulation is universally binding on all member states, a directive is specifically aimed at a named member state, informing it that something must be done, but leaving the way in which it is to be achieved to the discretion of the national government.
Decisions are issued by either the Commission or the Council of Ministers: they derive directly from the authority given to them by the Treaty of Rome or from previously issued directives or regulations, and they too are binding upon the governments to which they are addressed.
By contrast, recommendations and opinions are not binding.
One problem raised by the creation of the EEC was the proliferation of institutions within the Europe of the Six.
A first rationalisation was achieved by making only one assembly and one court serve the ECSC, EEC and Euratom.
It was not until 1965, however, that the treaties were revised to provide for a single Commission and Council of Ministers.
The 1965 changes were the first significant constitutional development since 1957, in that they provided for a review of the purposes and activities of the Community, incorporating also a schedule for a single European Community by 1970.
But that is moving ahead of the story.
The first test of the Treaty of Rome came in January 1959, when the preliminary stage of tariff reductions was due to go into operation, with customs duties being reduced by 10 per cent and import quotas increased by 20 per cent.
There was some apprehension, not only because of the newness of the organisation and the awareness that hitches could easily occur, but also because of possible French recalcitrance.
The tired and weak Fourth Republic had finally collapsed in 1958, to be replaced by a Fifth Republic headed by Charles de Gaulle, whose nationalist prejudices were already well-known.
In the event, President de Gaulle and France, still preoccupied by the war in Algeria which had toppled the Fourth Republic, did not obstruct the deadline, choosing not to invoke the escape clauses which France had insisted be incorporated into the Rome Treaty.
Indeed, this first step proceeded so smoothly that the EEC decided to speed up the timetable of tariff reductions.
During these first years of operation, progress towards some of the economic goals continued to be satisfactory.
By 1961 internal tariff barriers had been substantially reduced and quota restrictions on industrial products had been largely eliminated.
Trade within the EEC had expanded at a rate double that of trade with non-members, and the EEC had also become the world's largest trading power.
Of some of the other developments outlined in the Treaty of Rome, a European Investment Bank, based in Luxembourg, had been set up immediately to provide capital for the future balanced development of the Community.
By the end of 1961 the Bank had provided substantial loans for development, mainly to Italy, the poorest member of the Community.
A joint system of security for migrant workers had been introduced in 1958.
In May 1960 the EEC began to look at ways of liberalising the movement of capital, and the following year issued the first regulations governing the existence of cartels.
Again in 1960, the EEC had begun to look at the problem of discrimination in transport, and in 1961 a Monetary Committee was established, as well as one charged with examining trade cycle policy.
The one area where nothing seemed to have occurred was in setting up a Social Fund, since the Six had even begun to grasp the nettle of a common agricultural policy, agreeing in January 1962 to introduce common target prices for the most important farm products and a levy on agricultural imports into the EEC.
The seemingly positive advances on the economic front re-emphasised the fact that the Treaty of Rome had skirted around the question of political cooperation.
Economic progress helped spur new thinking on the political direction of the EEC, especially as  the Commission, under the forceful presidency of Walter Hallstein, had exceeded the expectations of many in terms of the activist role it had pursued.
It was, perhaps rather surprisingly, the Fifth French Republic which agitated most strongly for an acceleration of political momentum.
In June 1959 President de Gaulle had contacted West Germany and Italy to suggest regular meetings of the leaders of the EEC governments.
The Benelux states were hostile to the suggestion, because they hoped that a geographical expansion of EEC membership, including British participation, would occur before concrete political plans were discussed.
The Six eventually reached a compromise in November 1959, agreeing that the foreign ministers should meet regularly on a biennial basis.
De Gaulle returned to the attack with an even more ambitious scheme for regular three-monthly meetings of the heads of government, supported by a permanent secretariat.
This again met with a cool reception from the other five, first because it might foreclose the question of EEC enlargement, and second because it seemed to seek to push the EEC more in an intergovernmental direction.
On the whole, however, the Six seemed to be satisfied with the initial operation of the EEC.
Certainly it would not have been a viable proposition if it had run into serious trouble within a year or so of its launch.
A measure of its success and an indication of the magnitude of its task could be gleaned from Benelux.
The EEC was attempting to do within its transition stage of fifteen years what Benelux did in three: and yet it was only at the end of its transitional period that Benelux had had to face up to serious difficulties in seeking to achieve its ambitions.
The wider scope of the EEC and its larger membership might well impose strains long before the end of the interim period.
Yet paradoxically, this very scope itself demanded rapid resolution of such stresses, particularly since as time went on it would become more apparent that a much greater momentum and will than that supplied by the Treaty of Rome would be required to push the Six firmly into economic union and political unity.
This is not to denigrate what the Six did achieve economically and politically during the first few years of the organisation.
On the other hand, it is clear, as has already been indicated, that the establishment of the EEC and its initial development was assisted by a conjunction of favourable political and economic circumstances.
The late 1950s and early 1960s were the heyday of the economic boom that Western Europe had entered in the early 1950s.
Continued economic expansion and the widespread belief that Keynesian economic techniques provided governments with an effective tool for managing the economy  had engendered the belief that the future would be like the present, but better, that economic growth would simply continue into the indefinite future, bringing more and greater benefits to all segments of society.
In such an optimistic climate it was easier for national governments and interest groups to go along with the economic ambitions of the EEC; it was not seen as a great threat to their own concerns.
The political climate was also favourable.
Economic prosperity and satisfaction led many, perhaps, to look rather benignly upon Hallstein's activist Commission and not to be unduly worried by the possibility of it developing into some kind of European government.
The importance of the international climate must also be reiterated.
In the late 1950s Western Europe was still basking in the afterglow of the 1955 Geneva summit, the first since the war between the United States and the Soviet Union.
Détente was the catchphrase in which Western Europe wanted to believe — although, despite the wish to be master of its own destiny, Western Europe was nevertheless still not prepared to relax its concern about security as expressed through NATO.
Finally, beginning with the resolution of the Saar issue, there had been an increasing rapprochement between France and West Germany.
This grew with the coming to power of de Gaulle and the personal understanding he was able to reach with Adenauer.
The process, which had been one of the original aims of Schuman and Monnet, was to culminate in a formal treaty of friendship in 1963.
In short, progress in the first years after 1957 was sufficiently gratifying to all who had backed the formation of the EEC, and sufficient to oblige other states to take more account of it.
In effect, it seemed that notice had been served that the EEC was a successful operation.
In 1959 Greece and Turkey had already drawn this conclusion, and had applied for some form of association with it.
And in 1961 Britain publicly changed its attitude towards the principle of the EEC and formally applied for membership.
The British decision confirmed what had become increasingly apparent since 1958, that the EEC was central not just to European integration, but to Western Europe as a whole, and that after 1957 the history of West European cooperation would centre upon the EEC, upon both its activities and the response to it by the other European states.
CHAPTER SEVEN
THE EUROPE OF THE SEVEN
The countries of the Six geographically formed the core of Western Europe.
They had been in the forefront of developments since the late 1940s, progressing far beyond what other states, for varying reasons, were prepared to accept.
In fact, outside the Europe of the Six very little had been achieved and very little interest had been displayed in integration and cooperation beyond the all-European organisations that had been set up at the end of the previous decade.
The most significant developments occurred in Scandinavia where there was a long tradition of limited cooperation, or at least of a belief in a common cultural area which made such cooperation valuable, if not almost inevitable.
The major organisation had been the venerable Nordic Inter-Parliamentary Union, founded in 1907.
During the interwar years there had been several proposals for something that would go beyond this to involve governments, and in 1938 the idea of a Nordic Council had been proposed by Denmark.
The issue was raised again by Denmark after the war, first in 1948 and then successfully by the premier, Hans Hedtoft, at a meeting of the Nordic Inter-Parliamentary Union in 1951.
Denmark found strong support in Sweden.
Norway was more cautious, with several influential politicians fearing that even a limited form of cooperation might erode national sovereignty.
Finland, bound by its treaty of friendship with the Soviet Union, effectively ruled itself out of any participation for the time being.
Norway's suspicions were soon set aside, and the country joined with its two neighbours in setting up a Nordic Council in 1952.
None of the three states desired anything that would even smack of supranationalism, and their creation of the Nordic Council emerged as a faint mini-version of the Council of Europe.
The Nordic Council  was deliberately limited to being an intergovernmental consultative body, with a brief to seek Nordic cooperation across a broad front, but on a voluntary basis.
Its limited nature was underlined by the absence of any statutes and of any permanent headquarters or secretariat, or an ability to force governments to act upon its recommendations.
It met as a kind of annual conference.
The voting members were elected by the national parliaments; ministers who attended did not vote.
Even during its first few years, however, the Nordic Council began to achieve a considerable degree of coordination in the legislation of the three states, though these related to practical matters that did not seem to threaten national independence.
If it was thought that a consensus could not be reached, then the Nordic solution was very simple: the matter was not raised.
Hence defence was not an issue because it was not discussed, since Sweden's neutrality clashed with the NATO membership of Denmark and Norway.
This consensus by unanimity was reinforced in 1955 when Finland joined the Council.
The most striking absence of progress was in economic policy.
For example, Denmark, with its efficient agriculture, could not seriously propose a common agricultural policy because of the importance that Norway and Sweden attached to their own less economic agriculture.
On the other hand, economics could not be excluded entirely from Council sessions.
In 1954 the Nordic Council agreed to work for as comprehensive a Nordic common market as possible, and a committee was set up to study the question.
This committee was still to report when the Council in 1958 felt it necessary to reiterate its interest in a common market.
But by then any Nordic creation would have been a reaction to the EEC.
It is perhaps doubtful whether the Nordic states were really prepared to go the whole way to a common market.
Finland's participation would clearly have been dependent upon the consent of the Soviet Union.
While a common market would most clearly benefit Sweden, which had the largest economy, the question would have to be raised whether participation would compromise its political neutrality.
And for Norway and Denmark it would raise awkward questions about reorientating their trade, since for both states Britain was the most important trading partner.
What is clear is that for different reasons the Nordic states were disinclined to pursue closer economic integration wholeheartedly, or were at least following their customary practice of slow and cautious deliberation to try to pinpoint and resolve in advance any possible difficulties.
But events elsewhere were passing them by, and by 1958 customary caution and reluctance had led the Nordic states to the point where any move would be a reaction to external developments, a point wryly made later by Per Haekkerup, the premier of Denmark: ‘No stone was left unturned, no question unanswered.
…But while we were discussing and elaborating these problems from every conceivable angle, developments in Europe passed us by.’
Not only would the Nordic states have to reconsider what their relationships would be to the EEC, they, and especially Denmark and Norway, would be particularly interested in Britain's relationship with and attitude towards the new organisation.
BRITAIN IN THE WINGS
The advance towards the EEC had, of course, taken place without British participation, since Britain could not accept the fundamental supranational principle.
In fact, in many ways Britain disapproved of the whole venture, though continuing to lend vocal encouragement to the idea of unity.
The drive towards integration upset British conceptions about its relationship with Europe.
For most countries outside the Six, Britain was the natural leader, not just because of historical relationships, but because it would have by far the largest European economy outside the EEC.
Several states might have been willing to follow the Six in their ventures if Britain had been willing to join.
Though not prepared to join the ECSC, Britain had accepted a treaty of association with it in December 1954, although it was a further 11 months before the treaty was ratified.
Britain had been equally emphatic about the EDC, believing that there were simpler ways of achieving West German rearmament.
Again, however, once it seemed that the EDC had the support of the Six, Britain was willing to accept it and work with it.
After the defeat of the EDC the British approach to Europe during the remainder of the 1950s consisted of three phases: WEU, the so-called ‘Grand Design’, and the European Free Trade Association.
The WEU, which began life in May 1955, was in many ways an irritant to Britain, placing upon it a burden as great as membership of the EDC might have done, with the pledge to maintain British forces in West Germany.
In 1957, for example, when Britain decided to switch the basis of its defensive system from conventional to nuclear arms, it had to negotiate through WEU to secure a reduction in the level of its troop commitment on the continent.
WEU was an anomaly: a defence organisation designed to permit West German  rearmament.
Yet West Germany was soon an independent member of NATO, a de facto situation that could not be reversed against the will of the Federal Republic without disrupting the whole alliance.
Once the original rearmament furore had subsided, WEU largely became a useless appendage, existing passively within NATO.
While it did establish an institutional structure, its meetings were sporadic and its commitments overlapped -with those of NATO, the Council of Europe and OEEC.
It might have served as a link between Britain and the Six, but it was not until after its first application to join the EEC had been rejected in 1963 that Britain began seriously to consider this as a possibility.
Until then Britain, which had taken the initiative in founding WEU out of the wreckage of the EDC, tended to place little credence in it.
Politically, Britain was not prepared to allow WEU to intrude upon Anglo-American relationships, and placed it a poor second to NATO.
Quite simply the gulf which separated Britain from the Six, apparent long before the WEU was created, was far too wide to be bridged by such a tenuous organisation.
But for Britain, WEU was perhaps satisfactory: it allowed for the possibility of British association with the leaders of integration, if necessary, and may have permitted some form of British influence upon the latter.
This state of affairs changed abruptly with the Treaty of Rome and its implications.
If Britain wished to retain some semblance of leadership in Europe or even to maintain what it regarded as its special position there vis-à-vis the United States, some new arrangement would have to be found.
In fact, some members of the Six had been more positive than Britain about the potential of WEU.
In 1955 and 1956 West Germany and Italy in particular thought it could be an effective bridge between Britain and the Six.
Paul-Henri Spaak even wrote a personal letter to the British prime minister, Anthony Eden, which, in appealing for discussions within WEU, pointed in the same direction.
It was the speed of developments after the 1955 Messina meeting which forced a British reappraisal.
Britain, in fact, had been explicitly invited to attend the foreign ministers' meeting in Messina.
This was probably a consequence of British membership of WEU, but Britain's recent agreement to a treaty of association with the ECSC may have led the Six again to think optimistically of a British change of heart.
Attendance, indeed, would not have cost Britain anything or compromised it in any way, since unlike the meeting called to consider the ECSC, participants at Messina were not required to accept the principle of supranationalism in advance.
The extent of Britain's interest can be gauged by its response to the invitation: it sent only  a civil servant to the preliminary discussions on a common market, and he eventually withdrew completely in November 1955.
Britain simultaneously wrote to West Germany, stressing its opposition to a common market of only six countries, and asking for West German support for a much broader free trade area based upon the OEEC states.
Britain reiterated its view that membership in a European common market was not compatible with its membership in the Commonwealth, and that in fact a common market of the Six would not fit with the aims and membership of OEEC.
It is perhaps also true to say that, underneath, Britain, in regarding the Messina plan as too ambitious, was also quietly confident — particularly after the collapse of the EDC and the Political Community — that the scheme would come to nought.
At an OEEC Council meeting, Harold Macmillan, then Chancellor of the Exchequer, is reputed to have said that he had become aware of some archaeological excavations at Messina about which he expected to hear no more.
An expanded free trade area that would incorporate the proposed EEC was a view which Britain began to expound in OEEC meetings after June 1955.
The arguments were fleshed out by the foreign Minister, Selwyn Lloyd, at a NATO Council meeting in December, where he introduced proposals for what became known as the Grand Design.
These were further elaborated at the Consultative Assembly of the Council of Europe the following year.
The essence of the British suggestion was that the time had come to rationalise the proliferation of European institutions that had sprung up over the past decade, most specifically by introducing a single European assembly which, unrelated to any one organisation, would serve them all.
The second part of the British design was a comprehensive free trade area covering the whole of Western Europe.
Britain had its supporters outside the Six, notably the Nordic states with which it held regular meetings within Uniscan to discuss and coordinate views on European developments and their possible implications.
It was the British proposals which, as much as anything, stalled Scandinavian discussions on a Nordic common market, for if Britain was to be fortunate in its attempt to forge something beyond the Europe of the Six, the Nordic states would have little choice other than to follow the British lead.
As the government of Norway was to state during the free trade discussions of 1958, ‘whatever the United Kingdom does we must do as well’.
While the implications of Messina worried all the OEEC states outside the Six, the British proposals, by contrast, immediately aroused the suspicions of the Six.
It seemed typical of previous British  offers: so vague as to be almost meaningless or free to be interpreted in innumerable ways.
At the extreme it was seen as a plot to sabotage the projected EEC.
Suspicions were easily aroused, for it was also at this time that Britain announced its desire to reduce the number of its troops stationed in West Germany under the WEU agreement, as part of its switch to a nuclear-based defence.
Nevertheless, the British proposals were discussed and, since the talks ranged widely over defence, economics and politics, involved the whole of Western Europe.
By 1956 Britain had become concerned about the impact the EEC would have on its own economy and political role.
The British economy suffered more than most from low productivity as well as from an adverse balance of payments.
Ironically, part of the British problem was due to the success of the OEEC and EPU: under their efforts sterling had become convertible in most circumstances into other countries' currencies, leading to the end of Britain's restrictions on sterling which in the past had enabled it to protect its markets in the sterling area.
Politically, Britain feared that if the Six were to go ahead and form the EEC, it would generate a unit that would be dominated by West Germany.
While Spaak and his Committee wished to give priority to their own plans and timetable, the British argument struck a chord with some.
Spaak himself feared that the post-Messina negotiations might fail; to avoid this he urged Britain to join in the negotiations currently being conducted by the Six.
The signals coming from Spaak and others may in the end have led Britain to underestimate the determination of the Six and to overevaluate its own ability to pull the OEEC states, including the Six, round to its own viewpoint.
But in fact it was too late, if indeed it had ever been possible after 1950, for Britain to assert its will on the Six, especially upon France.
By the time that the OEEC Council agreed in October 1957 to set up the so-called Maudling Committee, named after Reginald Maudling who was appointed by the British premier, Harold Macmillan, in July 1957 to conduct the negotiations on Britain's proposals for a wider free trade area, the Six had in a sense already passed the point of no return.
Discussions on the Treaty of Rome had entered their final stages, with ratification outstanding only from France and West Germany.
It was not surprising, therefore, that while the Six were willing to discuss the Grand Design within the OEEC context, they saw it as an addition to, not a replacement for, their own plans.
Britain's strategy was not just to block the Six, but to have something in place should they succeed in getting their common market off the ground.
To  counteract the possibility of discrimination by the EEC should it be able to establish a common external tariff, the other OEEC states would need to accept a lowering of or even an end to their tariffs, providing the Six would waive their common external tariff on goods coming from the rest of the OEEC.
In short, the British strategy was for a free trade area in industrial goods, but with no external tariff surrounding the free trade area.
Instead, members would negotiate separate tariffs with non-members.
By contrast, Britain did not find much support across the OEEC for its proposal to exclude agriculture from the free trade area.
To the cynical and not so cynical, it seemed clear that Britain was seeking to secure the best of two worlds: to take advantage of the market opportunities for its own industrial goods that a free trade area would provide, while still retaining its special economic arrangements with the Commonwealth, especially its cheap food policy.
Britain was willing to make some further concessions on the political front, with some kind of executive body administering the free trade area.
This would be a Council of Ministers with majority voting being permissible on a ‘limited field of discussion’, but this would still be something that would lack the reality of supranationalism.
If Britain had suggested something like this several years earlier, it might have found some support within the Six, but by 1957 they had already passed far beyond that point.
It says something, perhaps, about the persisting British inability to realise the depth of commitment to something totally new that existed among the Six.
On this political front, the British line was assailed by federalists for seeking to wipe out all the advances made since 1950 and to freeze Western Europe in the more primitive mould of the Council of Europe.
From the other side, the British scheme ran into objections from the neutral states which wanted to avoid both the close integration of the Six and military entanglements within NATO.
In the end, the main argument took place over an amendment from Italy that would limit the single assembly to the EEC, WEU and the Council of Europe.
The key concern of these debates, however, was the economic component of the British proposal.
The idea of a broad free trade area was, on the whole, acceptable to the Six, but only if it was supplementary to, and not a replacement for, the EEC.
Within the Six, the strongest support came from the West German Finance Minister, Ludwig Erhard, who had long favoured a broader European grouping than that being developed by the Six.
But Erhard did not have the ability or the power to divert his premier, Adenauer, from a strong  commitment to the EEC.
Indeed, given the level of activity within the Six at this time and the patent way in which Britain's Grand Design seemed to go against everything they were working for, it is surprising that the Six were willing to discuss the scheme in the first place.
The opposition within the Six came from several sources.
There was the clear economic argument which believed that countries outside the EEC, particularly Britain with its preferential Commonwealth arrangements, would be in too advantageous a position.
Further opposition came from those who, no matter how much they might desire British association with their ambitions, saw a free trade area as a retrograde step, and feared its adverse effect upon the ultimate goal of political unity.
And within the Six there was an almost unanimous rejection of the British arguments that an institutional framework above that provided by the OEEC was not necessary, and that what the Six wanted to achieve could equally easily be reached by strengthening the OEEC.
In particular, men like Paul-Henri Spaak, who had worked so hard for the EEC, were conscious of the fact that many economic interests within the Six supported the foundation of the EEC primarily because of the advantages they believed would be accruable to themselves.
If the free trade discussions were pushed too hard, Spaak and others feared that they might prove more attractive than the EEC to many interests.
If benefits could be obtained without the closely-knit EEC structure, then the whole drive towards integration might well falter or collapse.
The key lay with France and, to a lesser extent, West Germany.
If these two states had agreed to the Grand Design, it may well have succeeded.
It was an open secret that the scheme had its supporters in West Germany.
Ultimately, however, the German decision lay with Adenauer who was strongly committed to the Europe of the Six.
In addition, because of the course of world events, he was turning to look more closely to France for political support.
France itself had an almost proprietorial interest in the EEC: after all, the Europe of the Six was very largely a French creation.
Certainly, it regarded itself as the leader of the Six: the British proposal would weaken that position.
French governments in 1957 had become progressively weaker and more short-lived, paralysed by internal conflict and the war in Algeria.
With the establishment of the Fifth Republic in 1958, the new president, de Gaulle, was able to offer a more decisive French lead.
In December 1958 the free trade area negotiations were abruptly terminated by France.
De Gaulle had accepted France's commitment to the EEC.
Although it was not entirely to his liking, politically  it was preferable to a free trade area where Britain would play a leading role.
He looked to West Germany for support, holding two meetings with Konrad Adenauer during the second half of 1958.
At the second meeting, in November, they agreed to call a halt to the free trade area negotiations.
Adenauer went along with de Gaulle's views because of the renewed pressure upon Berlin by the Soviet Union during the same month and his fears of a wavering United States commitment: strong French backing would be highly welcome.
De Gaulle had already made up his mind, having already instructed the French representatives on the Maudling Committee to convey the view that France did not believe it was possible to create the free trade area for which Britain was pressing.
De Gaulle's price for lending strong support to West Germany was reciprocity with his views on the Grand Design.
The other EEC members had to follow the French lead or risk the unravelling of the EEC.
The latest effort to prevent too wide a wedge being driven through the concept of Europe had failed.
The net result of the abortive free trade area negotiations was a sharp deterioration in intra-European relations.
They had done nothing to diminish Britain's isolationist attitude, and simultaneously had confirmed the widespread belief that any British proposal was a wolf in sheep's clothing.
Above all, Britain had failed to convince the new French president that it could be nothing but a rival to France for European leadership.
De Gaulle's known views — fashioned by his interpretation of the collapse of France in 1940 and his resentment over the refusal of Britain and the United States to treat him as an equal in prosecuting the war effort, on the failings of the Fourth Republic, on reforming NATO, on the need for France to acquire greater international prestige, along with his ambition to affect a lasting reconciliation between France and West Germany (ideally on French terms)— all influenced his decision to terminate the Maudling Committee negotiations, and all were still influential in his rejection a few years later of the British application to enter the EEC.
THE EUROPEAN FREE TRADE ASSOCIATION
With the collapse of the Maudling negotiations, Britain's next act was to go ahead with the formation of a European Free Trade Association (EFTA), along with Austria, Denmark, Norway, Portugal, Sweden and Switzerland.
Finland also participated in the discussions that  produced EFTA, but did not become a member.
It hoped that the involvement of neutral states like Austria, Sweden and Switzerland — all of whom obviously did not see membership as compromising their neutrality — would persuade the Soviet Union that the new association was sufficiently politically innocuous for Finland to be able to join it in the not too distant future.
Sweden tried to take the first initiative only two days after the ending of the Maudling negotiations, inviting other states to send representatives to Stockholm to discuss how their trade policies might be better coordinated.
Although the invitation was surprisingly withdrawn the following day, Sweden had ensured that some free trade momentum would be maintained.
Indeed, paralleling the work of the Maudling Committee, Britain and the Nordic states had discussed the idea of a loose inter-governmental consultative mechanism known as Uniscan during 1958.
At the same time, Switzerland had strongly affirmed its interest in the notion.
It was the fact that the seven states which formed EFTA were already in broad agreement as to what they wanted, particularly within the Uniscan core, that enabled the further discussions and an agreement to be reached extremely quickly.
With Britain playing a prominent role, government officials met in Geneva at the beginning of December 1958 to discuss, without being bound in any way by their own governments, the possibility of rescuing a smaller free trade area from the wreck of Maudling.
A second meeting was held in Oslo three months later.
The ground was sufficiently well prepared for formal negotiations to begin in Sweden in June 1959.
Within two weeks the participants were able to agree upon a draft plan.
By the end of the year the Stockholm Convention had been signed, with the launch of the European Free Trade Association being set for May 1960.
By contrast with the Treaty of Rome, the Stockholm Convention was quite modest, in both length and ambition.
It consisted of only 44 articles and seven appendices.
Its immediate economic aim was to work for the reduction and eventual elimination of tariffs on most industrial goods among its members.
The Convention set a transitional period of 10 years, with an industrial free trade area coming into being by 1970.
Special provisions were to be made for agriculture and fisheries.
But there the EFTA's work would be at an end.
It was not designed to continue to seek closer economic unification.
Indeed, in terms of the Convention, EFTA looked like a temporary or transitional arrangement.
Unlike the Treaty of Rome, where acceptance was totally contractual, membership of EFTA could be renounced upon giving only one year's notice of withdrawal.
Not  surprisingly, given the well-known stance of the Seven on political unity, EFTA was not intended to have any political implications, and so it was not deemed necessary for it to have an elaborate institutional structure.
Its institutions would be confined to a Council of Ministers, meeting only two or three times a year.
The Council would be supported by a group of permanent national representatives, serviced by a small secretariat, which would meet weekly in Geneva.
Some doubts were raised over Britain's real motives for encouraging the foundation of, and entering, EFTA: economically, the smaller members were likely to benefit far more, which indeed did prove to be the case in the 1960s.
Quite possibly the ulterior motive was to convince the EEC states of the virtues of EFTA's low tariffs, with the end objective of persuading them to return to the conference table to negotiate a multilateral trading agreement that would hold the two parts of Western Europe together.
This was a prevalent interpretation within the EEC, and one which was reinforced by the tone of the debate in the British House of Commons upon the Stockholm Convention, in which most speakers concentrated more upon the relationship with the EEC than upon the organisation and aims of EFTA.
One of the few  salutary notes in the debate was provided by the Labour Party spokesman, Roy Jenkins (who was to become President of the EEC Commission in the late 1970s), who said,
That is precisely the point.
EFTA was to be just a free trade area; as such, there was no agreement on barriers being set against third parties.
That barrier, a common external tariff, was integral to the Treaty of Rome, which wanted to go beyond a free trade area to a customs union, which the Six believed was a far more effective way of developing the potential of their internal market, the logic of which would ultimately oblige them to adopt common policies and harmonise their regulations.
That in turn would hopefully provide an impetus for closer political union.
The EFTA states were agreed on only one thing: they rejected the sequence of events beyond a free trade area postulated by the Treaty of Rome, accepting EFTA as the only possible alternative that would offer some benefits to its members should the EEC prove effective.
They were otherwise a very disparate group of seven.
Four were  members of NATO; the other three were neutral.
Portugal was ruled by an authoritarian dictatorship, and so was at odds with the principles of liberal democracy that were deeply embedded in the life of the other six.
They were also disparate in economic terms, and not just because of the dominant size of Britain.
Three — Britain, Sweden and Switzerland — traditionally were low tariff countries with an industrial economy that relied upon the import of most of the necessary raw materials.
Denmark and Norway were rather similar, but with high non-tariff barriers against certain manufactured goods.
By contrast, Austria maintained high tariff barriers, while Portugal had an extremely limited industrial base.
Given this diversity, it is not surprising that EFTA, with its limited infrastructure, looked a rather makeshift organisation.
It was hard to avoid the conclusion that while pique may have played a part in its foundation, it had come into being not so much to benefit its members in terms of strengthening trade within the seven, but on the basis of a belief that in unity there was strength: in other words, as a group of seven they would be in a less disadvantageous position vis-à-vis the Six than if each separately attempted to negotiate some accommodation with the Six.
In short, as the 1950s came to a close, Western Europe was truly and literally at sixes and sevens.
It had taken 10 years for the states definitely to decide where they stood on the question of integration or association.
On the other hand, the numerous developments and debates of the decade had not persuaded a single country to shift from the position it had originally adopted on the European question in the 1940s.
In 1960 the pattern which had emerged seemed likely to remain in force for some time to come, with the EEC countries preferring a maximum of integration and the remainder opting for a minimal level of intergovernmental association.
This arrangement might well have been satisfactory, with some accommodation between the two sides being not too difficult to achieve, but for the rancour that had been aroused in recent years.
The EEC and EFTA seemed determined to go their separate ways, and to regard each other as a rival, not a partner.
Since most of the states were members of its western alliance and important for its own economy, this rift was a matter of grave concern to the United States, which saw the abrupt ending of the Maudling negotiations as effectively signifying the ending of the OEEC's role as the leading West European economic organisation.
American policy disliked EFTA as an unnecessary complication, not for what it was, but because the EEC seemed to fit better with its own strategic, if not economic, interests.
The United States  therefore stepped into the European argument, seeking to preserve some semblance of economic consensus.
While wider economic considerations were relevant, the European rift between Six and Seven was a major factor in the American initiative for a reconstruction of the OEEC so as to allow non-European membership.
The OEEC was transformed into the OECD (the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development), charged with concentrating upon international problems of economic strategy and development.
The establishment of the OECD, however, also reinforced the lessons of the late 1950s that Britain was not something special.
The EEC would inevitably have a powerful voice in the corridors of the OECD, with direct links to Washington.
Britain, to which the other West European states had looked after 1945 for a lead, was, if any further evidence had been required, clearly in the wings.
CHAPTER EIGHT
De Gaulle and the EEC
As the 1960s opened the future for European integration continued to look bright.
Western Europe and the world were continuing to enjoy growing economic prosperity, though there were signs, as yet unheeded, that the rate of growth was slowing down.
politically, too, despite tensions over Berlin and the building of the Berlin Wall in 1961, the furore over the U2 incident when an American reconnaissance plane was shot down over the Soviet Union, and the shock of the Soviet lead in space exploration and technology, tensions between the two superpowers had not returned to the glacial levels of a decade earlier.
Indeed, the growing rift between the Soviet Union and China, which became public and final in 1963, heralded the end of world bipolarity, something which it was hoped would give Western Europe more room to consider its own development.
On the surface, the major problem within Western Europe seemed to be the division between the EEC and EFTA.
In 1960 EFTA still hoped for a multilateral solution, within the ambit of the OECD, to the economic differences between the two organisations.
But to the EEC this looked too much like the British proposals of the late 1950s, and it declined the overtures from EFTA for the same reasons as in the past.
However, even though the two bodies seemed to be in competition, the edge was held by the EEC.
It was the more coherent organisation and perhaps the one with a clearer and more positive economic future.
EFTA simply had to try to keep pace with its rival: when the EEC, for example, accelerated its timetable for tariff cuts in May 1960, EFTA had to follow suit with its own revised programme the following February, simply to keep in step with the EEC.
Even so, the tensions between the EEC and EFTA abated somewhat in the early 1960s.
By 1962, in fact, it seemed not just that  accommodation was possible, but that EFTA might well become a footnote in history.
The crucial factor was the reversal of the British stance towards Europe.
Britain, along with Denmark and Norway, as well as Ireland (which was not a member of EFTA), had lodged applications to join the EEC, and their initial negotiations with the Six seemed to be progressing satisfactorily.
Indeed, the EEC, in anticipation of its enlargement, had also begun to consider how it might accommodate the remaining EFTA states, all of whom for varying reasons could not consider joining the EEC, or were precluded from doing so.
The issue of enlargement, however, proved to be contentious.
It, and particularly the British application, jarred with President de Gaulle's conception of Europe and the EEC.
The issue is sufficiently important to justify separate treatment in the following chapter.
Here we shall concentrate upon developments within the Six.
Economic progress within the EEC had been satisfactory.
The goals of the first transition phase, the first series of internal tariff reductions and measures designed to reduce the differences in the external tariffs of the Six, had been achieved without too much hardship or dispute, and the Commission was looking forward with confidence to shortening the planned duration of the second transition phase.
Negotiations on the establishment of a customs union were ahead of schedule, and the Commission was forecasting that the union could come into effect by 1967, three years earlier than originally planned.
In addition, under strong pressure from France, the EEC had also taken the basic decisions on a common agricultural policy, to which it was committed by the Treaty of Rome.
So great had been the pace of development that the Commission was also recommending that attention should be turned to the much more complicated task of establishing a genuine economic union.
Again, the political and economic circumstances seemed favourable.
Some member states, for example, were beginning to register large trade deficits while West Germany's trade surplus continued to grow to embarrassingly large proportions: these discrepancies had made the national governments more interested in the idea of an economic union with coordinated monetary and budgetary policies.
The success story of the EEC was obvious on the economic front, something which was probably not just due to the favourable world conditions, important as these were.
The political story gave indications of following along parallel lines.
The most important indicator was the role of the Commission which under the guidance of Walter Hallstein had played the active role hoped for by ardent Europeanists, overcoming the diminution of the supranational element in the EEC as compared to the ECSC.
The Commission had taken seriously its constitutional role of initiating proposals, and seemed poised to take over some of the work load allotted by the treaty to the Council of Ministers.
Hallstein himself in 1964 dismissed national sovereignty as a doctrine of ‘yesteryear’, arguing that it was no longer true that ‘the national unit, relying on itself, its own strength and skills, should be the final and only yardstick of the historical process’.
As to what should take, or was taking, its place in Western Europe, Hallstein seemed to be in no doubt: it was the EEC and its Commission.
The following year he could comment to journalists that he, as President of the Commission, could be regarded as a kind of European prime minister.
To some extent, the Commission could be so active because the national governments, through the Council of Ministers, had been content to allow it to be so.
Even President de Gaulle had on the whole been quite circumspect about the Commission.
On the surface, de Gaulle even seemed to favour the idea of the EEC as a political unit.
In 1961 he suggested that the EEC consider more seriously the issue of political union, though, as we shall see, his conception of political Europe was very different from that of the supporters of supranationalism.
Equally significant for the political equilibrium was the rapport which de Gaulle and Adenauer had with each other.
The growing rapprochement between France and West Germany peaked in January 1963 with a formal Treaty of Friendship between the two states.
This included provisions for institutional cooperation between Bonn and Paris across a wide range of policy areas, something which was quite compatible with the political objectives of the EEC.
Yet within the space of only a few years, all this optimism, not for the first time, was in tatters — against a world backdrop that was also changing: the waning of American economic strength; the rise of Japan; the rapid expansion of decolonialisation; new superpower hostility with the Cuban missile crisis; the slowing down of economic growth and indications of problems to come.
Within the EEC the commitment to the Community seemed to be less; or at least it was rather different.
In part, this shift of emphasis was due to political changes within the member states.
To a considerable extent the Europe of the Six had been a Christian Democrat creation.
By 1963 while the Christian Democratic Union still governed West Germany, the elderly Adenauer had been forced out of the chancellorship.
He had been replaced by Ludwig Erhard, who did not have the same degree of commitment to a Franco-German core within the EEC.
In Italy the Christian Democrats had accepted the ‘opening to the left’, cooperation and alliance with the Socialist Party, as the only practical option for stable governmental coalitions: inevitably, they would have to pay some heed to their new partner.
A renewed politicisation of linguistic divisions in Belgium was beginning to create problems for the Belgian Christian Social Party, while rapid secularisation in the Netherlands would push the several religious parties to the brink of what would be a dramatic decline in support.
Above all, a conservative revolution had placed Charles de Gaulle in a dominant position in France, with the Christian Democrats not just in opposition, but heading precipitately towards extinction.
De Gaulle had already had arguments with the other five over his 1961 blueprint for political union.
His veto on British membership in 1963 effectively blocked any geographical enlargement of the EEC.
At the same time, disputes between France and the rest over institutional, political and economic plans grew to the extent where they called into question not just the desirability and possibility of the ultimate goal of political union, but also the current shape and even the viability of the Community.
Throughout all the arguments and disputes of the 1960s the shadow of de Gaulle loomed large.
The interlocking crises of the decade, with de Gaulle as the leading player, are the theme of this chapter, except for the issue of enlargement which is reviewed in the next chapter.
THE FOUCHET PLAN
The tendency in the 1950s to regard the essence of the European debate being simply between Britain and the Six blurred several divergences of opinion within the latter about the nature of integration and the way it should develop.
While these differences had not been allowed to stand in the way of the launch of the EEC and its immediate economic schedule, as the organisation moved on to more of its objectives it was always probable that these differences would gain greater expression.
They were not caused by the coming of de Gaulle: that merely served to crystallise them.
In effective control of France and the situation in Algeria by 1960, de Gaulle was able to turn more of his attention to European affairs.
While there were ‘Gaullists’ in every member of the Six, the debate within the EEC in the 1960s was essentially between de Gaulle and the other five.
The first clash came over de Gaulle's ideas on political union.
De Gaulle and his disciples had had a view on Europe since the 1940s.
It was a view which in essence called for a confederal or intergovernmental mould, rather closer perhaps to the British stand than to the vision of Monnet or Spaak.
Indeed, in 1949 Michel Debré, a leading Gaullist and the first prime minister of the Fifth Republic, had called for a ‘union of European states’ that would improve upon the limitations of the Council of Europe.
He returned to the same theme in 1953, but this time to counteract the ambitious European Political Community.
French cooperation in the EEC in the years immediately after 1958 could perhaps best be described as the lull before the storm.
It would only be a matter of time before the strong-willed de Gaulle would seek to reshape the EEC according to his own conceptions.
His first move came in Rome in 1959 when he proposed regular meetings of the six foreign ministers, backed up by a permanent secretariat.
A sensible idea, it received particularly strong support from Italy and West Germany.
In November the Six agreed that their foreign ministers would meet every three months.
Three such meetings were held during the course of 1960.
De Gaulle's conception of Europe, however, went beyond the Six.
At the same time he was pursuing his preference for bilateral meetings: these culminated during the first two months of 1961 with his meeting first with the British premier, Harold Macmillan, and then with Konrad Adenauer.
Within the EEC de Gaulle's efforts led to the first summit meetings of the Six since the Community began, in Paris in February and in Bonn in July.
It was in Bonn that the heads of government agreed to explore further de Gaulle's proposal, which he had been propounding regularly since the previous year, that the Six should consider ways of reaching greater political cooperation.
They endorsed a committee, to be led by Christian Fouchet, the French ambassador to Denmark, to consider the matter.
Fouchet and his committee produced a draft treaty for a ‘union of states’ by November 1961.
The French proposals had four key institutional ingredients: a council of government heads or foreign ministers that would meet regularly, but where decisions would be taken only by unanimous agreement; a permanent secretariat based in Paris which would also be intergovernmental since it would be composed of ‘senior officials of the Foreign Affairs Department of each Member State’; four permanent intergovernmental committees to take care of the policy fields of foreign affairs, defence, commerce and cultural affairs; and a European assembly whose members would be appointed by the national legislatures.
Originally, France had argued for these plans to be confirmed by popular referendum (de Gaulle's favoured  electoral ploy), but this was strongly opposed by West Germany on constitutional grounds.
The original Fouchet recommendations, a revised version submitted by France, and counter-proposals from the other five were all polished and discussed by the committee and later by the foreign ministers.
Simultaneously, de Gaulle was pushing his ideas in a parallel series of bilateral meetings, arguing the case with Adenauer in February 1961 and then with the Italian premier in early April.
All the French efforts, however, came to nought.
They ran into strong opposition from the smaller states, especially the Netherlands; nor were Italy and West Germany totally convinced.
Later in April discussions on the Fouchet Plan were abandoned, never to be resumed.
There were several reasons for the collapse of the Fouchet Plan.
It was essentially a scheme which would have entailed the coordination of foreign and defence policies outside the Treaty of Rome.
The other five, West Germany and Italy in particular, feared that this might weaken both NATO and the EEC.
In addition, because of its essentially intergovernmental nature, there seemed little doubt that it would have reduced the role and significance of the EEC Commission and its bureaucracy in Brussels.
Moreover, by 1961 the EEC was about to engage in serious discussions with Britain and the other applicant states about membership.
Benelux in particular objected to the vigour with which de Gaulle and France were pushing the Fouchet Plan, and argued that fundamental decisions such as those raised by the plan should be deferred until at least the question of British membership of the EEC had been resolved.
In essence, they were worried about Gaullist ambitions for French domination in Europe, particularly in view of the close relationship de Gaulle was establishing with Adenauer.
They desired Britain as an EEC member as an essential counterbalance.
In some ways de Gaulle and France were trying to turn the clock back.
The Six, in the Treaty of Rome, had gone beyond what the new France wanted.
While all the objections to the Fouchet Plan were interrelated, the main factor influencing its rejection was ultimately the fear that it would weaken the Rome treaty and whatever political objectives it implied, to the advantage of the national capitals, especially Paris.
Nothing much of the original French strategy survived, including much that was useful.
For example, no further summit meetings were arranged for quite some time, and the notion of regular summits had to wait until 1974.
The failure of the Fouchet Plan did have one negative impact.
The memory of it and the attitude of the other states rankled with de Gaulle, and undoubtedly strengthened his already considerable  doubts about the wisdom of allowing Britain into an organisation which he wished France to dominate.
The one positive consequence was the survival of a severely truncated Fouchet Plan in the Treaty of Friendship signed by France and West Germany on 22 January 1963, a kind of bilateral version of the original scheme with its provisions for institutional cooperation in the four policy areas of defence, foreign affairs, education and cultural affairs.
The Treaty was to provide in the future a solid core of cooperation between the two states and which, on the whole, probably benefited the EEC.
At the time, however, it was widely criticised as a threat to European collaboration and integration.
The Socialist parties of the Six attacked it for putting at risk the trust that had developed within the Community and for seeking to return to the ‘outworn concept of the absolute sovereignty of states’.
The Christian Democrat prime minister of Italy, Amintore Fanfani, was more forthright in his condemnation, arguing that the treaty was ‘harmful to the Common Market, harmful to the progress of European unity, and harmful to the internal equilibrium of NATO’.
THE 1965 CRISIS
The crisis within the Community which began with the abortive Fouchet Plan deepened with de Gaulle's veto of British membership in 1963.
It was not just the veto which caused a crisis of confidence: every member had the right to blackball an applicant.
Rather, it was the manner and forum — a press conference in Paris — in which de Gaulle had announced his verdict, without formally discussing it with the other Community members.
Walter Hallstein and the Netherlands were particularly critical of France, and the tension between the latter and the other five increased significantly.
Further unhappiness and a similar rift were generated over opinion and strategy in defence, where de Gaulle was striking out on a path different from that of the other Western allies, a path that culminated in the withdrawal of France from the NATO military command structure in 1966, necessitating the removal of NATO headquarters from Paris to Brussels.
Just as the Fouchet Plan was a French attempt to prevent the EEC Commission acquiring too much influence over the national governments, so the attitude on defence was a reaction to de Gaulle's dislike and distrust of the United States, which he felt wielded undue influence in Europe.
This attitude also led him to express his distaste  for the American-sponsored discussions on world trade, known as the Kennedy Round, that were currently being conducted within GATT: again, he suspected that they would produce a heightened American influence in Europe, something that would not be in Western Europe's or France's interests.
The crisis hardened two years later in 1965 in clashes over, among other things, the question of a common agricultural policy.
The dispute led to a French boycott of meetings of the Council of Ministers, effectively preventing the EEC from launching any new developments.
It was in many ways a logical consequence of de Gaulle's seeking to impose upon his partners and neighbours, and to put into practice, his vision of the future Europe, a vision which contrasted sharply with that of the pioneers of the Six.
It is perhaps ironical that while the decision by Britain to apply for EEC membership implied a tacit acceptance of the supranational principle inherent in the Treaty of Rome, the Gaullist design for Europe, which de Gaulle called the ‘Europe des Patries’, was very similar to the kind of traditional scheme so popular in the past with British politicians — an alliance sustained primarily by frequent conversations between national governments, in which national sovereignty would not be compromised.
Such a blueprint could not help but postpone indefinitely important questions facing the integrative bodies already in existence.
Indeed, for it to succeed, the progress and plans of the EEC would have to be reversed.
In some ways, therefore, France had to find a way of forcing the other five members into line behind his conception of an intergovernmental association of European states that would ultimately expand far beyond the Six, to what de Gaulle described as a Europe extending from the Atlantic to the Urals.
His earlier effort, via the Fouchet Plan, had been blocked.
In addition, the regular meetings with West Germany under the 1963 Treaty of Friendship were yielding little in the way of positive results.
Adenauer had gone, and the new West German government under Ludwig Erhard would probably, if pushed to the limit, prefer to maintain an alignment with the United States rather than with France.
It was in any case only to be expected that a serious move by the Community to advance further through a reduction of national sovereignty and freedom to act independently would generate a nationalist opposition.
As for de Gaulle, his views were already well-known, and it could only be a matter of time before he attacked Hallstein and his Commission.
The skirmishes of the past became in 1965 a full battle over the Council of Ministers and its powers to take decisions.
Despite the disputes that had occurred, and  even though 1963 gave a strong indication that de Gaulle's interpretation of the treaty might be very different, the Six had still in many ways continued to work in reasonable harmony on the Rome timetable.
However, by the mid-1960s the question had to be asked whether decision making would be more in the hands of the states, operating through bargaining and trade-offs, or rest with the Commission.
Early in 1965 Hallstein attempted to push the Community more firmly back on the supranational path.
The crisis that hit the Community in 1965 was a complex nexus of proposed policies affecting Commission and national governments alike.
To begin with, three separate issues were involved.
First, the European Parliament, supported by the Netherlands, wished to acquire more substantial powers for itself, especially over the EEC budget, and so begin to look more like a genuine legislature.
Second, the Commission was urging that the EEC, by which it meant itself, should have an independent source of revenue out of which it could finance its own activities: the EEC was still dependent upon direct contributions from national treasuries.
The Commission was seeking control of the revenue raised from the tariffs imposed upon imports from third countries.
There was a link between the two proposals.
If the EEC were to acquire its own resources, then the organisation would lose the element of control over its spending that came with the existing system of national contributions: Hallstein could then argue that giving the European Parliament more authority would provide the necessary democratic control over the Commission.
If adopted, both proposals would increase the supranational characteristics of the EEC.
It was for that reason that France was hostile to both proposals: de Gaulle had already expressed his belief that the Commission already had too much power.
The third proposal before the EEC involved the finalisation of the financial regulations concerning the adjustment of the several national agricultures, on which the Six had agreed in principle in 1962.
This, it was hoped, would mark the end of a long-running saga.
A common agricultural policy had been on the agenda of Europe ever since Sicco Mansholt had put forward an early version to the Council of Europe in 1950, though its roots lay further back in time in a series of discussions sponsored by the European Movement.
France, with its large agricultural production, was a strenuous protagonist of a common agricultural policy, believing that it would be a major beneficiary of such a programme.
Farmers elsewhere were not so enamoured of the idea.
Despite their efficiency and high productivity, farming organisations in the Netherlands had declared a preference  for free trade.
Those in West Germany were utterly opposed, partly because the policy proposals, they had developed, also contained the long-term aim of reducing in a painless manner the number of small, less efficient farm units; small farms predominated in many parts of West Germany.
While it is an oversimplification to view the first decade of operation as some kind of golden age, it is fair to say that until this point the EEC had worked fairly smoothly.
All, or most, major socioeconomic groups and the six governments had believed that its benefits for their own interests outweighed its disadvantages.
Despite the earlier declaration of principle, agriculture perhaps was an area where there always would have been a high probability of a clash of interests between supranationalism and national concerns.
Agriculture was still a major economic activity in the first postwar decades, and the ability to control the food supply was widely regarded as central to national sovereignty.
In 1965 the clash was more marked because for the first time the EEC was seriously attempting to inaugurate a common policy.
The French enthusiasm was counteracted by a reluctant West Germany, worried that the policy would adversely affect its own agriculture; and the governing Christian Democrats did not in 1965 wish to risk alienating one of its most important electoral clienteles, the farmers, just before the impending general election later in the year.
The Commission took the lead in seeking a way through the conflicting demands, attempting to bring all three proposals into one package deal.
This was in line with a practice already utilised quite extensively by the Commission.
Since the early 1960s it had increasingly opted for linking very different issues in a single package, hoping that because the latter offered something to each of the Six the whole would prove acceptable to all.
And indeed, linking these three proposals did have a certain logic.
If the EEC did wish to go beyond the 1962 agreement on agriculture, the arrangements of which were in any case due to expire in 1965, if financing was permitted to come from the EEC's own resources, and if the latter were to be levied on imports, then it was sensible for the EEC budget to come under the control of the European Parliament.
What the package meant for France, therefore, was that if it wanted an agriculture settlement, it would have to accept an increase in the supranational characteristics of the EEC.
This the French government was not prepared to accept.
It adopted a new approach, arguing for a continuation of EEC funding from national contributions until 1970 when, under the Treaty of Rome, the single market stage was due to  be introduced.
This counter-proposal, however, was not acceptable to the other states, which were not happy with the way in which the scale of national contributions to the EEC, adopted in 1962, had operated in practice.
The major critics were Italy and, to a lesser extent, West Germany.
In June 1965 France increased the pressure on the other five to agree to its proposed financial arrangements.
Its partners had probably accepted that they would have to acquiesce to some kind of compromise within the package deal.
What they perhaps did not realise at the time was that France was not prepared to compromise.
De Gaulle wanted the agricultural settlement but was not prepared to accept it at the price of giving in to the other five and the Commission on the issues of resourcing and budgetary control.
When it became clear by the end of the month that the EEC would not be able to concur on the financial arrangements for the common agricultural policy, the French Foreign Minister, Maurice Couve de Murville, whose turn it was that month to chair the Council of Ministers, abruptly terminated the session despite the objections of the other ministers.
France simply refused thereafter to attend any further meetings of the Council of Ministers, provoking what came to be known as the ‘empty chair’ crisis.
The point was that France was protesting not so much about its inability to get its way on agricultural policy nor about the latter's incorporation into a package, but more about the political or supranational elements of the package.
This was not surprising in view of the known Gaullist attitude that the Commission was already too powerful.
The French view was reiterated by de Gaulle at a press conference in September when he attacked the Commission for acting unconstitutionally in attempting to take power away from the national governments, concluding with the statement that France would not participate in the Council of Ministers until the Commission retracted.
The essence of the Gaullist critique is brought out well in his highly publicised comment that 
Hence de Gaulle was striking at the heart of the Community structure itself.
He had not given up hope of reshaping it along the lines he had already supported in the abortive Fouchet Plan.
What he wanted in  its place was put more colourfully, but very succinctly, when he said, also in 1965, ‘However, big the glass which is proffered from outside, we prefer to drink from our own glass; while at the same time clinking glasses with those around us’.
The French objective was spelled out more clearly in November by Couve de Murville who argued for a complete overhaul of the Community institutions, in effect implying a revision of the heart of Rome.
The time was additionally ripe for this Gaullist critique, for behind the French attitude towards the Commission package was a more fundamental worry, the fourth and perhaps the most important element of the crisis.
The Treaty of Rome outlined a change in voting practices from unanimity to majority voting, with most cases to be decided by majority voting after January 1966.
As we have seen, most situations had previously required the unanimous agreement of the member states, with most of the remainder requiring qualified majorities under the weighted voting system.
The change required by the Treaty of Rome would have a tremendous impact upon the EEC, and it was an impact that was antithetical to de Gaulle.
Finding himself in a minority of one in 1965 over the Commission's package of proposals, De Gaulle either had to cede the day to the Community and hence accept the principle of majority voting, or block the effective working of the Community.
France was simply not willing to resume participation until these fundamental features of the Treaty of Rome were modified or dropped.
De Gaulle wanted first for the Commission to end the pretence that it was a potential European government, and also its efforts to impose itself on national governments; and second that if the Treaty of Rome requirements about majority voting were to apply, they should not be permitted to do so in situations where a member state deemed its vital interests to be at risk.
And for de Gaulle each state should have the sole right to decide what its vital interests might be.
The dispute brought out into the open the argument about the kind of Europe the Community ought to be building, an argument which had simmered beneath the surface for some time, but which until now, partly deliberately and partly unconsciously, had been successfully avoided.
For a while the other five members dug in their heels and also refused to alter their stance.
The French boycott of the Council of Ministers lasted for seven months.
Only junior representatives were sent to sessions of the Council in order for routine business to be carried out.
But France pointedly refused to participate in meetings where substantive decisions affecting the nature of the EEC were scheduled to be taken.
While the EEC did not disintegrate under  the conflicting pressures, by the end of 1965 the stalemate could not have been permitted to persist for much longer lest the Community itself be endangered.
New decisions and directives were needed.
Either the five had to be willing to take these alone, or they had to yield somewhat to encourage France to return.
Similarly, France had to accept some relaxation in its position or risk seeing the five go ahead by themselves: the latter option would undoubtedly see a reduction in French influence as well as the likelihood of the five soliciting British membership.
The five had always perhaps accepted the necessity of compromise.
France was pushed to the same position in part because of the above considerations, and in part as a consequence of the French presidential election of 1965 in which de Gaulle, because he failed to win an absolute majority and was forced into a second run-off election against his nearest contender, suffered a not inconsiderable loss of prestige.
In addition, the angry reaction of French farmers to de Gaulle's policy demonstrated how much France, and the government, would lose in agricultural terms.
De Gaulle had not set out to destroy the EEC, but to remould it in a more appropriate form, where the ‘ambiguities’ and ‘mistakes’which he believed to be contained within the Treaty of Rome would be eliminated.
In the end he had to accept some compromise, or risk severely mutilating the EEC.
THE LUXEMBOURG COMPROMISE
The crisis of 1965 was a continuation of the argument that had begun in 1961 with the Fouchet Plan and that had resurfaced over the application by Britain to join the EEC.
All these disputes were about the same theme: the nature of the Europe that the Six wished to construct and the proper relationship between the Community and the member states.
Throughout all these episodes France had believed that its basic national interests were being threatened — in 1961 and 1965 by developments within the EEC itself, and in 1963 by Britain (and, by implication, the United States).
What de Gaulle wanted was not just a ‘Europe of states’, but one that would both be free from what he believed to be an intrusive and unacceptable American influence, and acknowledge some substantial element of French leadership.
Ever since his return to power in 1958, his foreign policy had been pointed in that direction: his development of an independent French nuclear deterrent and his growing estrangement from NATO are part of that  general background against which his treatment of the EEC in 1965 must be understood.
The effects of the dispute on the EEC were significant.
French leadership of the European movement, which it had held since at least the early 1950s, was severely shaken and no longer undisputed, even though its influence would remain strong.
On the other hand, there was no heir apparent ready to occupy the throne: West Germany, the only possible contender, understandably showed a marked reluctance to do so.
In that sense the Community moved to a more communal, balanced leadership.
By contrast, while de Gaulle failed to bring the other five completely to heel, he did succeed in achieving some of his objectives: the supranational element within the Community was reduced, and a more widespread use of majority voting was prevented.
Thus, while the five may have remained united, and the EEC survived intact, the ‘victory’ went largely to France.
In addition, in the short run at least , the door to membership remained closed to Britain.
More important, perhaps, the crisis was resolved by negotiations and discussions between national governments.
In January 1966 the Six agreed in Luxembourg to the retention, in practice if not in theory, of unanimity in the Council of Ministers, as well as informally accepting that Commission activism should be limited.
Hallstein's Commission was widely blamed for provoking the 1965 crisis by pushing too hard for more powers for itself and the Parliament.
France in particular had resented the fact that Hallstein had first raised the question of greater budgetary powers for the Parliament in the assembly itself rather than in the Council of Ministers.
The key sentence in the Luxembourg Compromise of 1966 was the statement that 
In addition, the Six noted ‘that there is a divergence of views on what should be done in the event of a failure to reach complete agreement’, but that ‘this divergence does not prevent the Community's work being resumed in accordance with the normal procedure’.
The Six therefore simply accepted to resume collaboration even though they had failed to reach a resolution acceptable to all governments: in essence, they agreed to disagree.
In particular, the  Luxembourg Compromise permitted a state to plead special circumstances in the Council of Ministers; in other words it would be able to exercise a veto on matters which it believed and claimed might adversely affect its own vital national interests.
At heart, this was probably almost as welcome to the other five as it was to France.
A further important consequence was an increase in the importance of the national governments relative to the authority of the Commission.
The latter was in practice obliged to pledge that it would consult and inform governments at all stages of any initiative, that it would cooperate more closely with the Council of Ministers, and that it would not seek in the future to behave like a government.
In short, the crisis resolved some of the ambiguity in the Treaty of Rome between supranationalism and intergovernmentalism.
The effect of the crisis and its resolution through the Luxembourg Compromise was that the future development of the EEC would be much more as an intergovernmental union of independent states.