

editorial
PEARL HARBOR saw a power too long underrated by the world lash out and inflict a crippling blow on a huge country.
The shock and amazement with which the USA greeted this spectacularly successful and brilliant attack was probably the most surprising event of December 1941.
The corner that Japan had been backed into by economic sanctions left her with little alternative.
Her military prowess should not have been doubted.
Japan entered the 20th Century by beating Imperial Russia in one of the most remarkable of conflicts ever staged.
The aircraft types and tactics employed at Pearl Harbor were also in advance of those employed by the US — irrespective of the element of surprise.
Why then, throughout the war were Japanese aircraft, pilots and their technology continually scoffed at?
With very limited resources and a minute technology base, the quality and innovation of Japan's aircraft has always deserved serious study.
Surviving Japanese aircraft are few and far between, recent trends to collect and exhibit them are to be encouraged, they represent a fount of experience and knowledge that has only slightly been dipped into.
IT IS, beyond doubt, a topic frequently aired in this column.
The Editor listened recently to three UK museum representatives who had submitted tenders to the Ministry of Defence for surplus airframes.
The sealed tender system has, in the past, alternated with the occasional  foray by the MoD into auctions.
Now, it seems, they have decided to mix the two.
The three individuals were all ‘phoned by a sultry female voice informing them that their bid had been matched by another.
In one case, the MoD expressed a desire that the airframe in question go to a good home.
Each bidder was asked if he would like to increase his offer?
All three of them, I am pleased to say, declined to enter such a Dutch auction.
I wonder if there are more out there who have had similar calls?
It appears the Ministry men can have their cake and eat it…but only if we let them.
NEWS
Wheeling and dealing
A WEAK US economy reflected itself strongly at the second Museum of Flight Auction at Santa Monica on October 5 & 6.
Auctioneers had to do a lot of behind-the-scenes wheeling and dealing just to get $100,000 aircraft to sell.
Vega-built B–17G N3509G had undergone an intensive maintenance and restoration programme at World Jet Inc in Florida and looked at least a million dollars, but the bidding slowed at $900,000.
A heads-together with the auctioneers failed to bring bidder and reserve (thought to have been $1.3 million) nearer.
Another example of the declining market was the amazing Goodyear Inflatoplane.
This aircraft sold at the last auction for $9,000 plus commission.
This year, the type was represented again, but was hammered for only $7,000.
Interest in ‘Classics’ was stronger, a Stearman YPT–9 Cloudboy sold for $87,500; an immaculate Cessna 37 Airmaster brought in $40,000 while a recently restored Cessna 195 realised $35,000.
Aircraft collectors  snapped up the few former airliners in the sale.
For Trimotor N7584 only reached $350,000 on the bidding floor but an ‘after-auction’ session clinched it at $650,000.
Cary Grants Convair 240 made $11,500, while a former Canadian Pacific Lockheed 18 sold for $47,500.
Many bidders were disappointed that the Lockheed Constellation did not arrive due to mechanical difficulties.
Despite much ‘hype’ that there was considerable Japanese interest and the Museum suddenly a centre for former Imperial Japanese airframes (see page 22), the A6M Zeke restoration package failed to attract interest.
Oxford population boost
Grossly updating our estimation of surviving Airspeed Oxfords, Jonathan Spinks has found a cache of no less than four substantially complete (see photos) airframes and six or so in poor condition at a site in Canada.
A good home is wanted for these remains — nominal exchanges invited.
Contact the FlyPast office.
Santa Monica prices
HIGH BIDS are given here, these indicate where bidding stopped and not necessarily a sale:
Not the Editor
READERS may have thought there was a superficial likeness  to the mug-shot on page 5, but this is not the Editor but a ‘guest’ and a quite intrepid aviator.
His name is Edward St John Biggin, or Teddy to his friends.
Teddy refuses to be drawn on his early life and will only go as far back as the Biggin Hill Air Fair of June this year when Anita and Bob Armstrong ‘adopted’ him.
They dragged him off to Thamesmead where there was an ugly scene while Teddy threw a tantrum (and a couple of vases) at being removed from his beloved aircraft.
It was then that Teddy realised he could keep up with the love-of-his-life and help Anita and Bob.
The couple were in the heat of a campaign to raise at least £200,000 for the St John Ambulance Brigade for a headquarters in the south east of England.
An alliance was struck, Teddy is gaining more and more sponsors.
Up until June 30 next year, Teddy is attempting to go flying in as many different aircraft as possible, and he already has some impressive types in his logbook.
Being, like the Editor, of compact dimensions, luggage racks or even map pockets are luxury to Mr St John Biggin!
(Teddy is also a man of letters, having a degree in B'Aeronautics.)
Teddy has lots of people to thank, including such nice FlyPast -type people as W/C Chris Booth of 8 Squadron who got him flying not only in a Shackleton, but in 8 Squadron's new Boeing E–3 Spinning Coffee Table; Teddy's logbook itself came courtesy of Vulcan XH558; thanks also to Plane Sailing,Sally B , the Old Flying Machine Company, the Fighter Collection and the Shuttleworth Collection.
The list is growing — any other aviators care to take the old boy aloft?
Drop a stamped addressed envelope to Teddy and a sponsorship form will come winging its way back — help out a good cause with an original idea.
Teddy isn't proud, a sum per aircraft up to June 30 is fine, but a fixed amount in a cheque now would be just as welcome (monies payable to St John Ambulance Headquarters Fund).
Awakening
BALTIC aviation is coming back to life.
In Latvia, thoughts are turning to bringing the former Soviet satellite state back into the ‘light’ and that means the suppressed aviators are beginning to stir.
At the centre of all of this is Ivars Ozols and the Latvian Aviation Club (LAK).
The Club staged a successful aviation meeting at Riga in July and plan another for next year.
Their UK representative is Arvids Natzins of Corby, Northants, and he is appealing to aero clubs worldwide to ‘twin’ with LAK and to exchange information as the Latvians urgently need western experience to bring their club back to life and to use western practices.
Ivars Ozols was trained by the Soviets to fly, but suffered a crash in a Yak which involved a horrific  forced landing through trees.
Ivars has built over the years a series of light aircraft, most employing a faithful Cirrus Minor I engine.
Now that the attentions of the KGB have  vaporised (they forced him to store or hide his machines, they may have helped him defect), the urge is to fly again.
Ivars needs help with a Hobson or a Zenith carburettor, correct camshaft timing and much more.
Shuttleworth Collection have supplied a copy of the engine manual — who else can lend a hand?
A warm welcome awaits anyone who wishes to visit Latvia and it seems that a number of aircraft will now be dusted off and returned to flight.
Ivars has spoken of a Soviet based in the country who has been building what he terms a ‘Sky Bug’ but what we in the FlyPast office think must be a Flying Flea of sorts.
We will forward mail.
Vampire out, Victor in
FORMERLY handed back to the Fenland Aviation Museum at RAF Marham on September 30 was Vampire T.11 XD434 (see photo last month) which had been painstakingly refurbished by members of the Victor Major Maintenance Unit (VMMU) who  carried out the work in their spare time over a four month period after dismantling and transport from Fenland's museum at Wisbech in May.
Airframe condition was generally very good and mechanical work comprised mainly of fabrication of a few missing panels, removal of surface corrosion and re-assembly, taking in total around 200 manhours.
Restoration of the surface finish was the most time consuming operation, taking some 800 manhours which included bringing the wings and tail down to bare metal before re-applying a new surface finish and markings and minor repairs to the fuselage fabric before restoration.
All work was done by hand, even dismantling and re-assembly being  carried out without the aid of lifting tackle, and the aircraft is now resplendent in original silver trainer scheme with yellow T-bands .
The only major component missing is the Goblin 35 engine although some small wingroot and tailplane fairings are still missing.
The team at Marham, overseen by Fred Beamish, have produced an aircraft which they proudly boast is one of the best preserved in the country and wish to express their thanks for their help to Pat Waterhouse, a former RAF sergeant painter and finisher now with the RAF Museum at Cardington, who provided invaluable help, Colin Jardine, manager of the Product Support Dept at BAe Manchester who provided all the technical drawings for the finishings and markings, and Sgt Tom Patel at RAF St Athan who supplied all the necessary stencils, enabling all the finer details to be added.
Having been re-assembled for the hand-over, the Vampire will now be carefully broken down again and transported back to the Museum where it will be placed on display once more after re-assembly.
Sixteen days before the hand-over of the Vampire, another historic event also took place at Marham — the final Victor major overhauls was commenced by the VMMU, marking the last Handley Page-built aircraft ever to be overhauled by the RAF.
(The Jetstreams were never delivered from the Radlett line, being  finished off by Scottish Aviation at Prestwick.)
XH671 Sweet Sue of 55 Squadron, saw extensive use in the Gulf War as evidenced by the 41 ‘petrol pumps’ stencilled on the nose, denoting operational tanking missions during the conflict.
By the end of September stripping to bare metal of the lower nose area for inspection had sadly also removed half of the nose art and the aircraft was completely gutted as the VMMU got to grips with their final overhaul.
Council meets
GEARING up for their 25th anniversary, the British Aviation Preservation Council staged its 98th quarterly conference at the Yorkshire Air Museum (YAM), Elvington, on November 2.
YAM Chairman Ian Robinson addressed the delegates and gave a brief outline of the Museum's growth and commented ‘we see the future as very rosy’.
With the RAF closing down the adjacent airfield and it going on the market next year, YAM ‘hope to expand and seek to continue to expand’, remarked Ian.
He was also proud to announce that the Barnes Wallis Collection was to come to the Museum and would make a major exhibition.
Delivered during the day to YAM's Air Gunners display was a turret care of the Solway Aviation Society, coming from a Vickers Warwick.
Going in the opposite direction was a bomb sight which would ultimately end up on the Hampden cockpit project at East Kirkby.
Membership of the Council continues to grow with Classic Warbirds — undertaking a ground-up Typhoon project (see page 94) with large sections of a Firefly next in line were admitted to Provisional Membership.
Underlining their ‘watchdog’ role, Council also announced the suspension of membership of the Stratford Aircraft Collection following the group's failure to repay a Council loan for the moving of an aircraft to their site.
Another Fury
AFTER a period when it looked as if airworthy examples of the type were going to be extinct in the UK, Hawker's Sea Fury is making a comeback.
With the OFMC Baghdad Fury already based at Duxford, arriving at Southampton docks in September was another former Iraqi Air Force Fury, N36SF, purchased by John Bradshaw.
Well-known for his displays over many years in Percival Provost G–AWPH, John flew the aircraft from Eastleigh Airport to the Science Museum's airfield at Wroughton late September and plans to base and operate it from there for the 1992 airshow season.
Airshow organisers wishing to book the aircraft for next year can contact John on .
Get your skis!
CLACTON Aero Club (CAC), well-known for their pleasure flying Dragon Rapide G–AIYR have recently been appointed as British representatives of the European Mountain Pilots Association.
As a result, the Club are expanding their activities into France with the introduction of the Snow Strip Special.
CAC have gained certification to operate one of their Piper Super Clubs with a pair of hydraulic snow skis.
These skis enable operation from either snow, grass or tarmac.
The CAC Super Cub will be operating from Tarbes in the foothills of the French Pyrenees mountains from mid-December 1991 and will be available for check-out and solo hire, tailwheel conversions and ski, mountain and alpine training.
The aircraft will remain in France until mid-March 1992 when it is anticipated that there will be sufficient snow to continue training in England!
Budding ‘Ski-pilots’ can gain further details on this unusual aspect of flying training from CAC on .
Stored away from the attentions of the KGB, Ivars Ozols Cirrus Minor powered aircraft requires help to get it back into the air.
Alas, no more.
Nose-art on Victor K.2 XH671 Sweet Sue, the last of its breed to have a major overhaul.
The artwork and mission tallies had been stripped away by the end of September.
Illustration from Storm in the Desert, the special issue from our sister journal Air Forces Monthly and available now from your newsagent.
MORE NEWS…
ON PAGE 81
Albacore on show
ONLY SURVIVING Fairey Albacore (N4172, painted as ‘N4389’) was put on public display at the Fleet Air Museum at Yeovilton on October 29.
This unique naval aircraft has been restored and rebuilt using components collected from four Albacore crash sites in Whiten Head, Glen Clova, northern Norway and the Island of Hoy over a seventeen year period.
Costing approximately £200,000 to restore, the work has been accomplished by Vivian Bellamy's Hampshire Aeroplane Company and the Museum's Society of Friends.
Next major project for the Museum will be the restoration of the Fairey Barracuda II, DP872.
Trijet retires
OCTOBER 5, saw the last commercial flight of United Airlines' Boeing 727, N7004U.
This aircraft was the first Boeing 727 to carry fare-paying passengers on a commercial flight, that being a schedule from San Francisco to Salt Lake City and Denver, Colorado.
United Airlines have donated the aircraft to the National Air and Space Museum who plan to incorporate the aircraft in an exhibition about air travel during the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s, at Dulles Airport.
In January 1991 United donated the first Boeing 727 built (N7001U) to the Seattle Museum of Flight and the airline has plans to donate further 727s to colleges as and when the aircraft end their flying careers.
(N7001U was wrongly called a ‘737’ in the November FlyPast when it was illustrated in colour!)
Change of type
FOLLOWING the report on the Beech 18 entered in next year's Round the World Air Race by Len Perry in last month's News pages, Len has informed us that the Beech will not now be entered in the race due to modifications needed to meet the specification for the race detracting from the overall authenticity of the aircraft.
Although the Beech will still come to the UK (the ‘shocking pink’ colour scheme being replaced with an authentic USAAF paint job), its place in the race will be taken by a Douglas A–26 Invader which is expected to arrive in Britain imminently and will be based at North Weald, along with the Beech.
Owner of the A–26 and Beech is Barbel Abela, a German lady resident in the UK, who also now owns Harvard G–BRLV Night Train , another North Weald resident.
Hopefully the A–26 will be displayed on the UK airshow circuit to help publicise the race and the owner's chosen charities, one of which is the Courtney Foundation, a registered medical charity.
Acquisition of both aircraft and the invaders participation in the race will be the subject of a documentary film.
 Enquiries regarding the Beech or Invader for 1992 airshow work can be made on .
Late news
NEW in The Fighter Collection hangar at Duxford in mid November was Spitfire XIV SM832/G–WWII, previously at the Charles Church Collection.
Tempest II PR536, under  restoration by TFC for the RAF Museum is marked as ‘OQ–H’ of 5 Squadron, based in India 1946–1947.
Previously in storage in Eire,Spartan II EI–ABU is now in the care of Ron Souch in  his Hampshire workshop.
Safe thoughts
OLD BUT SAFE was the title of the Historic Aircraft Association's (HAA) convention held at the Museum of Army Flying, Middle Wallop, on October 26.
HAA Chairman Charles Shea Simonds set the scene then introduced Bernie Forward of the Air Accident Investigation Board who used video clips and slides to highlight recent accidents.
This was followed by Des Penrose who hushed the audience with his frank and vivid recap of his accident in the Mew Gull G–AEXF.
He was quite open about lessons learned and gained the admiration of all who attended.
The morning session was concluded by John Davis who gave his views on the future of the European display scene.
David Ogilvy of AOPA (see page 88) kicked off the second session with a talk on airfield closures.
John Alison, a well respected pilot on the show scene then gave out his ten golden rules for survival.
Introducing himself as ‘without doubt the safest display pilot in the room,’ Bill Bedford caused some stir until he qualified this with ‘because I hung up my helmet some time ago!’
His description of the recovery of a Hunter over a Swiss airshow served as another graphic reminder that a performance should emphasize the aircraft's character but should utilize only the established skills of the pilot — and should never require his super-human efforts to get out of a situation.
If such efforts are required, the planning of the display was in error.
Civil Aviation Authority light aviation test pilot Darryl Stinton  rounded off the day with a highly technical look at the problems associated with the issuing of flying permits to replica vintage aircraft.
While such types may look authentic, their centre of gravity, for instance, may not be where the original's was meant to be.
Deemed to have been a great success, the HAA indicated that this sort of event would become a regular part of their work — being an extension of their long declared task, to increase the fund of knowledge relating to the operation and display of historic aircraft.
UK 'Raider
A LONG-AWAITED example of the Douglas AD4 Skyraider will soon be a familiar sight at British airshows.
One of the French-based Skyraiders has been purchased by a well-known warbird operation based at Duxford.
At the time or writing the aircraft was still in France awaiting completion of export paperwork, but was expected to arrive early in November.
‘Wright Patt’ additions
ADDITIONS come thick and fast at the USAF Museum, Wright Patterson AFB, Dayton, Ohio, with no less than nine airframes arriving in the past year, reports Curator Jack Hilliard .
Most surprising addition has been Lockheed YF–117A stealth fighter 79–10781, one of the only two YK–117s built, the other was written off in May 1978.
Other arrivals were:—(used for the Desert Storm victory celebrations in Washington DC);.
Jack reports that there is also a chance that Northrop YC–125B Raider 48–626 may join the collection.
C–125 48–634 (painted as ‘8620’) crashed en route to Wright Patterson on delivery in June 1988, making the possibility of another too good to miss.
USAFM hope also to take on a series of former Desert Storm aircraft in the wake of recent retirements.
A large screen IMAX cinema is now in operation at the USAFM, with seating for 500.
The construction of the IMAX theatre has allowed reorganisation of both the gift shop and book store, both are now enlarged and refurbished.
Baron relic
UP FOR AUCTION on November 13 were the contents of the Niagara Falls (Ontario) Aviation Memorabilia Museum.
The Museum was virtually put together by one man, the late Alex Massin, who sadly died of cancer before he could see his museum open to the public.
War Bonds, movie posters, uniforms, goggles, and even a fragment from one of the Baron von Richtofen's downed aircraft featured in the auction.
A decade ago this sight would have been deemed impossible by most readers.
Des Penrose described the last moments of Mew Gull G–AEXF to the HAA.
New Colours
BUCKING the usual trend to paint Spitfires after completion of their flight-test programme, Historic Flying at Audley End, Essex, are refinishing in detail at the earliest opportunity.
Employed successfully on their recently completed Mk XVI RW382 (see page 50), the next two airframes on schedule, TE566 and TD248, have both now been painted and detailed at the ‘fuselage metal complete’ stage.
Without doubt giving customers and crew that good feeling, it also provided a photo-opportunity at a recent visitor's day.
TE566 of the Historic Aircraft Collection is painted in its former markings of ‘DU–A’ of 312 Squadron of the reformed Czech Air Force on its return to Czechoslovakia from RAF service in 1945.
TD248 of Eddie Coventry is painted in an exciting silver post-war scheme of 41 Squadron.
This one-off personalised scheme with red bars on the fuselage, wings and tailplane picks out the squadron Cross of Lorraine emblem in  planform .
It is thought that the original machine on which this scheme is based was used for air racing in 1947.
Brick by Brick
FIRST London Bridge, then the Queen Mary .
Next, Twinwoods Farm airfield control tower?
Just another wartime control tower, readers may think, but fans of the famed 1940s bandleader Glenn Miller will know that it was from Twinwoods, Beds, that Miller, then a Major in the USAAF and in charge of the American Band of the AEF, departed in a UC–64 Norseman on December 15, 1944 for Paris — never to be seen again.
Now, Miller's adopted daughter Jonnie Dee and her husband Barry Soper, are planning to build a Big Band Museum in Clarinda, Iowa, where Miller was born in 1904.
Plans are afoot to dismantle the Control Tower brick by brick and reassemble it on a seven acre plot of land that has been acquired as a shrine to the famous musician.
 Soper,has already purchased the house where Miller was born and plans to incorporate this along with the Control Tower into the Museum complex.
Havocs find new homes
LONE STAR Flight Museum of Galveston, Texas, has purchased the world's only airworthy Douglas A–20 Havoc.
NWSF, the former 43–21709 and an A–20J–15–DO was owned by William Farah, but was rarely flown.
After being based at El Paso, Texas, in 1989 the aircraft was flown to the Liberal Air Museum in Kansas where it became a part of the Museum's static display on a loan basis.
The aircraft is currently at Liberal being prepared for a ferry flight to Galveston and it is expected that the aircraft will be restored to full combat configuration.
A second A–20 has also found a new home.
A–20G–45–DO N34920 (ex. 43–22197) has been acquired by Kermit Weeks.
This Havoc was owned by Howard Hughes' Hughes Aircraft Co and was an executive conversion that was retired in the 1960s.
In the mid 1970s Hughes donated the aircraft (along with B–25C 41–13251) to the Milestones of Flight Museum at Lancaster, California.
Both aircraft arrived by truck and since then they have remained parked at Fox Field with their outer wing panels and tail feathers removed.
It is expected that the A–20 will be moved by road to the Weeks Museum in Florida, where it will be put back into stock flying condition.
Save Hawkinge
A VIGOROUS campaign is being mounted by book publishers Wingham Press, to save Hawkinge airfield near Folkestone, Kent.
Hawkinge is one of the few remaining Battle of Britain airfields and is under threat from the developers, with the possibility of several hundred houses being built between the existing Battle of Britain Museum and the well-known gap on the cliffs overlooking Folkestone.
The Save Hawkinge campaign was launched on September 7 with no less than five Air Vice Marshals and seven Air Commanders supporting the cause.
Hawkinge was in the thick of the air fighting during 1940, with Hurricanes of 32 and 79 Squadrons operating from the airfield.
End of the line
BOEING'S 707 (the type has been in the vintage class for some while) has finally ceased production.
America's four-jet airliner flew for the first time on July 15, 1954 and immediately revolutionised the world of mass air travel.
One of the most successful jet airliners in the world, production of the 707, in its E–3 AWACS form, has ended due to a stagnant order book.
In all, 1,011 Boeing 707s were built, with the last commercial airframe being completed in 1982.
Expansion
KEN FERN's Vintage and Rotary Wing Collection has added Westland Whirlwind HAR 10 XP360 from Lasham, Hants, to the collection of helicopters.
It will be displayed at the Warmingham Craft Centre, Cheshire, alongside Whirlwind HAR.21 WV198 showing the ‘first and last’ in the Whirlwind lineage.
Sponsorship for V&R, in the shape of paint spraying equipment is being provided by Machine Mart of Nottingham, a new venture for a company more used to motor cars.
Above: Well-known racing pilot Eddie Coventry has adopted a race colour scheme used by 41 Squadron for his Mk XVI TD248/G–OXVI.
Below: Historic Aircraft Collection's Mk XVI TE566/G–BLCK has reverted to its original Czech Air Force markings.
Accidents
April 9: Cessna 305A N5193G collided in mid-air with Super Cub N6966D at Tatitlek, Alaska.
Both aircraft written-off, pilot of Cessna killed but occupants of PA–18 uninjured.
April 9: DHC–2 Beaver N9028 written-off when broke through ice after landing on frozen lake at Oak Island, Minnesota.
No injuries.
May 6: G–21A Goose of Oakley Air which crashed was C–GHAV, not C–FHAV.
(Updates August issue).
May 21: Bell UH–1B Iroquois N87966 crashed into Koyuktolik Bay, Alaska.
1 killed.
May 25: Piper J3C–65 Cub N3609K hit trees and crashed during training flight at Claremont, Oklahoma.
Two killed.
May 26: Piper PA–18–125 Super Cub N1799Aa crashed into ground near Newell, South Dakota.
Two killed.
May 29: Bell UH–1B Iroquois N9650N crashed into Lake Seminole, Georgia.
Two injured.
June 1: Piper L–4 Grasshopper destroyed when it crashed at a rodeo in Antioch, California.
No injuries reported.
June 7: Douglas DC–3–201D N102AP of Victoria Air force-landed in sugar cane field while attempting go-around at La Union Airport, Puerto Plata, Dominican Republic.
June 7: The A–26 involved in the mid-air collision was N9150 (Adds to August FlyPast ).
June 16: Navion 4 OO–NIQ crashed on approach to Wevelgem and written-off.
June 18: Taylorcraft B N37611 crashed into lake and sank at Kakhonak, Alaska, during flight with unlicensed pilot.
Two killed, one injured.
June 19: Piper PA–18 Super Cub N10PC stalled on approach at Woods River, Alaska, and crashed.
1 killed, 1 injured.
June 20: Douglas DC–6A HK–3511 of Aerosucre flew into ground at night in poor visibility while holding over  Barraquilla after several attempts to land.
Written-off and both crew killed.
June 22: Beech T–34A N45GD was the aircraft lost at Redding, California, today (Adds to August issue).
June 26: Navion A N91108 written-off after losing power and crashing into trees at Mountain Home, Arkansas.
Three injured.
June 28: Douglas DC–6B YU–AFF is now reported not to have been damaged at all during the fighting at Ljubljana Airport.
It was considered for use as a barricade but could not be moved without detaching the wings and was therefore left intact (Corrects September FlyPast ).
June??:
Chilean Air Force Sikorsky S–55T H–51 from Grupo 5 at El Tepual, the last operational example in service, was destroyed in unspecified accident.
July 5: Champion 7AC N3006E crashed during low-level flight at Burns, Oregon.
Two killed.
July 6: Piper PA–12 Super Cruiser N121EF crashed on take-off in severe turbulence at Merrill Pass, Alaska.
Two injured.
July 7: J3C–65 Cub PH–UCG written-off in take-off crash at Groningen/Eelde.
Two injured.
July 12: Temco D16A N88T hit trees after partial loss of power on climb out from Eau Claire, Wisconsin.
Aircraft destroyed and pilot killed.
July 19: Cessna 180J N9962N unable to climb out of canyon and crashed at New Castle, Wyoming.
Two killed.
September 8: T–28 Trojan lost was N128PS/146270 (Adds to November issue).
September 15: Antonov An–2 YU–BOZ destroyed on ground at Varazdin Airport during Yugoslav Air Force Orao 57mm rocket attack.
October 4: Nick and Safaya Hemming's well-known PA–22–160 Tri-Pacer tailwheel conversion G–JEST came to grief on a strip at Flecknoe, Warwickshire, when it failed to pick up speed during take-off for a flight to Honeydon.
The aircraft cartwheeled and was written-off.
October 11: LANSA Curtiss C–46D Commando HK–750, carrying false registration marks N–500, entered Guatemalan airspace on a flight from  Colombia without authority, believed destined for the USA, and crashed on a farm near Quirigua, Izabal province, 120 miles NE of Guatemala City, while attempting to force-land.
The six persons on board were killed.
The aircraft burst into flames, destroying part of the cargo of three tons of cocaine, worth $50 million, on board although some 2.5 tons were seized from the wreckage by the authorities.
October 22: Jodel DR.1051 G–BPLH suffered engine failure during flight from strip near Dunkeswell to farm strip in Nottingham and force-landed through cloud in field at Haven Pastures Farm, between Binton and Temple Grafton, Warwickshire.
Undercarriage damaged, wings broke away and pilot sustained minor injuries.
October 29: Antonov An–2 of the Yeviakh air transportation organisation/Azerbaijani civil aviation administration hit a rock and crashed in thick fog near Khanabad village, Nagorno-Karabakh, killing three on board.
56, 57 and now 58!
ONE OF THE original Westland WG.13 Lynx prototypes has been rescued from the Proof and Experimental Establishment dump at Shoeburyness, Essex.
XW837 is now in the care of the International Helicopter Museum at Weston-Super-Mare, Avon.
The aircraft is in very poor condition and is unlikely to be capable of a full restoration.
Also joining IHM is the one-off prototype Westland 30–300 G–HAUL, which has been in storage at Westland's Yeovil factory since the Ministry of Defence cancelled it in favour of the larger EH–101.
G–HAUL is the second WG–30 to join IHM (also holding the original prototype, G–BGHF) and is the 57th rotorcraft to join the collection.
Officially handed over during the Boeing Helicopters Family Day at Philadelphia to Elfan Ap Rees, IHM Chairman, was fully-restored Piasecki HUP–3 Retriever twin-rotor helicopter, 51–16622.
Built in 1954, it was donated to IHM by the Aviation High School, Cleveland, Ohio, who restored the rare helicopter to static condition as part of the 75th anniversary celebrations of the parent Company.
One of 70 H–25A helicopters ordered by the US Air Force, it was reallocated first to the US Army and then to the US Navy.
It was also one of only three HUP–3s to serve with the Royal Canadian Navy on utility and search and rescue missions, operating from HMCS Shearwater, Nova Scotia.
Once on display at the IHM, early in 1992, the aircraft will be the only example of a Piasecki helicopter in the UK, and the only HUP–3 in Europe.
IHM is eagerly awaiting the result of a Public Inquiry into the future of Weston Airport.
If the Secretary of State accepts an agreement between all the parties at the Inquiry last May, the IHM will take over an additional eight acres of Weston Airport, including the original 1936 control tower along with other building which will provide the space for expansion and improvement of the facilities already on offer at the Museum's present four acre site.
The extra space will allow the Museum to conduct helicopter pleasure flights and provide a helipad for visiting helicopters, as well as allowing development of an undercover restoration workshop, which will be followed by the construction of a £1.5 million display hangar on the existing site.
By the Spring of 1992 the IHM expects to have added a further six helicopters to the collection, including a Kaman HH–43 Huskie and at least two Russian types, bringing the total fleet list to over sixty rotary winged aircraft.
Busy 'Weald
ACES HIGH at North Weald have seen a burst of activity with ex-Swiss Air Force Vampires, having handled four aircraft in six weeks.
FB.6 J–1140 arrived on September 11 and was dismantled, crated and shipped out to new owner, Kermit Weeks at Tamiami.
Arriving the same day, T.55 U–1206 was also crated, leaving North Weald on October 11 for Fort Lauderdale, Florida.
On October 3, two more Vampires arrived, both owned by Swiss businessman H Weisskopff.
FB.6 J–1102 is also bound for Fort Lauderdale and the remaining aircraft, T.55 U–1234 will be housed temporarily with Aces High and is currently for sale.
After being on external display at Lasham, Hants, for twenty years, Dakota G–AMPP has been purchased by Mike Woodley and is being dismantled and moved to North Weald, where, due to its poor condition, it will be examined to see if a restoration programme is viable.
Also at North Weald, flying on September 9 for the first time in eighteen years was CM. 170 Magister G–FUGA in the hands of an Irish Air Corps test pilot from Baldonnel.
The aircraft has since departed for its new base at East Midlands Airport.
Being crated ready for shipment to Denny Sherman of Sherman Aircraft Sales, West Palm Beach, Florida, was the ex Charles Church Hispano Ha 1112MIL Buchon G–HUNN.
Spitfire project
WARTIME Spitfire pilot F/L Tony Cooper was recently re-united with his aircraft for the first time since crashing on marshland near the Humber Estuary in 1944.
Enthusiasts Julian Mitchell and Stephen Arnold have been busy restoring Mk V BL370 near Oxford for the past three years, after recovering the hulk.
After re-uniting Tony Cooper with his Spitfire, the restorers now hope to start working on the wings and are looking for bigger premises to enable this work to take place.
After the restoration to static museum standard is complete, Julian and Stephen hope that the aircraft will be put on display or may be used by film and television companies.
Left: Lt Chapin poses in front of BL370 ().
Below: Tony Cooper tries out the cockpit of BL370 again, Julian Mitchell and Stephen Arnold are with him.()
Indo-China A–26
Former Conair A–26B Invader C–GHLK in flight over Lake Erie during June.
The Reynolds Aviation Museum have repainted her as 434313 in the colours of the French Air Force, who used the type in the Indo-China offensive of 1951–1954.()
RISING SUN
Fifty years ago, the Japanese undertook their devastating attack on Pearl Harbor and World War Two took on a new dimension.
Francois Prins studies a famous date in history.
A FORMIDABLE BATTLE fleet of the Imperial Japanese Navy, consisting of six aircraft carriers, two heavy cruisers, a light cruiser and nine destroyers proceeded, in radio silence, from various locations to the remote Hitokapu Bay in the Kurile Islands of North Japan.
Other vessels already anchored in the location awaited their arrival.
It was November 10, 1941.
During the 1930s the world had seen considerable political and military changes, already the dictators of Europe were making territorial gains, and the Japanese also had designs on mainland Asia, invading Manchuria and waging a savage war on China.
To counter this aggression the United States  laid down certain rules and conditions which the Japanese blatantly ignored.
Japan was by now fully in league with the Germans and Italians who were forcing their eastern ally into action against British territories in the Far East.
Located in the Hawaiian Island of Oahu is Pearl Harbor where the United States has long maintained a massive naval presence which guards against an attack on the west cost of America.
In pre-war days this fleet continued to irritate the Japanese who considered it a threat.
In 1932 US Navy Admiral Harry Yarnell was commanding a fleet of some 199 ships on manoeuvres west of Panama in the Pacific; previously he had added his voice to the concern of Oahu's vulnerability but his warnings went unheeded.
Yarnell decided to prove his point so he detached two aircraft carriers, the Saratoga and Lexington and a few destroyers from his battle fleet and set sail for Oahu in poor weather conditions, radio silence and no lights.
Early on Sunday morning they had arrived undetected some sixty miles off the island.
Yarnell launched 150 of his aircraft which arrived in less than  an hour over Oahu, he now had the capability of destroying the ships that lay in Pearl Harbor.
Even this proven warning was ignored by Washington.
It was noted by the Japanese, including Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto.
Four years later the Imperial Japanese Naval War College in Tokyo published a paper entitled Study of Strategy and Tactics in Operations Against the United States .
One very telling line among many runs, ‘…in case the enemy's main fleet is berthed at Pearl Harbor, the idea should be open to hostilities by surprise attacks from the air’.
This document was known to Naval Intelligence and to the FBI.
Britain also made warnings to the USA underlining the Japanese threat but they went unheeded.
Admiral Yamamoto was appointed Commander-in-Chief of Japan's combined fleet on August 30, 1939 and immediately made air training a priority.
It must be stated that Yamamoto never wanted war with the United States and advised against it.
However, he knew the value of strategy and when the Royal Navy attacked the Italian fleet at Taranto on November 11, 1940, Yamamoto noted the action and studied the available data of the successful operation in which slow-flying Swordfish torpedo bombers decimated the Italian fleet.
His mind had been working on ideas for an operation against Pearl Harbor and when the United States Pacific fleet sailed to Hawaii on April 2, 1940 for manoeuvres Yamamoto followed their progress closely.
During a conversation on board his flagship Nagato during Christmas 1940, Admiral Yamamoto remarked to his Chief-of-Staff, Vice-Admiral Shigeru Fukadome, that ‘…an air attack on Pearl Harbor might be possible now, especially as our air training has turned out so successfully.’
From his papers discovered after the war it would appear that the Admiral began to plan such an attack in earnest about this time.
Carnage.
Above: Broken B–17D at Hickam.
Below: Ford Island Naval Air Station, Kingfishers and a PBY.
Yamamoto had a formidable file on Pearl Harbor titled The Habits ,Strengths and Defences of the American Fleet in the Hawaiian Area complete with charts, all available data on tides, shipping and aircraft movements.
Working with the head of naval aviation, Admiral Shigemi Inoue, Yamamoto submitted a detailed memorandum to the Minister — where it rested for the moment.
In Tokyo the US ambassador Joseph Grew heard rumours of a ‘Japanese surprise attack on Pearl Harbor’.
He submitted a report to Washington on January 27, which was filed away.
On February 1, 1941 Yamamoto showed his plan to Rear Admiral Takijiro Onishi, Chief of Staff of the 11th Air Fleet, he turned it over for study to his most able commander, Minoru Genda.
Commander Genda went through the plans in detail over the next ten days and came to the conclusion that it was possible and, although hazardous, had a reasonable chance of success.
At the end of March Major General Frederick Martin, commanding officer of the USAAC in Hawaii, and Admiral Patrick Bellinger, Air Defence Officer of Pearl Harbor, stated that the Japanese would attack Pearl Harbor from the north at dawn from some 300 miles away where trade routes were few and detection unlikely.
His report to Washington was filed away.
Due to the continued failure of the diplomats to reach any sort of agreement with Japan the US introduced an Export Control Act on July 5.
This forbade the export of aviation fuel and certain other raw materials to Japan.
On July 26 the US froze all Chinese and Japanese assets in the US and on August 1 more trade and oil embargoes were introduced.
This forced the Imperial Japanese government into a dangerous corner as she imported 80% of her oil from the USA.
Yamamoto's plan,Operation Z was complete by this stage and relied heavily on the fact that Hawaii is over 2,000 miles away from mainland America and any assistance would be slow to arrive.
He had to raid suddenly and with total surprise, to disable the fleet, destroy the airfields and block the entrance to the harbour — the whole fleet would then be held captive.
His brilliant plan did not meet with the approval of the Imperial Naval Staff.
On October 19, 1941 they rejected it as too far-fetched and risky.
On hearing this, Yamamoto offered his resignation but this too was rejected.
The next day the Imperial Naval Staff looked at the plans once again and decided to accept Operation Z .
The fleet began to assemble.
Yamamoto and his staff had already spent time and effort in training their men for the attack.
Genda, as operations officer for the airborne attack had trained the pilots of the First Carrier Division in low level flights over Kagoshima Bay in southern Japan.
The terrain and approach uncannily resembled Pearl Harbor and its surrounds.
They practised for several weeks using newly-developed 1,600lb armour piercing bombs and specially-developed torpedoes fitted with fins for shallow running in the waters of Pearl Harbor.
On November 26 the large assembled Imperial Japanese fleet, led by Task Force Commander Vice-Admiral Chuichi Nagumo, weighed anchor in Hitokapu Bay and set course for Hawaii.
The battle plan had still not been approved by the Japanese government.
Operation Z was underway although Nagumo remained unconvinced about the raid.
The formidable fleet consisted of:
In addition to the above three Submarines 1–19, 1–21 and 1–23 accompanied the fleet.
The Imperial Japanese Navy still had several capital ships under construction when the Pearl Harbor fleet sailed, they were well aware of the American strength and had to, hopefully, deal a knock-out blow in Hawaii to allow supremacy in the Pacific.
For this the US carriers would also have to be put out of action and the widespread Japanese espionage network in Hawaii kept them informed, on a daily basis, of shipping movements in the islands.
On November 28 the US Navy Department predicted that Japan would attack somewhere but could not pin-point the exact location, possibly the Philippines, Thailand or Borneo.
As the battle fleet made headway the Japanese government met on December 1 and decided to wage war on the USA, the following day at 0530 the message Niitaka-Yama Nabore (Climb Mount Niitaka) was sent in code to the task force, the signal that the Pearl Harbor raid was on.
That same day the US intercepted a coded Japanese message ordering all diplomatic and consular posts to destroy all codes and ciphers and all secret documents.
Another startling indication that Japan was in the throes of starting a war.
No action was taken.
Nagumo raised the ‘Z’ battle flag of the rising sun on December 4 as the task force neared the launch point, some 230 miles north east of Pearl Harbor, where the fleet halted.
At 0600hrs Hawaii time on December 7 Commander Mitsuo Fuchida, who led the formations, took off from the carrier Akagi — the first wave of 183 attacking aircraft included forty-three Mitsubishi A6M2 Zeros , first off to form the top cover, led by Lt/Cdr Shigeru Itaya, then 51 Aichi D3A4 Val dive bombers, led by Lt/Cdr Kuichi Takahashi, 49 Nakajima B5N2 Kate bombers and 40 B5N2 fitted with torpedoes led by Cdr Shegeharu Murata followed.
There were two aircraft casualties, a Zero crashed on take-off from the Hiryu and a Kate suffered engine failure.
All 181 aircraft were airborne within fifteen minutes, something of a record.
During  practice the best time logged was twenty minutes.
In the original battle plans, which were to be strictly adhered to, ten minutes were allocated for the raid.
If surprise was achieved then Murata's bombers would go in first followed by Fuchida's aircraft, if they were detected then Takahashi's dive bombers would open the attack.
Fuchida would give the appropriate signals.
At 0630hrs a PBY spotted a Japanese midget submarine as it approached the harbour defences and shot and depth charged it to sink in the harbour.
At 0645hrs on Sunday  December 7, 1941 Privates George Elliott and Joseph Lochard manning the army radar at Opana plotted an aircraft approaching Oahu, it was in fact one of the Japanese reconnaissance seaplanes sent on ahead of the attacking aircraft.
The operators ignored it as they were used to the odd US aircraft in the area.
At 0700, they plotted a large group of aircraft about 130 miles away and closing fast.
Elliott called Fort Shafter at 0706hrs and passed on the information to the duty officer, Lt Tyler.
He remembered that a flight of twelve B–17s of the 7th Bomb Group were expected from the mainland en route to the Philippines and that the US carrier fleet at sea could send aircraft back to Oahu, so he dismissed the report and told the radar operators to ignore the plots.
Besides, it was Sunday.
Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto, who planned the raid on Pearl Harbour.
Very few photographs survive of this brilliant commander.
Remains of one of the shot down Zeros near Pearl Harbor.
Leading the Japanese, Mitsuo Fuchida fired a flare at 0740hrs to launch the attack as they flew along the west coast of Oahu, the bombers broke off and went into their attacking run on the airfields.
It appears that the fighters missed Fuchida's flare and he had to fire a second, this was unfortunate as the firing of two flares meant that they had not surprised the Americans, which of course they had.
Therefore the Japanese switched tactics and attacked together with fighters and dive bombers which was not according to Genda's careful plan.
Originally torpedo bombers first then high level bombers and dive bombers.
At 0749 Fuchida sent the signal ‘To-to-to’ which is the first syllable in Japanese for ‘charge’meaning the raid was on.
A few minutes later he sent the signal back to fleet of the now famous ‘Tora!
Tora!
Tora!’
(Tiger) to signify complete surprise on the target.
Sunday December 7, 1941 was a typical lazy morning and very little stirred giving the Japanese a free hand.
Most of the US Navy fleet, including the aircraft carriers was elsewhere, but the battleships Arizona ,West Virginia ,California ,Oklahoma ,Nevada ,Pennsylvania ,Tennessee and Maryland were at anchor.
Other ships in Pearl Harbor that morning included two heavy cruisers, six light cruisers, 29 destroyers and a host of other craft.
An hour after the Fuchida's aircraft had left, the second wave of 170 Japanese aircraft led by Lt/Cdr Shigekazu Shimazaki  took off and headed for Oahu.
Included in this force were eighty Aichi D3A1 bombers led by Takashigi Egusa from the Soryu , they were to bomb the aircraft carriers, but as there were no carriers to bomb they bombed the ships dotted about Pearl Harbour.
Based at Kaneohe Naval Air Station were 33 PBY–4 flying-boats, three others were out on patrol.
At 0748hrs Zeros and Val dive-bombers which had  taken off from the Soryu attacked.
Led by Lt Fusata Iida they flew in at a height of 50ft and within a few minutes the airfield was a smoking mess.
One brave man grabbed a Lewis gun and, to save time, set it up on a rubbish bin rather than the tripod and fired away.
Some others took machine guns out of stricken aircraft regardless of flames and fought back.
The Japanese shot at anything that moved and  carried out the raid with skill and speed ;the Americans were taken by complete surprise.
Chief Aviation Ordnanceman John Finn set up a .50 calibre gun and fired on the attackers, he was wounded several times but continued to fight back, later he was awarded the Medal of Honour.
Iida's aircraft was holed by Finn and other gunners and he crashed deliberately on a road near the officer's quarters, one of the undercarriage wheels bounced through a house and the engine of the aircraft landed a ¼ mile away.
Iida's remains were buried the next day.
Twenty-seven PBYs were destroyed and six damaged.
Hickham and Ford Island airfields near Pearl Harbor were bombed at 0755hrs, the aircraft being led by Takahashi.
During the raid the first of the twelve Boeing B–17s from the mainland arrived.
Unfortunately they carried no ammunition and all guns were still packed in grease.
Some of the Flying Fortresses landed while others  turned off to land elsewhere like Bellows and Wheeler airfields.
As the B–17s landed the Japanese strafed the aircraft and also the hapless crew members running for cover from the downed B–17s.
By 0820hrs Hickam was wrecked, but not finished.
They fought back as the enemy continued to bomb hangars and parked aircraft.
During this attack another group of Japanese aircraft led by Lt Akira Sakamoto were attacking Wheeler air base.
Just after 0800hrs they swooped down on the closely parked Curtiss P–36s and P–40s.
These aircraft were an easy target as earlier General Walter Short, commander of the USAAC on Hawaii, ordered that all aircraft be grouped close together.
This in his opinion would make aircraft easier to guard against sabotage, no mention was made of a possible air strike which had not occurred to the air staff.
During the attack on Wheeler there was pandemonium all over the base, men fought to move the parked aircraft before they were damaged by the air strike.
Two visiting pilots from Haleiwa, Lts Welch and Taylor, hurriedly called their home base to order their aircraft made ready for combat.
Jumping into a vehicle they drove furiously to Haleiwa where their P.40s were ready for immediate take-off.
The two pilots made for Barber's Point to await developments.
At Pearl Harbor itself exactly at 0800hrs morning colours were  carried out on the moored ships, the first wave of enemy aircraft was sighted but not suspected.
Then the first bombs began to fall on Ford Island Naval Air Station and the dive bombers turned on the fleet at anchor, followed closely by torpedo bombers.
Ironically as the military band on board the Nevada , began the Stars and Stripes , a torpedo was aimed at Arizona and the enemy gunners sprayed the decks of the warships.
Arizona was hit first and blew up when a bomb hit near No 2 turret exploding the magazines.
1,177 of her crew were killed including Rear-Admiral Isaac Kidd and Captain Franklin von Falkenburg, she sank almost at once in forty feet of water.
Fuchida led his formations over the harbour again and again; the Oklahoma was ripped apart when seven torpedoes hit her.
By now the US personnel had got themselves together and began to return fire and before Maryland was hit her gunners claimed a torpedo bomber.
California was struck and sank quickly and by 0825 six o f the battleships were either sunk, sinking or badly damaged.
Only one, the Nevada , was able to get  steam up but as she made off was struck by bombs and grounded.
Dry Dock No 1, USS Downes (left) and the USS Cossin, both 1,500 ton destroyers.
Behind them towers the 33,000 ton USS Pennsylvania, still flying the morning colours.
At 0840hrs the second wave of enemy aircraft were met by a hail of gunfire from the ships, three went down immediately.
The US gunners were excited by the targets and even fired on some US aircraft flying to Ford Island from the Enterprise — several were shot down unfortunately.
By 0900hrs the Japanese were back to raid other specified targets, this time they met some opposition in the air, several American fighters were now airborne but the pilots had no combat experience so the Japanese had the advantage.
Ewa airfield was attacked and defended by Taylor and Welch who between them shot down six aircraft.
Welch had a gun jam and was low on fuel, Taylor was wounded in the arm and leg and they landed to refuel, before this was complete they were airborne once again.
Ewa was  devastated and 33 of a total of 50 aircraft on the base were destroyed.
Leading the attack on Ewa was Lt Fujita who ordered his pilots to withdraw after they encountered the defending aircraft and ground fire.
Joining Welch and Taylor was Lt Sanders who led a flight of four P–40s up through the clouds to attack six Japanese bombers, Sanders hit one aircraft while another of  his men, Lt Sterling, closed on a two-seater, Sterling's engine was hit and caught fire, but he carried on in pursuit, another Japanese closed in on his tail and the three flew on firing at each other, then Sanders joined in to attack the second Japanese, only Sanders survived this ordeal.
Just after 0900hrs Lt Shigematsu led nine aircraft against Bellows airfield.
As they flashed low over the airfield a B–17D piloted by Lt Robert Richards was on finals, this was one of the B–17s diverted from Hickham.
The Japanese strafed his aircraft and wounded three of his crew, nevertheless Richards, who was almost out of fuel, carried on and force-landed.
Zeros attacked Bellows just as some P–40s were trying to get airborne, many were shot down before they were able to  take off .
Those that did, turned onto the Zeros who were by now en route to other targets and then back to the battle fleet.
Shimazaki's aircraft accounted for several ships in the harbour and in dry dock, one of the most spectacular explosions occurred at 0930hrs when fire reached the forward magazine of the destroyer Shaw .
By 0945hrs the raid on Pearl Harbor was over.
To assist the returning aircraft which could be damaged and certainly low on fuel Nagumo moved the fleet forty miles nearer Oahu.
Fuchida ordered his remaining 324 aircraft back to the waiting carriers but stayed as long as he could over the target.
From his later writings it is obvious that he was quite fascinated by the entire operation and its execution.
Running low on fuel Fuchida headed directly back to the battle fleet, now 190 miles north of Oahu.
On the way back he picked up two lost Zeros who followed him back.
Nagumo's fleet observed strict radio silence and when two stricken bombers  called up for directions their calls went unheeded.
Fuchida was keen to refuel, rearm and return to Pearl Harbor to complete the destruction of the fleet but Nagumo decided against this action.
Had they returned the Americans would certainly not have expected another raid and victory would have been assured for the Japanese.
Six armed and bombed-up B–17s  took off at 1140hrs and flew southwards to seek the enemy, unfortunately they went in the wrong direction.
Probably due to the confusion no one thought of asking the radar station at Opana in which direction the enemy aircraft headed.
Opana kept an eye on the returning aircraft in spite of the devious routes they flew back to the carriers.
During the raid on Pearl Harbor the Japanese lost 55 men and 29 aeroplanes.
One of the Zeros shot down was afloat in the harbour and the minesweeper Montgomery sent her boat out to locate the aircraft.
As the crew neared the still floating aircraft they spotted the pilot nearby, they approached him to bring him on board but he pulled a pistol out and was about to fire when the coxswain shot him.
The Americans lost 2,086 officers and men, over 100 civilians were also casualties.
Ninety-two Naval aircraft were lost and 31 damaged, 96 Army aircraft were lost — only seven aircraft remained airworthy at the end of the attack — eighteen ships including eight battleships were lost or damaged.
When the last aircraft landed, Nagumo ran up a signal flag at 1330hrs to turn the fleet homewards.
This infamous attack, which in planning and execution remains brilliant, sealed the fate for the Japanese which culminated at Hiroshima.
On December 8, 1941 the Americans declared war on Japan.
Akagi and Kaga were the first of the battle fleet to arrive home, on December 24, they were welcomed as heroes, Japanese propaganda had made sure of that.
Admiral  Isorohu Yamamoto was not convinced after the raid and feared that the United States would not reset until Japan was defeated.
He was a marked man and US Intelligence kept tabs on his every move determined to avenge Pearl Harbor.
On April 18, 1943 at 0700hrs Yamamoto climbed aboard a Mitsubishi G4M Betty bomber and set off for Bougainville, his formation was accompanied by another Betty and six Zeros .
Sixteen P–38s  took off from Guadalcanal to seek out the enemy formation — on the direct orders of Secretary of the US Navy, Frank Knox.
At 0930 hrs they found the formation and four of the P–38s opened fire on Yamamoto's aircraft, it crashed into the jungle killing all on board.
Burnt-out P–40 at Wheeler beside Hangar No 4 which escaped the raid.
Captured Japanese photograph showing the raid on Ford Island, Battleship Row on the far side.
(All Photos US National archives via Author)
TORA!
TORA!
TORA!
Scott Thompson describes the making of an epic film.
USING THE American motion picture industry as a gauge of public interest it would seem that through the post-war years the American public was content to uneasily ignore the catastrophe that was Pearl Harbor.
Though much scholastic research and numerous books were written on the subject, the attack was only uncomfortably alluded to and often circumscribed in Hollywood's efforts to cinematically present the war.
That the attack was an unmitigated tactical disaster for the American military no doubt had much to do with its omission in post-war tales.
In a larger sense, the general public also seemed reluctant to accept a close examination of a fascinating day of history.
It was left to a subsequent generation to accept the often-skewed lens of the commercial motion picture camera as it focused upon the events of December 7, 1941.
Perhaps it was due to the increasingly introspective searching which resulted from the Vietnam experience, or it spite of it, that a full quarter century passed before the Technicolour version of December 7, 1941, was brought to the wide screen.
That effort resulted in the epic 20th Century Fox production entitled Tora !
Tora !
Tora ! which was released in 1970 and will likely remain the definitive story of the attack.
The insulation of time and the deadening of the American patriotic nerve, courtesy of the Vietnam War, undoubtedly contributed to the tone and even-handedness of the screenplay.
The story weaves the Japanese viewpoint widely through the film and presents, probably for the first time to most movie viewers, a rational reason why the Japanese felt they had to attack the United States or suffer as a second-class nation.
Many Americans who lived through the war years and remembered quite vividly the virtual hatred and perceived Japanese treachery fuelled during the war probably stiffened at the presented Japanese viewpoint but it remains, for the most part, historically accurate.
Indeed, the screenplay is credited to one American and two Japanese writers, an effort which parallels the way the film was actually shot — with both Japanese and American units completing sections which were later blended together in the editing rooms.
It is probably true to say that there will never be a huge assemblage of flying aircraft, supported by expensive ‘props’ on the ground, ever again.
Zekes sweep in fast — and low!— to wreak havoc among the aircraft parked out at Wheeler Field.
It is one thing to produce an unbiased manuscript which adequately tells the complex factors which contributed to the American disaster that day; it is quite another to successfully bring the story to life before the cameras.
Produced for 20th Century Fox by Elmo Williams, the film crews had the daunting  job of recreating two air forces and two navies in numbers sufficient to depict the massed Japanese attackers and, for lack of a better phrase, the massed American targets.
While the obvious interest here is the recreated air forces, it should be noted that the film employed nearly thirty very large scale model ships which were filmed in the huge film tank located at the Fox ranch north of Hollywood.
Also employed were three specially-built full scale ship sections, two in Japan and one in Hawaii, for the effort.
The Japanese ships included a full-sized replica of the battleship Nagato which stretched over 660′ in length and was ten storeys high.
It was the largest film set ever built in Japan.
The production company was also able to secure the use of six active USN ships, including an aircraft carrier (the USS Yorktown ), for the film.
Nonetheless, it was the effort to recreate the American and Japanese air forces which remain the central saga in the story behind the filming of Tora !
Tora !
Tora !
The film employed every trick in the Hollywood book of aerial tactics, with the refreshing exception of aircraft miniatures, to create the aerial fleet.
Actual period aircraft, including B–17s and P–40s, were used were available.
North American Texans and Vultee Valiants were remanufactured to become the three Japanese types employed in the raid.
Fibreglass mock-ups were built to provide the large numbers of aircraft which lined the numerous military bases across Pearl Harbor.
Finally, full-scale two dimensional panels were constructed of shark-fin B–17Ds to provide their appearance at Hickam Field.
All told, the gathered fleet of aircraft representations totalled nearly one hundred aircraft for the production of Tora !
Tora !
Tora !
This included fifteen actual vintage aircraft, thirty rebuilt trainers for use by the American film unit, another 21 rebuilt trainers used in the Japanese produced scenes, and thirty P–40 mock-ups for targets.
Pre-production planning for Tora !
Tora !
Tora ! began in 1966.
Producer Elmo Williams hired veteran pilot Jack Canary as a technical advisor and put him in charge of assembling the film's air force.
Reportedly, initial thought was given to trying to recover actual Japanese aircraft from various islands in the South Pacific.
Crews were even dispatched to determine if any of the aircraft could be made airworthy.
They established it would take five derelict wrecks to build up one flyable aircraft and its reliability would no doubt be poor.
One almost has to wonder if this account has any element of truth to it or if it was some public relations yarn to spur interest in the film.
It doesn't seem plausible to think that anyone with any knowledge of the difficulties which would have been presented by trying to recover and rebuild enough aircraft to produce the film would have seriously considered the idea.
In any event, Canary knew that the only possible solution to create the large numbers of Japanese aircraft was to remanufacture AT–6s and BT–13s to the proper configuration.
While the venerable AT–6 had long been used as the Hollywood Zeke , its resemblance to the real thing was marginal at best.
However, with a fairly small number of airframe changes and a reworked canopy area the Texan would  clean up quickly to become the Zeke for the film.
Presenting a greater challenge would be the other two types employed in the raid: the Aichi D3A1 Val dive bomber and the Nakajima B5N2 Kate torpedo bomber.
The BT–13 could be reworked as the Val with major modifications, while Canary cleverly envisioned mating the forward fuselage section of the AT–6 with the aft fuselage of a BT–13 and splicing in two fuselage plugs to create the elongated Kate fuselage.
Canary set out to purchase the base airframes for the planned conversions and marginally flyable Texans and Vibrators were collected from across North America and ferried to the modification headquarters at Long Beach, California.
At least 32 were purchased, with at least a dozen Harvards coming from surplus RCAF stocks.
Unfortunately, Jack Canary was killed during the process after the BT–13 he was ferrying suffered an in-flight fire.
Though Canary's death was a mortal blow to the film, the groundwork he had laid carried the project forward.
Two companies at Long Beach were hired to do the actual airframe modifications.
Stewart-David completed the Val conversions and also  built up the droppable torpedoes and bombs to be used.
Cal-Volair did the Zeke modifications and the extensive work on the Kates .
They also did the fibreglass forms which were used to create the P–40 mock-ups.
Working from engineering drawings done by Robert Brukhart, Stewart-Davis  built up nine Vals at the modification cost of $18,000 per unit.
Beginning from the stock BT–13 airframe, plugs were inserted forward and aft of the cockpit to increase the depth of the fuselage.
A seven foot fibreglass dorsal fin was fitted to the vertical stabiliser and a horizontal stabiliser leading-edge addition was added along with four foot fibreglass wing tips.
Fibreglass wheel pants were moulded and fitted to the landing gears and fake cowl flaps were attached to a re-worked AT–6 cowling.
Each of the Vals was refitted with a 600hp Pratt & Whitney R–1340–AN–1 engine in place of the 450 hp R–985 Wasp Junior standard on the BT–13.
One had a geared R–1340 with a three-bladed propeller installed.
One of several convincing ‘flats’ produced to use as back-drops during the filming.
The care and attention that has gone into the creation of this addition to the scenery makes the ‘single-tailed’ B–25 (see page 18) all the more puzzling.
A Kate landing on the USS Yorktown.
The carrier was ‘playing’ the role of the Imperial Japanese carrier Akagi.
The huge hangar at Ford Island used to assemble many of the ‘props’ of the film.
Here P–40 replicas are nearing completion.
A large wing-to-fuselage fillet was added which itself reportedly boosted the performance more than ten knots.
A rear-facing gunners position was installed into the aft cockpit under a  redesigned canopy.
Working bomb racks, including the trapeze assembly, were built and installed under the centre section.
Stewart-Davis also built over 100 torpedoes and 400 bombs for the film.
Most of the torpedoes were built from fibreglass and cardboard tubing and weighted to fall properly when dropped.
The bombs were plastic and cardboard and also weighted.
Cal-Volair had the lion's share of the modification work.
They completed twelve replica Mitsubishi A6M2 Zekes and nine Kates .
Though the modifications of the Zekes were relatively straightforward, they  cleaned up the airframe and the finished product closely resembled the Japanese fighter at a unit cost of $12,000 per modification.
A cover was installed over the second seat and a new canopy and windscreen were built.
New fibreglass wing tips and dorsal fin additions were attached.
Landing gear fairings, guns, and tail hooks were also fabricated and installed.
An 8″ high fibreglass machine-gun housing was installed ahead of the windscreen and strobe-equipped guns were installed.
One of the Zekes also had a geared R–1340 with a three-bladed prop installed.
Some of the Zekes also had the tail hooks installed.
It is the Kate which demonstrates the commitment to realism of the film planners.
Two fuselage plugs added nearly seven feet of fuselage to the hybrid AT–6/BT–13 combination.
The tailwheel was made to be retractable and a third seat was added along with a gun position.
One aircraft was fitted with a R–1340 geared engine and a three-bladed constant speed propeller with spinner.
Also fitted were fake cowl flaps, operable torpedo racks and tailhook and 2½′ wing tip extensions were added.
At least one Kate was reportedly modified with folding four foot wing sections.
Studio cost of the modifications for the Kate were $23,000.
Cal-Volair did the work at both its shops located at Long Beach and Oxnard, California.
While the modification work was underway other efforts were being made to produce the fibreglass replica P–40s for the film.
Two real P–40Es were secured for use in the film.
N1207V had come out of the Tallmantz auction and its new owner leased the aircraft to 20th Century Fox for use in the film.
It was used to produce the base moulds for the fibreglass fuselages for the replicas and carried the tail code ‘27–15P’ in the film.
Second P–40E was highly modified ex-RCAF 1064, which was registered as N151U and owned by Gil Macy of Monterey, California.
He also leased his aircraft, which had an unusual canopy arrangement and a four-bladed propeller installation.
His experience with Tora !
Tora !
Tora ! filming was not a happy one, as the film crew obliterated the old paint on the airframe and ground-looped a gear leg off during the filming.
Also, his P–40 came back with a different engine and three bladed prop.
N151U carried the tail code of ‘20–15P’ in the film.
Using N1207V as a fuselage mould, thirty replica P–40s were constructed.
The fibreglass sections were bolted around a built-up steel framework and Beech C–45 outer wing panels were attached.
Boxes of new T–6 main landing gears and P–40 tail wheel assemblies were located and utilised in the mock-ups.
Also, new Curtiss-Electric propellers were attached and, in at least two mock-ups, running Allison engines were installed.
Much of the actual mock-up assembly work was completed in Hawaii before the filming, but the preliminary moulding and construction was completed at Long Beach and then shipped to Pearl Harbor.
A fibreglass O2SU Kingfisher replica was also constructed for inclusion on the full-scale battleship Arizona replica being constructed.
Also procured were five PBY Catalinas.
Four derelict PBYs were located at Orange County Airport in Southern California where they had been abandoned after a Navy surplus sale.
They were purchased, cleaned up, and barged to Hawaii for use as targets.
An airworthy Catalina, PBY–5A N6108, was leased for use in the film and apparently flown to Hawaii.
A rare, even by 1967 standards, SBD Dauntless was also obtained for use in the film.
Believed to actually be A–24A 42–60817,(N9142H) the old Douglas was trucked in from Seattle to Long Beach for some much-needed mechanical work.
It was test-flown at Long Beach where the pilot, Don Dinoff, reported excessive oil consumption and a marginal engine.
The SBD was shipped to Hawaii where it was refinished in a Navy camouflage paint scheme and reportedly used for at least one air-to-air session but the resulting footage never ended up in the film.
Aircraft Specialties of Mesa, Arizona, agreed to provide five B–17 air tankers for the filming.
Given the type's fairly low profile in the completed film, it is remarkable that such a large number of Flying Fortresses were gathered.
Besides the obvious need to apply combat paint over the civil tanker schemes, the aircraft had to have their retardant tank systems removed.
Large oil tanks were installed in the nose of the bombers to provide a sufficient supply for the engines during the long ferry flights.
The B–17s staged through Oakland on their way to Hawaii, and had dummy turret shells installed upon their arrival.
Two of the B–17s, N620L and N621L, were fresh from Bolivian cargo service (as CP–620 and CP–621).
Aircraft Specialties had procured both B–17Gs for $55,000 from Lloyd Aero Bolivianos in December 1968 and they were flown to Hawaii the following month.
Aircraft Specialties also contributed to the film in another big way.
The studio contracted with the firm to provide maintenance support for the entire aircraft fleet during the filming, no small feat given the diversity of the equipment and the logistical requirements.
Maintenance was performed under the direction of the late John King, whose eleven man crew attended to making sure each of the aircraft was ready for its required film assignment.
Seven engine changes and numerous on-the-spot overhauls were accomplished to keep the aircraft airworthy.
Reports indicate that plug-fouling was a constant problem and was attributed to the lower power settings required to work with the helicopter cameraship.
Department of Defense co-operation and assistance was provided, mainly in making NAS Barbers Point, Ford Island, and Wheeler Field, as well as other military installations, available for the film's setting.
Much of the filmwork was done at Wheeler and Ford Island, which was later redressed as Hickam Field.
Other location shots were also done at various locations, both civil and military, around Oahu including Schofield Barracks and Kolekole Pass.
Also, as noted earlier, the USS Yorktown was provided to serve as the attack's launching point.
All the planning, training, and pre-production work began to culminate in early December 1968 when the first filmed scenes were completed aboard the USS Yorktown , playing the role of the Japanese carrier Akagi , cruising off the California coast.
As the modified aircraft had left the Long Beach and Oxnard facilities, they were test flown and ferried to Marine Corps Air Station El Toro in Orange County.
Initial crew check-outs for the California flight crews were performed at El Toro as most of the pilots were off-duty Marine and Naval aviators.
The pilots were required to complete twenty arrested landings at El Toro both to gain or regain currency in the tailwheel aircraft and to test the aircraft structure for weaknesses.
Once the check-outs had been completed the pilots and planes moved to Naval Air Station North Island in San Diego where they were put aboard the USS Yorktown for the carrier filming.
Evidently the carrier landings didn't work out well as those operations and their filming was quickly terminated.
The entire replica fleet aboard the carrier flown was from the deck into the rising sun of the east in some of the most visually stunning scenes of the film.
Once those scenes had been completed, the carrier went back to North Island to  pick up the replica aircraft and the two P–40s, and transported the entire group to Hawaii.
Air operations in Hawaii were put under the direction of Lt Col Art Wildern (USAF, ret) who hired and trained the second crew of pilots who were to do the flying in Hawaii.
He selected 47 pilots who mostly came from the ranks of the retired or off-duty military with extensive T–6 and formation experience.
He worked each through a transition training programme with the assigned aircraft and schooled them on the forthcoming filming.
Other location filming was underway across half the globe.
American units were filming in Washington and on the Fox studio back lot in California.
In Japan, a separate unit began filming in March 1969 with 21 rebuilt T–6s which had been released from US Military Assistance Group in Japan and rebuilt by the Kawasakai Aircraft Company.
Reports differ as to the extent of the modifications, but a close viewing of the film would indicate that the airworthy Zekes in the Japanese scenes do not appear to have been modified much beyond the application of paint and Japanese markings.
The Vought Kingfisher replica provides scale to the set for the USS Arizona superstructure erected in the Harbour.
Scenes shot on the Akagi set, where most of the aircraft were evidently not airworthy, show aircraft modified similar to those done by Cal-Volair, and also included folding wing-tips.
Twelve Zekes were used as window dressing for the Akagi scenes.
Reports indicate that take-off and landing scenes were shot on the Akagi set, but that one hard landing caused a Zeke break through the wooden deck with the gear  being ripped from the aircraft.
Actual filming of the attack scenes began in Hawaii on January 20, 1969.
The film crew had leased a large hangar at Ford Island and used it as their headquarters during the filming.
It was there that the fibreglass P–40s were assembled.
Also, sets were organised and much of the set decoration such as trucks, cars, and period pieces were stored and prepared for use in the film.
Machine shops and special effects crews worked night and day to bring the  film's culminating scenes to life.
The entire fleet of Japanese aircraft were based at NAS Barbers Point, while the flyable American aircraft, such as the B–17s, were mostly kept at Wheeler Field.
As noted earlier, scenes were shot at Ford Island, and then the field was redressed to become Hickam Field for arrival shots of the B–17s.
The Ford Island scenes were mainly those of destruction of the PBYs, which were placed in the exact position of the those PBYs lost in the actual attack.
The derelict PBYs were thoroughly exploded for the film.
Wheeler was used for filming the massed destruction of the American P–40s.
The resulting footage has to be about the best combat recreation ever put into a film can.
The pilots bring their aircraft through Wheeler and Ford Island low and tight, and often fly through the smoke of the created conflagration.
The attackers drop real ordnance, itself a rarity in the world of the Hollywood invisible bomb.
Some of the scenes, such as the ‘fly-by-wire’ shots of an Allison-powered unmanned replica P–40 attempting to  take off during the attack, did not go as planned but actually turned out better.
In that sequence, the P–40 veers into a row of parked P–40s as a line of strafing Zekes bear down.
The resulting explosions and the unmistakable scramble of stunt men who are literally running for their lives adds a vital touch to the scene.
Also unplanned but unforgettable is one of the B–17s making a one-wheeled landing.
The Fortress, N620L, suffered a gear extension malfunction during an airborne sortie and could not extend its right main wheel.
The pilot circled while camera crews were rolled into position and a few smoke pots were lit to put some smoke across the runway.
The B–17 pilot then skilfully brought the bomber down in front of the cameras, which recorded the dramatic crash landing as the right wing slammed down on the two right props and engines.
Mechanics everywhere must have cringed at that scene.
This was one of the few liberties taken by the film's editors, as no B–17 quite arrived that way on December 7, but the shot was clearly too good not to include and it approximated to what had happened to a number of the actual B–17s which stumbled into the attack.
Footage depicting the attack on ‘Battleship Row’ was equally memorable, as the Japanese aircraft  line up for their bomb and torpedo runs.
The Kates actually drop their torpedoes and then climb up over the ship superstructures as the torpedoes hit home.
The American frustration is evidenced by the utter confusion as sporadic resistance slowly starts to rise in defence of the fleet.
Only aerial defence depicted in the film was the efforts of two Air Corps pilots, George Welch and Kenneth Taylor, in their P–40s which had been parked at the auxiliary field at Haleiwa and not received any attention from the Japanese.
The filmed dogfights are beautifully staged and feature numerous shots of the olive drab and grey P–40s against the blue Hawaiian sky.
Only drawback to the scene is that it is obvious the Allisons are throttled back to keep pace with the T–6s and the helicopter cameraship.
The inclusion of a Tallmantz B–25 cameraship would have done much for both the dogfights and the other air-to-air formation shots.
One questionable oddity is the use of a bastardised B–25 bomber which was horribly modified to represent some imaginary type.
The B–25, a civil derelict  rounded up from Honolulu International, was fitted with one of its vertical fins replacing the twin rudder assembly of the Mitchell.
The beast can be seen very quickly (thankfully) in the scene where the Zeke crashes through the roof of the hangar and explodes.
Why such an effort was made to disguise the B–25 when reports would indicate there was at least one B–25 at Hickam during the actual attack is unknown.
Probably the sequence that most viewers remember more than anything else.
The Zekes come in against the line of P–40s, one runs amok as others erupt in flames.
The groundcrew running away are special effects men running for their lives as the planned-for sequence went wrong but with cinematically-sensational results!
Above: The incredible B–25J mock-up with a single fin for the hangar-crash sequence.
There was a Mitchell  at Hickham during the attack, so why dress it up as something that didn't exist?
Below: B–17 N620L makes its famous wheels-up before the camera.
A real emergency, the footage was a Director's dream come true!
There were a few other technical flaws in the    film.
The use of a B–17F and B–17Gs to depict the earlier shark-fin B–17Cs and B–17Ds which actually arrived during the raid was most notable, but unavoidable.
Other errors, such as minor painting or insignia oversights, are inevitable given the magnitude of the production.
The PBY paint looks terribly inaccurate and the fuselage insignia on the B–17s are way out of proportion.
Overall, however, the accuracy in the appearance of the equipment and the ‘feel’ of the period seem a full measure above most cinematic efforts.
Filming suffered a total of eight casualties.
On April 12, 1969 six off-duty Navy crewmen, who were performing as extras, were seriously burned in a filming sequence.
Also, the film lost one Val and its pilot in a dive-bombing accident when the aircraft went into a high speed stall and crashed into a sugar cane field.
A Kate was lost into Pearl Harbor itself with a fuel problem although the pilot was quickly rescued.
All the location filming was completed in May 1969 after 4,000 hours of flight time.
The film producers retired to Hollywood for a massive job of editing.
The surviving aircraft with the exception of the B–17s and the flyable PBY, were disassembled and barged back to the mainland.
The PBY and replica P–40 wreckage was scrapped in Hawaii and the massive ship sets and other remaining properties were similarly dispersed or scrapped.
The film took over a year to edit.
It was finally released on September 23, 1970 to disappointing reviews and box office results.
The film had cost at least $25 million (and may have soared as high as $33 million if all costs were considered) which, in 1970 dollars, put it way above the epic category.
The film's disappointing performance was laid at its documentary style and unfocused lack of drama.
However, it was also acknowledged that the task set before the filmmakers was so large that it defied reducing the complex series of events into a simple formula drama.
The five B–17s were ferried back to the mainland to resume their more mundane tanker duties.
Two were destroyed in forest fire work while the other three are firmly entrenched in museums.
Both P–40s remain on the civil register, with N151U now flying as N40FT in Flying Tiger markings, and N1207V operating as N95JB.
The replica Japanese aircraft  outlasted the film and became collectors' items.
They remained disassembled for several years in storage awaiting a studio decision on their fate.
It was finally decided to auction the aircraft along with the majority of the Fox Studio's props.
The February 1971 auction saw the majority of the Tora fleet sell for $2,000 to $5,000, depending on type and aircraft time.
Most were quickly put back together and joined the airshow circuit.
Today, they remain active and the largest group includes ten of the film veterans operated by the Confederate Air Force which regularly perform in Pearl Harbor re-enactments at air shows.
Twenty-one years after its release the film remains under rated, but is aging well.
It is still the definitive cinematic story of the attack and, for all the commercial flaws of the film, it stands alone in technical accuracy and the actual attack scenes are among the finest put together for an aviation film.
As the 50th anniversary of the attack is awaited, another viewing of Tora !
Tora !
Tora ! is well in order, both to get a general feel for the events of the day and to regain an appreciation of the efforts expended to bring the saga to the wide screen.
(Assistance in the preparation of this material was provided by Nick Veronico, Don Dinoff, Jim Farmer, and especially Bob O'Hara for the use of the photos from his collection.)
RISING SUN SURVIVORS
Nick Veronico and Alan Curry investigate the world's population of surviving Japanese World War Two airframes.
BEYOND DOUBT, the aircraft with which the Imperial Japanese forces fought their Pacific War are the least well known by enthusiasts.
Ask a follower of the warbird movement to ‘decline’ the sub-types of the Fw 190 and that will be done; marks of Spitfire will be no problem; who built B–17s and the distinguishing items of a ‘G’— easy; principal Italian fighter aircraft will also come to the tip of the tongue with only the occasional stutter.
But put a World War Two zealot into the dark recesses of the incredible Paul Garber Storage Museum (NASM) in Maryland and the chances are he will ‘freeze’ when asked to name the treasures therein.
This is not surprising, because the NASM store does carry some very rare Japanese types.
But the average ‘buff’ will probably also fluff his lines when asked to tell the difference between a Zeke and a Zero …
While interest in Japanese aircraft is certainly facing a renaissance now that the fiftieth anniversary of the daring Pearl Harbor attack is upon us (see page 10), it is still true to say that interest in the hardware of the Imperial Japanese forces is still low with the warbird community, despite the recent pioneering efforts of the Museum of Flight at Santa Monica.
(Planes of Fame at Chino are the true pioneers of the cause of Japanese military aviation in the hands of a private collection.)
In an attempt to redress some of this balance,FlyPast has undertaken the compiling of what is believed to be the most comprehensive list of surviving World War Two Japanese aircraft yet published.
From this it is hoped that our loyal readership will pass in comments to correct, add to and refine this listing so that a more major work can be published within these pages in the future.
Some information on survivors is very sketchy, and in order to maintain some form of balance in the listing, we have refrained from giving serial numbers, registrations (in the few places  where they apply) or similar.
Likewise true status of the aircraft is difficult to tie down and this guide aims really to locate airframes.
There are some notes where incomplete airframes have been listed and those that we have tagged ‘Airworthy’ indicate that the aircraft are known to have flown in recent years.
Entries are listed by manufacturer and then sub-type/designation.
Given alongside the designation is the Japanese ‘Popular Name’(if applicable) and an approximate translation into English.
Below this comes a brief description of the type's role and its ‘parentage’(ie Imperial Army or Navy) and its Allied Code Name (again, if applicable).
Museum locations are often shortened after the initial reference.
Compiling this listing has proved that there are more Japanese aircraft extant  than might at first be envisaged.
It remains to be said that perhaps as many again (and maybe many more) airframes are still to be found, truly catalogued and, hopefully, salvaged in the vastness of the Pacific area.
While many collectors are turning over every hedge and collective barn they can find within the Russian Republic and its former constituents and satellites for hidden treasures, a small and dedicated band have been scouring the Asia-Pacific region for many decades looking for Japanese material.
Many such ‘finds’ have to remain very ‘quiet’until salvage is undertaken, not only to keep other collectors off the scent, but to safeguard sensitive negotiations with governments and their agents.
Reisen is not a true ‘Popular Name’ for the Zeke .
Imperial Japanese ‘popular names’ were generally based upon the world of nature (eg Baika — Plum Blossom,Seiku — Clear Sky,Hayabusa — Peregrine Falcon etc).
Reisen is derived from the designation of the aircraft, which gives rise to the worldwide ‘popular name’.
The Mitsubishi A6M2 to A6M8 was the Navy's Type 0 (zero) Carrier Fighter.
Zero Fighter is Rei Sen toki, shortened to Reisen .
There were several other Navy Type 0s, who could well aspire to the shortened form ‘Zero’, but the A6M is the overwhelming holder of that title.
An in-depth history of the Zero starts in the December issue of our sister journal Air International , on sale November 29.
Three further Ki–115s were reported in Japan in the early 1970s at Kanda, Koganei-City and Tokyo.
They may still be extant.
Notes: This listing of surviving Japanese aircraft from World War Two is not complete, but is believed to be the most comprehensive yet published.
It does not take into account wrecked aircraft in the many Pacific Islands and the many more known to be in shallow waters — these must await salvage and/or more confirmable status.
A number of further Japanese aircraft wrecks may be displayed at the National Museum of Papua New Guinea (Port Moresby).
The compilation of this listing of Japanese survivors was considerably aided by the researches of Nick Veronico and Alan Curry, to whom go our many thanks.
Needless to say, input from readers much appreciated as we strive to make the listing even more authoritative for a future issue.
SETTING SUN
Ken Tyson recreates the advanced projects that Japan was working on before the atomic bombs brought World War Two to a close.
Baika
(Header page, top)
DESIGNED in July 1945 at Tokyo University by Taichiro Ogawa and Ichiro Tani, the Baika (Plum Blossom) was intended as a special attack Aircraft for the Imperial Japanese Navy.
‘Special attack’ was an accurate, if alarmingly understated, definition of the work of the suicide bomber.
Unlike the Yokosuka MXY7 Ohka (Allied code-name Baka ) special attack aircraft,Baika would have required no ‘mother-ship’ for launch, taking-off from land on a jettisonable undercarriage.
Baika , which was still at the drawing board stage when the Japanese surrendered on September 2, 1945 was to have been powered by a Maru athoyd (pulse-jet) which was expected to give the aircraft a top speed of 366mph in level flight, depending on warhead size (between 220lb and 550lb).
Kawanishi were to be the main assemblers.
But component production of this very simple craft was to be spread through scores of small plants, employing unskilled labour, such as students and housewives.
It was intended to play a major part in the Japanese defence of the Homeland should the Allied invasion occur.
Kitsuka
(Header page, bottom)
ALTHOUGH similar in layout to the German Messerschmitt Me 262, the Makajima J9N1 Kitsuka (Orange Blossom) was an indigenous Japanese design, and not a copy.
It was fitted with two Ne–20 jets of 1,047lbs thrust each and, being underpowered, managed a top speed (without bomb load) of only 452mph with a range of 553 miles.
However, the type marked Japan's entry into the jet era and the proposed version with Ne–330s (2,920lbs thrust) would have made an estimated 560mph.
Built with folding wings (originally to enable it to be hidden in caves), had the mighty carrier Shinano survived long enough, Japan could have fielded the first carrier-based jet strike force with Kitsukas !
In the end, the Kitsuka was designated as a special attack weapon, and would have carried a half-ton bomb.
Keiun
(Main spread, top left)
RECONNAISSANCE was of paramount importance in the Pacific War and the Yokosuka R2Y1 Keiun (Beautiful Cloud) would have been superb in this role had it entered service.
Powered by a Ha 70/1 ‘double’ -Atsuta buried in the fuselage and driving a six-blade constant speed propeller via an extension shaft, a crew of two sat well forward in the nose because of this arrangement.
The powerplant was in fact a coupled pair of liquid-cooled Aichi Atsuta 30s that developed 3,400hp.
Japanese sources gave the R2Y1 an estimated maximum speed of 493mph and a range of 2,400 miles, which would have made it invulnerable.
Beset with cooling and undercarriage problems, the Keiun made one flight only, on May 8, 1945 and this was brought to a premature close by high engine temperatures.
A twin-jet version was also under design, the R2Y2, with a jet engine hung under each wing, allowing the capacious fuselage to accept a battery of cannon firing through the nose.
Power was to have been supplied by a pair of Ne–330s of 2,290lbs thrust.
Shinden
(Main spread, top right)
A VERY IMPRESSIVE and innovative fighter design, the first Kyushu J7W1 Shinden (Magnificent Lightning) was completed in April 1945, but not test flown until August 3.
The prototype made only three flights in all, the second example was taken to the USA for examination.
Three MXY6 canard gliders were built to test the tail-first concept of the Shinden .
The pusher engine was a 2,100hp Mitsubishi Ha–43 driving a six-blade propeller.
Japanese sources gave an optimistic estimate of 499mph as the top speed.
More realistic was the US Air Technical Intelligence Unit evaluation of 466mph, which would still have given the Shinden the edge over most US fighters.
Armed with four 30mm cannon, it would have been an excellent ‘B–29 hunter’.
Plans were underway to re-engine the Shinden with the 1,984lb thrust Ne–130 turbojet.
Fugaku
(Main spread, bottom left)
NAKAJIMA'S private venture study for a trans-Pacific bomber,Project Z , was refined and developed by a joint Imperial Army and Navy team to produce the G10N1 Fugaku (Mount Fuji).
Powered by six NK11As of 2,500hp each this strategic bomber was intended to be based in Hokkaido to  carry out attacks on the Continental USA, using radar to ensure target identification at night or in bad weather.
With a range of 10,000 miles, the aircraft could have managed its mission although each sortie would have taken nearly thirty hours!
Bombload was to have been ten to fifteen tons and the designers believed that after shedding its bombs, the Fugaku would have been able to outpace US interceptors.
Fighters such as the P–51H Mustang (as illustrated, defending San Francisco) with a top speed of 480mph could certainly have caught it, however.
The G10N1's defensive armament of only four 20mm cannon seems inadequate for such a huge target.
Renzan-Kai and Ohka 33
(Main spread, bottom right)
A FINE AIRCRAFT, which would have made a good strategic bomber.
Powered by four 2,000hp turbo-supercharged NK9L–L radials, the Nakajima G8N1 Renzan (Mountain Range, Allied code-name Rita ) had a top speed of 395mph and a range of up to 4,700 miles.
Defensive armament was four 13mm machine-guns and six 20mm cannon in remotely-controlled turrets.
The prototype first flew on October 23, 1944.
Disruption of the test programme by US bombing, the Renzan's large use of all-too-precious light alloys and the changing needs of the Imperial Japanese Navy halted the project after only four examples had been built.
With invasion by the Allies looking more and more likely, the Renzan was redesigned to become a parent aircraft for the Ohka 33 suicide weapon.
This was the Model 22 G8N2 Renzan-Kai (kai = modified) to have been powered by 2,200hp MK9A radials.
This came to naught, however, as did an all-steel version, the Model 23 or G8N3.
The Ohka 33 was a larger version of the Model 22 special attack aircraft to have been powered by the Ne–20 turbojet.
This was intended to lengthen the combat range of the aircraft, after it had left the Renzan-Kai .
Ohka 33 would have had the endurance to permit a second or third attempt should the first death-dive have been miscalculated.
Both mother-ship and ‘off-spring’ remained as drawing board creations only.
Above: View inside the remarkably complete cockpit of the NASM's Shinden.
Below: Dismantled J7W1 Shinden inside the famous Silver Hill store of the National Air and Space Museum.
Messerschmitt Me 410 behind.
WHAT'S NEW
The Editorial Team tackle a bumper crop of books, videos and other goodies.
Portfolios
LATEST quartet in the Osprey Colour Series has ‘landed’ on the review desk.
Sky Trucks, USA by Austin Brown and Mark Wagner will appeal to all those with a fetish for ‘piston pumping propliners’ and their ilk.
All action photos of DC–3s, DC–4s, DC–6s, Neptunes, C–46s, Privateers and various Convairs abound, along with less glamorous shots of similar types in scrapyards and storage parks.
Deserves a place on the bookshelf of any ‘propliner’ fan.
Vietnam, The Air War by Robert Dorr concentrates on the jet powered ‘heavy metal’ aircraft used by the USA in this conflict.
Lots of pictures of Super Sabres, Intruders, Thunderchiefs, Phantoms etc, all sporting colourful markings (this was before ‘low-viz’ became the in thing), Crusaders, Corsairs and Skyraiders also feature in all their glory, as does the F–111 and B–52.
A lovely record of this highly pictorial (as far as aeroplanes go) era.
The other two titles are strictly in the ‘warbird’ mould.
Classic Warbirds by David Stubbs is an overall look at the warbird scene, with coverage of Reno, detailing the much-modified machines that participate in the air races each year; Duxford's Classic Fighter display of 1990; warbird training on the T–6 Texan and an excellent section on the B–17s, Mustangs and Messerschmitts used in the move Memphis Belle .
Peter March's Confederate Air Force , pays homage to the ‘mother’ of all warbird organisations with photographs taken between 1980 and 1990.
All aspects of the CAF are covered, ranging from the fighter fleet of Mustangs, P–40s and P–38s, naval wings with Avengers, Corsairs and Wildcats, the Tora !
Tora !
Tora ! collection of Zeke ,Kate and Val replicas, to the bomber ‘heavy metal’, one area where the CAF excel, with Fortresses, Mitchells, Liberator and Superfortress.
With sections touching on the Spanish Luftwaffe and Training for War, this book will be  snapped up by all those interested in the largest and most colourful fleet of warbirds in the world.
World War One
ZEPPELINS of World War One by Wilbur Cross, tells of the little-known aerial battles that took place over England during the Great War, when Germany attempted to paralyse the British by dropping tons of bombs from a fleet of super-Zeppelins.
These great leviathans of the air eventually met their demise with the development of British high flying aircraft armed with guns firing incendiary bullets.
The aerial battles of World War One have always been shadowed by the dogfights of World War Two.
Germany's First Air Force , by Peter Kiduff, goes  some way to redressing the balance with the story of the German Air Force during World War One.
This book is the result of 25 years of research, which shows in the amount of information contained in the text.
Heavily illustrated, this work will please all those interested in the early years of German aviation.
De Havilland Aircraft of World War One by Jack Bruce, an authority on World War One aircraft, is a definitive study of those products of de Havilland, ranging from the DH.1 through to the DH.15 Gazelle.
Technical detail is extensive and is extended to include individual squadron deployments of each type throughout the War.
A good selection of high quality photos and reproductions of the original de Havilland three-view, technical drawings add to the authoritative nature of this book.
 Albatros  Fighters by Ray Rimell is the first in a new series of expanded monographs on famous World War One aeroplanes from  Albatros Productions.
Numerous photos and drawings will appeal to modellers, as will a comprehensive listing of all  Albatros model kits that are available.
For the First World War aircraft enthusiast this publication offers a detailed look at one of Germany's most widely used fighter types.
No 27 in the Historical Arms series,Allied and Enemy Aircraft is a reprint of a rare identification manual published by the French government in 1918 that illustrated 60 aircraft of French, English, American, German, Italian and Belgian origin (in three-view drawings) that may have been seen over the trenches during World War One.
Provides a ‘period’ look at early fighting aircraft which will be useful for the World War One aircraft buff.
Biography
A PAIR of ‘people profiles’ have recently been published.
Charlie Rolls — Pioneer Aviator by Gordon Bruce, is Volume 17 of the Roll-Royce Heritage Trust's Historical Series.
This is the first in-depth study of Charlie Rolls as a pioneer aviator.
Compiled by the author after many years of research, this book contains fresh data on the history of the Rolls family and explores Rolls's interest in flying, in particular with regard to his part in the formative years of British military aviation.
Betty Heycock's autobiography Put It Down To Experience is a classic tale of one of Britain's pioneering women aviators.
Flying to Paris within two weeks of gaining her  pilot's licence led to Betty taking part in record breaking flights, one of which was as co-pilot to F/O A E Clouston in DH.88 Comet G–ACSS flying from Croydon to the Cape, breaking Amy Johnson's outbound record along with five other records in the overall flight.
Betty relates many other tales of her world-wide flying trips with her late husband Air Commodore George Heycock CB DFC, making this book an interesting addition to the ranks of publications charting the participation of women in British aviation.
Prisoner of War escape stories often make for interesting reading and Ten Minutes To Buffalo by Ulrich Stienhilper and Peter Osborne is no exception.
After being shot down during the Battle of Britain, Stienhilper became a PoW and after a short period in a British camp was transferred to Canada.
This is his story as a PoW and his eventual escape (one of the very few) from capture.
Not really an ‘aeroplane’ book, but fascinating reading nevertheless.
Tante Ju
LUFTHANSA Junkers Ju 52 by Peter Pletschacher, is a book divided into two halves.
The first half dealing with the historical aspect of the Ju 52, its development and predecessors, and the impact that it had in the world of air transport, concentrating mainly on the type's civil use.
The remainder of the book is  taken up with a detailed study of the acquisition and restoration of D–CDLH  (‘D–AQUI’,)now operated by Lufthansa as a promotional exercise.
Lavishly illustrated, especially in the restoration chapters, this book is a worthy tribute to one of the classic transport aircraft of all time.
Badge brigade
ELITE OF THE FLEET by Peter Morgan is a book composed entirely of photos of embroidered ‘patches’ as worn by American Naval aviators from 1927 to the present day and as such will be of limited interest to the general reader of aircraft literature.
To the ‘patch’ buff it will be a worthy addition which illustrates patches from Fighter, Attack,Top Gun and Aggressor Squadrons, through to Carrier Air Wings and AEW units.
Tiger, Tiger
To mark the 60th anniversary of the first flight of the Tiger Moth, this limited fine art poster, approved by the DH Moth Club, has been produced in full colour.
A limited run, Nos 1 to 300 are signed by the artist Ian Walton.
Available from 
Local history
MIKE PHIPP's History of Hurn Airport is a nicely produced paperback charting the history of this popular airport.
Published in connection with the 50th Anniversary of Hurn being opened for operations by the RAF in 1941, the Author charts the events and aircraft that have used the Airport over the years.
A pleasing publication which shows the diversity of military and civil aircraft and airlines that have used this airport.
Another airfield celebrating 50 years is RAF Woodvale and Airfield Publications have released their book RAF Woodvale — The First Fifty Years to commemorate the event.
Author Aldon Ferguson has produced a well researched history of the last ‘temporary’ RAF station that was constructed during World War Two that is still in current use.
All the various units that have used Woodvale are described, from its early days with Spitfires of 308 Squadron to Liverpool University Air Squadron who currently use the airfield with their Bulldog T.1s.
Heavily illustrated with photos of the aircraft and people who inhabited this airfield, it is worthy of inclusion on any aviation historian's bookshelf.
Equally well presented, but somewhat smaller in size is the Solway Aviation Society's publication,Carlisle   Airport — A History of Crosby-on-Eden .
Compiled by Paul Wiggins, the book charts the life of this Scottish airfield, from its military days with the RAF and its Battles, Beauforts, Beaufighters, Dakotas, Hurricanes and Oxfords, post-war sporadic scheduled civilian airline services of BEA, Silver City, Autair et al , to the present day when as ‘Carlisle Airport’ the airfield serves the needs of the local community.
Propellers over Warwick by M J Evans is a small, but nevertheless interesting, booklet on the four generations of aircraft seen in the skies over Warwickshire.
Ranging from Zeppelins over Tipton to Valiants over Gaydon, it is the second offering from the Midland Warplane Museum, currently based at Hatton Craft Centre near Long Marston airfield.
Very much in the local history mould comes Wings Of War Over Gwynedd by Roy Sloan.
The stories of the eight airfields in the Gwynedd area during World War Two are chronicled in detail along with a chapter on flying accidents in Snowdonia.
Personal recollections are a feature of the narrative, including many humourous anecdotes.
RAF Hawkinge in Old Photographs by Roy Humphreys, is a pictorial history of this Kent airfield which was in the forefront of the Battle of Britain.
Photos of SE.5s and Avro 504s in 1917 contrasting sharply with the Hurricanes and Spitfires of 1940.
Lysanders, Defiants and even a B–17 and Walrus feature in this worthy photo.
tribute to one of the RAF's key airfields during 1940.
Published in the year in which the ROC stood down,The Royal Observer Corps in Lincolnshire 1936–1991 by Charles Parker, is a short but highly informative description of the Corps in Lincolnshire, from its formative years to its ultimate disbanding in 1991, with an appendix listing all the ROC posts in the county.
Waterside — A Pictorial Past , is not strictly an aeroplane book, concentrating more on the history of the parishes of Calshot, Fawley, Hythe and the surrounding areas.
Aircraft do appear however in the chapter on Calshot where good coverage of the various types to have been based there over the years is included.
The greater ‘Few’
AIRCRAFT FOR THE FEW by Michael Bowyer is probably one of the most comprehensive accounts yet published of all the operational types to see RAF service during the Battle of Britain.
So often books are published on the 1940 Battle that feature just the Hurricane and Spitfire part of the conflict, forgetting that numerous other, less glamorous types served with equal distinction.
The contributions made by Ansons, Battles, Blenheims, Hampdens, Harrows, Sunderlands and Whitleys, a few types among many others are well documented in this book.
Together with other frontline RAF types they kept the enemy at bay for over three months, and every aircraft type that is known to have seen operational use during that period is contained in this publication.
At last the tide has turned for the unsung aircraft of 1940.
Stocking filler
The much sought-after Pilot's Pals Calendar for 1992 features The Best of the Pals.
This institution should need no introduction to FlyPast readers and we present a classic way to fill a stocking.
Included in the month-by-month choice are some shots where the Pals were commissioned to do Flight Safety posters for MoD and NATO and a special called Tiger Tiger Tiger with three of the Pals at 74 Squadron.
Just £14.00 inc p&p — form an orderly queue!
Wear a dream
Aviation Leathercraft of Thruxton are not in the business of replicating or copying the famous Irvin jacket — modelled here by Tony Banfield and Caz Short — they have the exclusive licence from the original manufacturer.
Their range (they also stock aviation jewellery) is very wide, and their jackets can be found being worn by the most distinctive of people.
Fit and quality guaranteed.
Your first stop is their excellent catalogue which contains a wealth of detail — start to wear a dream now — see page 9.
Awaiting the call
Geoff Nutkins' fine work has been featured in the pages of FlyPast before, as has the excellent Museum he helps to run.
Here is one of his latest, Aces High, pilots from JG2 await the ‘go’ in front of the Fw 190A–3s in northern France.
This and Lone Wolf (see page 47) are limited to 525 prints each at £75 each or the pair for £120 — matching numbers are available to pair-purchasers.
Detailed research and an eye to atmosphere.
RAF exploits
BOB DOE, Fighter Pilot is the autobiography of one of the surviving high scoring aces of the RAF during the Battle of Britain.
Talk of the 1940 Battle always brings mention of Standford-Tuck, Bader, Townsend and others, but very seldom is Bob Doe's name brought up in conversation.
Bob's book traces his flying career with the RAF, from training in Magisters and Ansons to operational combat in Hurricanes and Spitfires during the Battle .
Post-war Bob went on to fly Vampires in the   Middle East, eventually becoming CO of a Royal Indian Air Force squadron.
It's good to see the story of one of the lesser known aces of the RAF in print!
Press on Regardless by Stanley Humphrey, is one man's story of life in the RAF from 1934 to 1946.
The difference with this book is that the story is told from the  groundcrew's side of things.
Stanley Humphrey was an engine fitter in the period when the RAF was in one of its most interesting periods.
This is very much a ‘people’ story and concentrates on the day-to-day happenings in The Mob , with a fair amount of humour thrown in for good measure.
Littered with service slang (luckily a listing of ‘slang’ definitions is included to enable the ordinary reader to cope with the stories) the book follows the author from erk to NCO and from life on a troopship to the first 1,000 bomber raid.
Bombs on Target by Ron Mayhill, is the RAF's bombing offensive of World War Two, as seen through the eyes of a 75 Squadron bomb-aimer.
Based on his wartime diaries, Ron records what it was like to be in the nose of a Lancaster at night over Germany, and to be the radar eyes in the navigation cabin.
The heroic and hum-drum, the fun and the tragedies, all are recounted in this eye-witness account of Bomber Command operations.
Another tale of Bomber Command is The Whitley Boys by Larry Donnelly.
For a refreshing change this book is not about the exploits of the Lancaster, but that unsung stalwart of Bomber Command's early war years, the Whitley.
The bomber that looked as if it was always flying downhill is the subject of this account of 4 Group's operations during 1939 and 1940.
With a foreword by Hamish Mahaddie, himself an ex Whitley pilot, this book recalls the pioneering days of the bombing offensive when the Whitley was very much in the frontline every night, flying over Germany, Czechoslovakia, Austria, Poland, Italy and all the German occupied countries of Western Europe.
Stories abound of how the Whitley crews learnt their trade the hard way.
Eye-opening reading!
The British Commonwealth Air Training Plan (BCATP) trained 58,000 pilots for all manner of aircraft during World War Two at schools in Rhodesia, Canada, South Africa and the USA.
By The Seat Of Your Pants by Hugh Morgan is a well researched and presented book on the experiences of volunteer wartime pilots who were posted overseas to undertake their flying training on such schemes as the Empire Training Scheme, the Arnold and the Towers Schemes.
Over the years so much has been written about pilots flying in the ‘operational’ phase, sometimes forgetting that all these pilots had to be trained.
This book, which contains a wealth of stories and information is long overdue and it is heartening to see a tome that tells the story behind the ‘training’ phase of the RAF's history.
The exploits of RAF Bomber Command's Pathfinder Force during World War Two are legion.
The leader of the ‘Force’ was AVM Don Bennett  and,his story is chronicled in Archie Jackson's new book,Pathfinder Bennett, Airman Extraordinary .
Don Bennett led from the front, he excelled in everything he did, eg flying a record-breaking 6,000 miles in Mercury , part of the Short Mayo composite, the setting-up and operation of the Atlantic Ferry during 1940, bringing much-needed aircraft from North America to the UK.
Other  achievements included leading a Halifax squadron to attack the Tirpitz , only to crash in Norway and escape to England via Sweden to fight again and, of course, the creation and leading of the Pathfinders, which reduced dramatically the bombing errors of the less experienced crews to create a more viable bombing campaign, which itself helped shorten World War Two.
This is Bennett's story and it makes for fascinating reading.
Spitfire potpourri 
NEW BOOKS on the Spitfire are always being produced, the latest being Spitfires Reborn , written by the founder of the Spitfire Society, David Green.
Basically a look at surviving Spitfires, it is an interesting work marred slightly by some incorrect photo captions.
Nevertheless, there is much to interest the Spitfire enthusiast with chapters on the BBMF, the rounding-up of Spitfires for the movie Battle of Britain , the restoration of TB863, now flying in New Zealand, the Charles Church operation and many others, all illustrating why this fighter has captured the hearts of many for generations.
Humour
LIFE on the Airliners by Bob Price is one of those books that manages to combine humour with facts.
Over eighty years of drama, mirth and high endeavour are chronicled here through the memories of pilots, stewardesses, ground crews, customs officers and the like combining to make for a highly interesting, and funny, read.
Definitely in a humorous vein and  just in time for Christmas is Banger and Pranger in Snowman's Land by Graham Hey and Brian Robinson.
Just the thing for all the serious aircraft enthusiasts, spotters, heavy metal fans and number-crunchers to get hold of.
A selection of cartoons relate the story of Banger Mango, his pet mouse Reginald (who likes to go flying) and Banger's friend Pranger Bailey, who go in search of the Abominable Snowman.
This book should be in the Christmas stocking of any serious aircraft enthusiast, although it would make walking difficult!
Rotary club
‘Answer the helicopter, will you dear?’
This conversation could take place in your home now that Stewart Aviation are stocking these incredible helicopter 'phones.
A great talking-point, on or off the 'phone — turn your desk into a helipad!
Airliners through the ages
Behind the Cockpit Door by Arthur Whitlock is a story of one man's career in civil aviation, flying airliners which encompasses a multitude of types ranging from Dakotas to TriStars.
The book concentrates on the good old days of airliners, flying Dakotas over the Himalayas, rope starting the Dak when all else had failed, Avro Yorks on the Rangoon-Singapore route, an undercarriage collapse on an Ambassador at Southend, transporting horses in a Bristol  Freighter (known to all as the Frightener ), and tales like these fill the pages taking the reader back to the days when flying was still an adventure.
Flights of fancy
FOR ANYONE with an interest in hot air balloons, David Iggulden's book Hot Air Ballooning is an absolute must!
 Crammed full of stunning photos of balloons of all shapes and sizes this book tells the story of ballooning through the ages.
With chapters on the history of ballooning, record breaking flights and mad, mad, balloonists, all the intricacies of hot air balloons.
From Australia comes,Gliding in Australia by Allan Ash.
Written by one who is obviously in love with gliding, the author takes the reader through the history of gliding in Australia, from kites in the early 1900s to the high performance aircraft that abound today.
With emphasis given to construction, technical terms and safety, this book will be enjoyed by all with an interest in gliding.
Before World War Two and since, the saviour of many pilots has been the parachute.
Bale Out by Ian Wright sets out to present a general background of historical information on the parachute and its evolution.
Post-war development of parachutes acting as brakes on jet aircraft are also covered in this rarely written about subject.
RAF units
FIGHTER Squadron by Derek Palmer, is a highly detailed history of 19 Squadron from its inception in September 1915 to date.
During its history 19 has achieved many ‘first’, the first British unit to receive the French SPAD, the first to operate the Sopwith Dolphin, the first squadron to be equipped with the supersonic Lightning F.2, but 19 will probably be best known for being the first RAF Squadron to receive the Spitfire.
A very comprehensive history which includes many anecdotes and reminiscences along with a multitude of facts and figures.
As a sequel to the highly successful Malta :The Hurricane Years , Chris Shores, Brian Cull and Nicola Malizia's Malta: The Spitfire Year 1942 is a massive tome crammed to the brim with a day-by-day, blow-by-blow, account of the struggle for the Island in 1942.
With over 250 photos, some of which are extremely rare, backed up with meticulous research based on official war records and eye-witness accounts, this book is a fitting tribute to an area of World War Two that has in the past been overlooked in terms of its importance.
Hendon's month
December's page from the RAF Museum's find 1992 calendar — a Hurricane of 615 Squadron keeping an eye on two Stirlings of 15 Squadron, from the canvas of John Young.
American forces
AIRCRAFT of the US Coast Guard are a familiar and welcome sight the length and breadth of the United States.
Arthur Pearcy's book US Coast Guard Aircraft Since 1916 is a history of the Guard comprising detailed descriptions of over 90 different types of aircraft that they have operated over the years, coupled with information on the designation systems and the colours and markings used by this fifth military air arm of the United States.
A History of USAFE by Cees Steijger on the surface looks like just another ‘coffee table’ book.
On the inside it is a very detailed look at American military aviation in Europe, from the days of the famous volunteer Lafayette Squadron in World War One  to the vast military deployment of  today's F–15s, F–16s, A–10s, their supporting reconnaissance, in-flight refuelling and supply aircraft, electronic warfare machines and all the associated paraphernalia.
A useful appendix lists major USAFE organisations.
A recommended addition to the bookshelf for reference purposes.
US Fighters of World War Two , by Robert Dorr is a standard ‘pot boiler’ of a book with limited new information or photographs, some of the photographic content being of dubious quality with some vague photo captions.
Whilst chapters are devoted to all the major US fighter types, P–38, P–47, P–51 and the like, the most interesting reading comes from the sections devoted to the less successful aircraft like the XP–50, Hughes D–2 and the P–63.
Whittle print
Midland Air Museum at Coventry have produced a limited edition (500) print to mark the 50th anniversary of the first flight of the Gloster E28/39 — a lovely watercolour by Ken Aitken.
Proceeds of sales will go to the Museum's Robin hangar project.
Signed and numbered, prices range from £25 to £200 for a very select 25 prints with several signatures, including Sir Frank Whittle's.
Send a SAE to MAM at Coventry Airport, for full details.
Starting VH–
Historic Civil Aircraft Register of Australia by Tony Arbon and David Sparrow encompasses the VH–CAA to VH–CZZ range.
Tabulated in the usual manner, registration, date, aircraft type, c/n, previous registration, this booklet is the third in the Civil Aircraft Register series.
Special sections deal with trade plates, prohibited registrations, RAAF call-signs and sailplanes.
From the same distributors comes Australian Civil Aircraft Register 1991/1992 .
Whilst not really in the FlyPast field this publication will be of great use to the enthusiast who needs an up-to-date concise listing of aircraft in Aussie .
Widowmaker
Starfighter by David Bashow is a retrospective look at the CF–104 Starfighter and its use in Canada from 1961 to 1966.
A controversial aircraft, the Starfighter gained notoriety during its career and the Author deals with this in an objective way, helping to dispel the Widowmaker myth that has surrounded the type.
From nuclear strike to conventional attack/reconnaissance, all the changes in the roles that the Starfighter carried out are detailed, in company with a very comprehensive collection of colour and black and white photographs.
This is the Starfighter story as experienced by the Canadians, hence the inclusion of a detailed listing of the disposition and fate of all F–104s in Canadian service.
For the Wall
Slotted in among the books on the review desk was a copy of the Canadian Vintage Aircraft 1992 Calendar .
A selection of twelve first class colour photos from the camera of Rick Radell, featuring mainly aircraft of the Canadian Warplane Heritage, Avro Lancaster, Cessna Crane and B–25 Mitchell.
Mixed in are shots of Kermit Week's Mosquito RS712 and Jerry Janes' Sea Fury Cottonmouth .
Available in the UK from Midland Counties Publications.
Another ‘At War’
Many aircraft that provided valuable service during World War Two have been overshadowed and forgotten, the Bristol Blenheim, Handley Page Hampden, Miles Martinet, to name just three.
It is therefore very pleasing to see appearing in the Ian Allan At War series, Jonathan Falconer's Stirling At War .
The Author weaves the narrative around the detailed eyewitness accounts of aircrews, groundcrews and those who built the large four engined bomber.
All aspects of the Stirling's career are covered, taking the fight back to Germany in the early nights of the Bomber Offensive, cloak-and-dagger SOE operations, participation in Operations Overlord ,Market Garden and Varsity , as well as aspects of Bomber Commands operations with the aircraft.
Women on the wing
Artist Roderick Lovesey has produced a montage-like limited edition print entitled A Tribute To Women Aviators.
A donation from the sale of each print is being made to the Air League's Flying Scholarship scheme.
At 26″ × 22″, each print is signed and numbered by the artist, £73 inc p&p, details from 
Double feature
ARRIVING in time for the Christmas market is a double video pack,Great Warplanes of the RAF .
Jumping on the Gulf War bandwagon, these are Central Office of Information films made for the MoD during the 1970s and take the form of four short documentaries on the Tornado, Jaguar, Buccaneer and Nimrod.
The four films have no connection to the Gulf War as such, other than showing the aircraft and crews of the RAF going about their daily business.
One minor criticism is that all COI/MoD made films seem to be grainy and slightly over-exposed and these four are no exception.
Having said that, the video pack is good value for money and the films are well worth a look.
Smoke trails
Top Teams .
The superb Red Arrows are a familiar sight at many airshows in the UK.
Less commonly known, but equally polished, are the performances of Patrouille de France and Frecce Tricolori at some of our larger air displays.
This video shows these major European aerobatic display teams and also shows the viewer a number of North American teams, namely the USAF Thunderbirds, the USN Blue Angels and the Canadian Snowbirds.
The visual and photographic quality of this video tape is excellent, particularly those sequences associated with the Blue Angels and the Thunderbirds.
it is a pity that more of the  world's  premier aerobatic teams are not featured (eg Swiss, Russian etc) but this is a small criticism.
This is a good quality video, which can be recommended.
Classic footage
The Great Fighting Machines of World War Two No 1 Allied Fighters , No 2 Axis Fighters , No 3 Allied Bombers , No 4 Axis Bombers .
This set of videos, which are available separately, cover some of the fighters or bombers used either by Allied or Axis powers during World War Two.
Major types used by the combatants, or famous or interesting aircraft are featured.
This, of course, means that the compilers have been selective, presumably due to the availability of suitable film.
This is not a criticism as these are excellent videos of high quality.
The design and development of each aircraft is described in turn using contemporary film footage.
Advantages and weaknesses of individual types are described in a good accompanying commentary.
Axis Fighters (No 2) and Axis Bombers (No 4) are particularly recommended as they show the expected types and such interesting aircraft as the Arado Ar 234 jet bomber, Heinkel He 177 bomber and Heinkel He 280 jet fighter.
In addition, some of the film of Japanese aircraft is of captured or surrendered examples being evaluated in the USA.
The Allied videos are not quite as good, but this probably reflects the greater number of types described and our greater familiarity with most of the types shown.
Some less familiar aircraft such as the Northrop Black Widow, Bristol Bombay and Vickers Wellesley do, however, feature in these films.
The photographic quality is excellent in all four of these videos.
Highly recommended.
For the glovebox, or cockpit
From Corning Optics comes the Serengeti range of eyewear.
Dubbed ‘The Ultimate High Performance Sunglasses’ their Drivers variety are just  as much at home in the cockpit.
Automatically adjusting to changing light conditions they are stylish and, above all, quickly become part of your face which is what a good pair of glasses should do.
From leading high street opticians at £89.95 — more details on .
Support gift
IT SEEMS like only yesterday that the pages of FlyPast were helping to launch the Friends of the Fighter Collection , but they are two years old this month.
Margaret Gray of the ‘Friends’ reminds us that a subscription, or one of their limited edition prints would be a great festive gift for a warbird lover and would be supporting the astounding warbird fleet of TFC at Duxford.
Large SAE to  will bring details.
Tigers Down Under
G'DAY TIGER in our July issue featured the amazing Tiger Moth (and other airborne goodies) record-breaking fly-in Down Under .
Armchair Aviation have produced a booklet to mark the event with a photo of every Tiger attending therein — all (but one) the work of Les Bushell.
More details by sending an IRC to .
A Tiger of a Video
AFTER a glut of warbird videos on the market comes a welcome change with A Tiger's Tale , about the Tiger Moth, its designer, and the men and women who fly it.
A well-produced video filmed at Redhill and Woburn with lots of lovely air to air shots of Tigers in all their glory.
The film is punctuated with interviews of Tiger ‘people’().
An interesting selection of period archive film is slotted in amongst the colour footage showing Tiger Moth training units during World War Two, Yugoslav training in Italy and air racing with Tigers.
The viewer gets airborne, courtesy of a camera fitted to G–ACDC.
Scenes with the Tiger Moth Diamond Nine Team, showing the pilots ‘walking through’ their routine on the ground and then the formations in the air are most entertaining.
Spoiling an otherwise first class video is the inclusion of no less than six shots of interloping Stampes.
Apart from this,A Tiger's Tale is well worth having on the video shelf.
YAK OKB
MUSEUMS OF THE WORLD
At Yakovlev's headquarters in Moscow, a small museum is maintained.
UNTIL RECENTLY reserved for private viewing by potential customers and officials, a number of Western journalists and enthusiasts have recently been privileged to view the small collection of early Yak aircraft kept at the head office of the Yakovlev OKB (Design Bureau) situated opposite the old Frunze Airport in Moscow.
With prior permission, access can normally now be gained to the aircraft by the general public.
Aleksandr Sergeyevich Yakovlev is probably one of the most well-known of all Soviet aircraft designers and his OKB has been responsible for a wide variety of aircraft types.
He is probably most famous for his fighter designs during World War Two although personally he was much more interested in small sporting types of which he designed quite a number over the years.
Having become interested in aviation as a teenager, he worked his way up from the workshop floor and designed his first glider in 1924 while still only eighteen, following this with his first powered aircraft, the VVA–3, two years later.
Completed on May 1, 1927 it first flew on May 12 and proved to be an excellent design, setting a world class record for long-distance flight when it flew the 1,240km from Kharkov/Sevastopol to Moscow in fifteen hours thirty minutes.
Later re-designated the AIR–1 and given the civil registration R–RAIR, a replica of this aircraft is now preserved in the Museum.
Over the next few years Yakovlev continued to design and build a variety of successful single-engined biplanes and monoplanes and in July 1934 he was given a derelict bed factory on Moscow Leningradski Prospekt where he set up his own OKB and this has remained the headquarters ever since and also now holds the Museum.
His first seventeen designs carried the AIR– designation but in 1937 the eighteenth became the Ya–18 and during the Second World War the now well known Yak-prefix came into being.
One of Yakovlev's other early successes was the UT–1 (AIR–14), the unmarked prototype of which is now preserved in the museum.
Designed as a ‘fun’ aeroplane it first flew in 1934 or 1935, subsequently being taken on by the Soviet Air Force as the standard advanced trainer for fighter pilots with production totalling 1,241 by early 1940.
It also saw service as a liaison aircraft and an aerobatic display and sporting type.
Between 1936 and 1938, it set eight speed, distance and height records.
In 1937 the type was tested on twin-floats, setting several more records in this configuration, and during 1942 numerous examples were used in combat after being modified with various armament configurations involving guns mounted on the wings or fuselage and even on the undercarriage spats.
Another classic Yakovlev pre-war design, the Ya–20 or UT–2, is still little-known in the West but the prototype is also preserved at the OKB.
Fitted with a Renault engine, it first flew in 1937 and went on to become the standard Soviet primary trainer throughout World War Two.
Excluding development prototypes, total production was 7,243.
Used by all Soviet pilot schools up to 1948, over 100,000 pilots graduated on the type and it was extensively used post-war by aero clubs.
Much modified over the war years, in 1944 a much refined and altered version emerged as the Yak–18 which continued the successful line for many more years.
As war in Europe approached, Yakovlev began looking at fighter and bomber designs and produced the Ya–22 twin-engined, high-speed combat aircraft which entered series production as the Yak–2 bomber and was later completely redesigned as the Yak–4.
It was also during this period that his single-engined fighter designs began appearing, starting with the Yak–1 and leading on to the classic Yak–3 — later developed into the familiar Yak–11 trainer.
The Yak–7 was developed into the Yak–9 which was by far the most significant fighter on all Soviet fronts and by 1944 outnumbered all other types combined.
Built in many variants, a total of 16,769 Yak–9s had been produced when production ceased in late August 1945 and a typical example is preserved in the Museum.
Post-war the variety of designs continued with the Yak–12 high-wing utility monoplane which was first flown in 1947 and appeared in several variants, culminating in the Yak–12A of 1957, over 1,000 of which were built.
An example is preserved in the Museum.
Widely exported, it was also built under licence in Poland where a developed version was later produced as the PZL–101 Gawron.
Other developments during the late 1940s included the Yak–14 assault glider and the Yak–15, the first jet aircraft completed in the Soviet Union and derived from the Yak–3.
Apart from the Swedish J21R this was the only successful production jet fighter based on a piston-engined design and as such has earned its place in the Museum.
Although completed and ready to fly in October 1945 (when short hops are reported to have been undertaken) it did not officially fly until April 24, 1946 on which date the other Soviet jet, the MiG–9, also took to the air shortly before the Yak.
In the 1950s the Yakovlev OKB diversified yet more, producing several helicopter designs including the large and powerful twin-rotor Yak–24 heavy transport helicopter and continuing military jet aircraft development.
Piston-engined trainers were also still being produced during this time, including the Yak–18 series which culminated in the Yak–18T, an example of which is on display.
The ‘18T was radically different to earlier variants, a totally new fuselage having been designed to give side-by-side instead of tandem seating and first flight is believed to have been in 1967.
From the more recent Yakovlev era, which has included such interesting types as the Yak–36 vertical take-off aircraft, Yak–40 short-haul airliner and Yak–25/26/27/28 family of tactical aircraft, little is yet on display in the Museum although the one notable exception is an early example of the Yak–38 Forger — N2 the second prototype.
Forger was first flown in 1971 and production began in 1975, the type becoming the world's second operational jet V/STOL fighter (after the Harrier) when deployed aboard the Soviet carrier Kiev the following year.
Although comprising only ten airframes, the collection gives a fascinating glimpse at some early Soviet designs of which little has been heard  in the West.
Lining the walls of the display hall are a long series of photographs and displays which trace not just the history of Yakovlev but the whole history of Soviet aviation, both civil and military, from the very earliest days right up to date and covering significant events through the years.
Above: Marking the Soviet entry into the jet era was the Yak–15 which used many Yak–3 components coupled to a new extended forward fuselage housing a 900kg thrust RD–10 jet engine, based on the Jumo 004B.
Right: A replica of the AIR–1, Yakovlev's first design, powered by a 60hp ADC Cirrus.
Top: Yak–18T CCCP–81434 with cooling louvres on the front of the cowling which are a distinctive feature of all Yak–18s and are also to be seen on several other Yak types, including the Yak–12.
Above, left: Smart Aeroflot scheme on Yak–12A CCCP–L5275, a typically rugged Soviet design.
Above right: Second prototype Yak–38 V/STOL naval fighter.
Armament underwing comprises a UV–16–57 rocket pod on the outer pylon and an inert AA–8 Aphid air-to-air missile on the inner pylon.
Below: Designated UT–1 in Soviet Air Force service, the AIR–14 was a stylish single-seat aerobatic design of the 1930s.
AIR SHOW 91
Reno
Jim and Lora Babcock report from this year's National Championship Air Races
WOULD the changing of the guard occur during the 28th running of the Reno National Championship Air Races (September 12–15)?
That was the question on everyone's mind.
The $3 million Rutan-designed Pond Racer had arrived to push its technological magic against the very fabric of the warbird-dominated race dynasty.
We were not to find out.
The exotic twin was there alright, but with ‘development’ engines and an obvious share of the ‘first time out’bugs.
Lyle Shelton in Bearcat Rare Bear started people talking about the 500mph mark, with a winning average speed of 481mph.
Both Shelton's Bearcat and John Sandberg's  purpose-built Tsunami were finding out that perhaps propellers might hold the key to more speed at Reno.
Engine and airframe modifications have reached a possible zenith, the airscrew might well constitute the last trip to the warbird racing well.
For the second year, Shelton's ‘Cat sported a new composite proboscis from a P–3 Orion turboprop.
Tsunami tuned a new composite scimitar to Reno's magic, clearly echoing Rare Bear's song of more speed.
(As reported in the November FlyPast , John Sandberg was tragically killed while ferrying the Tsunami out of Reno on September 25.
Race result and times were also published in the November issue.)
Lesser financed, but no less interesting battles occurred between R2000 and R2800-engineered Yak C–11s.
In a couple of cases ‘stock’ -looking P–51 Mustangs reminded everyone of the lasting tribute of the marriage between a British engine and an American airframe.
Reno (air racing's long-running event) had record crowds and good weather.
The race organisation was great with very few hiccups evident.
One T–6 cartwheeled into the sagebrush during qualifying (again see the November issue)— but lucky pilot Gerry Miles received only cuts and bruises.
Even the lack of a military demonstration team dimmed no lights at Reno 91.
A high number of singular military displays more than took up the slack, riding a post- Desert Storm popularity wave.
Reno National Air Races and Lyle Shelton's Bearcat — two definitions of refining the art!
(With thanks to Zack and Nancy in the Press Department and to Kodak for all the facilities.)
Right: The Pond Racer, seen here with prop blade protectors in place, has yet to prove itself.
Far right: Something is always in front of the Reno crowd between races.
USAF C–130 Hercules equipped with the Aero Union Modular Airborne Fire Fighting System makes a ‘drop’.
Left: Gleaming P–51D N68JR with the highly-appropriate name Platinum Plus.
Below left: Tsunami, with new propeller, red paint scheme and wave-effect artwork.
This one-off was destroyed in a fatal accident on September 25 — on its way home from the races.
Below: Stirring sight at Duxford's end-of-season event on October 13, Spitfire XVI RW382/G–XVIA in formation with Bf109G–2 10639/G–USTV.
Bottom, left: Oostmalle in Belgium hosted a warbird show on September 7/8.
Part of a large Czech contingent (including Frogfoots) was this L 29 Delfin which performed a very low level show.
Another show is planned for 1992, a venue to watch.
Bottom, right: Highlight for FlyPast followers at Heli-Tech, Redhill, on September 27 was Jim Wilkie's Whirlwind HAS.7 G–AYXT.
Opposite page: Making a big impression at Old Warden for their October 6 show was Antonov An–2 G–BTOV.
aerobatics
Nine pilots competed, the most for some years.
Included was guest Nikolai Timofeev, the Soviet No 2, flying the unfamiliar Extra.
Nigel Lamb won all three individual programmes, to record his sixth consecutive championship victory.
AIR SHOW 92
Display and fly-in organisers, make sure your event gets into Britain's largest circulation airshow publication.
AIRSHOW 92 will be on sale in March — copy deadline February 29, 1992.
Contact  for editorial and  for advertising.
FROM VIMY TO VULCAN
A household name in the world of aviation spares is looking for a new owner to carry on its traditions.
Robert Rudhall reports.
ANYBODY owning or restoring a vintage aircraft, be it to flying or static status should know of W A Parker (Aircraft Spares) Ltd at Benfleet in Essex.
There they will find spare parts for all manner of aircraft, in fact if the RAF flew it, PAS have got spares for it.
An approximate total of some 2,000 tons of aircraft ancillary equipment is held in stock in four large warehouses.
Items cover three quarters of a million different part numbers, a large proportion of which are still in their original wax paper bags and packing boxes.
Not just ex-RAF aircraft spare parts are in stock, but parts for all manner of American-built aircraft fill the racks at this ‘ Aladdin's Cave’ of aeronautica.
Visitors to PAS are known to have been totally ‘bowled over’ by the amount of stock contained at the South Benfleet facility.
Directors Bill and Kath Parker started the business back in 1957 in a small underground warehouse in London with stock that could have been housed in the boot of their car, with Bill packing and Kath typing each treasured order as it arrived.
After working seven days a week for three years, the lease on the premises in London expired and Bill and Kath decided to take the really big gamble of buying their first factory on the Manor Trading Estate at South Benfleet, moving there in 1960.
They pride themselves on the ‘family’ atmosphere among the workforce.
Victor Vince, the Company's General Manager has been with the firm for the past twenty years, Victor served five years in the RAF as an Aircraft Electrician tending to the needs of Bomber Command's Halifaxes and Lancasters.
Post-war Victor spent some time with Aviation Traders before moving to his current employment.
Another member of staff is 78 year old Len Eade, who worked on Stirlings during World War Two.
Upon reaching retirement age Len found that he missed the job so much he came back on a part-time basis.
Longest member of staff was Kath's ‘No 1 Personal Assistant’, Iris Gibbard, who had been with the Company for 26 years, but sadly lost her fight against cancer in October 1990, having worked to within three days of her death, this being Iris's last wish.
Iris was a familiar and friendly face around PAS and is sadly missed.
When starting out in the aircraft spares business, twenty Tiger Moth wings were acquired, which after a period in storage were deemed to be taking up too much space, so reluctantly they were taken out into the back yard and burnt.
Shortly afterwards Rollasons contacted PAS with a view to purchasing the wings from them, as at that time they were desperate for Tiger Moth wings.
From that day on Bill and Kath have hardly ever thrown anything away.
This attitude is reflected in the enormous flexibility that PAS has in supplying not just complete assemblies, but small internal parts of those assemblies.
For example, if a customer needs an altimeter, PAS can supply the complete article, but if a customer needs just part of the instrument, they are willing to break them down into component form to ensure that the customer gets just what he wants.
A walk around the PAS warehouses is like a trip back in time, with all the parts stored floor to ceiling in tea chests — quite apart from all the aircraft spares this must be one of the largest gatherings of tea chests in the world!
Some visiting aircraft engineers having arrived just  to collect a specific part, spend hours just browsing through the stock.
Transactions at PAS are done ‘by the book’, no sign of computer technology here, even the tea machine is configured to take pre-decimal currency, with a cup of tea costing 4d.
All the ‘ins and outs’ are logged in a large collection of files which, when glancing through, look like a history of British aviation, with such names as British Aircraft Co, Fairey Aviation, Fields Aviation, Gloster Aircraft Co appearing in the purchasing ledgers.
PAS supply parts worldwide, with places like Australia, Denmark, Holland, India, the Middle East and USA cropping up with amazing regularity.
Although PAS is a commercial business, Bill and Kath both have a soft spot for museums and collectors alike, and in the past have supplied, at reasonable prices, parts to large museums like the Imperial War Museum at Duxford, and to ‘one man collections’ who may want just a small item to complete a cockpit panel etc.
Diversity is another of the Company's aims, with items held in stock ranging from wind-driven generators for a Vickers Vimy (PAS supplied the generators for the Vimy replica G–AWAU when it was airworthy during the late 1960s,Alpha Uniform now resides in the RAF Museum, Hendon), to rudder actuators for the Avro Vulcan, complete ‘mod kits’ for Mosquitos to illuminated marshalling bats.
Ministry of Defence approval was gained many years ago and as such PAS have supplied much needed parts to the RAF's Battle of Britain Memorial Flight, all transactions being made with the relevant release documentation.
Bill and Kath, along with their loyal staff have put virtually a  lifetime's effort into acquiring the immense amount of stock contained at PAS, and the one thing that really concerns them is that if anything should ever happen to either of them, what would be the future for all the stock?
It would be a tragedy for the aircraft preservation and restoration movement as a whole if it were all scrapped, and so it is with great sadness that after a great deal of thought they are agreed (having been partners both in business and as husband and wife) that the time has come to take life a bit easier and retire from the business.
They are now looking for a good buyer who would be willing to continue their lifetime's work, and either buy the stock separately, or as a whole package complete with factories.
Interested parties can contact Bill or Kath personally by letter or ‘phone at the Company.
Quotations for aircraft parts, large or small, are freely given, with no obligation.
Bill Parker examines one of the many aircraft parts ledgers.
Interior shot showing just a tiny part of the immense stock carried by W A Parker (Aircraft Spares) Ltd, Benfleet.
firefly
It falls to Fairey's Firefly to notch up its fiftieth anniversary — Ken Wixey celebrates.
IN RESPONDING TO Admiralty Specification N5/40, Fairey Aviation's design team, led by H E Chaplin, followed an almost traditional Fleet Air Arm (FAA) concept when they produced the Firefly F.I.
This was a two-seat reconnaissance fighter which adopted the name given to an earlier Fairey fighter, the single-seat Firefly biplane of the mid-1920s.
FAA policy had included a two-seat reconnaissance fighter since 1926, and resulted tin types like the one-off Fairey Fleetwing (N235) and the successful Hawker Osprey biplane, which served with a number of FAA Catapult Flights and carrier-borne squadrons until 1939.
Predecessor to the Firefly F.I was Fairey's Fulmar, a two-seat carrier-borne naval fighter with eight wing-mounted .303-in Browning machine-guns.
In its early form the Firefly F.I, with a 1,730hp Rolls-Royce Griffon IIB engine, was around 40 mph faster than the Merlin powered Fulmar, and armament was heavier consisting of four 20mm cannon.
In addition provision was made to carry either eight 60lb rocket projectiles or two 500lb bombs beneath the wings.
Of all-metal construction, the Firefly F.I was a cantilever low-wing monoplane with an alclad-covered monocoque fuselage.
Wings were elliptical in planform and comprised a stressed-skin, light alloy structures built in three main sections — Fuel and oil tanks were incorporated into the centre-section, plus wing locking mechanisms for the folding wing sections and the fully retracted landing gear.
Fabric-covering, as applied to ailerons on the initial four Fireflies, was later replaced by metal.
Initially the all-metal tail unit included a fabric-covered, horn-balanced rudder, but following tests with the development aircraft a mass balanced rudder was fitted.
The Firefly featured Fairey-Youngman aerofoil flaps which provided the type with exceptional slow-flying qualities and good manoeuvrability.
First tested on Fairey P4/34 K7555, and employed operationally on the Barracuda, Fairey-Youngman flaps were made fully retractable on the Firefly.
Giving very high lift with small drag at take-off, but high lift and high drag on landing, these flaps could be used to tighten up the turning radius in combat.
If set at 3°, they assisted in providing a long cruising range for reconnaissance duties, an F.24 camera often being fitted for such operations.
The flaps stretched between the ailerons and fuselage centre-line, and enabled Fairey's design team to surmount the problem of combining fighter ability with high lift and slow landing performance as demanded by a carrier-borne aircraft.
A mock-up of the Firefly was accepted by the Admiralty on June 6, 1940 and work commenced on the prototype Z1826 which made its first flight from Fairey's Great West Aerodrome on December 22, 1941 with test pilot Chris Staniland at the controls.
Three further development machines were part of the initial production batch of 200 Firefly F.1s for which a contract had been signed on June 12, 1940.
Second to fly was Z1827 on June 4, 1942, this aircraft suffering collapse of the tail unit while being tested on June 26.
Sadly Chris Staniland lost his life in this crash.
Third machine to go aloft was Z1828 on August 26, while a fourth aircraft, Z1829, flew in September, and went to RAE Farnborough.
By the end of 1942, Z1828 had undertaken carrier trials aboard HMS Illustrious .
First production Firefly F.I delivered to the FAA was Z1830 on March 4, 1943.
Of 459 F.Is produced, 327 came from Fairey's Hayes factory and 132 under contract from General Aircraft Ltd at Hanworth.
Early versions of the F.I had a low, slanting front windscreen panel fitted with a wiper blade and an almost flat pilot's hood, features which restricted the forward view.
This was improved on later versions by deleting the windscreen wiper, heightening the front screen and fitting a ‘bubble’ canopy to give the pilot extra head room.
Further modifications were added on the F.I production line including, gun barrel fairings, replacement of a two-man dinghy (stowed in the rear fuselage) by a pair of K-type individual dinghies, and substitution of the Rolls-Royce Griffon IIB by a Griffon XII.
First FAA unit to operate Firefly F.Is was 1770 Squadron which formed at RNAS Yeovilton on October 1, 1943.
After moving to Grimsetter and Hatston respectively, this unit embarked aboard the carrier HMS Indefatigable , and in the period July 14 to 19, 1944, took its Fireflies into action for the first time when they supported FAA raids on the German battleship Tirpitz by attacking gun positions and two German naval vessels.
During August and September that year, this same Squadron used its Fireflies on photo-reconnaissance missions against Tirpitz , the results of their operations leading to final destruction of the battleship by RAF Lancasters on November 12, 1944.
A second Firefly unit, 1771 Squadron, formed at Yeovilton on February 1 1944, eventually embarking aboard HMS Implacable and  carrying out its first operational mission the following October.
From then until December this squadron was engaged on armed reconnaissance sorties and anti-shipping strikes along the coast of Norway.
Prototype F.I Z1826, first flown on December 12, 1941.
The addition of ASH (anti-ship/submarine radar) in an under-nose pod resulted in Firefly FR.I, 236 of this version being produced.
A number of F.Is were updated to FR.I standard and became the F.IA.
A night fighting variant, the Firefly NF.II, was developed in which an 18° extension was incorporated aft of the engine firewall to compensate for an alteration in the aircraft's centre of gravity.
However, it was realised the AI Mk 10 radar fitted in the rear cockpit could be housed in a pod beneath the engine, and of 328 NF.IIs planned only 37 were built, these being later converted back to Mk 1 standard.
In the event Firefly NF.Is, fitted with shrouded exhausts, emerged as the result of modifications to FR.Is on the production line.
After their Norwegian operations 1770 Squadron's Fireflies (Indefatigable ) transferred to the East Indies Fleet, and on January 2, 1945, during softening-up operations in readiness for raids on Japanese oil refineries in Sumatra, Lt D Levitt shot down a Nakajima Ki–43 Oscar fighter.
Two days later 1770 was in action against Japanese targets, when they joined Grumman Avengers in an attack on Pangkalan Brandon with bombs and rockets.
Later that month the British Pacific Fleet's (BPF) main strike force sailed from Trincomalee for Sydney, which was to be the main Fleet base for Pacific operations.
En route aircraft from the BPF carriers attacked Sumatran oil refineries around Palembang, and on January 24 a force of 43 Avengers, twelve Fireflies (eight 60lb rockets each) and fifty escorting fighters made a strike against Pladjoe refinery.
Due to diversionary raids on enemy airfields acting as a fighter decoy, no Japanese fighters were encountered, but an unexpected hazard was a balloon barrage.
No FAA aircraft were lost, output of the refinery was halved for three months, while much of the oil stored in tanks was destroyed.
A similar air strike was launched by the FAA on January 29, Avengers, Fireflies and fighters attacking Soengi Gerong refinery near Palembang.
In this strike the Fireflies were ordered to strafe the barrage balloons during their rocket dives, but two Avengers were lost by hitting balloon cables.
Result of this raid was complete stoppage of production for two months, deliveries when they did recommence being only a fraction of previous supplies, thirty enemy aircraft destroyed in aerial combat and 38 on the ground.
During March 1945 FAA units flew in support of the American attacks against Okinawa and Fireflies from Indefatigable made cannon and rocket sorties against enemy airfields in the Sakishima Gunto group of islands during which heavy flak was encountered.
On April 12 two Fireflies on patrol attacked a formation of Japanese bombers heading for Okinawa, four of the bombers being shot down and the fifth badly damaged.
In June Fireflies of 1771 Squadron (Implacable ) joined in attacks on the Carolinas, and the following month saw 1772 Squadron, which had joined Indefatigable ), carrying out strikes against Japanese home islands, including raids on airfields and the railway yards on the north coast of Honshu.
Fireflies were also among aircraft which attacked the Japanese carrier Kaiyo on July 24, leaving her ablaze with a broken back.
She was later  finished off by US Navy aircraft.
Meanwhile in 1944 the prototype Firefly Mk III (Z1835) emerged with a Griffon 61 engine, this being a converted Mk I which retained the ‘beard’ radiator, but proved to have poor aerodynamic qualities.
Development of this one-off was abandoned in favour of the Mk IV which, in prototype form, was again a converted Mk I airframe (Z2118) powered by a 2,330hp two-speed, two-stage supercharged Griffon 72 engine.
This gave a better high-altitude performance and raised the top speed by around 70mph.
This first prototype retained the original elliptical wing and Mk I empennage, but was later updated to full Mk IV standard which included clipped wings, removal of the chin radiator to wing leading edges, and redesigned vertical tail surfaces necessitated by a change of centre of gravity position and directional trim.
Boundary layer ducts were incorporated at the radiator and fuselage junctions, and matt camouflage was superseded on the Mk IV by a gloss finish.
New outer wing sections could carry internal fuel (256 Imp gals) or underwing nacelles containing an ASH radar scanner (port) and auxiliary fuel (starboard.
Three further prototype Mk IVs were ordered (MB649, Z1835 and PP482) all Mk I conversions with Griffon 72 engines, but production Firefly FR.4s, the first of which (TW687) first flew on May 25, 1945 were powered by the 2,245hp Griffon 74 with Rolls-Royce fuel injection pump and four-blade Rotol propeller.
The FR.4 was too late to see service in World War Two, and of the 160 built, 120 were delivered to the FAA and forty to the Royal Netherlands Naval Air Service (RNNAS).
This number included a few NF.4 night fighters, while the TT.4 was a target towing conversion fitted with a winch beneath the centre-section.
First FAA units to be FR.4 equipped were 825 and 810 Squadrons at Eglinton during August and October 1947 respectively.
Postwar uses for converted Mk I Fireflies included the T.1 dual-control pilot trainer which featured a raised rear cockpit for the instructor, the T.2 operational trainer armed with two 20mm wing guns and the T.3 ASW in which naval observers were trained in the art of anti-submarine warfare.
A number of Mk I Fireflies were converted as TF.1 target tugs.
Externally similar to the Firefly Mk 4, Mks 5 and 6 next appeared, the Mk 5 being equipped for either day-fighter-reconnaissance (FR.5), night fighting (NF.5) or anti-submarine patrol (AS.5).
Differences involved mainly internal equipment and of 352 Mk 5s built fourteen went to the RNNAS.
First production Mk 5 (VT362) made its initial flight on December 12, 1947, and was delivered to the FAA on January 9, 1948 while the last Mk 5 built (WB440) was delivered on May 19, 1950.
On January 24 1949, the first Mk 5 equipped with power-folding wings (VX414) left Fairey's works and was later delivered to the Royal Canadian Navy (RCN).
Five Mk 5s went to the Royal Australian Navy (RAN) in 1948, and were followed by twelve dual-control trainers (AS.5s converted to T.5s in Australia).
Later Mk 5s had power-operated wing folding.
January 1948 saw Firefly Mk 5s entering service with 814 Squadron at Yeovilton.
Other first-line squadrons followed suit, and with the advent of the Korean War in 1950, Fireflies were once again in action, squadrons involved being .
Many bombing and rocket strikes were carried out against enemy lines of communication and supplies.
During severe winter conditions, especially those of November 1951, Fireflies pressed home their attacks causing severe damage to harbour installations, railways and bridges.
A most noticeable achievement was that of 812 Squadron (Glory ) which, together with Sea Furies from 804, carried out 4,834 missions during the two year Korean war.
Only 24 aircraft were lost during these sorties.
In 1954 Fireflies from 825 Squadron (Warrior ) saw action against the communist rebels in Malaya.
The Firefly AS.6 was designed specifically for anti-submarine warfare, and became the FAA main type in that category until the Fairey Gannet arrived in 1955.
It differed from the Mk 5 in having no armament and was equipped with British sonobuoys and equipment, whereas the Mk 5 was fitted with American gear.
First AS.6 (WB505) made its initial flight on March 23, 1949 and was delivered to the FAA on May 26, 1950.
Altogether 133 AS.6s were produced, the last (WJ121) being delivered on September 18, 1951.
The type served with first-line FAA units, and in the Queen's Coronation fly-past of 1953 AS.6s from 812, 814, 817, 820, 825 and 826 Squadrons were among FAA types taking part.
This version also served with a number of RNVR squadrons including,.
Major alterations were introduced in the updated Firefly AS.7 the prototype of which (WJ215) made its initial flight on May 22, 1951, the first production machine (WJ146) flying on October 16 that year.
Most noticeable change was in the newly-designed tail unit, also a chin radiator was re-introduced larger than that of the earlier Mk 1, wing planform was altered with a reversion to full span, and a revised rear canopy which covered a cockpit designed to seat two radar operators.
Only a limited number of AS.7s were built, production concentrating on the T.7 variant used to train FAA observers, this operating from shore bases minus a deck-arrester hook.
Firefly T.7s flew with 814 and 824 Squadrons, the latter retaining its machines until February 1955, when Fairey Gannets began to arrive.
Final version of the Firefly was the U.8 and U.9 pilot-less target drone used to aid missile development.
U.8s were missile test aircraft converted from Mk 4s and 5s.
Altogether 34 U.8s were built and forty U.9s.
A number of the latter equipped 728B Squadron at RNAS Hal Far, Malta to provide pilot-less target drones for RN Firestreak armed fighters and Seaslug missiles on HM warships.
Top: Manually-operated wing fold on an early F.I  Above; Trainer Mk 1 prototype, with stepped rear seat (via Author)
Fourth production AS.7 WJ149 showing the very clean lines of this version.
(via Author)
Evelyn Tentions
Robert Rudhall describes Duxford's Mk 1 Firefly and its recent conservation.
CONSIDERING the Firefly's valuable contribution and operational success (see page 55), relatively few of the type survive in the world today.
Probably the best known of these is the Royal Navy Historic Flight's AS.5 WB271 which has been delighting air show audiences in the UK since 1972.
But a more historic example has recently emerged from a conservation programme to preserve it in first class static display condition for many years to come, this is Mk 1 Z2033/G–ASTL of the Skyfame Collection owned by the Imperial War Museum (IWM) and part of the collection of the historic aircraft at Duxford.
The only Mk 1 to be preserved in the UK, Z2033 was one of the first batch built at Heaton Chapel, Manchester, it was test flown at Ringway, and delivered to the Fleet Air Arm.
It is thought to have seen no operational service during World War Two, but was used for spinning trials at Farnborough.
In March 1949, Z2033 was purchased by Svensk Flystjanst AB of Stockholm, Sweden, who were contracted to convert the Firefly and operate it as a target-tug for the Swedish Air Force.
Painted in the Company's all yellow colour scheme and registered as SE–BRD, the Firefly flew with the Swedish company for thirteen years until being declared redundant, whereupon the aircraft was put up for disposal along with three other Mk 1s.
After some enquiries from Peter Thomas, who at that time was in the process of forming the Skyfame Aircraft Museum at Staverton, Glos, the Swedish company decided to donate the Firefly to the Museum, providing that sufficient funds could be raised to finance the flight from Sweden to England.
Needless to say the chance of obtaining this rare aeroplane made sure that funds were forthcoming and on May 5, 1964 Firefly Z2033, piloted by Tage Paller with observer/engineer Kenneth Skold flew from Gothenberg to Staverton.
Arriving still in its overall yellow scheme the aircraft was soon repainted in Fleet Air Arm colours with the inscription Sir Richard Fairey on the nose cowling.
It was registered as G–ASTL on June 1, 1964.
Due to the high cost of operating a high powered aircraft like the Firefly (this was during the mid-1960s, before ‘warbirds’ were commonplace), the aircraft was reluctantly grounded, but maintained in good order.
During 1976 the Firefly's Rolls-Royce Griffon XII was  worked on by local aircraft engineers and they managed to get it running again.
From then on,Sir Richard was taxied on a regular basis, including a spirited run up the main runway during that year's Staverton Air Display.
In 1977 the Skyfame Aircraft Museum closed its doors to the public for the last time and virtually all the aircraft in the collection were transferred to the Imperial War Museum at Duxford in one of the most momentous rescue and re-site operations ever undertaken.
In early 1978 the Firefly was prepared to make the long road journey to its new home in Cambridgeshire.
CPO Ron Gourlay of the Navy's Historic Flight came up from Yeovilton to supervise the removal of the Firefly's wings prior to the contracted transport firm loading the aircraft onto a low loader.
Sadly, Z2033 was to suffer a minor accident even before the aircraft had left Staverton.
Somehow, the aircraft had not been adequately lashed down on the low loader and as the lorry moved forward the Firefly rolled off its trestles on to the bed of the lorry damaging the undersides of the aircraft in the process, the aircraft was then reloaded and secured and thankfully the reset of the trip to Duxford was uneventful.
Z2033 remained on display at Duxford in its naval colours until September 1989 when Ken Evans and Herbie Church, two volunteers with the IWM, started work to  tidy up the aircraft, working at the outset just one or two days a week.
Even so, a lot was accomplished.
From then on conservation work on the Firefly was  stepped-up with three more volunteers joining Ken and Herbie.
When work on the engine bay was completed, attention focused on the cockpit areas.
In the main cockpit the blind flight panel was removed and cleaned, virtually all other instrumentation was removed and refurbished, cockpit fittings, trim wheels, knobs and switches were all cleaned, re-painted and generally made as new.
Because of its target-towing days in Sweden the rear cockpit was slightly non-standard, this meant that new perspex panels had to be manufactured to bring the rear cockpit back to Mk 1 configuration, the target cable guides on the tailplane were removed and the tailplane restored to standard fit.
One of the main aims during conservation was to restore to original condition of all areas of the aircraft that were visible, including the interior structure underneath access panels, undercarriage bays, stowage areas etc.
Added to this was the waxing of the fuselage interior to protect it from corrosion in the future.
IWM's Bevis Griffiths supervised the conservation work on the Firefly, and had this to say of the professional/volunteer team used to restore Z2033: ‘The Museum require volunteers for this sort of work because we have some seventy aircraft here at Duxford and six [full-time]technicians to look after them, which in anybody's book is a huge workload, so we work alongside the volunteers.
But it is a two-way system whereby not all the volunteers need training because many have spent their entire lives around aeroplanes and they have not lost the ‘feel’ for aeroplane-related work.
That way the other helpers learn skills etc off the more experienced helpers, thereby preserving the skills for future generations’.
When it came to respraying the Firefly, an enamel-based paint was used.
Due to the conditions inside the Duxford hangars a fast drying paint was needed, cellulose paint would have been preferable, but the enamel-base used gives a long-lasting finish very similar to cellulose and is touch-dry in thirty minutes.
Z2033 now wears the markings of Firefly DK431 of 1771, Squadron, RN, when embarked upon HMS Implacable , although the aircraft still retains its original serial.
Colourful nose-art now adorns the aircraft with a map of Japan on the forward fuselage with the name Evelyn Tentions on the nose cowling.
After operations against the Caroline Islands in June 1945, 1771's Mk 1s were involved in strikes on the Japanese mainland during the last days of the war — hence the map.
On completion of the conservation programme the Firefly was officially  rolled out at Duxford on June 2, in company with the IWM's Fairey Gannet XG797 and Sea Hawk WM969, both of which had been subjected to a similar conservation programme.
The three now make a valuable contribution to the IWM's collection of naval aeroplanes on display at Duxford.
Roll-out of the completed Z2033 at Duxford on June 2, 1991.
(Author)
Peter Thomas welcomes Tage Paller after the ferry flight from Sweden.
(via Author)
REGISTER REVIEW G–
A VARIED selection of veteran and vintage aircraft have appeared on the register within the past few months and include the former Warbirds of Great Britain P–63A Kingcobra which has been on rebuild to flying condition at Duxford for some time for The Fighter Collection.
Also of note is another Yak–11, this time for Mark and John Jefferies at Gransden.
From an earlier era, comes a Hawker Demon for Aero Vintage.
Readers may well be familiar with Bristol F.2b Fighter G–AANM that is nearing completion by Aero Vintage it would seem that the Demon is next for their from-the-ground-up treatment.
Not surprisingly, a number of former Swiss Vampires appear following the sales earlier this year (see News in the March, April and May issues) and include a two-seater recently delivered to Jet Heritage to add to the single-seater delivered earlier this year.
Several other examples of the type have also made fleeting visits to the UK while  transiting to owners in the USA.
On the airliner scene, Air Bridge continue to acquire Electras, with a further two former Canadian examples registered during August and September to supplement their expanding fleet of the type.
On the lighter side, the Cessna 195B has been around for some time, having been auctioned at Duxford in April 1990 and, although remaining in the UK since then, has only just been registered.
The Chipmunk is also of interest, its previous identity suggesting it was recently acquired from the MoD but not so — it is an ex Army Air Corps example that was sold many years ago after storage at Kemble and has been kept as a spares source at the gliding site at Currock Hill, Northumberland, for at least fifteen years.
It became redundant a couple of years ago when the Chipmunk glider tug it was providing spares for was replaced by a Piper Pawnee.
Other recent imports which have yet to aspire to UK marks include a pair of Aeronca 11AC Chiefs, NC3458E and N86359, which arrived some time ago at Compton Abbas and are now undergoing rebuilt for UK registry while similarly the frame of Stinson 108 N97915 is being slowly worked on in the gliding club hangar at Booker.
More recent imports include Stearman N746BJ which, unusually, was actually flown across the Atlantic, arriving at Glasgow on July 30 and then flying on to Gamston the next day.
Two veteran Piper Cubs imported into Little Snoring airfield, Norfolk, recently were N88689 and NC98648 which both arrived crated from the USA.
In the traditional all-yellow civilian Cub scheme, both were being re-assembled during August and were expected to remain based in East Anglia although probably retaining US marks.
Gleaming Cessna 195B N4461C at the Christie's Duxford auction in April 1990.
It has now been registered as G–BTBJ.
Floatplanes are all-too-rare in the UK.
Helping to redress the balance is G–DHCB, seen here at Lee-on-Solent where it undertook water trials during the summer months.
G–BSBG, first of the former Mozambique Harvard IVs to complete its restoration at Thruxton.
It made its first flight in July, shortly after this photo was taken.
AERONAUTS EXTRAORDINAIRE
Alastair Goodrum turns back the clock to a high speed dash across England in 1811.
SOME READERS may be forgiven for thinking that aeronautics began with the Wright Brothers.
Those, however, who search just a little harder will find a panorama of aero-delights unfold before their eyes, if they move back in time.
By way of a contrast to the more usual content found between these covers, let me take you  to Georgian England at the beginning of the Nineteenth Century.
Here is a tale of two gentlemen adventurers and their early ballooning exploits, typical of those bygone days, but so reminiscent of more modern aviation dramas.
James Sadler made the 21st ascent in a balloon on October 7, 1811 and in doing so, became the first aeronaut to visit the Fenland region.
Riding on the back of a tempestuous wind, this journey became an epic of its time, being accomplished at a speed which remained unequalled until surpassed by an aeroplane more than a century later.
At 2pm that day, in the Vauxhall district of Birmingham, the scene was set for this drama.
Sadler's balloon, 40 feet tall with a diameter of 36 feet, was fully inflated with hydrogen, a time-consuming process begun the previous day.
‘Amidst an immense concourse of spectators…’ the veteran aeronaut and his friend John Burcham took their places in an open carriage suspended beneath the ‘aerostat’(balloon).
At 2.20pm the final restraining ropes were  cast off and the crimson and gold silk balloon rose majestically.
Gaining height rapidly, heading east, after a few minutes it was enveloped by clouds and lost to view.’
Born in Oxford, Sadler lived from 1751 to 1828 and has the distinction of being the first English-born ‘aeronaut’.
This term was introduced to describe someone who indulged in the science of ‘aerostation’(lighter-than-air flight) using an ‘aerostatic’ machine (balloon).
His first ascent was in a hot air balloon, of the Montgolfier type, in October 1784 and his last was made in 1816.
During this time he earned a reputation as an intrepid aerial adventurer, in whom no less a person than King George III took a special interest in his ballooning exploits.
It was Sadler, too, who in May 1785, became the first Englishman to use ‘Inflammable Air’ to fill a balloon.
An aptly named gas, discovered in 1766, it had that potentially lethal combination of having both explosive and lifting properties.
It was renamed to the more familiar hydrogen in 1790 and ousted hot air as the preferred lifting agent for the next thirty years.
Heated in the Montgolfier-style, air would lift about 15lbs for every 1,000 cubic feet of volume, while the same volume of hydrogen could lift about 70lbs of payload.
This meant that, although hydrogen was more expensive to produce, it enabled the dimension of balloons to be minimised, in addition to its nature allowing longer flights over greater distances.
It will be remembered that hydrogen, having given way to the use of coal gas from 1821, although still being utilised when effective pressurised containers were designed later in the century, regained popularity with 20th Century airships.
This was mainly due to the ‘dilution’ of coal gas by carburated water gas (thus reducing its lifting capacity) and the need to lift greater payloads, including motive power units, in addition to people.
Until, that is, it lived up to its original name once too often!
If ballooning itself was essentially a leisurely-paced occupation, then the process of manufacturing hydrogen at the point of departure was even more so.
It was a lengthy and not a little dangerous, chemical process requiring the gas to be cooled through a large tub of water from barrels containing iron filings onto which sulphuric acid had been poured.
The gas was collected through tubes and piped into the envelope of the balloon, which was generally fashioned from the finest quality oiled silk.
Sadler's used 1,900 square yards — made more impervious to the gas by an inner coat of rubber.
By such primitive methods, the volume of gas necessary to carry one or two people aloft, could take up to a day and a half to produce.
It is known that early French experiments to manufacture hydrogen in this type of situation for a small unmanned balloon of 1,000 cubic feet, required 1,000lbs of iron and 500lbs of acid to generate sufficient gas for sustained flight.
This was no frivolous pastime in which these men — rightly described as ‘intrepid’— were engaged.
On the contrary, they were risking their lives at the forefront of discovery in a new branch of science.
Returning now to that day in 1811, the hair-raising events of those next few hours graphically unfold through the words of the voyagers themselves, taken from a contemporary account in The Gentleman's Magazine :
Above: Engraving of the first English aeronaut, James Sadler Esq.
Right: Sadler and Captain Paget of the Royal Navy make ascent in August 1812 — a year after the epic flight described here.
In those days before altimeters, height could be deduced, given the availability of a barometer, by the simple process of recording the mercury column before take-off then reading it at intervals during the flight.
Using a conversion factor of  1,250 feet per inch of mercury the approximate height above ground, at least in relation to the take-off point, could be calculated.
In the circumstances of 19th century ballooning this rudimentary process was quite adequate for general information about the flight profile and its inherent limitations, while obvious now, caused little problem then.
The pre-take-off reading for this flight is not recorded but the overall height gain suggests about 28″, which would be consistent with the windy conditions.
The travellers were then carried in a northerly direction and with Spalding now on their right and Bourne to the left, the craft was stabilized by throwing out all the remaining ballast.
This, however, failed to arrest the balloon's descent and the carriage struck Mother Earth at the hamlet of Burton Pedwardine, near Heckington, south of Sleaford.
Grappling irons were  thrown out but these, too, proved ineffective.
Mr Burcham was fortunately relieved from his perilous position, being deposited on terra firma safely and with only a slight bruise to mark his passage.
He had ‘landed’ in the parish of Asgarby, some two miles from where he and Sadler had parted company.
Burcham was quickly surrounded by people anxious to render assistance and was speedily conveyed to the home of Mr Godson, upon whose land he had alighted, where he was ‘…welcomed heartily and with good cheer.’
From there he proceeded to Heckington where he was reunited with Sadler in the market square.
The scene may be more easily pictured than described, each believing the other had been killed, ‘…that their raptures on meeting were almost ludicrous (sic )…’.
Sadler himself had, on recovering from his fall, proceeded to the nearby house of a miller before making his way into Heckington.
Duly recovered from their exploits the two aeronauts made a more leisurely departure for Birmingham, in a chaise and four, at 3.00am the next morning.
During his rapid exit from the balloon carriage Sadler had lost both his signal flags, but these were found the next day in a field near Burton Pedwardine by Mr Edward Robinson, together with Sadler's hat, cushion and, understandably, his broken thermometer!
In the course of this epic journey Sadler and his companion calculated that they had flown a distance of not less than 112 miles in one hour and twenty minutes.
This splendid achievement was due of course to exceptional wind conditions thrusting them along at the remarkable average speed of ninety miles per hour.
Even so, it took great nerve and daring to ride that wind for such a distance and it is a fitting tribute to the bravery of the balloon pioneers, yet it will be seen that those men and women who followed Sadler into the skies display, in their own way, no less daring than he.
James Sadler made only one subsequent aerial visit to the region, that being to Deken's Lodge, Pickworth, near Stamford, which was the termination point for the first flight from Nottingham made in 1813.
In addition to the epic flight described here, James Sadler is remembered particularly for his daring but abortive, attempt to cross the Irish Sea from Dublin to England in October 1812.
What set Sadler apart from his contemporaries and rivals in Britain and France, was that he was acknowledged as the first to consciously apply science, to aerostation.
In its inaugural edition,The Dublin Magazine (November 1812) paid the following erudite tribute to James Sadler:
Sadler, however, although being keen to identify and chart the existence of air currents, had to be content to place his trust in the wind and fly wherever it chose to take him.
James made his last ascent in September 1816.
His aeronautical mantle was taken up by William (born 1796), one of his two sons, who was successful in crossing the Irish Sea by balloon but who, tragically, lost his life in 1824 as the result of a ballooning accident.
At First Sight
While marking the launch of a new book, a watch was returned to its family, 47 years on.
WHAT STARTED out as a circular to keep former squadron members in touch was launched as a full-blown book at the Mosquito Aircraft Museum (MAM) during September.
Researched and compiled by Alan Webb,At First Sight is the history of 627 Squadron, from 8 Group's Pathfinder force.
The Museum hosted a large gathering of people associated with 627.
While they were at Woodhall Spa in Lincolnshire, 627 was always under the shadow of 617 Squadron.
Operating the Mosquito 617 wags referred to 627 as the ‘Woodhall Model Aeroplane Club’.
Author Alan, who was with the unit throughout its operational career, has collected and researched a series of fascinating contributions from unit members building up to a comprehensive and highly readable work.
As well as a good selection of photos, Alan's sketches and cartoons adorn the book.
‘It just grew and grew,’ Alan grinned as he talked about the development of the book, ‘I soon realised that a circular including anecdotes to keep former members in touch was not possible, we had given rise to a book!’
Contributions from Squadron members are related in the order that they joined the unit and make for fascinating reading, especially as raids and operations inter-weave with different opinions coming to the fore — Alan has added occasional notes only by way of factual back-up, ensuring the originality of the contributor's writing.
Since publication, Alan has been given more information on this illustrious unit and has been kept busy updating his files.
Also occupying his time is the construction of wingtips for MAM's Mosquito FB.VI TA122.
On the day of the launch of At First Sight at London Colney, on September 20, among many moving moments as crews meet up and shared their memories, there was a most poignant presentation.
Brian Harris DFC made a speech which set the scene:
‘May I steal a few minutes of your time on this unique occasion and go back to November 22, 1944 when nine Mosquitos from our Squadron were briefed to mark the U-Boat pens at Trondheim for 171 Lancasters.
Many of you present will be familiar with this unhappy bombing mission.
‘One of our pilots, Bill Topper, who I am glad to see is with us today, took part in this raid tells how he was able to listen to the crew of a Lancaster chatting away on their  intercom as the RT transmit button was down, I understand their conversation not only included details of their local pub, but the name of the target ahead.
Other ears heard the transmission, so by the time the force arrived at the target it was covered by a very effective smokescreen.
‘At Briefing, the Mosquito crews were told their markings must be very accurate in order to avoid civilian casualties.
This was impossible, so the attack was called off.
‘On the return journey one of our Mosquitos, DZ642 J-Johnnie, was short of fuel, so the pilot — John Reid — and his navigator — Wes Irwin — made for Sumburgh on Shetland.
There were also communications problems, but in spite of help from other Mossies and a Lerwick giving weather conditions and a course to steer, sadly J-Johnnie crashed on a hill top.
Some days later the wreckage was found by three shepherds.
‘Nearly fifty years later Mark Reeder, who is with us today, a helicopter pilot with Bristows, spotted the crash site, landed, too some photographs, and with the help of the Public Records Office, discovered it was a 627 Mossie.
Then I had a ‘phone call from Mark, ‘Can I come and see you?
By the way, were you on 627 Squadron?’
‘We met and he showed me some excellent photos he had taken at the crash site.
‘Any chance of your taking a video for me some time?’
Within a week I had a complete record of this remote site, it is amazing how much remains — an undercarriage with its wheel and tyre in place.
I sent the video to Andrew Denholm, a navigator with me on 627 and who is with us today.
This prompted him to contact a business acquaintance of his in the Shetlands who kindly offered to enquire about DZ642.
‘He came across John Mann, whose uncle George was one of the men who found the wreckage.
Among the scattered debris he found a watch which he kept as souvenir until shortly before he died when he asked his nephew, John, to take the watch and try and trace a relative of the crew to give it to.
‘The make of the watch was Optima, so I contacted the British Horological Institute for information.
They put me in touch with a Fellow of the Institute by the name of John Read — same name as the pilot of DZ642, which I thought was a good omen.
I was, he told me just what I wanted to hear, ‘that watches of this make were issued to RAF navigators’.
I was now certain this was Wes Irwin's.
Incidentally, at the time of the crash Wes's son was eight weeks old.
‘This now brings me to the moment when I have immense pleasure in asking Douglas Irwin to come up and receive the watch worn by his father on that fateful night nearly fifty years ago.
‘But first, for their vital help, I must thank Mark Reeder, Andy Denholm and George Henderson of the RAF Association in the Shetlands and most of all the donor, John Mann.’
There is a sequel.
Douglas took the watch home as a treasured memory of his father.
He had a new strap fitted, but had the old one retained for posterity.
Placing the Optima beside the bed, that night Douglas's own watch misted up and stopped!
Researched and compiled by Alan Webb and published by him care of the Mosquito Aircraft Museum, At First Sight is a magnificent and original unit history, based entirely upon accounts written by former 627 Squadron members.
Hardback, 244 pages, illustrated it includes  copious extracts from 627's ORB while at Oakington and Woodhall Spa, a list of aircrew personnel, aircraft operated and aircraft incidents.
Price £15.95 — proceeds to the RAF Benevolent Fund and the Mosquito Aircraft Museum.
Available by post at £19.25 from  .
COLLECTAIR
Aeronautica with Jeremy Collins
DURING the period immediately after the cessation of hostilities in 1945, many Allied military personnel ‘liberated’ quantities of documents relating to the German war machine.
Much of this activity was  carried out by special commissions especially set up to cope with the flood of material that was uncovered.
One such collection of material came to light recently and was purchased by FlyPast reader C D Robinson .
The bundle of papers he acquired included a quantity of original German aircraft manufacturer's secret plans, and specifications of some well-known and other less well-known aircraft types.
The list included the JONA 22 self-launching aircraft which appears to have been an Italian invention — did it ever get to the production or prototype stage?
Other items in this collection include specifications for the fuselage construction of the Ta 154, a report with drawings of the Me.264 multi-engined bomber; a fascinating group of photographs and details of the Do.335 engine test-bed and early prototype construction; a quantity of Combined Intelligence Objectives Sub-Committee (CIOSC) reports on BMW, Heinkel and Junkers gas turbine engines and much else.
Altogether a remarkable collection to have uncovered.
I note that the CIOSC reports were available from HMSO at prices between 3/,(15p) and 4/6d (22.5p)— one does wonder if they are still available from some ‘back number’ store of ancient documents?
The original German ones, of course, may well be unique.
This brings me neatly on to the exhibition of German aircraft and equipment held at the Royal Aircraft Establishment at Farnborough during October and November 1945.
A copy of the catalogue of this exhibition was sent in by a reader recently and it is quite mind-blowing to read what a wealth of aircraft and engines were on display:
Some survived, the Dornier Do 217 being  broken up as late as 1960 (what a tragedy!). this remarkable exhibition would surely be a money-spinner today.
Perhaps one day the survivors could be brought together as some sort of retrospective exhibition — not impossible, especially if there is a will to mount such a show.
World War Two German aviation seems to be the theme of this month's Collectair as a letter from Lorenz Rasse of Livermore, California, brings news of a fine metal model of an Me.262 given to him by former pilot Franz Kulp of III/JG7.
Apparently, about fifty of these models were made and presented to former ‘262 pilots.
A number of Me.163 Komets were also produced — do any survive?
Lorenz had his model restored and it now takes pride of place on his writing desk, decorated in the colours of the aircraft flown by Helmut Lennartz also formerly of III/JG7.
The Ehren pokal previously featured in these columns continues to invite comment from readers, and I am grateful to Roger Miles of Atherstone and others for their useful research.
This results in the Collectair library gaining valuable notes, all of which is carefully filed away for use as and when the archive that has been created over the past few years becomes available to students of aviation history.
Such is the volume of material that a new office has been built to house this material at the home of Collectair !
Lovely metal DH Albatross, complete with souvenir booklet on Imperial Airways, from Brian Eaton's collection and found in a car boot sale.
Left: Collectair has long had a fascination with the magazine Tee Emm.
We were therefore very pleased to see the entire set, the proud possession of F/L Frank Neill from the Tri-National Tornado Training Establishment at Cottesmore.
As with most items that come as a ‘set’, value increases considerably for having every one and more so for them being in fine condition.
Tin-plate models continue to provide a mass of correspondence.
 Thank you to enthusiast Robin Reid who was fascinated by the picture of the model of the R–101 featured in FlyPast in July.
He comments on the incorrect modelling of the airship going into great detail with regard to the number of ribs, panels, engine positions etc.
I would add that toy manufacturers used a good deal of imagination and licence  when they produced their models, perhaps not taking into account the keen eye and future criticism of FlyPast readers!
Robin adds that as a boy he saw both the Graf Zeppelin and R–101, obviously an enthusiast from an early age.
Continuing on the tin-plate theme how about the amazing machine-with-a-difference illustrated here?
A fanciful idea by some toy manufacturer which only goes to underline what was said previously about imagination and licence!
Brian Eaton , a collector from Camberley has been rummaging around car boot sales and found a splendid aluminium model of a DH.91 Albatross.
Complete with propellers and Imperial Airways booklet, this appears to be a well-made model and, perhaps, originally was on sale as a souvenir at Croydon.
It seems that many excellent models were made in aluminium at one time, some collectors I know have superb models on display, the variety being considerable.
I was pleased to receive a letter from Dick Lewis of Weybridge who has had, for nearly fifty years, various copies of a magazine with the title Skipper .
It appears that from time to time this magazine published supplements and one such example, featuring aviation, went under the title The Bright Boys Album of Aeroplanes .
This is one publication I have not come across before.
Interestingly, it featured such unusual aircraft as the Seversky Amphibian, Miles Merlin and Blackburn Perth flying-boat.
Another unusual offering, one perhaps for Christmas if one could be found, would be an example of the souvenir rayon handkerchiefs which were on offer in RAF Officers' and Sergeants' Messes during 1940/1941.
John Withers of Stafford has one of these fragile and now unusual items which features, with a certain amount of artistic licence, Spitfires, Hurricanes and Wellingtons.
I particularly liked a coloured poster, entitled The Men Who Saved the World , sent in by reader T C Raynor of Crowle.
It shows a steely-eyed fighter pilot climbing into his Spitfire to do battle against the Luftwaffe .
With engine running and the faithful mechanic looking on, St George on his white charger within a protective halo of glory looks on!
A really splendid piece of propaganda artwork which I have not seen before.
Mr Raynor asks if this column can help in identifying the origin of this poster which his family have owned for many years —doubtless readers can help!
It is really quite extraordinary how many unusual and rare items some collectors have.
J B Graham of Maidstone was the lucky discoverer at an antiques fair of an exceptional piece of World War Imperial Austrian Air Force memorabilia.
A silvered white metal or aluminium wall plaque measuring 9″ × 12″ depicting a Lohner Hydravion manufactured by Jacob Lohner Werke & Co in 1914.
About forty of these robust and successful aircraft were built and they became the forerunner of a considerable output of flying-boats produced by this Company.
It is said that the first of the Macchi flying-boats was developed from a captured example of the Lohner E type.
The badge in the corner is moulded with two portraits and inscribed Frances Foucault ,Hundio Submarino ,Hydravion Lohner Austria 1916 , for what purpose was it made and who was Foucault?
In the September issue, mention was made in this column of the Spitfire Fund at the Cufton Cinema at Coseley.
Douglas Kilvington of Kirkstall  wrote in querying the ‘Cufton’ and making the point that this should have been Clifton.
Apparently Clifton Cinemas raised enough cash to purchase for the nation Spitfire Mk Vb BM240.
Turning to Spitfire :The History , published by Key Publishing, I find that BM240 was named Clifton Cameras and was first issued to 452 (RAAF) Squadron in March 1942 and went on to serve with 602 (City of Glasgow ) Squadron, 416 (RCAF) Squadron, 350 Squadron and finally with 65 Squadron.
BM240 failed to return from operations on January 17, 1944.
Christmas greetings to you all and happy landings in 1992.
Right: Wonderfully messianic poster featuring a Spitfire complete with nose-art, pilot mechanic and St George and entitled The Men Who Saved the World.
Left: Very good all-metal model of a Me 262, treasured by Lorenz Rasse of California.
Detail from a corner of a handkerchief in the collection of John Withers of Stafford.
Above: Tin-plate ‘star’ of the month.
Below: Lohner flying-boat plaque from J B Graham — can readers supply more information?
VIEW OF BROOKLANDS 92
Robert Rudhall looks at plans for the Brooklands Museum in its first full year of opening.
‘NO OTHER PLACE in the UK can lay claim to so much aeronautical history,’ was how Sir Peter Masefield, Chairman of the Brooklands Museum Trust summed up the status of the famous site at the ‘launch’of their 1992 season plans.
During its active aviation days, Brooklands witnessed no less than 13,500 individual aircraft first flights of 143 different types, more than anywhere else in Britain.
Sir Peter and the active and enthusiastic staff, led by Morag Barton, Museum Director, are looking forward to celebrating Brooklands' 85th anniversary year in 1992.
An appeal for funds has just raised the first £100,000, enabling the Museum to further improve the facilities offered to the visitors to this already fascinating centre of British aviation and motoring.
Built in 1907 by 2,000 workmen in the space of nine months, Brooklands was funded by Hugh Locke-King (on whose estate it was built), and was the world's first purpose-built motor racing circuit, incorporating a banked track.
One year after Brooklands opened, A V Roe, one of Britain's aviation pioneers arrived on site, other aviators followed, flying schools were set up and Brooklands soon became known for the ‘art of aviating’.
Very soon the aircraft manufacturing companies, Vickers, Bleriot, Martinsyde etc, established works on the site.
Since the Museum was initiated on the site, it is estimated that the volunteers on site have contributed over 40,000 hours of work on the cars, aircraft and buildings on the complex.
The Museum is rich in exhibits, ranging from a classic car collection (most of which are on loan from their owners), to the Sultan of Oman's personal VC–10 airliner, built by Vickers at Brooklands, making its first take-off on October 17, 1964 and flying back to make its last landing there on July 6, 1987.
Apart from the exhibits, work has progressed rapidly on restoring the various buildings to make them usable once again.
Courage Ltd, sponsored the restoration to its full 1930s condition of the Members Club and Bar.
Ronald Gerad generously paid for the reconstruction of the new Visitor Reception area, including the shop, cinema and cafeteria.
Various local companies sponsored the restoration and furnishing of other areas of the 1907 Clubhouse.
Brooklands' aviation heritage has not been forgotten, it forms an integral part of the ‘atmosphere’ at the Museum.
With some 29 aircraft in residence, although not all on display, pride of place goes to the ‘Loch Ness’ Wellington Ia N2980, which is being painstakingly restored.
This aircraft, the world's only surviving operational Wellington, crash-landed into Loch Ness after a sortie on New Year's Eve 1940.
It remained there in its watery grave for 44 years, until it was raised from the Loch and brought to Brooklands in 1985.
Work on restoring the Wimpy to its former self is proceeding well, thanks to its loyal band of workers, many of whom give up a considerable amount of spare time to work on the aircraft.
It looks more than possible that it will be on its wheels next year.
Help from industry has provided a welcome boost to the restoration of R-Robert , with the bomb beam assembly restored by Dan-Air Services at Lasham, the outer wings were rebuilt by Monarch Aircraft Engineering at Luton, the port engine has been put back into original condition by British Airways Engineering at Heathrow and the cockpit canopy frame donated by the RAF Museum and reglazed by British Airways.
Considering that there are only ten full time members of staff on site, wonders have been worked on a number of the aeronautical exhibits.
Currently in the workshops are the former Leisure Sport Vickers Viking replica BAPC.114 which is being restored as ‘G–EBED’, Keith and Ross Smith's back-up aircraft in their proposed round-the-world flight in 1922.
Alongside the Viking is Avro 504K replica BAPC.177, now painted up as ‘G–AACA’ of the Brooklands School of Flying.
There is no doubt that the Brooklands Museum has made great strides in preserving part of Britain's motoring and aviation heritage and to celebrate 85 years of Brooklands an ambitious programme of aviation and motoring events are planned for 1992.
Each weekend during the summer will see an event of some kind taking place at the Museum.
On the aviation side, three or four fly-ins are planned including the Air-Britain British Light Aircraft fly-in and the DH Moth Club plan to hold a meeting of Moths during May.
Details of next year's events programme can be obtained by sending an SAE to:
Just published, in association with the Museum is Robin Holmes' superb book on the entire R-Robert saga.
190pp, hbk, retailing at £16.95 it tells of the crash-landing, the salvage and the restoration — brilliantly.
And it raises money to help the Wellington come back to life — highly recommended.
‘R for Robert’, the Loch Ness Wellington takes shape at Brooklands, fully restored port engine and FN5 front turret in foreground.
Avro 504K ‘G–AACA’ and Vickers Viking ‘G–EBED’replicas share space in the Brooklands workshops.
BOMBING THE UNSEEN ENEMY
It would be wrong to omit the Lincoln from our Year of the Lancaster.
Wayne Wanstall relates the RAAF's seven year campaign in Malaya.
THREE UNARMED British rubber plantation owners were attacked and murdered by a group of Chinese bandits at Sungei Siput, Malaya, on June 16, 1948.
There was already an uneasy atmosphere surrounding the activity of the Chinese-backed Communist insurrection in post-war Malaya, and this incident brought things to a head.
The unprovoked action  sparked off what was to become a national emergency, lasting up to 1960 and involving one of the most hard-fought jungle campaigns of this century.
Great Britain urgently requested military assistance from its Commonwealth partners in order to secure the fragile Malayan State against an impending communist onslaught.
The Malayan Emergency was never officially recognised as a ‘war’ however it embroiled the hard-pressed Commonwealth forces in what was largely an operation of cunning and wit, pursuing a small, elusive army of bandits in some of the most inhospitable terrain in the world.
The Australian Government met the British request by sending the Royal Australian Air Force's Dakota transports of 38 Squadron to Malaya, deploying in May 1950.
A month later the Commonwealth Aircraft Company (CAC) -built Lincoln heavy bombers of 1 Squadron thundered into the Tengah airstrip, at Singapore, commencing combat operations that would last eight hectic years.
Strength of the Squadron remained at eight Lincolns throughout the tour in Malaya and most of the RAAF's Lincoln Mk 30s flew with the unit during the emergency.
No 1 Squadron shared the ramp at Tengah with RAF Lincolns and Canberras.
The Australian bombers carried the brunt of the Commonwealth bombing operations with 85% of total ordnance dropped between 1950 and 1955 and after 1955 constituted the entire heavy bomber mission tally until withdrawal in 1958.
Nos 1 and 38 Squadrons, RAAF, formed 90 (Composite) Wing at Tengah, making joint co-ordination of operations and administration far more practical.
No 1 Squadron was initially commanded by S/L H Williamson, a World War Two veteran, but many of his operational aircrews were relatively inexperienced non-commissioned flyers, not long out of conversion units.
The heavy workload demanded the requirement for familiarisation training to get the Lincoln crews used to operating over the largely featureless Malayan jungle.
On average the crews served a nine to twelve month operational tour, but as the emergency wore on it was not unusual to see operational aircrews flying on combat missions for two, or more, years.
It was the longest operational tour flown by RAAF aircrews but it served as a classroom as it provided a huge fount of experience amongst crews that, in effect, provided a base for future RAAF units operating in South East Asia in the 1960 and 1970s.
Indeed this is proven by the fact that some of the original 1 Squadron crews of 1950 were still flying in 2 Squadron Canberra medium bombers over South Vietnam over a decade later.
(An example of this was the author's uncle, S/L Charles Reif RAAF (Retd), a graduate of 2 Flying Course, the second RAAF post-war aircrew course, who flew as a F/Sgt navigator/bomb-aimer with 1 Squadron in 1950 to 1952.
He was Mentioned in Despatches for his skill as a bomb-aimer, flying on 187 operational missions over the Malayan jungle, and leaving 1 Squadron as a Pilot Officer.
Seventeen years later, then Flight Lieutenant Reif, he flew as one of the first navigators in 2 Squadron Canberras when that unit deployed to South Vietnam in April 1967.
Again Charles Reif spent two years of operational flying in this theatre, amassing an enviable mission record for a RAAF navigator of the immediate post-war period.)
First bombing operation in the Malayan Emergency for 1 Squadron was on July 26, 1950.
At first the operations were dropping bomb loads on known terrorist targets but as the communist bandits employed more elusive tactics the air operations had to be restructured to accommodate the changing nature of the communist operations.
This involved bombing and strafing for harassment rather than direct target destruction.
In the first year of operations, 1 Squadron flew 744 bombing missions which resulted in 3,303 flying hours.
Several Squadron records were established during the Malayan Campaign, such as the delivery of 480,000lbs of bombs in a staggering forty sorties over four days.
Further evidence of the effectiveness of 1 Squadron's operations was a single day in February 1956 when seven of the eight Lincolns  carried out two bombing sorties, dropping 196,000lbs of bombs in the 24 hour period.
Added testimony to the skill of the RAAF deployment was the incredible serviceability rate attained by 1 Squadron's ground crews who kept the Lincolns at 85% during the entire eight year tour.
The total eight year bombing campaign resulted in almost 4,000 sorties flown and 14,732 tons of bombs dropped, by far the highest tonnage of any Commonwealth squadron in Malaya.
Flying bombing missions in Malaya was totally unconventional considering the Lincoln was designed as a main-stream heavy bomber for service with RAF Bomber Command on expected missions over Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union, a similar role to its predecessor, the immortal Lancaster.
The RAAF utilised the Lincoln primarily as a ‘quick reaction’ strike aircraft, tasking sorties after direct request for ground support from combat units, usually attempting to drive the bandits into ambush sites.
By bombing suspected or known terrorist hideouts, the Lincolns deprived the bandits the advantage of establishing well defended bases and the continual air harassment kept the terrorists on the move to the extent that their efficiency and morale suffered considerably.
Although 1 Squadron can only be credited with directly killing 21 communist bandits, the constant bombing and strafing contributed to the destabilisation of the communist terror campaign afforded by the Chinese-backed guerrillas.
The Lincolns destroyed vital food crops and staging areas thus slowly sapping the bandits' will and strength.
Information on suspected terrorist hideouts came form diverse sources.
Some of the information was unreliable and amounted to a considerable wastage in air dropped ordnance and flying hours by launching bombing and strafing missions over ‘dead’ jungle.
Army Intelligence and Police Special Branch informant networks allowed British South East Asia Command (SEAC) to implement effective tactical plans to block and hit communist bandits  transiting through the jungle towards hard civilian and military objectives.
As the Commanding Officer of 1 Squadron was also the Senior Strike Leader at Tengah, he had the task of activating operations as directed by SEAC.
The Lincolns played an integral part in the overall harassment of the communist offensive campaign and were effectively the only permanent heavy bomber unit in Malaya.
Bombing sorties required exceptional skill and technical accuracy on the part of the Lincoln aircrews, particularly the navigation plotters and bomb aimers as most bombing missions required ordnance to be dropped on an exact point as opposed to the more conventional method of ‘carpet’ bombing large areas.
this method was essential as the vast majority of targets had Commonwealth forces bounded on each side, ready to pounce on the bandits as they attempted to flee from the air attacks.
The pin-point bombing also hoped to minimise the damage caused to property, particularly that caused to public and private property, the result of indiscriminate air strikes around rubber plantations, native villages and jungle railroad systems.
The well-dressed Lincoln navigator of the 1950s.
The Author's uncle, F/Sgt Charles Reif — note the pistol.
Lincolns flew with a full bomb load and operated at relatively low levels, sometimes down to 500ft if the weather was unsettled.
The crews performed both day and night operations and would drop the bomb load on night targets with the aid of searchlights used to illuminate targets and provide datum points for navigation onto the bomb run.
The navigator plotter and bomb aimer would independently calculate the course to be flown and times to target and an agreement would be reached as to final course.
The success of any bombing sortie rested on the map reading ability of the bomb aimer who had to pick out relatively insignificant and optically difficult land features to use as navigation datum points.
This was no easy task as the Lincoln would be flying at low level over  a featureless jungle and the bomb aimer had to be quick in identifying each datum point on the route into and out of the target point.
Occasionally the Lincoln crews had the advantage of working with British Austers who acted as Forward Air Control units, relaying information to the Lincolns as they made their way into their bomb runs.
The little Austers removed a significant amount of the in-flight workload imposed on the Lincoln navigators, however the frequent rain squalls that came over the jungle limited their use and as such the heavy bomber crews had to carry out operations with the required precision in dangerously adverse weather conditions.
When the target area was reached, and the bombload dropped, the tail gunner had the task of counting each bomb flash to ensure that all of the bombs had exploded.
This was required as the bandits had a habit of using unexploded ordnance against Commonwealth forces.
Following the bomb drop, the Lincolns would wheel in at low level allowing the air gunners to heavily strafe the target area.
As the communist terrorists lacked any real anti-aircraft defences, 1 Squadron did not lose any aircraft to hostile action whilst on operations.
However three Lincolns suffered accidents whilst operating from Tengah in August 1950, a Lincoln suffered a fire on board during a flight.
A parachute flare got hung-up in the bomb bay causing a fire near the H2S radome.
The captain, F/L K I Foster, saved the aircraft by using evasive manoeuvres to extinguish the fire.
Loss of A73–40 was the result of the aircraft hitting trees on high ground after  cleaning up on take-off.
This accident occurred on February 1, 1951, and ended with the aircraft ditching in the sea of Jahore, the crew, escaping with minimal injuries.
On November 30, 1951, B 30A A73–39 was damaged beyond repair when it overshot the runway at Changi.
This aircraft gave up the crew without any major injuries.
During 1 Squadron's bombing operations in Malaya the unit was awarded six Distinguished Flying Crosses, two bars and one second bar to the DFC, one Distinguished Flying Medal, four British Empire Medals, one Order of the British Empire, and fifteen Mentions in Despatches.
The Squadron also achieved official recognition from the Commander-in-Chief Far East Air Force, Air Marshal the Earl of Brandon, who presented the unit with its Standard.
With the Squadron's withdrawal in July 1958, five Lincolns undertook a 10,000km tour of the major Australian capital cities.
Led by the Commanding Officer, W/C K V Robertson, the aircraft, now sporting the red kangaroo roundel on their fuselages, flew around Australia via Darwin, Perth, Adelaide, Melbourne, Launceston, Hobart, Canberra, Sydney and Brisbane, arriving at RAAF Amberley on July 17.
The aircraft were immediately retired and replaced by Canberra jet bombers.
Retirement of the Mk 30 Lincolns saw the end of the piston-engined heavy bomber in Australian service.
Many aircrew musterings, such as air gunner, became redundant and the entire bombing technique took on a new chapter.
The Malayan Emergency gave the RAAF extensive experience in post-war jungle operations and provided an edge for the crews that flew over South Vietnam in the next decade.
Footnote : The RAAF continued air operations in support of the British Commonwealth forces fighting the Malayan communist insurgency, tasking missions right up to the official ending of the Emergency, in 1960.
No 2 Squadron RAAF flew its Canberras into the reconstructed air base at Butterworth, arriving on July 1, 1958 and in September of that year five Canberra bombers, led by S/L Doug Harvey, hit a terrorist position in Northern Malaya, making the operation Australia's first jet bomber mission.
RAAF Lincoln A73–57 staging through Momote Island en route to deployment with 1 Squadron in Malaya, about 1951.
Most of the RAAF's Lincolns served with the unit during the Malayan Emergency.
View of the nose of a Lincoln at Tengah in 1951.
The prismed bomb aimer's station provided excellent visibility for the pin-point accuracy required.
Bomb tallies are black for day strikes and red (lighter colour) for night attacks.
(All via the Author).
farewell
In October 1956, the RAF bid farewell to the Lancaster.
Stuart Taylor was lucky enough to be on RF325 as it took its last bow.
IT FELL to RAF St Mawgan and to Coastal Command to fly the last-ever operational sortie by the Lancaster.
A small number of Lanc GR.3s had been employed by the School of Maritime Reconnaissance (SMR) alongside the Air-Sea Warfare Development Unit (AASWDU) at St Mawgan.
With two Flights, SMR operated up to twenty Lancasters at one point.
SMR's role was to be  taken over by the Shackleton-equipped Maritime Operational Training Unit at Kinloss and the unit was scheduled to disband in September 1956 with the remaining Lancs being ferried to Wroughton to await their fate.
It was apparent to many people that this phase-out was an occasion that had to be marked.
Two events were planned, a farewell flypast of Coastal Command Stations on October 10 and a final goodbye as the last two SMR Lancs departed to Wroughton on the 15th.
With a take-off at 0815 hours on the 10th, GR 3 RF325 was to spend seven hours airborne as it flew from St Mawgan for flypasts at St Eval, Pembroke Dock, Ballykelly, Aldergrove, Kinloss, Topcliffe and back to ‘Mawgan.
On board were W/C Brooks, F/L Sharples, Sgt Hennessy, F/O Spencer, F/L Burns, Sgt Lerwell and the Author, then SAC Taylor who worked in SMR's Orderly Room.
Built during the Spring of 1945 by Armstrong Whitworth at Coventry as a B.III, RF325 was converted to ASR.3 status before delivery to the RAF.
Operational use came with air sea rescue unit, 279 Squadron, based at Beccles, who also operated a detachment in Burma.
After this, RF325 joined the ASWDU and was coded ‘P9–J’.
ASWDU flew variously out of Thorney Island in Hampshire or Ballykelly, Northern Ireland as needed.
Then came conversion to GR.3 for maritime reconnaissance work, following which came trials by ML Aviation and the Royal Aircraft Establishment before RF325 was reunited with the ASWDU.
SMR was formed at St Mawgan in 1951 with the ASWDU moving into the Cornish base soon afterwards.
RF325 was transferred to SMR, carrying the codes ‘H–D’ and progressing from the white/grey maritime colours to overall dark grey circa 1952.
On October 15, 1956 St Mawgan witnessed a rare assembly of brass with invited notables including Bomber Harris for what must have been an emotional farewell.
SMR's final two Lancs, were to make the fifty minute flight to 15 Maintenance Unit at Wroughton, Wilts.
Each flight to Wroughton was to be shadowed by an Anson from the ASWDU to bring the four aircrew back to ‘Mawgan.
Last of the pair to depart was RF32, taking off at 0900 on October 15, 1956.
Stored at Wroughton, on July 11 the following year, the airframe was struck off charge and joined a large number of Lancs that were pounced upon by scrapmen eager to turn them into saucepans.
RF325 in a somewhat tired white and grey maritime scheme, worn up until 1951/1952.
Note the chute under the rear turret.
End of an era.
Lancaster GR.3 RF325 on the last operational flight for the RAF, St Mawgan-Wroughton, October 15, 1956.
Paying respects to RF325 before the departure to Wroughton, October 15, 1956.
Either side of the Lanc are two SC–54D Rescuemasters of the USAF with a C–47 Skytrain in the background.
(All photos via Stuart Taylor)
‘THE SIXTH WAS LOST’
Helen Attwell tells the moving story of how she discovered what happened to her brother and his crew on their last heroic flight in September 1940.
IN SEPTEMBER 1940, the Battle of Britain was being fought over south east England by the pilots of Fighter Command, but at the same time the crews of Coastal and Bomber Commands were making heroic, but less well-known, attacks on the invasion barges and German naval forces assembled in the ports and harbours across the Channel.
Official Report on the operation by 22 Squadron on September 17, 1940
‘A very gallant and historical operation, the first torpedo attack ever to be carried out at night by the Royal Air Force.
For the purpose of this operation 22 Squadron moved to Thorney Island and it was from there that the attack was launched.
‘Six Beauforts of 22 Squadron operating from Thorney Island attacked shipping in Cherbourg Harbour at 23,00 hours on September 17, 1940.
The aircraft were in two flights of three aircraft.
The leading flight led by S/L Mack, the second led by F/L Francis.
Targets were selected before take-off.
‘The leading aircraft, piloted by S/L Mack, entered the harbour through the western breakwater at 23.00 hrs, at approximately ten feet.
The defences were at that time concerned with 59 Squadron which was bombing the docks.
However what appeared to be a Bofors gun mounted on the fort on the breakwater, manned by three men, observed the aircraft and fired at it but did not obtain sufficient depression.
The tracers were seen bouncing off the other breakwater, which by this time was also firing at the aircraft with similar results.
‘The aircraft then turned into the Harbour, climbed to sixty feet, identified a ship of approximately 5,000 to 8,000 tons and attacked it.
Just after releasing the torpedo five searchlights, two from the breakwaters and three from the Harbour were switched directly onto the aircraft.
During the attack intense fire from the breakwaters and the Harbour was encountered.
Guns were firing from both sides across the Harbour and also from ships.
‘The aircraft turned over the breakwater and was followed out by the same intense gunfire.
The second aircraft made his attack over the breakwater, released his torpedo and saw a hit on destroyer.
A third aircraft attacked a MV, was badly hit and landed with half its elevators and hydraulics shot away.
‘The fourth aircraft dropped outside the Harbour in an attempt to run a torpedo through the breakwater but failed to see the result.
The fifth aircraft returned with its torpedo.
The sixth aircraft was lost.
‘All pilots reported that the opposition was the fiercest they had ever encountered.’
The pilot of that sixth aircraft was my elder brother, Pilot Officer Thomas Atherton.
Even as a small boy, Thomas had been interested in mechanical toys and as he grew up he determined to become an engineer like our father, who was a regular Royal Engineer.
However, when we were living at Gosport, the aircraft from there and Lee-on-Solent, and in particular the excitement of the Schneider Trophy Races, made him decide on the RAF rather than the Royal Engineers.
Having passed the entrance examinations he joined as an Aircraft Apprentice at Halton in August 1928.
In October 1932 he was remustered as Fitter Aircraft Apprentice Engineer/Leading Aircraftman.
By now, having experienced the sensation of flying, he felt that his future was in flying the aircraft rather than servicing them on the ground; in April 1934 he was finally accepted for pilot training.
He qualified in February, 1935 whereupon he was promoted to Sergeant.
While training at Lossiemouth in Scotland he met a young Scots girl, Maisie Hunter, at one of the dances held at the Station — from then on they met regularly.
In March 1935 Thomas was posted to 22 Squadron and Maisie and he became engaged.
However, in November 1935 22 Squadron was sent to Malta, where they remained until the end of August 1936.
During this time Thomas was fortunate in that our elder sister and her husband, a Royal Engineer, were also stationed in Malta.
On his return to England he had hoped that Maisie and he would be able to marry, but on October 1 he was posted to 36 Squadron at Seletar on Singapore Island — and sadly, the plans for a wedding had to be deferred.
Ironically, my father, mother, younger brother and I had recently returned to England from Singapore, at the end of a four-year posting.
In April 1939 Thomas was promoted to Flight Sergeant.
It was while he was still at Seletar that England declared war on Germany on September 3, 1939 and he did not return to England until February, 1940.
At Seletar he had been flying Vildebeest torpedo bombers, and he now underwent a conversion course onto the more modern Beauforts.
On the completion of the course he was granted a commission as a Pilot Officer and rejoined 22 Squadron at North Coates in April, 1940.
On May 11 Maisie and Thomas were married by special licence at Dunfermline.
Thomas had been granted only a weekend pass.
They returned to North Coates where they were to share a rented house with another officer and his wife.
Thomas started operational duties with the Beaufort, initially on mine-laying, but on September 11 he, with four other aircraft, carried out the first torpedo attack to be made by 22 Squadron with Beaufort aircraft.
On September 17 he failed to return from the ‘gallant and historical’ night attack on Cherbourg.
Then followed the long agonising wait.
Month followed month without news — we clung to every shred of hope — was he a prisoner, or perhaps even hidden by the French Resistance?
At last, but not until May 1941, did the much-feared message which we had prayed never to receive, arrive.
The letter from the Air Ministry stated that the International Red Cross had informed them that Thomas's aircraft had crashed at Bourbourg outside Cherbourg, that all four crew were killed and that they were buried in the Tourlaville Communal Cemetery.
Finally, in 1948 my parents received from the Air Ministry a photograph of the grave at Tourlaville, a simple white cross bearing the name ‘P/O T Atherton’.
For many years my husband Brian and I had determined to go to Normandy in order to visit the grave and to find out, if possible, any further information concerning the shooting down of his aircraft over Cherbourg in September 1940, even though it had happened so many years before.
In 1985 we finally were able to arrange the long-awaited visit.
Before leaving we wrote to the Ministry of Defence asking if any further information was available concerning the operation in which my brother lost his life.
Their reply gave us the number of the aircraft which Thomas was flying, Beaufort I L4508, and the names of the other members of his crew.
Using what they had discovered from their visit to Bourbourg and official sources, Helen and Brian Attwell were able to piece together the last moments of Beaufort I L4508.
The map shows the probable course of the aircraft through Cherbourg's Outer Harbour to the impact point.
The letter states that the International Red Cross had reported that the aircraft had crashed at 0030 hours on September 18, 1940 at Tourlaville, and that unhappily all four crew members had been killed.
P/O Atherton and his comrades were buried in Tourlaville Communal Cemetery.
In order to ascertain the exact location of that cemetery we telephoned the Commonwealth War Graves Commission and learned that Thomas and his crew had been moved to the British Military Cemetery at Bayeux.
We had hoped to coincide with the actual anniversary date of that fateful flight, but unfortunately this proved to be impossible, though we were able to travel to France on September 20.
In Bayeux we found a florist and ordered a wreath in the shape of an RAF roundel.
The outer ring was of blue iris, slightly above those in tiers were huge white carnations amongst scattered gypsophilus.
The centre, again rising in the cushion, was the crown — seven huge deep red flowers, resembling large opened daisies.
In the centre of that was the final touch — one deep red rose.
We also ordered some separate red roses.
Then we drove to the Bayeux Military Cemetery which is divided into plots, these are identified by Roman numerals, each plot divided into rows with alphabetical letters, and the graves by numbers in each row.
The position of Thomas's grave was Plot XXIX, Row J, Grave 4.
Beside his grave are those of the other three members of his crew.
We placed the beautiful red, white and blue wreath at the base of the headstone of Thomas's grave, with a ‘Peace’ rose, brought from our garden in England, still in full bloom and with every petal intact, in front.
Also, in memory of each member of Thomas's crew, we knelt and laid one of the five red roses on each grave, including one behind the roundel opposite to the ‘Peace’ rose.
All this time the cemetery was bathed in soft sunlight — there was no wind — all was calm and quiet.
This, perhaps, made us feel that here in this sunlit place serenity bore a deeper meaning, it was the peace for which the thousands lying here had given their lives.
Next we knew, we must take the road which led to Cherbourg, where we hoped to find out more of what had happened on that tragic occasion — and we were soon on our way to the Château de la Brehouse at St Pierre Eglise, where we were to spend the night.
The owner, Christian Brisset told us that there was a journalist in Cherbourg who had written five books on the history of the town during the war — Paul Ingouf — who worked on the local newspaper La Presse de la Manche , was an historian and kept extensive records.
Monsieur Brisset arranged an appointment for us, and later that day Paul Ingouf, in his office, passed to us a typewritten page from the secret daily record that had been kept during the war; listed there we saw:
(Wednesday 18 September 1940.
An English aircraft, no doubt hit by anti-aircraft fire, crashed on a house in the village of Bourbourg (Tourlaville); the house, demolished, caught fire, 7 civilian victims).
This was the first and only news that we had ever had that Thomas's aircraft had crashed in a built-up area, let alone on a house, and that seven French people had been killed.
At the same time he also passed to us a folder containing photographs of the crashed aircraft.
Paul Ingouf informed us that he had telephoned to a retired fireman who had actually attended the crash and who was now on his way to the office to meet us.
Shortly afterwards, this brisk, tubby figure entered and we were introduced to Raymond Truffer, retired Under-officer of the Cherbourg Fire Service.
He told us that as a young man he had joined the Fire Service in which his father was a Lieutenant, and the first fire he had attended was this crash.
His father was on the first fire-engine to arrive and Raymond was on the second.
The first crew removed the bodies of three of the airmen, but Raymond removed the body of the navigator, P/O McFarlane and took from him, his identity papers and personal papers which he concealed from the Germans and later passed to the French Resistance.
Monsieur Truffer confirmed to us that the crew must have died instantly — if they had not already been killed by the anti-aircraft fire.
Paul Ingouf then said that they wished to take us to the spot where the aircraft had crashed.
Monsieur Truffer came in our car and directed us through Cherbourg and up to Bourbourg, which is on a hillside rising behind the east side of the Harbour.
From the photograph of the crash we had seen that the demolished house was on the corner of a small lane, and although the house had been rebuilt, when we arrived at the place the position was easily identified.
Then I remembered that, in the car was the last red rose from Bayeux — I placed it on the rough ground outside the house, and prayed for the family whose happy, safe home it had once been.
We expressed, to the small group now assembled at the innocent French people who had been killed in this tragic disaster, but they all said, very sympathetically —‘C'est la guerre’.
We then said goodbye to the kindly fireman and Paul Ingouf said he would come with us to the Harbour where we were to catch the ferry to Portsmouth.
Over a cup of tea in the departure lounge he asked about the red rose I had placed  by the wall, and so I told him of the red, white and blue wreath at Bayeux, of the other red roses on the graves of the crew, and of the ‘Peace’ rose which we had brought from England.
He seemed very moved by my story and said he intended to write an article about it.
After our return from France we felt that we still did not have the complete story of that operation, and so we went to the Public Records Office at Kew to look up the records of 22 Squadron over that period.
It was here that we found the official report of the operation by 22 Squadron on September 17, 1940, the report with which I had opened this story.
‘A very gallant and historical operation’.
Also a copy of the Operations Record Book RAF Form 541 for that day.
Some days later we received from Paul Ingouf copies of the article about our visit which he had written for the Cherbourg newspaper, together with further photographs and documents.
We had been studying all of the information we had collected in an effort to reconstruct the events of that operation.
To help in this, we asked Paul Ingouf if it would be possible for him to obtain maps and plans of the Harbour, and to mark the spot where the aircraft crashed.
These were kindly supplied.
By now, knowing that Thomas must have pressed home his own attack, we were concerned that the only reference to his part in the operation was the bald statement —‘The sixth aircraft was lost’.
Furthermore there was a time discrepancy between the various reports.
The RAF report stated that the attack was made by two flights, each of three aircraft, at 23.00 hours GMT on September 17.
The French report, via the International Red Cross, stated that the aircraft crashed at 00.30 hours on September 18.
Allowing for the hour's difference between French time and GMT, this meant that Thomas's aircraft was shot down 30 minutes after the main attack.
From these reports and maps, Brian who is a scientist, and was also a pilot, reached the following conclusions as to the actual course of events.
Probable sequence of events
The attack was made by six aircraft of 22 Squadron operating from Thorney Island, at 23.00 hrs GMT.
The first three aircraft had the advantage of surprise and managed to enter the Harbour before encountering the full force of the anti-aircraft fire and searchlights.
They dropped their torpedoes successfully and escaped, although one aircraft suffered damage.
The remaining three aircraft, seeing the intense opposition put up by the Harbour defences and no longer having the advantage of surprise, realised that they had no chance of entering the Harbour without being hit.
One aircraft dropped its torpedo outside the Harbour and attempted to run it through the Harbour entrance, the fifth aircraft, unable to locate its target, returned to base with its torpedo, and the sixth aircraft, piloted by P/O Atherton, must also have turned away and retired seaward.
However, after having reached a position out of range of detection by the Cherbourg defences, P/O Atherton and his crew must have decided to circle and wait until they felt that the defences would have assumed that the attack was over and would therefore have relaxed their alertness.
They then returned to Cherbourg and succeeded in entering the Harbour and dropping the torpedo, but the aircraft was hit and crashed at Bourbourg at 23.30 hrs.
GMT, thirty minutes after the original attack.
The reasons for these assumptions are as follows:
1
The flying time from Thorney Island to Cherbourg was 35 minutes, and the aircraft were to fly in loose formation.
P/O Atherton was a very experienced pilot, with a second pilot as navigator, so one cannot accept that they could be so far off course as to reach the target thirty minutes later, especially as the fires started in the docks by the bombing raid of Blenheims of 59 Squadron could be seen from many miles away.
2
There was no torpedo on board when the aircraft crashed — no unexploded torpedo was found by the French, if the torpedo had exploded there would have been a tremendous explosion and the aircraft would have been totally destroyed.
3
The torpedo must have been dropped in the Harbour — there would have been no other reason for entering the Harbour.
4
The position of the crash was consistent with the aircraft entering the eastern entrance — flying just above sea level — with the intention of turning east after dropping and attempting to escape along the coast at low level.
5
The low level of the aircraft on entering the Harbour and its speed, would have made it impossible for heavy anti-aircraft guns to depress and traverse to follow the aircraft and even difficult for 30mm cannon such as Bofors, even when the aircraft climbed to sixty feet to drop its torpedo.
6
Therefore the aircraft is most likely to have been hit by heavy machine-gun fire, which, unless it hit a vital spot such as fuel tanks or engines, would not cause the immediate destruction of the aircraft, but could kill or disable the pilot.
This is most likely what actually happened, as the aircraft appears to have continued on a straight course into the rising ground behind the Harbour.
There would have been no time for another member of the crew to try to take over the controls.
In the end the planned German invasion,Sea Lion , was abandoned — due to the defeat of the Luftwaffe by Fighter Command — but before this outcome was evident, crews like those of Beaufort L4508 had also made heroic, but little-known, ultimate sacrifices to try to prevent the invasion.
Two views of the crash site.
Seven civilians perished as well as the crew.
The Author with the roundel wreath and ‘Peace’ rose at her brother's grave.
(All photos via Author)
FlyPost
Letters from readers are always welcome.
Letter published in FlyPost will receive a newly-launched hardback book.
Readers requiring a reply should enclose a stamped addressed envelope or an international reply coupon.
Airfields — an endangered species…
UNDERSTANDABLY there has been much wailing and gnashing of teeth over the demise of West Malling (West Malling Lament , October issue,et al ) but I am amazed that the people most affected by its loss made no attempt to save it from destruction.
Over more than ten years there have been negotiations between Kent County Council (which originally intended to retain West Malling as a general aviation aerodrome) and the local planning authority that intended to build all over it.
During this time there were many opportunities for intervention by interested parties.
In March of this year a Public Inquiry was held to enable the site's future to be determined.
Speakers from only two organisations gave evidence to support the airfield's retention for flying: these were the Save West Malling Airfield Action Group (SWAG) and the Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association (AOPA).
There were no representations from Metair (who by then were making arrangement to remove to Biggin Hill), from the Ministry of Defence (which had no alternative site for the country's largest cadet gliding school) or from anyone representing warbird interests.
The other aviation associations, too, were missing.
I have said before — and I say again — that unless the organisations and individuals concerned are prepared to stand up to resist the aggression of developers, we will lose many, many more aerodromes.
Within the past 2½ years, AOPA has been involved — often alone — in dealing with problems (total closures, operating constraints or unsuccessful opening or reopening attempts) at no fewer than 54 aerodromes in the UK.
By the time this letter is published, that figure will have grown.
The aerodrome crisis is the most serious situation facing all of us in aviation, whether operators, pilots or spectators; but with no Government policy and a Civil Aviation Authority whose officers are not allowed to offer support, the futures of our airfields must be fought by the people who are most affected.
Among those must be many FlyPast readers.
It is possible to win.
The small private aerodrome at Castle Mill, near Bedford, was threatened with closure as a badly planned trunk road would decimate it.
However, the owner, with help from other bodies, including AOPA, fought the case at the resulting Public Inquiry and the Inspector recommended strongly that the airfield should remain open.
In the decision letter, the Secretary of State endorsed this by saying that the Department of Transport must re-design the offending section of road to enable flying to continue.
The Department's objection, on the grounds that this would delay the road's completion by two years, was over-ruled; the resulting hold-up is self-inflicted as the DoT gave too little thought to the damaging effects of the original scheme.
So objectionable proposals are worth fighting!
…at home and abroad
IT WAS with considerable sadness that I recently heard that Grimbergen Airfield, near Brussels, is threatened with closure.
Grimbergen to Brussels is like White Waltham is to London, and I have very close connections with both.
In August, 1944 I was flying Mustangs from Grimbergen, through to the Arnhem campaign, and my memories are that we were the first RAF Squadron to be based near Brussels, and only a matter of a few days after our armies had liberated that City.
Our welcome by the Belgian people was enormous and quite unforgettable.
Some 36 years later I was invited to become Patron of Vliegclub Grimbergen, which honour I took very seriously and when my Belgian friends told me of the threatened closure of this, one of the busiest of Belgium's general aviation airfields, I could see no obvious reason for closure, other than what only seemed to me to be political bias.
Compare Grimbergen's advantages to Brussels with White Waltham's advantages to London.
Again I was personally involved because I was one of White Waltham's Commanding Officers during the last few years of my Service career.
White Waltham is very close to the built-up area of the town of Maidenhead and its convenience to business people with private aircraft attending meetings in London is invaluable.
If Grimbergen is closed, and developed as a residential area, or even worse, if factories are built there, the loss of a convenient airfield to attract business and executive aircraft will be far reaching to the ‘hub of Europe’, ie Brussels.
Furthermore if Grimbergen is closed, where do the present 150 plus light aircraft presently based there go?
There is no suitable airfield near enough.
If there are complaints about aircraft noise,(who can complain about the gentle purring of light aircraft engines?) perhaps the complainers should consider the noise made by industrial development and the increased heavy traffic associated with such development.
Even after the factories have been built, the heavy vehicles will continue to serve the industrial activities there.
I hope that Belgian Ministers involved in the fate of this airfield will read this and consider seriously the disadvantages of closure of Grimbergen, and they should also bear in mind the forthcoming elections!
Chadwick comes ‘home’
IN CASE any of your readers were left with the impression that most of the Chadwick Collection had disappeared into an anonymous private collector's hands , we would like to reassure them that fortunately this was not the case.
This Museum, with the help of the Museums and Galleries Commission/Science Museum Grant Fund, was able to purchase most of this collection and thus help it in the public domain.
As regards the items we failed to acquire, we hope the current owners will consider the Museum if and when they decide to sell.
The Chadwick Collection is an important addition to the collections held by the Museum's Library and Records Centre and concerning the aviation industry in the North West.
The Library and Records Centre is open to the public between 1.00pm–4.00pm on Tuesdays and Thursdays, and by appointment at other times .
Catch the Express
Our October issue reported the possibility of a DH.86 Express coming ‘back’ to life.
J Osborn of Bolton has supplied this shot of G–ACZP in happier days, pleasure flying from Blackpool in the early 1950s.
This is the aircraft that might be resurrected.
WHITE-OUT
Without wishing to make any predictions, we present a portfolio of RAF Bentley Priory's gate guardians caught by Bill Taylor in last winter's snow!
Above: Hurricane replica ‘BN230’ in the markings of 43 Squadron, outside the Headquarters of 11 Group, Strike Command, nestled within Stanmore in Greater London.
It shares its duties with Spitfire replica ‘K9926’.
Below: Keeping a grip on reality is Lightning F.1A XM173 in the striking colours of 56 Squadron.
First flown in November 1960, it served the unit from January 1961.
finals
PROJECT Help!
LINE
NORFOLK-BASED Classic Warbirds are undertaking a long-term airworthy Hawker Typhoon restoration.
The project is based on some unidentified former scrapyard sections of airframe.
Classic Warbirds would like to appeal to anyone who has, or knows of, any Typhoon or Tempest components and Napier Sabre engine parts to contact them.
Unboxed Typhoon components are marked G5, boxed Typhoon parts 26BX, 26ER for Tempest and 36M for Napier Sabre parts.
Manuals and manufacturers drawings are also required, particularly those referring to the wings.
If you can help out in any way, or would like to know more about the project, please contact   .
SOMEONE, SOMEWHERE, must need a helping hand! someone engaged in rebuilding of an aircraft must need skilled help.
As an aircraft technician (A+E) with the REME I have become increasingly bored with civilian life.
I have a very extensive tool kit and am employed in the motorcycle industry and desperately need the challenge of something more worthwhile and reasonably long term.
Forgive the trumpet-blowing but I am good, very good!
I am not looking for money, just a deep involvement and I must be worth a telephone call.
Please contact   .
39 RESTORATION GROUP are looking for a volunteer, local to the North Weald airfield area, to help them to organise their newsletters and membership details.
Preferably an ex 39 Squadron member or any ex-RAF personnel who might feel able to dedicate some time to assisting the Group's efforts at North Weald.
The above ‘spare time’ could also include re-activating the full 39 Squadron Association Membership.
1933 FORDSON TRACTOR.
Recently purchased for vintage vehicle collection.
It was originally used by the RAF and sold for civil use in 1938.
Interested in finding out what colour scheme would the RAF have used for the vehicle, ie size, position and colour of any lettering on the bodywork, size and position of roundels would also be useful to know.
The tractor is not the usual farm type, but the twin-rear wheeled and small front wheeled industrial type.
Grateful for any information to enable an accurate restoration to be accomplished.
HP VICTOR ASSOCIATION.
Over the years the Victor has not had the glamour or attention that has been bestowed on the Vulcan so I am seriously considering starting a Handley Page Victor Association.
I would welcome contact from any Victor enthusiasts or ex-members of 57 Squadron who think that this is a viable proposition, and who would be interested in embarking on this project with me.
TRYING TO TRACE the following aircraft in any condition with a view to restoring them to a minimum of static condition:.
Would appreciate any leads as to the availability of these aircraft.
WANTED: ENGINES AND PARTS.
No 6 RCAF GROUP HQ MUSEUM, seek info, photos, maps, memorabilia, etc to help enlarge the ‘living museum’ at the Group's wartime (and only) HQ in Castle Dismal .
Anyone living locally who wishes to become involved with any of the current projects will be warmly welcomed.
Projects include: expanding the Museum to make it a live wartime HQ with ‘operational briefings’ being given to visitors; Bomb aimer's simulator; air gunner's simulator; intelligence room; crash recovery room; building a memorial garden which will be dedicated to Canada; refurbishing and fitting-out the Great North Road's most famous landmark, the Grand Old Duke of York's ‘Temple’, as a memorial chapel to those who died serving in 6 Group.
BOMBER AIRFIELD SOCIETY is dedicated to recreating a World War Two bomber station exactly as it was, complete with aircraft.
If you are interested and would like to help or know more about the Society then please write to  
RESTORERS of unique Percival Q6 G–AFFD (see FlyPast January 1989) are nearing the completion of their rebuilt to flying condition.
They need assistance with the flap mechanism and really need to inspect a Percival Proctor, ideally a dismantled one, to examine the cranks.
Alternatively, the loan of a Proctor flap crank would enable Q6-sized versions to be fabricated.
Help put a unique twin back in the air — any leads contact the FlyPast office.
TAILPIECE
It's that time of the year again.
Time to let the readers loose on the FESTIVE CAPTION CONTEST.
We will be giving away FIVE of our legendary FlyPast Goodie-Bags containing new books, a video, FlyPast stocking-fillers, all wrapped in a crowning glory — the memorably FlyPast shopping bag (all-in-all retail value at least £50 each Goodie-Bag).
For this, work out what A and B are saying in John Wegg's photo and put the answer on a postcard with your name and address.
Postcards only to 