

NEWS…
In the wake of Andrew
HURRICANE ANDREW ripped through southern Florida and caused havoc during late August.
Aircraft in the area suffered considerably, with reports of the Weeks Air Museum (WAM) being heavily damaged or possibly destroyed.
Communications with Tamiami Airport and with WAM were not re-established as FlyPast went to press, but Susy Q , the WAM B–17, is thought to have been blown over on top of the A–26 Invader and/or B–23 Dragon that were also stored outside the WAM hangar.
The WAM hangar is reported to have been demolished, with no details to hand of the state of the aircraft inside.
Kermit Weeks' storage and restoration complex nearby has also supposedly been hit by the hurricane, with the prospect of more aircraft being damaged.
Hundreds of privately owned aircraft at Tamiami Airport were blown over and on top of each other, a parked DC–6 disappeared completely and was found over a mile away from its tie-down point on the Airport.
Miami International Airport and Homestead Air Force base were also hit, the latter may possibly close due to the severity of the damage.
It is hoped that the situation will become clear by the next issue when a full report can be made.
Lightning incident
DUXFORD-BASED P–38J Lightning NX3145X operated by The Fighter Collection, came to grief at Lydd Airport, Kent, on Sunday September 6.
Due to participate in the Shepway Airshow, held on the seafront at Folkestone, the P–38 is reported to have belly-landed at Lydd, blocking the main runway for a time, until the aircraft was lifted up, the undercarriage released, and it was towed into a hangar for the night.
Pilot Stephen Grey was unhurt apart from a minor neck injury which hospitalised him for a short period.
Major area of the damage to the aircraft was centred around the propellers and undersides of the aircraft.
F3Fs now, Me 262s to come!
INSIDE A TEXAN hangar no less than four new-build Grumman F3F–3 biplane fighters are under construction for museums and owners in the USA.
These aircraft, one two-seat G–32A and three single-seat F3F–3 variants are being built to original Grumman blueprints, and will be fully airworthy when completed.
The builder concerned has recently signed a contract to construct six Messerschmitt Me 262s!
Again using original factory drawings, all six will be completed within the next three years, two of which have been commissioned from the UK and Europe.
Like the Grumman biplanes, all the 262s will be built to airworthy standards and the only deviation from the original plans will be their General Electric J–85 engines, which will fit into the engine cowlings without altering their contours.
All of the single seat 262s will have the option of a ‘quick change’ rear fuselage decking, allowing a second seat to be used for pilot conversion.
Two of the six Grumman F3F–3 biplane fighters under construction in Texas.
Swordfish Flies
AFTER A LONG restoration programme, Bob Spence's Fairey Swordfish II HS554/C–GEVS took to the air on August 17, completing four test flights within five days.
The aircraft was granted its Certificate of Airworthiness on August 21.
Bob acquired the Blackburn-built Swordfish in September 1970 and has spent the last 22 years painstakingly rebuilding the aircraft.
Finished in the temperate sea paint scheme similar to the Royal Navy Historic Flight's LS326, Bob's aircraft now becomes the second airworthy Swordfish in the world.
(Full report in the next issue).
MORE NEWS…on page 55
NORSEMANIA!
Before the Norseman, Red Lake was an isolated mining community.
During July, the entire area paid lasting tribute to an aircraft that helped open up not just this town, but hundreds like it all over Canada.
Robert Rudhall
BEARSKIN AIRLINES are one of the operators that fly into Red Lake airport.
It is not much more than a landing strip  hacked out of the Canadian wilderness in eastern Ontario, about 200 miles north east of Winnipeg.
The view from the Beech 99 explained everything about the area and its needs — vast numbers of small lakes set in an almost tundra-like expanse of scrub and woodland.
Up until 1950, when the first road was built into the town, the area depended on air transport for the main services into and out of the township.
Paramount in these operations was the Noorduyn Norseman.
Equipped with floats, these dependable aircraft proved to be the lifeblood of the community.
The engineering capability and traffic demands meant that an airfield was many years off — the float-equipped ‘bush’ aircraft was to have many years of sovereignty in Ontario.
With a population of 7,000, the area's economy is based on mining, forestry and tourism.
Red Lake and its sister township of Golden is well noted for its goldmining potential.
Located in one of the richest greenstone belts in the world, companies from all over the globe are continually looking for, and finding, previous metals in the area.
Above: Taken from a locally-based Jet Ranger, this photograph shows just six of the 11 airworthy Norseman aircraft that gathered at Red Lake to participate in Red Lake's Norseman Celebration weekend on July 25/26.
This shot shows a mixture of Mk's IV, V and VI Norseman, utilising two and three blade propellers.
Left: Sitting on its purpose-built ‘wishbone pedestal’, UC–64A Norseman CF–DRD, presides above Norseman Park in the centre of Red Lake, Ontario.
For 20 years ‘DRD was a familiar sight operating on and off the water in Howey Bay, Red Lake.
There is a deep aviation history in the Red Lake area, Romeo Vachon is credited with the first flight into Red Lake in 1924, when he checked out a fire for Ontario Provincial Air Service.
Two years and a historical event passed before Jack Elliot and Harold Farrington made the first commercial flights in Curtiss Jennies, on March 3, 1926.
On July 25, 1925, close to the shores of Red Lake, south east of Howey Bay, Lorne and Ray Howey and their partners discovered gold.
This discovery precipitated the Red Lake Gold Rush, and their find became the Howey Gold Mine, the first in the Red Lake district, resulting in Burnt Bay being renamed as Howey Bay, the name that it retains to this day.
In 1936 as a result of the growing need to supply the every increasing numbers of mines in the area, Howey Bay became known as the busiest ‘airport’ in the world.
Whilst air transport and travel was still in its infancy, Howey Bay averaged more than 100 flights per day, being made by floatplanes in the summer and ski-equipped aircraft in the winter.
It was during these years that the new Canadian designed Noorduyn Norseman began its long association with Red Lake.
It joined the various Curtiss Robins, de Havilland Moths, Fairchilds, Bellancas, Fokker Super Universals and Lockheed Electras, which all were engaged in opening-up the countryside.
The area is still very floatplane oriented, indeed Red Lake is known as the Norseman Capital of the World .
Among many other floatplane types, Beech 18s, Beavers, Otters, Cessnas etc that operate from Red Lake, the Norseman still plays a vital role.
Now the town has a permanent shrine to the Norseman, in the shape of CF–DRD, which served the community faithfully for 20 years before being mothballed in 1984.
Built at the Noorduyn factory in Carterville/Montreal, Quebec, in 1945 (c/n 831), it saw service with the USAAF in the United States as a UC–64A, 44–41747, until being sold to a civilian buyer on August 20, 1946.
In 1953 ‘DRD was purchased by Ontario Central Airlines (OCA) and returned to Canada to fulfil its designer's original purpose — serving the remote settlements and pioneer developers of Canada's rugged and beautiful North.
For 20 of the next 30 years OCA and Wings Aviation Limited flew ‘DRD out of Red Lake, using floats for the summer and Noorduyn-designed streamlined skis during the winter.
The aircraft performed well and, in the main, its life was uneventful, although not so on one trip however.
One flight with a party of American fishermen on board, ‘DRD blew one of its cylinders and the aircraft was put down very quickly onto a small lake, in a decidedly unserviceable condition.
The lake was acceptable for emergency landing, but not for take-off.
The fishermen were lifted out two at a time by a DHC Beaver floatplane and ‘DRD was repaired.
Positioned at the far end of  the lake was a clump of trees in direct line to the aircraft's take-off path.
These offending trees were cut down and, to ensure that the Norseman would succeed in its take-off run from this short expanse of water, the rear of the Norseman was tied to a tree, the aircraft revved-up, the rope cut and ‘DRD shot off down the lake and lifted-off with no problems whatsoever.
From then on the lake has been known as DRD Lake!
Making a low fly-by and overshoot, Norseman V CF–BSB along with C–FJIN operates with Red Lake Airways Ltd, and was one of 11 Norsemen t take to the air during the opening of Norseman Park on July 25 at Red Lake.
CF–DRD was retired from service in 1984, but this was not to be the end of this particular Norseman's fame.
Locally, people began to talk about some form of recognition for the aircraft and how the town could help its tourist industry into the bargain.
Local floatplane pilot Hugh Carlson, almost as a joke, came up with the idea of ‘Why don't we put one up on a pole?’
From this joke the seed began to germinate and the whole idea of Norseman Park was formed with CF–DRD as the centre-piece of the whole complex.
In 1991 the Norseman was purchased by the Township of Red Lake with the aim of restoring it and mounting it on ‘the pole’.
From December 1991 to June 1992 work was carried out on ‘DRD by Red Lake Seaplane Service along with local volunteers, who together logged a total of over 1,700 man hours of restorative work on the veteran floatplane.
During this process it was suggested that a dummy engine be installed to save time and weight, but this idea was rejected on the grounds that the idea was for the Norseman to be as live an aircraft as it could be, and for it to taxi from the hangar in which is was being restored, across Howey Bay, to its position on the shoreline, adjacent to where it would be mounted on the pole.
The pole itself turned out to be something much more substantial.
A large ‘wishbone pedestal’ was created locally which incorporated 8,400lbs of half inch steel plate and 500lbs of welding rods.
Floats were fitted to the Norseman on June 25 with the aircraft  taxi-ing across the bay on June 28.
With the aid of a crane ‘DRD was mounted on the pedestal on July 7 and took-up its new job as a permanent monument to the Norseman.
Bob Noorduyn stands proudly in front of the recently restored UC–46A Norseman CF–DRD, on the day of the official opening of Norseman Park in the township of Red Lake, Ontario.
Bob, son of the designer of the Norseman, worked with his father one summer flight testing Norseman aircraft, for which he was paid 40 cents an hour, later rising to 52 cents an hour!
In order to focus the attention on the official opening of Norseman Park, a unique set of events took place at Red Lake over the weekend of July 25/26/ Organisers involved the whole township in myriad different functions, ranging from a fly-in pancake breakfast, Norseman loading competitions (using the fuselage hulk of CF–GBI), float pumping contests, pilots discussions and lectures, to a street fair, in which the whole of the main street in Red Lake was closed to traffic, marquees were erected, street bands played, food and drink was consumed and a carnival atmosphere was enjoyed by all.
Seen here almost on the point of touch down during the Norseman Celebration weekend at Howey Bay, Beech 3NM Expeditor C–GEHX is operated into Red Lake frequently by Minto Airways of Edmonton, Alberta.
Central to these events were invitations to a number of Norseman operators and owners to bring their aircraft to Red Lake for the weekend and join in with the festivities.
Ron Robinson took charge of this element and the gathering that was achieved might have caused him more than a few ulcers, but he had to admit was more than worth the effort!
Main aviation interest centres, of course, around a pristine-looking CF–DRD perched upon her wishbone pedestal, and at 4pm on Saturday July 25, Norseman Park was officially opened and dedicated by Bob Noorduyn, son of the designer of the Norseman.
Bob, now retired, commented that his father would have been justly aloft as the focal point of the town, to remind all visitors of the great contribution made by this aircraft type to Canadian history.
Drawing the assembled crowds’ attention to the Norseman's pedigree, Bob pointed out that it is thought to have been the first aircraft to land on the Normandy beaches during D-Day, the American fighter ace Screwball Beurling was killed in Italy whilst ferrying a Norseman to the Israelis and of course there is the legend that has built up surrounding the mysterious disappearance of bandleader Major Glenn Miller in December 1944, after taking-off in a Norseman from Twinwoods airfield, near Bedford, England, bound for Paris, never to be seen again.
(See the Editorial .)
track down the histories and fate of the 903 Norseman aircraft built, in order to compile a complete history of the type and its service.
Shortly after the official opening ceremony a collection of no less than 11 Norseman floatplanes that had gathered at Red Lake, started-up, taxied around Howey Bay, took-off (a tremendous effect as the sound of 11 Pratt and Whitney R–134s revving at full power reverberated around the bay) and performed a series of fly-bys and overshoots over the bay in salute of CF–DRD and the weekend events.
These Norseman had flown into Red Lake from all over northern Canada, one (N45TG) even making the trek up from Minnesota in the USA.
Eight of the 11 aircraft present during the celebration weekend still worked for their living.
One of these aircraft was unique in that it was fitted with metallised wings and fuselage, making it the only metal Norseman in the world.
C–FOBE, presently operated by Green Airways out of Red Lake, flies with the metal wings of C–FUDD, which once frequented Red Lake, but now flies fitted with standard Norseman wings with Coyote Air Service, based at Fox Point Bay, up in the Yukon territories.
Norseman attendance consisted of Mk IV: CF–DTL; Mk Vs: C–FBHZ, CF–BSB, C–FJIN, N45TG; Mk VIs: CF–GLI, CF–IGX, C–FJEC, C–FOBE; UC–64A: C–FLZO; all of which participated in the afternoon's fly-by procession.
After many doubts as to whether the event would go as planned, or if a significant number of aircraft would turn-up, the celebrations held over the weekend went off without a hitch and the whole town was enveloped in Norseman fever or Norsemania , as the local press called it.
It was a worthy tribute to the aircraft, the man who designed it, the pilots who flew it and the people who continue to operate and maintain them.
(Red Lake hopes to stage similar events in the future and Norseman Park and the town itself are well worth a visit anyway.
The scenery surrounding the town is stunning, fishing is abundant and there are two local charter concerns who can help you get airborne.
Green Airways — feature on them coming up — and Red Lake Airways, both of whom operate Norsemen.
There are scheduled services in  and out of Red Lake Airport from a variety of points, more details from  .
Tel (from the UK) or Fax .)
SCARLET SQUADRON
Concluding the three-part feature on Spencer Flack and his aircraft, with a look at the classic warbirds he has owned, the Mustang, Spitfire and the troublesome Sea Furies.
After the biplane era, Spencer Flack's ‘toy department’ was now ready to move on to serious play.
Spencer has always longed to have a Spitfire and one day Mike Searle, presumably having recovered from the shock of the Jungmann episode (see the September issue, page 25), pointed out an advertisement in which some Spitfires were for sale at Strathallan in Scotland.
They landed the King Air at Sir William Robert's strip there and found a couple of former Irish Air Corps two-seaters and one former Belgian Air Force Mk XIV all in a million bits.
(This being SG108, RAF serial NH904.)
The Mk XIV, was the most convincing-looking with a fuselage, windscreen and engine intact.
Its wings were in a barn in Sussex.
Spencer naturally didn't want a training aircraft so they came away having bought the Mk XIV, this was January 1979.
Later, with the fuselage loaded on a lorry and at least one-and-a-half of everything else they could find in spares, they started to assess the rebuild.
Unfortunately appearances has been misleading and heavy filling was found as they started to take it to bits.
Once the wings has been retrieved, serious work began in the ‘garden shed’ in Shenley, Herts.
It is not everyone who can boast a Spitfire rebuild at the end of the cabbage patch, but with Spencer masterminding and a couple of chaps from the King Air days — two years later the contents of 35 cardboard boxes in pristine Spitfire formation bearing Spencer's distinctive red livery, graced the skies.
Ray Hanna too G–FIRE up for its first test flight on March 14, 1981, in primer.
All went well but for a small hitch.
When it was Spencer's turn he found that although he had quite a few hours in his ‘Fury, the Spit was a harder aeroplane to fly.
The visibility was not nearly as good and although the aeroplane was lighter, it was nose heavy, the controls were heavier and the under carriage was narrower.
All-in-all entirely new challenge.
Above: Spencer with his trusty air racing Baron at Abbeville in late June.
G–FLAK has been sold and another Baron is on line to replace it.
Left: G–FURY in all her glory.
(via Spencer Flack)
The problem was that every time they took it over 250 mph the left wing became so heavy that it needed two hands to hold it up.
subsequently after about ten flights, and porting over the books, and speaking to people who serviced them during the war years, they discovered that all it needed was a well-placed whack with a hammer on the trailing edge of the aileron.
So that sorted that out.
In the meantime they had lost a Sea Fury.
This was former Royal Canadian Navy FB.11 G–AGHB, bought originally from Ormond Haydon-Baillie after an engine failure at Osnabruck.
Spencer just happened to have in his bottom drawer, as it were, a spare Centaurus engine.
With the intrepid Mike Searle, they journeyed to and from Osnabruck each day to change the engine.
Work complete, Mike Searle was destined to fly the Sea Fury home with Spencer in the King Air.
But on  the trial flight (June 24, 1979), the aeroplane ran out of fuel and Mike didn't make it back to the runway.
The only terminal casualty of this extraordinary occurrence, apart from the aeroplane, was a hare which it struck on landing.
Mike, though he not have thought it at the time, was extremely lucky, as the aircraft hit the ground the fuselage broke open, his helmet came off, became lodged in the opening and was then crushed as the fuselage closed again.
He did hurt his back and lost a fair chuck of elbow on the side instruments which kept him in hospital in the UK for a couple of weeks.
But as Spencer observes wryly, he was lucky there wasn't a fire, though that was hardly possible without fuel….
That was the end of that Sea Fury.
Ray Hanna takes G–FIRE up for the first time, Elstree, March 14, 1981. (via Spencer Flack)
In the meantime the first of the warbird collection was two-seater Fury T.20S G–BCOW which had been bought from Doug Arnold at Blackbushe in 1976 and had previously been used in West Germany on contract to the Luftwaffe as a target tug.
Spencer managed to persuade Tony Bianchi to let him have an hour-and-a-half in a Harvard, by way of working up to his most impressive taildragger to date…
‘It didn't seem that difficult at the time,’ Spencer recalls.
But he did discover that ‘if you pull the stick back too far, too fast, it will stall and flick, and you need quick responses to recover, without losing height.’
So with this experience well absorbed he came back to Elstree and his ‘Fury.
Neil Williams (see the September issue) was flying it for him and, the initial tests complete and the aeroplane signed off by Mike Searle, Spencer was ready for his first sortie.
(Tragically, Neil Williams was killed while ferrying CASA 2–111B G–BFFS from Spain to the UK, it crashed into the Pyrenees mountains on December 11, 1977.)
Being familiar with Elstree, Spencer elected to fly Oscar Whiskey from there, and taking-off was not a major problem, despite the length of the runway.
He flew to Hatfield and touched-down successfully balancing the elevator against the very powerful airbrakes, as previously used on aircraft carriers.
Elstree now mastered in the ‘Fury, he went from strength to strength until one day he took-off, put the wheels up and the lights wouldn't go out.
He recycled the wheels a few times but still the lights remained on.
Air traffic confirmed the glad news that one was hanging down.
By this time he could smell the hydraulic fluid.
Mike Seale raced up to the tower with the manual and read out the emergency procedures.
In theory you pull a handle with operates an air bottle which blows the wheels down.
That was the theory, in reality all it did was blow the rest of the hydraulic fluid out.
Spencer by now wasn't very pleased, Elstree weren't very thrilled about him landing back on the runway either, and with the hydraulic fluid gone, there were no flaps either.
but with plenty of fuel on board they tried various other methods.
The book says if you keep yawing the aircraft from side to side the wheel may release.
After half-an-hour of this eventually the other wheel dropped into place.
But there were still no flaps.
Sea Fury FB.11 WJ288 with 776 Fleet Requirements Unit, Hurn, 1966.
This aircraft became G–FURY.
(MAP)
With his usual understatement, he remembers: ‘Elstree with flaps was exciting, but Elstree without flaps was — even more exciting!’
So he decided to add another fifteen knots to the approach speed and give it a go.
He managed to touch-down at the threshold and put the brakes on.
There is still a skid mark from one end of the runway to where the ‘Fury left it at the other end.
Halfway down he knew it wasn't going to stop so he switched everything off, kept the brakes on to the end, and as it hit the grass he let the brakes off.
it came to rest in the soft ground 100 yards on.
And says Spencer, that was the end of that one.
(It was sold in the USA during 1980 and is now N281L.)
Then there was the ‘Fury that Spencer shall never forget.
Sunday August 2, 1981.
‘That was an exciting day,’ he muses.
This was former Fleet Air Arm FB.11 WJ244 once with the Historic Aircraft Museum at Southend, but never restored.
The Flack team restored her to pristine condition as G–FURY, and she made her first flight at Elstree in June 1980.
The ‘Fury and the Spitfire has been to an airshow the previous day at Yeovilton, they had then flown to Humberside for another airshow and were on their way home.
The fee for performing at Yeovilton was not high but they did offer free fuel.
The ‘Fury, fully loaded with drop tanks, can take away 150 gallons under each wing in addition to the main tanks which makes the aeroplane very heavy.
Spencer remembers it was a beautiful day but quite hazy.
During the tight formation take-off his eyes were on Stefan and the Spitfire as they climbed to get on top of the haze.
The ‘Fury needing only half throttle to keep up with the Spitfire as they climbed to get on top of the haze.
The ‘Fury needing only half throttle to keep up with the Spitfire.
The top of the haze layer came at about 7,000 ‘ft ‘.
By this time they were several miles from Humberside and, the climb completed, they loosened the formation and Spencer scanner the cockpit.
He noticed to his alarm that the oil temperature gauge was twice its normal reading.
His immediate reaction was that there was an oil leak.
He called Stefan on the radio, who had a look round on the underside of the ‘Fury and could see nothing wrong.
The temperature remained high so Spencer called Humberside and asked for a QDM (bearing to effect a return).
They weren't able to give him this so he took up a reciprocal heading and dropped down to 2,000 ‘ft ‘and eventually found Humberside — all the time trying to figure out what had gone wrong.
As he cruised around to land the oil temperature resumed a normal reading.
After a couple of minutes of this he decided to go back to Elstree.
They climbed back on top of the haze again and started to relax.
Everything seemed OK.
However, after 15 minutes or so the oil temperature had doubled again.
Humberside was now too far away, RAF Waddington, according to the map, was approximately 10 miles away.
Although the haze had restricted visibility forward Spencer recalls that he could see down quite well and everything seemed to be going smoothly for a controlled emergency landing.
He closed the throttle for a descent into Waddington.
But as he put the wheels down the engine signed off.
He saw then he wasn't going to make the runway, so the Stefan on the wingtip following him down he put the wheels back up again.
By that time the prop had stopped turning/.
One wheel wouldn't retract, although he wasn't aware of it at the time, and the next thing he knew he was near the ground.
Despite pulling the elevator back and the aeroplane changing attitude, it carried on, sinking fast.
He woke up to the nauseating smell of burning skin  and a roaring sound.
he opened his eyes and was confronted by a sheet of flame, so he closed them again and tried to undo his harness.
Years of flying so many different aeroplanes with different cockpits and harnesses can make escape very difficult.
In the meantime, he was busy talking to Stefan on the radio, at least that's what he thought he was doing.
Naturally the radio didn't work as the aeroplane was in several pieces.
Many people confronted with a crash have done the same thing.
You need a link with the world as you realise subconsciously that yours may be frail.
No answer, then Spencer passed out for a few seconds, only to wake to the pungent smell of burning and the sharp realisation that he must now get out of the thing.
He found the harness release, unlocked it and remembers falling until his head hit the canopy.
Intent now on a sharpish exit he banged with his helmet on the canopy until he had made a hole big enough to climb through.
There was no pain in any of that at all he recalls and no fear.
Everything was apparently under control until the last few seconds of flight and he was  so busy trying to sort it out that fear had no time to grow.
As he crawled away from the burning wreckage he thought he was surrounded by trees.
In fact it was a potato field with two foot deep furrows and tall healthy plants on the tops.
Seen from the air this looked like a good green field to land in.
When he stood up he could just see a fire engine as if on the high seas diving and heaving towards him.
The driver couldn't find him at first as only the top of his helmet was visible.
Spencer waved vigorously to avert a second major accident and was eventually spotted and taken on board.
In the meantime, the aeroplane was burning enthusiastically in various parts of the field, when suddenly there was an almighty bang and one of the tanks separated itself from whatever it was attached to and flew through the air to land at Spencer's feet.
The ultimate parting shot from an ungrateful aircraft that had enjoyed every care and attention.
If he's had more time between the engine signing off and the aircraft hitting the ground, he could probably have dumped the drop tanks and jettisoned the canopy.
But from the time the engine stopped he had five or six seconds to hit the ground.
Even a small amount of power from that engine would have helped to offset the tremendous drag of the wheels hanging out.
Of course he has been over it a million times in his mind, but when the normal glide speed is 160kts, with the drop tanks you should have 175kts, add another 15 on top of that to flare it from a descent, and he really needed 200 kts to make a decent landing in those conditions.
The cars parked on the end of the runway didn't help either, but Spencer says now that he wouldn't have made the runway even it they hadn't been there.
The rate of sink once the engine had stopped, from an aircraft weighing six tonnes plus five hundred gallons of fuel, plus another three hundred handing under the wings, is fast.
‘Yes’, says Spencer ‘when it goes wrong, it goes wrong in a big way.’
He feels lucky in that the aeroplane was very strong, although it broke up into several pieces, the cockpit remained intact.
It held together with the engine, the rest of the fuselage separating which took him out of the major part of the fire.
So that was the fate of the third Sea Fury, in a field of potatoes.
‘Every sort of potato,’ Spencer laughs, ‘roast potatoes, mashed potatoes, baked potatoes…’his humour shines through constantly, of course he knows what a narrow escape it was, but he is well passed the haunting of it.
The worst bit was the recovery in hospital, by that time it was beginning to hurt.
Lucky for him that he was wearing a fire-proof suit, and it was only the joins such as between the leg and the boots, where the mask didn't cover the face, eyebrows, nostrils, lungs and wrists that were severely burnt.
Plus of course the attendant horrors for someone normally so well-groomed to have to wait for a face plastered with scabs and unshaveable stubble to heal.
Not to mention a broken knee and all sorts of aches and bruising.
Why when he had lavished so much care and time, not to mention a medium-sized fortune on this aeroplane did it let him down so utterly?
He says, philosophically, that ‘those engines were prone to signing off even when they were is service’, but somehow this was all a bit personal.
He left the hospital three months later and spent another six months hobbling about on crutches and having treatment.
No wonder there was a bit of a diplomatic problem at home.
So the aeroplanes were sold, as he puts it ‘to keep the piece.’
Ten years on and comparatively carefree flying oiled the wheels considerably.
he won't fly singles over water, at night, or over dubious terrain, though I have seen him fly over the odd potato field!
The Flackair P–51D 1051S Sunny V111 is Spencer's current warbird mount.
Spitfire XIV SG108 lying in the then new hangar at Strathallan, prior to its purchase by Spencer (via Spencer Flack)
He is not a man to repeat an experience but to move on and find new adventure in alternative spheres.
He would still like a Spitfire, not another Mk XIV but the lighter Mk IX.
He also has a yearning for a P–38 Lightning.
And I have no doubt that it won't be long before we see him in a Bearcat.
Once he has persuaded a certain colleague in the States to sell it  to him.
Miraculous escape…
Close-up of the cockpit area of G–FURY after the crash near Waddington, August 2, 1981. (via Spencer Flack)
He is not in a hurry, he is man to wait until a thing is right, time, price, everything but he will always do what he wants, and get his aeroplanes eventually.
In the meantime he is content with his Mustang on the warbird front, ‘it's very safe if you are careful in what you're doing,’ he insists.
He did discover a serious oil leak in its engine late last year and immediately changed it for the spare he keeps in what looks like a glass case in his garage.
Needless to say another replacement is on the way from the States, so that not a moment should be lost should he need yet another one.
The garage also houses a pristine 1926 6.5 litre Le Mans Bentley.
A Flack collection item in every way.
He has raced it at the Nurnburg Ring incorporating a five day trip and intends to explore the delights of this new venture to the utmost.
A friend with a Spitfire has bought a similar machine and a small group will no doubt emerge to enjoy this new game.
He is obviously serious about it as he also has a 1926 3 litre Bentley which he is upgrading to 4.5 to race.
Sea Fury FB.11 G–AGHB following the forced-landing at Osnabruck, June 1979.
A very lucky escape.
(via Spencer Flack)
I hope the Royal Aero Club's Records, Racing & Rallying Association will take note of the dates for the six hour races around the globe so that they won't interfere with Spencer's motor racing!
He has experienced his share of most of aviation's delights.
His company, National Airways which he ran in the early 1980s provided great adventure too.
The object was to buy King Airs and other aircraft from South Africa and ferry them home to sell, hiring them out as and when.
In the meantime, he eventually sold the Company as its peak in 1987, he had made another small fortune, and with some 30 aeroplanes and 80 pilots on the books he felt it was the right time to let it go.
He personally ferried two Aero Commanders, an Aerostar, a Beech Duke, and two Barons.
Inevitably there is a little story to be told about this.
Because of the political situation, the ferry route had to be up the west coast of Africa.
With a companion in a BN Islander and Spencer in an Aero Commander they set off for Botswana.
They needed to be there at daybreak, so the Islander set off first at about 11pm and Spencer took-off at two o'clock in the morning.
The idea being to catch the Islander up and land at a similar time.
The plan was to go up towards Salisbury,(or Harare) Zimbabwe, and, mindful of the SAM missiles, jump the border at 12,000 ‘ft ‘.
After about five hours they could speak to each other on the radio, and Spencer asked the Islander pilot to flash his lights to establish contact.
This done, for the next five hours Spencer followed the Islander's tail lights.
Except they weren't.
He ended up 200 miles off course and when the Salisbury beacon came in showing a 160 mile track error to the west, he realised he had been following a star!
‘Another little lesson I learnt,’ he laughs.
He enjoys it all with equal enthusiasm, and when I visited him in a small hut on Denham airfield where he was instructing ab initio pilots in Cessna 172s I detected the same dedication, pride and affection he has for all his aviation exploits.
A man with his knowledge, humour and candid self-assessment must make an excellent instructor.
What was he doing there?
Oh didn't I say.
Well apart from attaining a Flying Instructors ticket along with his Basic Commercial Pilot's Licence, Commercial Pilot's Licence and Air Transport Pilot's Licence, this year he has taken many performance category ratings.
This together with his DC–3 rating (back to the August issue for more on that) gained in the States, spells new adventure.
What we won't say — yet.
‘Watch this space!’ he grins.
We will Spencer, we will.
LIFE WITH THE WASHINGTON
Concluding the feature on the Washington B.I, an eye-opener for those who maintained them!
Washingtons of 57 Squadron  taxi-ing out for take-off at Coningsby 1952/1953.
WORKING IN ASF Larry was seldom involved with the flying of aircraft but on one occasion he stood in as Electrical NCO, on 15 Squadron, in lieu of F/Sgt Sanders who had done into hospital.
He had never flown in anything other than a Tiger Moth so her requested that his name be put forward for a short Washington sortie.
In due course he was told that a short three hour trip was in the offing so he collected his parachute and went with the crew to the aircraft.
he had hard all about the long sorties that were carried out by the Washingtons, so he was quite chuffed that his trip was for only three hours.
Halfway through cockpit checks the crew decided that the aircraft was unserviceable, so they all got out and tramped back to the Squadron offices.
Larry was informed that another aircraft was on cockpit checks and would he like to fly in that, especially as he already had his flying kit.
He decided to go and the aircraft took-off about teatime.
They flew across the UK, down the Irish Sea to Gibraltar, back through France and Germany eventually arriving back at Coningsby in time of an early breakfast.
There was no seat for Larry, so he started the trip by being strapped to the barber's chair — the mid-upper gunner's chair.
Then he sat for a while on the aisle stand which was a box covering the auto-pilot, where he was able to look out through the nose.
When it got dark he looked for somewhere else to sit and went to the back of the aircraft by way of the communication tunnel, but quickly got bored.
The next place he tried, the loneliest, was the rear turret, and that was once he had fathomed out how to work the heating system.
He reckons the trip would have been smashing if it had been the height of summer but as it was, he saw practically nothing from start to finish.
Bill Rimmer on the other hand made several flights with 149 Squadron and they were all trips of short duration; mainly air tests of the APQ–13 radar.
Although it was a fairly reliable piece of kit, the radar sometimes needed tweaking to get maximum signal returns.
This meant removing metal covers during flight and delving inside the set with a small screwdriver, trying not to get a shock.
Bill frequently got his fingers burnt and even now he wonders if his servicing procedure was strictly legal, but at least the navigator was happy.
Besides the radar, Bill also looked after the radio communications equipment on the Washington.
He remembers the Very High Frequency (VHF) radio was far superior to the kit the RAF was using at that time.
Each frequency required two plug-in crystals, one for the transmitter and one for the receiver but at the push of a button it self-turned.
The Washington was fitted with an Auxiliary Power Unit,(APU) which was located in the unpressurized rear fuselage. it was basically a two cylinder, four-cycle petrol engine which drove a generator.
The APU power was used for engine starting and to provide emergency power if one of the main generators went off line.
When running it had a very distinctive sound which quickly earned it the name of Put-put or Phut-phut.
Bill recalls a crew coming into the 149 line-hut after a sortie one day and they snagged the APU as being unserviceable on the Form 700.
However, it was written as follows: ‘Phut-Phut U/S Phut-Phut not Phut-Phutting!’
The groundcrew, not to be outdone repaired the offending APU and cleared the Form 700 entry as follows: ‘Phut-Phut fixed ‘S’, and Phut-Phut now Phut-Phutting’.
During his time at Coningsby with the Washingtons, Larry recalls it was a very happy station and the Station Commander was the legendary G/C Gus Walker.
When you met him he would salute with his left arm, having lost his right arm during the war, and when he said ‘Good Morning’, you really felt he meant it.
fifty YEARS
However, Larry did have one very unhappy incident which involved his work.
Once during rectification of a fault his team located the problem as being due to broken wires in a cable loom which ran through the communications tunnel.
Closer examination showed these to have been cut, about 12 wires in all.
Larry reported it to his superiors and due to the nature of the discovery the Service police were notified and eventually the Special Investigation Branch (SIB) arrived on the scene.
Because he had actually found the cut wires he was grilled for several days, as were several other suspects, all electricians.
Eventually the SIB narrowed their investigations down to two electricians with pocket knives, Larry and one other.
Their knives were sent away for analysis and when the results came back indicating the presence of copper on the blades the rest of the suspects were released.
Larry and the other pocket knife owner became the prime suspects and it got quite ugly with such  suggestions as, ‘why don't you admit it, you know you did it’.
This lasted for three days and they were called-up for questioning several times each day.
suddenly it all ended when a SAC, who wasn't even a suspect, admitted that he'd done it during a fit of depression; with a pair of pliers, not a knife!
There were a few accidents involving aircraft at Coningsby and one incident occurred shortly after the Washington entered service.
The aircraft concerned was in the hangar with one engine removed.
A crane arrived and the propeller from a second engine was removed in preparation for a further engine change.
Immediately after the removal of the propeller, the nose of the aircraft started to rise and continued to do so, to everyone's amazement, until the tail was almost down to the ground.
A tail-steady, which should have been in place under a hard point before work started, was about 6″ out of position.
The result was a ‘crunch’ as the tail-steady plunged into the soft skin of the rear fuselage.
A No 149 Squadron aircraft suffered substantial damage while in flight due to gun-shot.
The gun turrets had safety circuits which stowed the guns horizontally but not longitudinally.
There was also interruption circuits to prevent airframe structures being hit by an aircraft's own gunfire but as there was always a round left in the breech, gunners were instructed that after prolonged firing the guns should be stowed into the slipstream until they cooled.
A Washington on XV Squadron's dispersal at Coningsby, 1952.
In this instance the gunner must have failed to heed the warning with his upper-rear turret.
The result was that one round ‘cooked-off’ and fired into the fin and rudder.
This would have been bad enough under any circumstances but in this instance the bullet hit the base of some armour plate in the leading edge of the fin which caused it to split.
Part of it went upwards perforating the leading edge of the fin in several places.
The remainder deflected downwards into the rear pressurised compartment, went straight through the conduit carrying the cables to the lower rear turret, then carried on into the rear gunner's position, perforating the hatch and embedding itself in the lagging on the armour plating at the rear of the position.
Luckily the rear gunner wasn't at home at the time!
Larry recalls two fatal accidents which involved Washingtons.
One night during night flying a young airman was killed when he walked into a propeller.
The second involved 15 Squadron Washington WF533 which was being flown by Ken White's crew, with F/L Rust as captain.
On January 5, 1953 they were feeling their way back to Coningsby through terribly foggy weather when the aircraft crashed in a field at Claxby Pluckacre.
Five of the crew, including they captain, died in the tragedy but Lady Luck was with Ken and he was one of the four survivors.
After recovering from his injuries he spent a tour as a Link Trainer Instructor before converting to the Canberra in 1955.
Following the Coronation of Queen Elizabeth 11 in June 1953, RAF Marham, the other major RAF Washington base, began preparations for the Coronation Review of the RAF, which was taking place at RAF Odiham the following month.
Marham was to provide all of the Washington aircraft for the review which was taking place on July 15, 1953; a 12-ship formation and four a static display.
Practise formation flying began early June and by the 18th, rehearsals with a full complement of 12 aircraft were being flown over the Norfolk countryside.
The first full dress rehearsal occurred on July 10 and 637 aircraft took part, a few less than on the actual event.
The Washingtons displayed on the ground at Odiham were; WF527 of 35, WF545 or 90, WF562 of 115 and WF565 of 207 Squadron.
Leading Aircraftsman (LAC) Derek Chapman joined 192 at Watton, straight from Boy Entrant training as an Air Wireless Mechanic in 1953 and during his time with the Squadron he rose to the rank of Sergeant.
Jim Keeble, also an ex Boy Entrant, was posted to Watton in 1954 as a Senior Aircraftsman (SAC) Radar Mechanic and he worked in the Special Radio Servicing Flight (SRSF).
His section was responsible for the maintenance of radio equipment fitted to the Washingtons.
Diagram of the path of the bullet that ‘crooked off’.
It ducked under the armour plating of the fin, cut the conduit of the lower turret and ended up in the rear gunner's position.
No 192 Squadron's ‘A’ Flight operated the four Washingtons and these were WZ966 ‘55’, WZ967 ‘56’, WZ957 ‘57’and WW346, which, unlike the other three, was a conventional bomber.
WZ966, WZ967 and WZ968 had had several modifications done to them which included removing the gun turrets from the fuselage and fitting extra aerials.
Watton was the RAF's Central Signals Establishment and 192 is thought to have been involved in radio calibration duties.
WW346 was used for crew training, also for transporting groundcrew and spares, including engines, when the Squadron went on detachment to Malta, three aircraft out of the four were grounded all at the same time, because of engine problems.
The Second Line maintenance of 192 Washingtons, which included Major and Minor Servicings, was carried out by Marham ASF but when the Washington was withdrawn from Bomber Command service, this responsibility was transferred to Watton.
A number of experienced tradesmen were also posted from Marham to Watton to assist with the extra workload.
Derek seems to remember that it was shortly after this change that a couple of what could have been nasty instances occurred.
The first concerned an aircraft that was in the hangar undergoing engine cylinder pressure checks.
All the spark plugs on this particular engine had been removed and the necessary test equipment had been attached, ready for a dry run to be carried out;(engine turned over without starting up), so that the individual cylinder pressures could be read.
However, the cylinder pressures could be read.
However, the tradesman who was sitting in the pilot's seat, when he got the order to turn the engine over, cranked with wrong engine.
The one he selected, instantly burst into life and the propeller whizzed round to the utter amazement of all those working in the vicinity.
Within a split second of the initial shock, bodies were running in all directions.
The engine was quickly shut down and it was a miracle that no one was hurt.
A few cowlings and panels got bent though, having been lifted off the floor and hurled against the hangar wall by the force of the propeller.
The second was similar to one that had happened at Coningsby.
A Washington was in the hangar under going a double engine change and a tail steady had not been fitted  under the rear fuselage.
An experienced armourer came into the hangar with a group of new armourers and proceeded to show them the wonders of the Washington.
They climbed in at the front and gradually worked their way down to the back.
Two engines and propellers had been removed from the aircraft and all of a sudden the nose lifted and she went down on her tail.
The SNCO in charge of the aircraft yelled at several tradesmen to climb up the ladder into the nose.
Eventually it came back down and ‘landed! on the hangar floor, without suffering any damage.
Derek remembers what must have been ‘A’ Flight's finest hour.
prior to June 1956 the Squadron had never managed to get their four aircraft airborne at the same time.
However, it is believed that due to remarks made about ‘A’ Flight's flying capabilities in the Officers' Mess on the night before the Air Officer Commanding's (AOC'd) Annual Inspection, this happened the next day.
The four Washingtons got airborne and flew in formation over the Station, just as the AOC was walking across the Parade Square.
As far as Derek can remember this feat never happened again.
In late 1957 one of the Washingtons left Watton for a detachment to the Middle East and it suffered a slight mishap which caused it to return to base.
Derek was a member of the duty crew that particular day and he remembers seeing the aircraft off, then a short time later seeing it back in again.
When an aircraft went on detachment, it was normal practice for those on board to stow their personal baggage in the bomb bays along with the aircraft spares and tool kits and this trip was no exception.
It was a long time ago and the memory plays tricks but Derek thinks the following account is fairly accurate.
When the aircraft reached its required altitude, somewhere over France, a rear crew member was asked by the Captain to switch off one of the pressurisation systems.
Unfortunately the wrong switch was operated and both bomb doors opened, jettisoning the contents over France.
Included in the kit were some special camera lenses for a Canberra PR squadron in Cyprus.
All the kit, including the lenses, was eventually recovered and returned to Watton except for one personal suitcase which belonged to the aircraft Crew Chief.
Jim Keeble recalls one amusing incident in ASF which could have been a terrible accident.
Once of the aircraft had been fitted with some new kit and a whip aerial had been mounted on one of its bomb doors.
The aircraft Crew Chief had a routine that he followed when opening the bomb doors and he always stood in the same place; fairly adjacent to one of the doors.
He shouted for the doors to be opened and of course they snapped open as usual.
Unfortunately he was standing right beside the door with the new aerial mounted on it and his voice was within a gnat's whisker of being raised a few octaves.
Luckily that aerial only pierced his dust coat.
No 192 Squadron on detachment at Bodo in Norway, 1956.
Air and ground crew post in front of their Washington, Cpl Derek Chapman is eighth from left.
The last RAF B–29 Washingtons of 192 Squadron were finally phased-out of service in February 1958 when the unit disbanded and a big party was held at the Queen's Hall in Watton town to mark the occasion.
The walls of the hall were adorned with cartoons and slogans and a large model of a Washington dropping suitcases, hung from the ceiling.
during its limited period of service with the RAF, most aircrew who flew the B–29 found it an enjoyable experience; a good stepping stone into the age of the jet bomber.
As a footnote, when Jack Wannan was posted to Coningsby in 1953 to join 57 Squadron which had re-equipped with Canberras, where were only about three Washingtons left on the Station.
In those days all aircrew had to take a six monthly Basic Efficiency Examination to ensure they were keeping up to date with equipment and training procedures.
The March examination passed OK but when the Canberra crews sat the October examination they all looked in amazement at the test papers; they were for the Washington.
Bomber Command got it right two weeks later!
30 Missions with Mary Alice
Duxford's static B–17G honours a Deenethorpe-based warhorse.
Surviving crew have vivid memories of their missions in Mary Alice.
Over 400,000 people per year visit the Imperial War Museum at Duxford, Cambridgeshire, where, in hangar No 3, stands a B–17G Flying Fortress, faithfully reproduced in the colours and markings of Mary Alice of the 615th Squadron, 401st Bomb Group.
it is likely that most of the visitors, as they stand looking at Mary Alice , wonder about the men who flew in her and what a 30 mission combat tour’ entailed to these men of the 8th USAAF during the daylight bombing offensive in occupied Europe.
Three of the original crew members of Mary Alice were traced in the mid 1980s and were willing to share their memories and experiences.
Now a retired accountant living in Orlando, 2nd Lieutenant Dan C Knight was the first to be assigned to B17G, 42–31983 and christened his aircraft Mary Alice after his mother, Mary Alice Knight.
As part of the 401st Bomb Group, based at Deenethorpe, Northants, Dan and his crew took Mary Alice to bomb the aircraft factories at Oschersleben for their first mission of the war, on February 22, 1944. finding the target obscured by overcast, the low box of the 401st bombed the secondary target of Magdeburg.
The crew returned with one minor casualty.
Top turret gunner, Bill Sartor, injured his arm in the turret mechanism and was out of action until March 22.
Second mission came on March 6, 1944. it was the day all the Mighty Eighth had been waiting for.
The first American daylight bombing raid on the German capital itself —Big B — Berlin.
From his home in Brandon, Mississippi, Charles Atcher said ‘Yes, I was the original radio operator on the Mary Alice .
Until the briefing, we didn't know where the raid was to be.
When the map was uncovered that morning and the arrow pointed to Berlin, I had the mixed emotion of fear, excitement and, as most others, I was stunned’.
The 615th flew as the leading squadron in the lead box of the 94th Combat Bombardment Wing.
The flak and fighter defences were all that the crews had feared they would be.
Dan Knight takes up the story ‘We were somewhere over Germany on the way to Berlin,flak was very heavy.
Then one burst got us good.
Charlie (Atcher) called on the intercom, saying that he was hurt.
That was an understatement.
I told the co-pilot to take over and I went back to the radio room and saw Charlie with blood all over his head and the front of his flight suit’.
‘The shell had blown the radio hatch completely out.
The shell fragments had penetrated Charlie's head and chest and he was in tremendous pain and begging for help.
There was a syringe of morphine but under no conditions should it be given for head or chest wounds and here Charlie had both.
We could only make him as comfortable as possible under the conditions, and we still had to bomb Berlin’.
Charles Archer says, ‘I had just been manning my gun and had sat down when we took the hit.
If I had been at my gun, I would have been dissected.
The shell practically melted all of my equipment.
When I was hit, I rolled out of the chair, onto the floor and lay cross-ways of the plane in the middle of the radio compartment.
It felt like I had been kicked in the chest by a mule’.
Charlie could still picture the right waist gunner, Charles Paceley, standing at the right waist gun.
‘Charlie Paceley was the first to reach me after I was hit.
He tried so hard to help me while I was hurting in the hours it took to reach England’.
‘We talked some.
I asked him for something to ease the pain, but he reminded me that he couldn't because I had a head wound.
Charlie did not know, at that time that I had also been hit in the chest and that my right lung had been punctured and had collapsed’.
‘I began to lose consciousness and felt that I was standing on the world's edge aside of a high, dark space looking across it, thinking that I was about to enter into it.
Then Charlie turned the oxygen valve onto full supply and I was back in the plane again.
He told me that the oxygen mask had pulled away from my face some, and that I was probably just blacking out.
I can't be sure, because if lack of oxygen was affecting me, I would have blacked out at lot sooner, and I remember the whole episode’.
‘Later, my mother told me of her terrible foreboding that she had about me the day we made that first daylight raid on Berlin.
she said she had prayed and prayed, struggling with God for my life.
A number of things saved my life.
First, Charlie remembering our first aid training in not giving me morphine, his quick thinking in turning the oxygen to full supply, and the Lord in granting my mother's petition.
I asked Danny (Knight) to put down at the first chance after crossing back over the Channel, and he did’.
Mary Alice proudly wearing the all-important 30 mission tallies.
After bombing Berlin, there were numerous attacks from enemy fighters, identified by Dan as Bf 110s.
With two of their four engines knocked out and Charlie so critically wounded, Dan made an emergency landing at Horsham St. Faith.
Back to Dan again, ‘I checked on Charlie on the way home and his bleeding had stopped due to the extreme cold at high altitude.
The doctors said that he would have bled to death at a lower altitude and I'm sure this is so, because as we let down over the Channel his bleeding started again.
By the time we had landed, the floor of the radio room was slick with his blood.
The medics met the plane and gave him plasma etc right there in the radio room before transporting him to the hospital.
He was still in hospital five months later when I finished my tour.
I went to see him several times before I went home’.
Charlie spend just over a year in hospitals both in England and the USA.
Numerous operations were performed, until, as Charlie says, ‘I was eventually shipped back to the States on the Queen Mary and was so happy to see the Statue of Liberty again.
After about six months Stateside and more operations, I was given a medical discharge with 100% disability’.
‘I still have the piece of flak that did the most damage to me.
It's about the size of one joint on your little finger, and it went sideways through my chest and stopped in  my right arm.
It's the only material souvenir that I have from the war’.
After Charlie was carried off the aircraft, it was unable to even taxi and I had to be towed off the runway.
Despite this damage, she was back at Deenethorpe for Dan's third mission just three days later, on March 9, 1944.
Briefing was at 0445 hours.
When the curtain was pulled back, the target, Berlin, was revealed again .
The crew were not to know that this day would be so different from their previous raid on Berlin.
The weather had closed in again and the 401st bombed through 10/10ths cloud on secondary targets.
No fighters were seen this time.
The only hiccup to Mary Alice was a malfunction on the bombardier's equipment, causing Dan, as pilot, to salvo the bombs.
The rest of March brought six more missions for Mary Alice and her crew.
Berlin again, Munster and Frankfurt among them.
Bill Sartor was back in the top turret again for their third visit to Berlin on March 22.
This time, the crew were in such high spirits that they dropped Nickles over the heart of Berlin, spirits that were somewhat subdued when it was realised that they could not close the bomb bay doors after combing.
They flew all the way home with them open.
Though Dan's notes read ‘another malfunction’, ‘very accurate flak ’, ‘Capt Rumsey's plane exploded’‘Intense flak over city’, when pressed for details Dan replies ‘Not really much to tell.
We just had to sit there and ride through the flak .
We would pick up a few flak holes, but every mission had those’.
Larry Cummins, former navigator, now living in  Cincinnati , comments ‘Our Mary Alice usually returned with some flak holes in her.
On one occasion, I recall someone commenting that so-and-so came back with 235 holes in his airplane.
I doubt this was a usual number.
Possibly 30 or 40 would be more reasonable on a routine experience’.
April 9, 1944, brought the crew their tenth mission, on what Dan described as a ‘Long haul’ to the FW 190 plant at Marienburg, in East Prussia.
They were in the air for just under 12 hours and were so short of fuel upon their return, an emergency landing had to be made at Ludham.
This time, they saw enemy fighters appear over Denmark, the first fighters seen since the March 6 mission to Berlin.
Stars 'n' Bars
the americans in europe 1942–1945
Another problem had arisen, as Dan explains.
‘Charlie Wilson, bless his little ol' soul, was not too bright.
He was assigned to me as armourer and tail gunner.
This meant that he was supposed to know more about the Guns than any of the crew’.
‘Anyway, while under heavy fighter attack from the rear, Charlie calls up to tell that neither of his guns were working.
We flew the mission with no support from the tail at all.
when we got back from the mission and inspected the guns, we found he had put the right gun in the left barrel and vice versa.
Everything being backward, nothing worked.
After that, I assigned Charlie to the waist position, replacing him with Charlie Paceley as tail gunner’.
(He was the man to tended Charles Atcher so well on the Berlin mission).
Dan comments ‘Paceley was as sharp as a tack and super dependable.
Poor ol' Charlie Wilson meant well, but that was the situation’.
Charlie Wilson was to the fore again on the very next mission, another long haul to Sorau on April 11.
It was on this mission that Wilson, now flying his first as waist gunner, was on the receiving end of a flak fragment that pierced Mary Alice .
It came up through the floor and took out a piece of his ear.
Larry Cummins recalled, ‘All I remember about Wilson's ear was that it didn't amount to much, but a big deal was made out of it.
Huge bandage, Purple heart Medal and all’.
Dan's notes after the mission read, ‘Intense flak over Hanover — Lost a lot of planes — Kuhl and Englehart went down — I prayed plenty — thank you Lord’.
April 20 and 22 brought two evening missions, with all aircraft airborne by 1620 and 1630 hours respectively.
A routine mission on April 24, followed by a ‘milk run’ on April 26 completed their missions for that month, bringing the total to 15 — halfway through their tour/
The first day of May saw a very early briefing for the 401st, at 0100 hours.
The targets were the V–1 rocket sites at Siracourt.
Larry Cummins, navigator, tells us, ‘I flew the tail position.
it had been decided that we should take-off and form-up before daylight.
Since all the officers had been required to learn Morse code, each plane had an officer in the tail.
it was always easier to sent fast than it was to receive or read the code.
The result was that all one could see was dozens and dozens of blinking lights all over the sky.
In don't know how Dan ever identified out correct slot in the formation.
So anyhow, I flew in the tail and found it to be very draughty, very cold, very uncomfortable and pretty darn boring’.
Bad weather frustrated the attack and Mary Alice returned with her bomb load.
Only a few, isolated bursts of flak were seen and no enemy fighters were encountered.
The lack of enemy opposition was a far cry from the next two missions on May 7 and 8.
On both days,Mary Alice and crew were despatched to bomb Berlin again.
Both flak and fighter defences were as tough as ever.
The flak encountered along the route was of varying intensity and accuracy, while over Berlin intense flak of the barrage type was thrown at the B–17s, causing two-thirds of the Division to receive some form of battle damage.
Larry Cummins recollected, ‘I was looking out of the window while seated at my navigator's table, and I saw a sizeable hole suddenly appear in the left wing.
It was caused by an AA shell that didn't explode.
I also vividly recall an occasion when I suddenly heard a loud crash’ and Ed Chambers, the bombardier, reeled back shouting ‘I'm hit — I'm hit’.
A large hole had appeared in the Plexiglass right in front of Ed, and he was struck in the chest.
It transpired that a large quantity of spent shells from a plane ahead went through the nose and had struck Ed.
He wasn't hurt, he was well padded with his flak suit, but he was scared.
We all scared real easy in those days’.
The crew returned to the base for the next mission on May 19.
It was Berlin again.
This time no enemy fighters were seen, but the flak again was accurate, resulting in a loss of one B–17 from the 401st.
When the group failed to contact their fighter escort, they turned as planned to bomb the secondary target, the docks at Kiel.
May 23 and 25 brought two missions in France.
‘Really milky ‘milk runs’ as Dan described them.
‘No flak or fighters.
With no flak at all, I watched Eddie drop his ten 500lb bombs from the bomb bay’.
The target was Ludwigshaven on May 27, 1944.
The 401st furnished the lead and low boxes of 18 aircraft each, to form the 94th ‘B’ Combat Bombardment Wing.
The city of Ludwigshaven could be dimply seen through the haze as the Intermediate Point (P) was reached.
It was here that the Luftwaffe appeared.
No attacks were made on the 401st Bomb Group, but  vicious assaults were made by the enemy fighters on the bomber wing that was flying alongside them.
Dan's notes record that he saw eleven B–17s go down.
Dan C Knight, pilot of Mary Alice.
(All Author's collection)
The luck of the 401st on the 27th turned completely around the next day.
It has been said that the mission to Dessau on May 28 was the roughest the Group ever experienced.
Dan Knight stated to the Author, ‘This one was by far the worst mission out of all the 30 I flew.
I have no objections in talking about it, but I really don't think I could recall the events in any form of sequence with any accuracy.
I just wouldn't know where to begin.
We saw the Luftwaffe in full strength that day and they kept hitting us with all they had.
I know Lt Kaminski went down — we lost seven planes in out Group.
The Mary Alice cam back with many holes in her, with a live 20mm cannon shell still in her tail resting behind Charlie Paceley’.
What is known, is that approximately 200 enemy aircraft were encountered, in what was the most concentrated attack made on the 401st.
The attacks lasted for 40 minutes, from the IP to after two runs on the target.
As many as 60 enemy fighters flew abreast of the Group, then turned and attacked in formation, using saturation tactics.
The entire high squadron went down with the exception of the leader.
1st Lt V J Kaminski, flying alongside Mary Alice in the low squadron, was one of the 615's oldest and best-liked veterans.
Kaminski and crew were almost at the end of their tour, the pilot being on his 27th mission.
His B–17 went down after continual attacks, the fighters still firing into him as he continued to fall, until the aircraft suddenly exploded.
For Dan Knight and the crew of Mary Alice , it had been their 23rd mission.
Seven more missions was required fro them to complete their tour.
With the 401st Bomb Group continuing their dials missions, a brief respite cam e to Dan and his crew as Mary Alice underwent repairs, until just even days later when they flew to the marshalling yards south of Paris on June 4.
June 6, 1944.
D-Day for the Allied Forces.
The entire 8th Air Force was out in force.
Mary Alice among them, as the 401st furnished six squadrons of six aircraft each on that day.
The coastal defences of Normandy were bombed through a complete undercast of cloud.
No enemy resistance was encountered by Mary Alice , and the cloud parted briefly on the homeward leg to give the crew a glimpse of the invasion fleet.
The raids on June 11 were on tactical targets in support of the invasion.
Mary Alice flew in the low box and bombed an airfield in France, going in at only 12,000 ‘ft ‘.
Apart from the low altitude bombing, the mission was considered routine.
A record was set on June 14, 1944 by not only the 401st Bomb Group, but the whole of the Eighth — they put up 1,525 four-engined bombers and 908 fighter aircraft.
The 401st furnished 60 aircraft, the greatest number for one mission in its history.
Supply depots, airfields and oil refineries were hit.
Mary Alice was assigned to bomb Le Bourget airfield near Paris, where Charles Lingburgh had landed after crossing the Atlantic.
Enemy resistance came in the form of accurate flak and fighter attacks.
2nd Lt Schroeder and crew were shot down by Bf 109s.
They had joined the 401st within the previous ten days and this was the only loss suffered by the 615th Squadron on this mission.
The two Bf 109s responsible, were disposed of very quickly by up to 50 American fighters that were flying as fighter escort.
Two more targets in France on June 22 and June 24, took Dan Knight and Mary Alice to 29 completed missions.
The final one required to complete his tour was given to Dan the next day, on June 25, 1944.
In August 1943, statistics for American bomber crews of the 8th Air Force stated only a 35% chance of surviving a combat tour.
By June 1944, those statistics had improved greatly, but as Dan tells us, ‘Statistics proved you were dead after 25 missions in those days.
So each one got a little harder as you reached the end of your tour’.
‘On June 25, I was awakened around 2 am.
I even remember it was a Sunday and thinking that this was not day to be flying your last mission.
We shaved, for the oxygen mask would drive you crazy if you didn't, showered and went to the mess hall for the usual powdered eggs for breakfast.
Briefing followed, were Colonel Seawell, the Group Commander, told us we would have no fear of flak on the way home.
He would bring us back ‘on the deck’.’
Target for the 401st consisted of an underground fuel dump at Montbartier in France, close to the Spanish border.
The information had been furnished by the French underground, and, as the crews had been told, there was no way of knowing if the information was correct.
The mission would be flown on the assumption that it was.
As Dan stated, ‘The target was under a patch of woods that looked like all the other woods around, so we had to drop on some co-ordinates by a railway track.
The take-off flare went up at 0440 hours and Colonel Seawell was the first away as Group Commander.
I was flying as Deputy Group Commander, and followed him one minute later.
Everyone took-off at one minute intervals to allow for the prop wash to subside from the plane in front of you.
We were always assigned a prescribed pattern to follow after take-off.
We turned on a pre-arranged course and climbed at a predetermined rate of feed per minute at a certain airspeed.
This hopefully, kept everyone from crashing into everyone else.
Many times we would never see the sky before 10,000 ‘ft ‘.
Our ETR back at Deenethorpe was set at 1420 hours’.
The information flew over the Normandy beaches and as they approached the town of Caen, a wing ahead of them ran into heavy flak .
The 401st moved slightly to the right to avoid it, but ran into an even heavier barrage that knocked down one B–17 from the 612th in the Group.
That was the end of the enemy opposition and the formation continued on to Montbartier.
Dan again takes up the story.
‘We weren't used to such targets, as prior to this it was such things as ball bearing plants, aircraft factories, Berlin etc.
At bombs away, I know we all had the same feeling.
Was this really a target of just a bunch of trees?
Then we saw those woods erupt into one big ball of flame and a pillar of smoke rose almost to our altitude as that fuel dump went up’.
The trip home took them over the Bay of Biscay, and they descended ‘on the deck’ as planned, flying no more than 100 feet above the water.
‘We were flying our usual tight formation that the 401st was famous for, with the wings overlapping’.
Dan continues, ‘My left wing tip was almost in Colonel Seawell's right waist window.
It felt good sitting there with the oxygen mask off and not having to worry about flak .
We didn't know that something was going to happen to make us think it really was the last mission for all of us’.
‘We ran into a dense bank of fog, so dense that Seawell's plane just suddenly disappeared from view.
I kicked the rudder and dropped the nose, and we broke out of the fog and saw the water coming up in front of us.
I hauled back the wheel and the plane mushed down and hit the water.
We bounced up, and there was Colonel Seawell's plane coming down right in front of us.
I shoved  forward, but not in time to avoid hitting him.
My vertical stabiliser hit the side of his fuselage, knocking a hole in him and bending about three-quarters of my tail over’.
Explaining this incident to the Author in 1989, Dan slapped his right hand against his left palm twice in quick succession.
‘We hit the water and the other plane that quick.
The whole thing happened so fast.
A lot faster than the time it takes to tell!’
‘Colonel Seawell kept up with the rest of the Group OK.
But the tail of the Mary Alice looked as though it might break off completely any minute and was causing such a drag that we had to fly back on our own.
All the balloons were up in the Channel when we finally got there, and we dodged all around them trying to find the closest field in England.
We put down at Weston Zoyland, called Deenethorpe and they sent a plane over to collect us’.
Dan had a special mention for one of his crew.
‘I will never forget Bill Mackowiack, my ball turret gunner, who didn't have to be on that mission with me.
He had already completed his required 30, but had always said from the start that he was going to be along on my last one, and he did it.
Mack who painted the name Mary Alice on the B–17.
Carol was painted on the tail as this was the name of Charlie Paceley's wife.
The Bugs Bunny design on the backs of our jackets was also the work of Mack .
He couldn't find any brown paint, so he mixed cocoa in with some white paint.
It's a wonder that the ‘roaches didn't eat it up, but didn't as may jacket is still intact’.
The relief felt tat the completion of the tour is expressed in Dan's notes made after each mission.
Part of his notes for June 25, 1944, read:ALL THROUGH — WHOOPEE — No 30 ALIVE!!!
With their 30 combat missions completed, the crew awaited the return to the USA.
For their B–17 Mary Alice , it was another story.
The aircraft was turned over to other crews and her role in the daylight bombing offensive against Nazi Germany continued until the end of hostilities.
As one last twist of fate for Dan Knight, his flight log shows that he flew a B–17 just one more time from Deenethorpe.
On this occasion, on July 15, 1944, he flew the Bomb Group photographer to the RAF field in Beccles, Suffolk, to record the damage inflicted on a 401st Flying fortress that had to make an emergency landing there.
The damage had been so severe that at one stage, the fail out order had been given.
However, the fail out alarm had been knocked out and the intercom was working badly.
With the tail gunner mortally wounded, the pilot rescinded the order and brought the aircraft back.
The aircraft was Mary Alice .
As Dan noted in his Flight Log, ‘Took photos of Mary Alice — What a mess!’
In the early 1980s, Dan tried to trace his old crew and received this letter from the Veterans Administration, informing him ‘We regret to advise you that our records reflect the deaths of three of your crew:— Edward C Chambers, July 31, 1973; William F Mackowiak, November 10, 1975; Charles J Wilson, January 2, 1978.
Dan said, ‘I really hated to get that news as I really hoped to see them again’.
Charles Atcher recounts in 1985, ‘I volunteered for military service and I am satisfied to have made my contribution.
Army life agreed with me.
I lived it as I have always lived, with all my energy.
No, I have never been back to England.
I would have liked to though.
It would be nice’.
Larry Cummins said, ‘I have no unpleasant feelings about remembering my experiences during the war.
Evidently, one tends to forget the worst episodes over time, and remembers only those items that stand out for some reason’.
As for Mary Alice , she was flown back to the USA in June 1945, some 11 months after her original crew.
In November 1945, she went to the B–17 graveyard in Arizona, where the breakers succeeded in doing what the Nazi flak and fighters had failed to do — destroy Mary Alice .
In 1975, the Imperial War Museum at Duxford acquired a B–17 that, by 1978, was repainted as an exact replica of the original Mary Alice .
On September 14, 1989, the 401st Bomb Group arrived for their first annual reunion to be held in England.
On the 18th, Dan, along with the rest of the party, entered Hangar No 3 at Duxford.
Once more, for the first time in over 45 years, Dan Knight was back in England, back in the pilot's seat of a B–17 that bore the name Mary Alice in the familiar yellow letters edged in red on the nose.
With his lovely wife Eva beside him in the co-pilot's seat, Dan Knight was the only one of the original ten crew members aboard.
Larry Cummins unfortunately, could not make it to England for the reunion.
Frequent correspondence from Charles Atcher had stopped abruptly in 1987.
It would seen, as Dan wrote, ‘I agree something must have happened to Charlie.
He really had a hard time and suffered a great deal over the years from the wounds he received back then.
I am afraid he may not be with us any longer’.
Efforts are still being made to ascertain the condition of Charlie Atcher.
Meanwhile, the B–17 at Duxford stands daily inviting visitors to reflect on what a 30 mission combat tour entailed for the men of the Mighty Eighth .
Worn with Pride
We turn to the AFC and DFC, awarded since 1918 for acts of valour, courage and devotion.
Continuing with the series of orders, decorations and medals awarded to RAF personnel since 1918, we look this month at two decorations awarded to officers and Warrant officers for acts of courage or devotion to duty performed whilst flying — one primarily a ‘piece-time’ award, the other very much for operational service.
The Royal Navy equivalent award — the Distinguished Service Cross (DSC), and the Army equivalent award — the Military Cross (MC), will be covered in a later article within this series, both awards having been awarded at times to members of the RAF.
AFC
The Air Force Cross (AFC) was established on June 3, 1918 for award to officers and Warrant Officers for ‘an act or acts of valour, courage or devotion to duty performed whilst flying, though not in active service against the enemy’.
A 105 Squadron Blenheim IV making landing.
(105 Squadron records via Peter Green)
The Cross is silver and consists of a thunderbolt in the form of a cross, the arms conjoined by the wings, base bar terminating with a bomb, surmounted by another cross composed of aeroplane propellers, the four ends inscribed with the Royal Cypher.
In the centre is a roundel with a representation of Hermes mounted on a hawk and bestowing a wreath.
On the reverse is the Royal Cypher above the date 1918.
The cross is suspended by a straight silver bar, ornamented with sprigs of laurel, connected to the cross by a silver link.
The ribbon is 1¼″ wide and was originally crimson and white alternate horizontal stripes.
However, from July 1919 the stripes were changed to run at a 45° angle from left to right.
Awards made during and after World War Two have the year of the award engraved on the reverse lower limb.
The AFC was issued un-named; however, examples are often found which have been privately engraved by the recipients or their family.
Bars may be awarded for additional qualifying acts and, as with original award, those given during or after World War Two carry the date on the reverse.
All awards, except those to foreigners, are listed in the London Gazette , although very few are found with citations.
Between 1918 and 1939 a total of 837 awards were made, with 12 first bars and only three second bars.
During World War Two some 2,000 AFCs were awarded, with 26 first bars and just one second bar; the latter going to W/C H J Wilson.
Since 1945 a further 2,000 awards have been made, with 150 first bars and 20 second bars.
DFC
The Distinguished Flying Cross (DFC) was established on the same date as the AFC, June 3, 1918, with the same basis except that in this instance it was for duty performed whilst flying on active operations against the enemy.
The Cross is silver and consists of a cross flory terminated in the horizontal and base bars with flaming bombs and in the upper bar with a Tudor rose.
This is surmounted by another cross of aeroplane propellers, with a roundel within a wreath of laurels and the letters ‘RAF’ on a rose-winged ensign by an Imperial Crown.
On the reverse is the Royal Cypher above the date 1918.
The Cross is suspended from a straight silver bar, ornamented with sprigs of laurel, and connected by a silver link.
The ribbon is 1¼″ wide and was originally of violet and white alternate horizontal stripes, although as with the AFC this was changed to a diagonal format in July 1919.
Likewise, awards made during and since World War Two carry the date of the award on the reverse lower limb.
The Cross is issued un-named but recipients for family often have them engraved.
Bars are awarded in the usual way and, as is common to most awards, are depicted by a rosette worn on the ribbon if the medal is not worn.
Awards, except to foreigners, appear in the London Gazette ; citations exist for a number of awards although the majority of World War Two examples do not have citations.
Between 1918 and 1939 some 1,215 DFCs were awarded, with 88 first bars and seven second bars.
During World War Two over 20,000 DFCs were awarded, with 1,550 first bars and 42 second bars, thus making it the most frequent gallantry award of the War.
The award was never simply ‘given away’; indeed, every Cross had to be earned, often in conditions of extreme danger against considerable odds.
In essence there were two general scenarios leading to the award of a DFC: firstly, an instance/incident considered worthy of an immediate award; and, secondly a non-immediate award in recognition of a period of distinguished service, sometimes highlighting one or two instances.
Since 1945 just over 600 awards have been made, with 41 first bars and five second bars — a reflection of the numerous small conflicts which have plagued the latter part of the 20th Century.
The latest series of DFCs were those awarded during the Gulf War.
Gordon Hampton in front of a 114 Squadron Boston V, Italy 1945. (via authors)
Alistair Ramsay DFC
Wing Commander Hughie Edwards, CO of 105 Squadron, let a daring low level daylight raid against the German industrial city of Bremen as part of Operation Wreckage in July 1 ‘941.
For outstanding leadership, determination and gallantry on this mission he was awarded the Victoria Cross.
The navigator in lead Blenheim V6028 was P?
O Alistair Stewart Ramsay.
Alistair Ramsay was born in Tunbridge Wells in 1907 and, at the outbreak of World War Two, immediately joined the RAF.
Trained as a navigator and commissioned, he joined 105 Squadron at Swanton Morley in April 1941.
The Squadron was equipped with the Blenheim IV as part of 2 Group and tasked with offensive operations, mainly by night, over Germany and Occupied Europe.
Ramsay flew his first operational sortie on April 8 with a night trip to Emden with P/O Broadley, who became his regular pilot.
The following day the Squadron was told that it was to transfer to pinpoint daylight bombing, and so began an intensive training period of low level flying and combing, although night ops and a day anti-shipping role continued.
Suitable weather conditions, ie adequate cloud cover, were considered essential for  these risky daylight raids and unfortunately very few days in May and June proved to be usable.
Towards the end of June, Bremen was targeted and the Squadron attack force took-off on the 28th of the month and headed out low level over the sea.
Approaching Heligoland the weather was obviously unsuitable and so the mission was abandoned and the aircraft went home.
It was the same story on the 30th and frustration mounted amongst the crews, by the end of June Ramsay had flown 18 operations and had become well established on the Squadron as one of the most accurate navigators.
Edwards, as leader of the joint force, was determined to get the target and so the Blenheims were airborne again on July 4.
The attacking force was made up of nine Blenheims from 105 Squadron and six from 107 Squadron at Great Massingham.
As his crew Edwards had chosen the experienced Ramsay as navigator and Sergeant Gerald Quinn as gunner.
At 0521 Blenheim V6028 ‘GB–D’ took-off from Swanton Morley, the remainder of the attack force soon formed-up and set course.
Almost as soon as 107 Squadron's aircraft joined up three of them had to turn back with various technical problems, leaving only 12 aircraft in the attack force.
S/L Paul Day, best-known for flying with the BBMF, was awarded this AFC on January 1, 1987 for services to RAF air combat training and for services to the BBMF.
(Authors)
Flying at around 50 feet in conditions of poor visibility the Blenheims pressed on over the sea, crossing into Germany just south of Cuxhaven and swinging south towards Bremen.
The visibility had improved and there was scattered cloud as the bombers sped low over the countryside — attracting a string of flak .
As they approached the 500 ‘ft ‘balloon curtain around Bremen, Edwards ordered the split, leaving each aircraft to find suitable target and carry out individual attacks.
V6028 plunged through a hail of flak , dodging balloon cables and aiming at the centre of the docks.
Keeping the aircraft low, and as level as he dared, he raced over the target as the bombs fell away, and kept going at rooftop height until reaching the outer suburbs of the city.
Cranking the aircraft around in order to spot the rest of the attacking aircraft and determine the damage caused to the target, the Blenheim stayed in the Bremen area for 10 minutes, attracting a great deal of flak and being hit about 20 times.
At some stage Gerald Quinn was wounded in the knee.
others of the 105 Squadron Blenheims were less fortunate — Z7486 (Sgts Mackillop, Nethercott and Entwistle) were shot down and crashed into a factory; Z7486 (F/O Lambert, Sgts Copeland and Charles) was hit by flak and last seen in flames heading further inland; V7484 (Sgts Jackson, Williams and Purves) was also hit by flak but made it back to Swanton for a belly-landing.
With damaged aircraft and a wounded crewman, Ramsay had to navigate back avoiding any possible danger spot.
Their Blenheim was the last to return, landing at 11.12.
Congratulatory messages flooded in from senior RAF commanders, including the Chief of the Air Staff, Portal —‘I have just read first accounts of Bremen raid.
Convey to units concerned my warmest congratulations on a splendid operation.
I am sure that all squadrons realise that besides encouraging the Russians, every daylight attack rubs into the Germans the superiority of our units.
You are doing great work.’
Shortly afterwards came the announcement of a DFC for Ramsay and a bar to the DFM for Quinn.
The three crew of V7484 also received DFMs.
Ramsay's citation includes:
‘There is no doubt that Ramsay's skill in navigation and cool determination contributed very materially towards the success of a most hazardous operation.’
The group of W/C Gordon Hampton OBE, DFC, consisting of: OBE, DFC 1939–1945 Star, Africa Star with clasp, ‘North Africa 1942–1943’, Italy Star, Defence Medal, War Medal 1939–1945.
(Authors)
Later that month the Squadron moved to Malta on anti-shipping duties.
On August 1, the aircraft in which Ramsay was flying was shot down leading an attack against merchant shipping.
Although the crew were picked-up by an Italian rescue launch, P/O Alistair Ramsay DFC died from his wounds.
Gordon Hampton OBE, DFC
Gordon Hampton was born in Doncaster in August 1919.
He joined the RAF in 1941 and, following pilot training in South Africa, was posted to Nakuru, Kenya, to convert to Baltimore bombers.
In May 1943 Hampton and his crew were posted to 223 Squadron at Fauconnerie, flying Baltimore IIIs on daylight raids against a wide range of targets.
By July he was flight Lieutenant and part of the detachment operating from Malta in support of the operations in Sicily.
On August 15 the Baltimores were tasked against the German evacuation beaches north of Messina.
Hampton and his crew were in FA342:
‘There was a heavy flak over the target area and our aircraft was hit several times.
However, the Baltimore was a good aircraft and it needed a direct hit to knock one down and so, despite our damage, I was able to get the aircraft back to base.’
Intensive operations in support of the Allied offensive into Italy continued throughout late 1943 and into spring 1944.
The Germans had launched a counter-offensive against the Allied bridgehead at Anzio and air support, against enemy troop concentration and lines of communication, became vital in preventing loss of the bridgehead. 223 Squadron moved from Foggia to Biferno/Campomarino to join 3 (South African Air Force) Wing on March 13 and after one day to settle in to the new surroundings was tasked against the San Benedetto marshalling yards.
The first of two raids on that day was led my Gordon Hampton, now one of the senior and most experienced pilots on the Squadron.
One of the Baltimores was hit by flak and as it spun out of position in the combing box it hit another aircraft, both then spun into the sea.
Although fighter opposition was fairly rare, the German flak defences were always intense and accurate and on the final run-in to the target evasion was impossible.
Daily raids were mounted against transportation targets.
On March 18, 1944, flying his 63rd operational sortie, Hampton (in FA563) was again leading the Wing of 24 Baltimores plus Kittyhawk fighter escort against ammunition dumps and MT at the San Lorenzo marshalling yards, near Rome.
‘We were told just how important the target was as the Germans were desperately trying to contain the Anzio beachhead.
We found that the target was covered by five-eighths cloud which meant that out only choice was to get below cloud to comb the target.
We descended down as the flak, which caused us no major problems, opened up.
We managed to bomb the target and overall the raid was very successful.’
For leading this raid and for his previous 62 operational sorties, many as Wing leader, Gordon Hampton was awarded the DFC.
The day after this raid was the official start of Operation Strangle , an attempt to completely destroy the enemy lines of communication.
223 Squadron played a full part in this campaign although Hampton left the unit in mid April for a brief rest having flown 70 operational sorties.
On the night of February 25, 1945 he was flying Boston BZ658 with 114 Squadron against a power station near Comacchio.
‘After bombing the target out task, as usual, was armed reconnaissance.
I found some barges and was busy strafing them when we were hit by 40mm cannon shells.
There was an immediate loss of power and all I could do was to crash-land the aircraft.
We managed to survive the crash but after two weeks of lying-low were captured by the Germans.’
Gordon Hampton remained a prisoner of war until repatriated in May 1945.
After the was he continued his career in the RAF, including command of 50 Squadron with Canberras and an exchange tour with Strategic Air Command flying B–52s.
In 1952 he was awarded the OBE.
Now retired, Gordon Hampton lives near Sheffield and continues to take an active interest in the RAF as President of the Sheffield branch of the RAF Association.
COLLECTAIR
IN THE Collectair office there has been much back correspondence to catch up on.
The wealth of letters and contents therein is something for which I am ever grateful.
Readers of FlyPast appear to have an inexhaustible supply of knowledge with regard to their pet subject, much is well researched and the constant supply of ‘new’ material is never ending.
A letter from Mr T Owens of Smallfield, Surrey, enclosed two photocopies of the short-lived magazine The King's Air Force which was edited by Clarence Winchester and published in co-operation with the then Air Ministry.
Featured previously in these columns I make no apology for repeating my plea to anyone who has copies of this publication to look after them, because good examples are none too common these days.
It just so happens that a framed photograph of Clarence Winchester in his 50hp Caudron biplane at Hendon circa 1915 adorns the Collectair office wall!
Edward Cuff from Yeovil sent a most interesting collection of photographs as diverse as a Bleriot-type being flown by Gustav Hamel near Canterbury, and a selection of pictures related to the Battle of Britain airfield at Warmwell whose correct name was Woodsford.
Also a photograph of the grave of Oberfeldwebel Erich Maack and Unteroffizier Heinrich Haselmeyer who died in the crash of their Heinkel He 111 at a site near the Grimstone viaduct four miles to the west of Dorchester on August 13, 1940.
The pilot survived, and a photograph of him holding the swastika emblem removed from the fin of the Heinkel was taken recently, naturally a most emotional experience.
Completely new to me was the Skybird League, an aeromodelling association which presented an annual trophy to the winning modeller of Skybird kits between 1933 and 1940.
Douglas Jones of Christchurch, Dorset, won this competition in 1939 and 1940 (A ).
Sadly, he says, all the actual trophies were destroyed by enemy action during the war.
Perhaps his shield and mounted plaque are unique?
Stephen Simms from Fleet, well remembers a memorable day when he raided his school Cadet Force dustbin one evening when the resident CO was having a clear-out.
The contents of this dustbin produced a fine collection of silhouettes (sillographs —B ) and photographic aircraft recognition cards.
Many were in mint condition and judging by the list sent in, a pretty comprehensive collection it is too, ranging from World War Two aircraft of the fighting powers to post-war helicopters and such giants as Convair's B–36.
Other recent correspondents include Arthur Kerle from the USA who writes with rather sad news of his model Zeppelin, similar to that once owned by Alan Todd and mentioned in the September 1991 FlyPast, p62.
Arthur writes:
‘A German made toy…
I spent hours assembling and re-assembling it.
Mine was 18″ long and had two engine pods, each with a small stamped metal prop front and rear.
It had no gun pods.
It was hanging over my desk until it cam down in flames on May 8, 1990, when my house was lost in a forest fire,(shades of Hindenberg?)
I trust Mr. Todd's fared better’.
Something that has not been illustrated in Collectair in the past is the printed and illustrated match-slip (or book-matches).
Mr C F Motley of Lincolnshire has a small collection of such things which I feel sure have a rarity value as match-slips are eagerly collected on a world-wide scale.
(C ) A most unusual collection and good to see.
Yet another rarity turned up the other day and which I illustrate here.
This is an earthenware plate commemorating Christmas 1943 at the Luftwaffe unit known as Fliegerhorst Vannes — found recently in a junk shop in France.
(D ) this is indeed a scarce collector's item and a valued addition to any collection.
Some years ago Collectair featured another commemorative luftwaffe Christmas plate, that time for a celebratory landing at Moscow, something that never happened.
The aircraft featured on this recent example, which measures some 10″ in diameter, appear to be a Junkers Ju 88s.
The unit badge a pigeon wearing flying boots!
Any clues readers, if so please let us share your wisdom?
Earlier this year, April to be precise, these jottings were accompanied by a photograph of a huge model of the ill-fated airship R.101 being hoisted aloft amid the spacious surroundings of a large and palatial room.
The cry ‘Who what, when and where?’ went out and the response was immediate and most comprehensive.
Many thanks to all those (to numerous to mention here) who were thoughtful enough to write.
The model being erected was that made for the Olympia Aero Show in 1929.
It was 15′ long, and the workmen in the published photograph were raising the model as an exhibit for the enquiry convened after the disaster at Beauvais in October 1930.
The public enquiry was held at the Institution of Civil Engineers in Westminster and the Board included Sir John Simon (Chairman), and two assessors, Lt Col Moore-Brabazon and Prof Inglis.
This enquiry found that the airship trials had been unsatisfactory and in their final report they stated that ‘…no Government department, high official or group of individuals was held to be responsible’.
— a whitewash?
Correspondent Hadrian Jeffs of Norwich suggested that the lady in the background of the photograph could have been Hilda Lyon, who was a calculator on the design staff at Cardington; he also points out that ‘the model is of the R.101 in its original form, before the fitting of the controversial amidships bay which became the subject of so much debate in the post mortem ’.
John Bagley , formerly Curator of the Aeronautical Gallery at the Science Museum writes to say that the model now resides there.
Obviously there were many models made of this and the R.100 — the high-tech of the age.
What of them now?
Few, except for those in museums seem to have survived.
AIRSHOW 92…
Gateway to Aviation
Oshkosh, July 31 to August 6, witnessed a melding of all forms of aviation from Connies to Fishbeds, to the Doolittle Raiders and everything in between!
Above: MATS Connie M494TW made its debut at Oshkosh and within a day's flying had taken to loose formation work with her bigger sister.
Right: Reserve Grand Champ — John Dilley's F–86 Sabre N9689H, one of two at the show.
Below: Ryan STA NC17368, winner of the outstanding open cockpit award.
Below, middle: Thousands boarded the Save-a-Connie L–1049H, this and the L–749 two dominated both the static and the flying.
Below left: Combat Jets North Vietnamese-schemed MiG–21 and Soviet-marked MiG–15 get close.
The F–104 and T–33 also got in on the act, all are now based at Oshkosh.
Left: Just a slice of the Doolittle set-piece.
This may turn out to be possibly the most innovative airshow scenario staged anywhere this year — detailed down to Flyco flagging them off the ‘deck’.
EAA Convention & Sport Aviation Exhibition, Oshkosh, July31/August 6
OSHKOSH 92 had to be seen to be believed, it was everything that any aviation enthusiast could ever hope for, a unique mix of every form of aviation on this planet, from a USAF KC–135 that performed fly-bys to the Experimental Aircraft Association's Ryan NYP monoplane Spirit of St Louis replica, from a privately owned NDN–1T Firecracker N2157C (owned by Richard Slaney from Eugene, Oregon) to a 1935 built Waco YMF–5 C–GIBF, and from the latest homebuild designs to a staggering collection of warbirds.
On the first day of the event an awe-inspiring 41 T–28 Trojans were present, with more arriving during the week!
The organisers of the annual EAA Convention, held at Wittman Regional Airport, Oshkosh, Wisconsin, have got things down to a fine art, the event runs like clockwork, in fact it would probably do some airshow organisers in Europe a power of good to pay a visit to Oshkosh and see for themselves how fly-ins, airshows and ground exhibitions can, and should, be run.
This year's event, the 40th of its type to be held, proved once again that Oshkosh is without doubt the largest aviation event of its kind in the world.
With an estimated 14,500 aircraft visiting the Convention during its week long run, Wittman's 6 mile flightline is crammed to capacity, and yet everything is in a controlled, orderly environment.
Aircraft come and go all day long (with the exception of the afternoon's flying display) and moving aircraft in among the viewing public seems to be accomplished with the minimum of fuss.
With all these aircraft begging to be looked at, one would think that it would be impossible to attempt to see everything that Oshkosh has to offer, not so!
With a not overlong flying display that runs from 2pm in the afternoon until 6pm in the evening, plenty of time is available to roam among the aircraft parks and view whatever is the viewer's fancy.
Aircraft parks are arranged in themes, warbirds all park together, homebuilts are parked up in another area, antiques and classics have a section all to themselves and so on.
This year's Convention remembered the Doolittle Raiders an impressive collection of B–25 Mitchell bombers were gathered together to re-enact that historic first air attack (April 18, 1942) by US Forces on Japan, operating, as President Roosevelt called it, from Shangri La !
In a very realistic scenario, nine Mitchells were lined-up on the main runway, much how they would have been on the aircraft carrier UDD Hornet ready for their fateful flight to Tokyo.
Special effects (sounds of waves lapping against the side of the ship and seagull cries) were played over the public address system, milling around the aircraft were groundcrew all dressed in period Navy uniforms, and then the order to start engines was given.
Oshkosh reverberated with the sound of 18 Wright Cyclone radial engines chattering away.
The call was given to launch and the Mitchells, one by one, moved forward on the ‘deck’, opened the throttles, held the aircraft on the brakes and were flagged-off by ‘flyco’.
All nine aircraft clattered away at full power down the ‘deck’, with their nosewheels coming off the ground very quickly, in what was one of the most impressive set pieces seen by the writer in many years.
In low level solo passes the B–25s returned and with accompanying pyrotechnics relived the attack on Tokyo.
Just a minute part of the mass of aircraft present at Oshkosh 92.
A rare bird indeed, Fairchild XNQ–1 N5726, built in 1947 and powered by a 600hp Lycoming R680.
Resembling somewhat of a cross between a Texan and a Trojan, this machine is owned by Don Pellegrneo of Story City, Indiana.
From bombers to fighters, another of the themes at Oshkosh was the 50th anniversary of the activation of the USAAF 357th Fighter Group.
The first fighter to use P–5 Mustangs in the Eighth Air Force, the 357th had a faster rate of kills than any other unit within the Mighty Eighth The 357th featured may top ‘ace’ pilots and five survivors, Chuck Yeager, Clarence Bud Anderson, Leonard Kit Carson, Richard Peterson and Tommy Hayes were all present at Oshkosh to be reunited with five Mustangs that had been painted in the markings carried by ‘their’wartime aircraft.
Oshkosh 92's opening day on Friday July 31 featured these five Mustangs,Glamorous Glen III, Old Crow, Nooky Booky IV, Hurry Home Honey and Frenesi , in a celebratory flypast.
Pilot of the lead aircraft,Glamorous Glen III , was Chuck Yeager, flying his aircraft, who led this formation down the display line to open the days flying programme.
Howard Pardue's Goodyear built FG–1D Corsair NX67HP Ruthless Two, was one of four examples of the bent wing bird present at Oshkosh 92, among which was the ex Old Flying Machine Company F4U–4 N240CA.
But Oshkosh is much more than just warbirds, the cream of the US airshow acts are one of the big attractions for the general public.
Delmar Menjamim flew his replica Gee Bee R–2 racer, the Eagles Aerobatic Team performed a faultless routine in their trio of Christen Eagles, a scintillating performance was given by Bobby Younkin in his Beech 18, a routine which included barrel rolls!, but probably the most unusual of all was Craig Hisking, who flew his much modified Pitts Special, which has been fitted with an undercarriage on the top wing, enabling him to land upside down as well as the right way up.
In the EAA Warbirds of American Spectacular, held on the Sunday and Tuesday of the convention, aircraft from the recently donated Combat jets Collection played a prominent part, with the F–86, a Folland Gnat, another T–33, and pairs of Hispano Saetas and Soko Galebs.
The antique and classic park included much to interest the enthusiast, with bucket loads of Stearmen and Staggerwings, all manner of Ryan, Waco, Stinson and Cessna variants, oddest of which just had to be the Waco ZVN–8 N1937S, a 1938 built biplane with tricycle undercarriage!
But, even taking all the above mentioned aircraft into consideration, just two aircraft stole the show and grabbed the enthusiast and public attention during the week of the Convention, the Connies !
L–1049H N6937C Save-a-Connie and L–749/VC–12N N494TW, the latter in a highly-polished natural metal Military Air Transport Service (MATS) scheme, thundered around the Oshkosh circuit together in a series of low level flypasts, filling the air with the sound of radial engines.
Both of these veteran airliners gave a spritely performance despite their age, proving that there are no bounds to what can be preserved in flying condition in the USA.
If all of this was not enough, there is the Oshkosh Splash-in .
Floatplanes of all shapes and sizes operate from Brennands Seaplane Base, in a cove on the west shore of nearby Lane Winnebago.
Here, such types as Curtiss, Funk and King Loon mix with more common Cessnas and Pipers in a unique relaxed atmosphere, where up to 80 seaplanes or amphibians can be moored at any given time.
Some of these aircraft participate in a formation fly-by at Oshkosh during the week-long Convention.
So, Oshkosh 92 truly lived up to the legend that has built up around this event, there was indeed something to interest and captivate anyone with an interest in aviation.
EAA Oshkosh 92 Champions
Welcome to Wroughton!
The 11th Great Warbirds Air display was also the first at the new venue of Wroughton.
The great British weather conspired to deal a heavy blow, but organisers, participants and audience refused to be put off!
Top: With a rural backdrop, Sally B takes-off from Wroughton's main runway during the 11th Great Warbirds Air Display (GWAD).
(Duncan Cubitt) Above: Warbird reflections as the fighter Collection's Hellcat, a pair of Beech 18s and the Dutch B–25 Mitchell enjoy a brief period of sunshine during Sunday's display.
(Duncan Cubitt) Above, right: DH Vampire T.55 U–1230 was a welcome participant.
Now on the British register as G–DHZZ, it is based at Cranfield.
(Cliff Knox) Right: Three Diamond None Tiger Moths overfly a Russian Mil Mi–2 Hoplite.
FLA–01 was one of three such aircraft flown from the Commonwealth of Independent States to the UK for the World Helicopter Championships, to be held at Wroughton during the week following GWAD.
(Robert Rudhall) Left: Beech 18 N8389H Beech Belle, part of the Bar Belle Aviation fleet, was runner-up in the Mike Twite Trophy award for best preserved aircraft at GWAD.
(Robert Rudhall)
Great Warbirds Air Display, Wroughton, August 30/31
IF THE TRAUMA and problems involving the Great Warbirds Air Display (GWAD) from its established site at West Malling in Kent to Wroughton in Wiltshire were not enough, Elly Sallingboe, her airshow team and all the pilots involved in the show had to contend with low cloud, torrential rain and wind that gusted up to 65 knots on the first day of the show.
Having said that, the GWAD Flying Safety Committee, led by Hoof Proudfoot, organised a flying programme that put aircraft in the air for the bulk of the afternoon.
Obviously it was very much an ad hoc programme, with none of the smaller aircraft being able to get airborne and some aircraft from elsewhere being prevented fro leaving their home bases.
Nevertheless, a creditable show was put on for the public, which in true GWAD fashion, stood their ground despite what the elements threw at them.
Stealing the show on Sunday (the 40th anniversary of the prototype Vulcan VX770's first flight) and Monday was Vulcan B.2 XH558, which put on a stupendous display, and quite rightly was awarded the trophy for the most meritorious display.
The following day saw a remarkable change in the weather, the wind had dropped considerably, blue skies, and sunshine reigned supreme and it was all systems go for a cracking airshow.
Visiting aircraft began arriving early in the day and by the time the airshow started at midday quite a line-up of visiting types were present, ranging from award-winning Percival Vega Gull G–AEZJ to Duncan Baker's Howard 500 N500LN, the latter making a very rare appearance away from its Exeter base.
Monday's display ran like clockwork, opening and closing of course with Sally B , in between which a veritable pageant of flight took place, ranging from the Barnstorming Days with the Crunchie Stearman trio, Dragon Rapide G–AKIF and the Tiger Moth Diamond Nine team (the latter operating eight Tigers and a Hornet Moth),Biplane Warplanes involved the Shuttleworth Collection's Hawker Hind and Gloster Gladiator (making first appearance at GWAD) and recently — revitalised Swordfish LS326 of the Navy's Historic Flight.
In a 50th anniversary tribute to the USAAF,Sally B flew in company with the Dutch Mitchell and a pair of P–51 Mustangs.
A trio of Grumman ‘Cats (Hellcat, Tigercat and Bearcat) took to the air, Bob Mitchell's PT Flight brought the training theme to the fore and the Battle of Britain Memorial Flight put on an exciting synchronised display with two Spitfire XIXs (PS853 and PS915) before the Lancaster thundered through and filled the air with the sound of Merlins.
Main: The Duke of Brabant's B–25, now a ‘regular’ at GWAD.
Left: The MoD/LWM operated Bf 109G G–USTAV banks away from the Charles Church Displays Spitfire Tr 9 G–CTlX at Wroughton.
Right: Duncan Baker's Howard 500 was a very pleasant visitor from its base at Exeter.
Modern aircraft participants played their part at Wroughton, with the Red Arrows having almost clear routines.
The RAF's contribution to Operation Desert Storm was represented by a Tornado and Jaguar, whilst maritime operations cam e under scrutiny with Nimrod, the mighty hunter.
Gem of the warbirds present was the Messerschmitt Bf 109G Gustav , whilst another rare participant was the Linday Wood Promotions' Vampire T.55 U–1230/G–DHZZ.
The weather gave rise to problems other than in the air.
Some aircraft were prevented from appearing the ‘pans’ on the crowd-side of the airfields, because their turning circle would place them on the grass and at risk of bogging.
(The Air Atlantique DC–3 did so on the Sunday, sinking nearly up to the hubs of its main gear!)
Under normal circumstances, the show would have given the audience the closeness with the warbirds it has become well-known for.
The apparent lack of multiple entry and exit gates on the crowd side of the airfield was bound to cause problems.
Trying to exit the airfield after the show ended resulted in large queues of vehicles all trying to get out of one gate.
A second entry and exit gate was available, but the soggy conditions would have rendered it useless within minutes.
The organisers wisely elected for a slower, but much drier, exit!
Many a display organiser and participant would have looked at the prevailing conditions, shrugged shoulders and turned away from the problem, presented a ‘weather-out’ show to the paying public.
Not so at GWAD, the organisers, Sally B Supporters Club and the pilots, did much work behind the scenes to make sure the audience got a quality airshow.
Despite all the tribulations, they achieved their aim, the Great Warbirds Air Display lives on!
Great Warbirds Awards
October
AS THE END of the 1992 airshow season rapidly approaches, there are still a few events worthy of a visit before winter and the withdrawal symptoms set in!
The month opens with the 21st Guernsey International Air Rally, on October 2/4.
October 3 sees the Vintage Aircraft Club (VAC) Autumn Fly-in taking place at Finmere airfield, Bucks.
VAC fly-ins have attracted substantial numbers of aircraft to this one time RAF Boston base.
The following day, October 4, Anthony Hutton and members of The Squadron hold their Autumn Fly-in at North Weald , Essex.
Anthony and his team have built-up a reputation for running well-organised and entertaining events at this historic Battle of Britain fighter base, so a trip to North Weald on the 4th should be pencilled into your diary.
For lovers of rotary winged machines Popham , Hants, are holding a Helicopter Fly-in on October 11.
Helicopter fly-ins are quite a rarity and the organisers of the Popham event should be encouraged in their endeavours.
Warbird fans will do doubt make a pilgrimage to Duxford on October 18, for on that date the IWM hold their Autumn Air Day.
(FlyPast Roadshow in attendance.)
With the vast amount of based warbirds present at Mecca , enthusiasts are guaranteed to see something of interest take to the air for the final time this year, before hangar doors are closed and winter maintenance schedules begin.
(Dates compiled and researched by Robert Rudhall with the best information available at the time of going to press.
To avoid a wasted journey, readers are advised to use the telephone numbers provided to check with the organisers that a particular event it still taking place.)
de Havilland Moth Club, Woburn Abbey, August 15/16
Seen over the shoulder of Charles Shea-Simmonds' Tiger Moth, a further eight Tiggies grace the Woburn turf.
WONDERFUL WOBURN produced a number of surprises this year at the annual gathering of the de Havilland Moth Club in the picturesque grounds of Woburn Abbey over the weekend of August 15/16 although strong winds and generally poor weather in the few days leading up to the event meant that the number of foreign Moths arriving was down on previous years.
Despite this, an intrepid few made it from the continent, including examples from France, Holland, although the star of the event was from much further afield — half-way around the world.
The Antipodean visitor was VH–AQJ/A17–26, which had been especially crated over to the UK for the event and was expected to spend about a month or so in the country before returning home.
Built at Bankstown in 1940, the aircraft was the third example from the Australian production line and as such is the oldest surviving Aussie Tiger.
Initially delivered to the RAAF it was sold in 1946 to the Tasmanian Aero Club then passed to South Australia Aerial Spraying in 1954 as a crop duster.
Restored in 1960 for the Temora Aero Club she eventually fell into disuse and was sold to Ray Windred of Dungong, New South Wales, as a basket case.
Restored in 1980, ‘AQJ was wrecked in a crash during 1989 but rebuilt again and reflew the following year.
Shipped to the UK some weeks before Woburn, ‘AQJ was re-assembled here by Nigel Arnot from Camden, Sydney, and showed that she was still as agile as ever by taking part in the Tiger Moth aerobatic competition at Woburn.
In addition to the abundance of de Havilland types on the ground, which on the Sunday included 47 Tiger Moths, no less than seven DH.60s, four Hornet Moths, two Puss Moths and one each of the Leopard Moth, Fox Moth, Jackaroo and Gragonsly, there were also several welcome additions to the flying display.
On the Saturday these included BAe's Mosquito while Sunday saw the DH.88 Comet Racer making a flying visit from Old Warden and Desmond Penrose also brought his Arrow Active II across from there to give a very spirited display — the aircraft just about qualifying as at least the engine is a Gipsy III!
Woburn usually sees one or two newly-rebuilt Moths appearing each year but these seemed to be few and far between this time although one impressive exception was Torquil Norman's immaculate DH.90 Dragonfly G–AEDU which made its debut here finished in a smart red and silver scheme.
The aircraft had previously been flown in the USA as N190DH until a crash at Sellersburg, Indiana, on September 22, 1987, following which it was imported into the UK in 1989 and has only recently completed rebuild in the capable hands of Cliff Lovell, giving us a second airworthy DH.90 alongside Wessex Aviation & Transport's G–AEDT.
First-footing at Woburn was Torquil Norman's pristine DH.90 Dragonfly G–AEDU, bringing the UK airworthy population of Dragonflies to two!
Along with the Tiger Moth aerobatic competition, the new regular display by the Diamond Nine and the delightfully sedate DH.60 race, a novel new item was the deHMC Parachute Team descent from Tiger Moths.
Overall Woburn was its usual relaxed self, providing a very welcome change from the noise and crowds of the ‘heavy metal’ airshows — FlyPast will doubtless be there again next year to savour the unique atmosphere of the event!
Air Racing
RAeS Grosvenor Trophy, Shobdon.
August 9
A race that nearly didn't happen as the first of August's glorious ‘weather’ settled in.
Back to the hotly-contested Chipmunk ‘shoot-out’.
RAes Stewards' Cup
Leicester, September 5
An exciting finish, giving Dave Lewedon his first win.
The race also decided the 1992 National Air Racing Champion, Bruce Hook in Chipmunk 22 G-ARGG.
RAeS King's Cup
Leicester, September 6
Weather threatened the event, but eventually a suitable ‘slot’ was found.
The win by Peter Crispe and navigator Tony Poole was an exceptionally popular one, the pair having been stalwarts of air racing for a long time.
SPIN-OFF
Long before the Harrier, the RAF were presented with a proposal to minimise dependence on vulnerable airfields.
IN EARLY 1942 the invasion was still two years distant and the European Allied air offensive was being mounted from the numerous and growing number of airfields in the UK.
In response to a shortage of sites for further airfield construction, and also to save on huge construction costs, typically about £500,00, a scheme was submitted to the Air Ministry whereby aircraft could take-off not on conventional runways, but by means of centrifugal launchers.
The proposal was made by the civil engineering firm Rendel Palmer and Tritton who, 30 years later were to play the key role in the Thames Barrier project.
The notion of centrifugal launchers was based on the idea that rather than using a long, straight runway, the aircraft could take-off following a circular path around a tower, or possibly a more mobile type of launcher, rather in the manner of ‘round-the-pole’ model aircraft.
The prototype of this idea was not unlike a tower crane.
The aircraft would be taxied into position at the base of the tower and connected to two cables, attached by way of mounts at the wing roots.
It would then be winched just off the ground, and when steady, the pilot would apply power, and the jib with the aircraft hung underneath would slowly begin to rotate.
As the rotation accelerated, the aircraft would swing outwards, from a wing-level to a steeply banked attitude, with more cable being gradually paid out until, having attained flying speed, it could be ‘released smoothly under its own power, without fear of stalling’.
Once cannot help but speculate that the inventor of this launcher had little, or more likely no, experience of piloting an aeroplane.
Take-off even in the conventional manner is a critical phase, unforgiving of mechanical failure or human error.
Therefore, the notion of being whirled around in a low-level steep bank, at maximum take-off weight, would surely have been viewed with scepticism by pilots and aircrew.
Although maybe not too daunting in light observation aircraft such as Piper L–4s, as these could already operate with ease from small fields and open spaces, there would be no advantage in using a large and unwieldy centrifugal launcher.
It was anyway particularly envisaged for heavy bombers ‘suitable for super-loading planes for special duties, for example the protection of straights, by launching planes carrying heavy air torpedoes from a short distance inland’.
Mercifully, there was no proposal to attempt landing an aircraft by the same means, but rather it was envisaged that rough landing strips could be constructed adjacent to the launcher.
One of the fundamental principles behind the concept was that short landing strips for unladen aircraft were more readily found than sites for runways maybe a mile in length needed for a fully laden bomber to get airborne.
The Author's interpretation of the ‘parent Type’ launcher in action.
Even more imaginative, not to say fanciful, was the concept of ‘Battle Zone Portable Launchers’, which could be used close to the fighting front.
This was essentially to be a rotating mast mounted upon a tank, which could be driven to the centre of a large field, and with the mast lowered the aeroplane could be attached with a cable.
The pilot would then be required to taxi round and round the launcher, gradually increasing speed.
To prevent the aircraft veering inwards from its circular path, there was to be a check cable on the outer wing tip, joined to a motor vehicle, which would drive around the outside of the circle during take-off.
The effects on the driver and vehicle can only be imagined, as driving in circles round a field, at say 40 mph, would be uncomfortable enough, let alone trying to match the take-off speed of a warplane.
Further considerations included the effect of centrifugal forces on carburettor feeds, cockpit instrumentation and the pilot, who could be in danger of blacking out as speed and ‘g’ loading increased.
As far as is known practical tests of centrifugal launchers were never undertaken, and with hindsight it is difficult to imagine that they could have proved to be a practical notion, requiring large structures and imposing high stresses on man and machinery.
In all likelihood it would have been considered by the Air Ministry, and quietly stored, with the many other ‘war-winning’ schemes, from the possible to the ridiculous.
Some outlandish schemes did reach at least the experimental stage, such as catching a landing aircraft in a glorified tennis net, strung between two posts.
Such a landing, especially after a centrifugal take-off, would indeed be a flight to remember!
Centrifugal launchers did at least recognise a genuine need, even if they were not themselves the solution.
The report concluded ‘the capacity of the catapult is at present somewhat restricted, and other mechanical means of launching aircraft may have to be adopted by force of circumstance unless in the meantime aircraft designers find new means of lessening the length of take-off required’.
In fact, thanks to Frank Whittle and his team, a solution was already at hand.
From the jet engine came the notion of vertical take-off and via the vectored thrust of the incomparable Harrier, the idea of a true battle zone aircraft came into reality.
TARGET: Tirpitz
Earlier this year, Norway played host to a small party remembering the raid on the Tirpitz of April 1942.
Out of the gallantry of the raid, a Halifax was to come back from ‘extinction’.
Halifax W1048 approaches the edge of Lake Hoklingen, June 1973.
Step one of a journey that would take it to Hendon
AS I SAT, gazing out of the Boeing 737 window watching the beautiful Norwegian countryside passing a few thousand feet below, my thoughts cam back to the reason for my visit.
I wondered what memories were passing through the minds of the other members of the group, especially those that 50 years earlier had paid a flying visit to Norway in rather different circumstances.
Not then travelling in the comfort of an airliner to attend ceremonies marking an anniversary but actually taking part in the historic attacks against the mighty German battleship Tirpitz .
In April 1942,Tirpitz , a major threat to Allied shipping, especially to northern Russian convoys, was sheltering in Faetten Fjord near Trondheim.
The Fjord was small in size and the Tirpitz , which Norwegians called The Devil , lay moored close to its steep sides which afforded her excellent protection from air attack.
Intelligence reports were passed to London by the Norwegian underground, which included a plan of the German anti-aircraft (ack-ack ) gun positions in the locality.
Also, a young Norwegian secret agent named Bernhard Bergersen had while travelling past in a train on the opposite side of the fjord, risked his life by taking a photograph of the Tirpitz as she lay at anchor.
On the night of April 27/28, 1942, a force of 31 Halifaxes from 10, 35 and 76 Squadrons and 12 Lancasters from 44 and 97 Squadrons flew up Faetten Fjord in a desperate attempt to inflict damage or sink the Tirpitz .
Some of the Halifaxes from 10 and 35 Squadrons carried out their attacks at very low level, from a height of about 350 ‘ft ‘.
They dropped specially-adapted mines which it was hoped would, if they missed the Tirpitz , roll down the steep slopes of the fjord and still cause damage.
Unfortunately this was not to be.
During both this attack and a repeat performance the following night, crews were greeted with an intense barrage of ack-ack as they approached the target which resulted in the loss of seven aircraft and 18 men.
As for the Tirpitz , her crew received a considerable scare but the ship itself sustained no damage.
Once of the Halifaxes that crashed on the night of April 27.28, 1942 was W1048,S-Sugar of 35 Squadron.
She was hit and caught fire while going in to attack at low level and her pilot Don MacIntyre brought her down on the frozen surface of nearby Lake Hocklingen.
The crew of six survived the impact, five of them escaped to Sweden by the sixth member, Vic Stevens the Flight Engineer, injured his foot and being unable to travel was captured by the Germans.
Vic remained as a PoW for the remainder of the war.
In June 1973 a team of RAF divers, in conjunction with Norwegian divers from the Draugen Froskemansklub in Trondheim, recovered Halifax W1048 from Lake Hocklingen and it is now on display in the RAF Bomber Command Museum at Hendon.
Fourteen years later, in the autumn of 1987, Nigel Smith decided to write a book about the experiences of his father-in-law, Vic Stevens.
As he wrote, another story emerged, that of the RAF attacks on the Tirpitz in Faettenfjord.
Through his research in Norway he made contact with the former secret agent Bernhard Bergersen who was keen to ensure that the Norwegian facts were correct.
After considerable correspondence and a meeting with Bernhard, Nigel was then introduced to Trygve Lian of the Aasen Historical Society.
As Nigel's book progressed, so did the preparations in Norway for a series of commemorative events to mark the 50th anniversary of the RAF attack on Tirpitz .
I was privileged to have been one of the 28 guests, which included 11 veterans of the Tirpitz raids, who were invaded to attend these events.
On arrival at Trondheim, Vaernes airport, we were all made to feel very welcome and local Norwegian families in the Aasen district accommodated us in their homes.
I teamed up with peter Cornish who was one of the key divers who master-minded the recovery of Halifax W1048.
We were extremely well  looked after by Per Sorum, a sprightly 70-plus year old who had a beautiful house in Aasen.
Later we discovered that Per was also involved with the Norwegian underground during the war and he had provided much of the information for the pas that showed the locations of the German ack-ack batteries in the Trondheim area.
He had also transported vital information between safe houses, in his lorry which had a false floor, right under the noses of the occupying German forces.
First official event took place during the early afternoon of April 25, when a large number of people gathered at the memorial site dedicated to the RAF and Allied aircrew.
It was situated on the flat ground at the head of Faetten Fjord near to the spot where the Tirpitz was moored.
The local Aasen band performed a variety of pieces of music, including one that was specially composed for the occasion.
Speeches were made by notable guests which included a Norwegian General and Don MacIntyre the pilot of Halifax W1048.
Also among the guests was Mrs Ly Bennett whose late husband W/C Don Bennett, had taken part in the Tirpitz raids.
His Halifax, W1041 ‘B’, has also been shot down but he survived and escaped via Sweden.
shortly after his arrival back in England he founded the famous Pathfinders, eventually retiring from the RAF as an Air Vice Marshal.
At 1500 hours a dozen light aircraft swept up Faetten Fjord in line astern, at about 600 ‘ft ‘to 1,000 ‘ft ‘, with their landing lights blazing against the dull sky.
They were flying the route taken by the heavy bombers 50 years before.
The first five aircraft were from the military flying school and the remainder from the local aero club.
Each aircraft climbed and peeled-off to port as it reached a position overhead the memorial site.
Tail-end Charlie in the formation was a small float-plane owned but Bernhard Bergersen which on this occasion was being flown by his son.
In September 1991, Bernhard flew his small aircraft along, and videoed, the exact route and at the same altitude that W1048 had flown when she attacked the Tirpitz in 1942.
His experience of flying this route has led him to conclude that the bravery and daring of the crews who took [part in these raids was quite remarkable and deserves to be more widely known.
Bernhard believes that they must rank with the other famous low level heavy bomber raid of the war,The Dambusters , Don MacIntyre, when asked if he thought the low level attacks were dangerous, replied, ‘Yes, but it was dark at the time’.
Over 150 people gathered in Aasen County Hall that evening at the invitation of the Aasen Museum and Historielag (Historical Society).
At the entrance to the Hall was a superb display of photographs and a number of items that had survived the raids.
These included two Mae Wests from Don Bennett's Halifax, a section of one of the specially-adapted naval mines that were carried by the Halifaxes, various flying helmets, a leather flying suit and a rudder from Lancaster L7572 ‘L’.
During the evening, not only did we sit down to an excellent meal but we were also entertained.
The Aasen band provided music, the local choir, including young children, sang for us, Trygve Lian, chairman of the organising committee, presented a slide show of local views and after all the veterans had been introduced with a brief synopsis of their parts in the raids, speeches and presentations were made.
The evening was rounded-off with the cutting of a large cake which had been made and presented by the local baker.
Early the next morning, two coaches set-off from the County Hall on a six hour trip to visit a number of the sites that were connected with the Tirpitz raids.
We were shown the place where F/Sgt Roe had crashed-landed his Halifax (W1053 ‘G’) on the shores of Lake Movatnet, sadly with the loss of one crewman.
Then we were taken up steep narrow logging roads into the mountains of Boras.
We were treated to splendid views of distant mountains and farms scattered among an open rocky landscape.
On arrival at a solitary farm we stopped at a simple stone monument which marked the nearby crash-sites for F/L Mackid's Lancaster,: 7572 ‘L’ and F/L Poole's Halifax, W1020 ‘K’.
Both aircraft had crashed on the night of April 27/28, 1942 with the loss of 13 airmen.
In a short address by Solveig Skjelstad, the quests scattered about the hillside and heard how as a seven year old girl, she had helped remove the bodies from both crashes, to a barn on the farm, there the bodies were placed in coffins before being taken to Trondheim for burial.
Evidently the body of Sergeant Day, who was mid upper gunner in Lancaster L7572, was not recovered until sometime after the rest.
Solveig Shjelstad remembers clearly how because he was so badly disfigured, her mother had sent her to collect small branches to lay over his body before the coffin was sealed.
On every anniversary of the crash she has picked small branches from the same tree and laid them on Day's grave.
It was very fitting that the late Sgt Day's brother, Arthur, and sister, Joan, were among the guests attending.
I think we all found this address very moving, especially Don MacIntyre, who had flown seven sorties as second pilot with F/L Poole's crew before he himself was made a captain and given his own crew.
memorial at Faettenfjord, close to the Tirpitz mooring place, dedicated to the Allied aircrews who took part in the raids of 1942
Faettenfjord, Norway, April 1992.
Tirpitz was moored close to the rocks on the right
W1048 S-Sugar at rest on the  edge of Lake Hocklingen, after the surfacing operation
The tour concluded with a formal ceremony at the Military cemetery at Stavne in Trondheim, the appropriate graves of those who took part in the Tirpitz raids marked simply with Norwegian flags and Union Jacks.
All the visitors brought home with them visual memories of the sights they had seen, the feelings they had experienced and, in particular, the tremendous warmth and hospitality extended to us all by the Norwegians.
Croydon Abandoned!
Not a comment on municipal mismanagement, but the extraordinary fate of the ST–18 Croydon, abandoned on a coral atoll in 1936.
GENERAL AIRCRAFT had been formed to exploit the patents of the Monospar Wing Co ltd.
As its name suggests, Monospar had undertaken the development of a wing built round a single strong Warren girder spar, braced by a pyramidal system of tie rods to take the torsional loads.
It was claimed that this system allowed a lighter wing structure, and it was invented by a Swiss-born engineer, H J Stieher, who had worked for Wm Beardmore & Co.
A prototype wing, designated ST–1, and covered with fabric, as were subsequent Monospar wings, was exhibited at the Olympia Aero show of 1929.
When Beardmore closed down its aviation department, Stieger formed the Monospar Wing Co Ltd, with Fred Crocombe, who had worked for Fairey, as Chief Designer, S/L Rollo de Haga Haig, A E L Chorlton and C W Hayward.
The Air Ministry ordered a larger wing, the ST-2 for testing on their Fokker F.VII/3m, and work began on a three-seat, low-wing monoplane with twin 50hp Salmson radials.
The success of G–AARP, as it was registered, prompted the formation of General Aircraft and the setting-up of a factory at Croydon to build a four-seat, Pobjoy-powered version, the ST–4.
The prototype, G–ABUZ, first flew in 1932, and the aircraft began to sell in reasonable numbers, also being produced with a retractable undercarriage as the ST–6.
(The story of the ‘Smaller’ Monospars can be found in Air Enthusiast 44.)
In 1934 DL Hollis Williams, the former chief designer at Fairey's was appointed Chief Engineer.
The staff was then only 65. later in the year the Company was moved to Hanworth and located on the stock-market.
Shortly afterwards Stieger resigned and Eric Gordon England was appointed Managing Director, a man firmly convinced that the era of civil aviation had finally begun in earnest.
In 1935 Hollis Williams initiated the design of a 10-seat, twin-engined, low wing airliner, the ST–18.
It would have an estimated speed of 190mph and a range of 600 miles, plus a retractable undercarriage, variable pitch airscrews and landing flaps.
The layout of the aircraft was unusual in that the fuselage was set well back on the wing, that his the nose was very short in relation to the length of the rear fuselage.
This was an attempt to increase the lever arm on which the rudder worked, to make directional control with one engine out far easier for the pilot.
This of course moved the centre of gravity aft, and to restore the trim of the aircraft the wings were given a marked degree of sweepback.
The wings were built on the Monospar principle with single bracing struts running to the upper fuselage longeron at a point where the bulkhead between the cockpit and passenger cabin could conveniently be located.
The engines chosen were Pratt & Whitney 450hp Wasp Juniors driving twin-bladed, variable pitch propellers, no British engines of this size being immediately available.
Not surprisingly with these particular engines, a great deal of trouble was taken to sound-proof the 100-seat passenger cabin.
Build at Hanworth during 1935, the prototype was registered G–AECB.
The tentative price was £8,000 and Oceanic Airways of Australia were interested as they operated 10 Monospar four-seaters.
Named Croydon it was ready for flight tests in March 1936.
British Airways tried the Croydon but preferred to order the Lockheed 14 because of its metal-skinned construction, whereas the Croydon was fabric covered.
Major C R Anson of Anson Airways promised to buy the prototype if it made a record flight to Australia where it would be operated.
Lord Sempill was designated pilot for publicity purposes, but with the amiable R H Timber Wood, Major Anson's pilot, as second pilot.
He had been the original Chief Pilot of Hillman Airways, and was very experienced.
Two other crew were to be carried, Mr. Gillroy as wireless operator and Mr. Davies as ground engineer.
Only modification to the aircraft was the fitting to two extra fuel tanks totalling 40 gallons.
The intention was to operate the Croydon at normal all-up weight and not to exceed the normal maximum cruising speed, thereby simulating normal airline operation.
They took-off from Croydon on July 30, 1936, flying via Vienna, Athens, Aleppo, Bushire and Jask on the Persian coast, towards Karachi.
Bad weather on the way to Karachi resulted in a return to Jask, where Lord Sempill made a heavy landing, damaging the tailwheel.
A temporary repair was made and they flew on to Karachi, where the damage was found to be worse than at first suspected, as the fastenings had pulled out of one of the fuselage verticals.
Fred Crocombe as Chief Designer flew out to supervise repairs.
He was delayed by an accident to the Imperial Airways' HP.42 on which he was flying on the Kisumu-Cairo-Karachi sector.
Short Kent G–ABFA Scipio has sunk after a heavy landing at Mirabella on the Alexandria-Brindisi service, and this had delayed the service out to India.
The HP.42, G–AAUC Horsa , took-off from Basra on August 28 at 22.30 hours, to try and make up lost time.
Bahrain station was not informed of their approach and so failed to light-up, and the moon has already set, so the pilot of Horsa overshot.
The force-landed in the Saudi desert at dawn, a 100 miles to the south of Bahrain and the starboard undercarriage leg collapsed.
No-one was hurt and they were found the following day, after a search by RAF aircraft, Crocombe and the other seven passengers were rescued by an RAF Vickers Valencia transport.
Crocombe should have taken this as a bad omen, but did not, carrying on to Karachi.
The Imperial Airways ground staff at Karachi assisted with the repair of the Croydon, but without the facilities available in England it still took several weeks.
Lord Sempill could not afford the time, and flew home, so Fred Crocombe decided to take his place for the rest of the flight, with Wood as the sole pilot.
Repairs were completed on September 11 and the flight continued via Jodhpur and Allahabad, the latter sector being achieved at a respectable average speed of 191.6mph (at 75% power, with a light following wind), then on to Calcutta.
Flying over the Bay of Bengal on the way to Rangoon they experienced a terrifying monsoon storm.
Well out over the Bay at 4,000 ‘ft ‘they flew into a cloud front and struck what seemed to be a solid wall of water.
The Croydon was bounced around the sky like a pong-pong ball, and Fred Crocombe watched in grim horror as the Kollsman altimeter recorded prodigious amount of ascent and descent.
Wood was flying completely blind, but there were occasions when the various instruments contradicted one another, such were the violent changes of attitude, while the seat of his pants told him something entirely different.
Gillroy and Davies hit the roof several times before managing to strap themselves down in the cabin, where all they could do was sit ashen-faced and pray.
After 45 minutes they finally emerged from the storm under broken cloud, and then made good time to Rangoon.
They continued via Penand, Batavia, Sourabaya and Koepang, cruising mostly at around 10,000 ‘ft ‘, which was pleasantly cool.
In calm conditions Wood was able to trim the aircraft to fly feet-off for hours on end, with just a touch of rudder now and then to correct their course.
He was often able to fly hands-off as well, as long as the crew did not move about.
Having to do all the flying, Wood was supplied with black coffee and cigarettes to keep awake on these long boring stretches.
Over the bumpy conditions of central Australia he had more to occupy him, flying from Darwin via Daly Waters, Brunette Downs, Cloncurry and Charleville to Melbourne.
Unfortunately, because of the delay, Major Anson repudiated the contract to buy G–AECB.
They undertook a number of demonstration flights in Australia, and took part in the Air Pageant organised by the Victoria Aero Club on September 26 and won the Herald Cup, with the fastest time.
They decided to attempt the Australia to England record on the return journey, and left Melbourne in fine weather on October 6.
They reached Darwin the same day, covering  the 2,435 miles at an average speed of 188.4mph, with stops at Charleville and Cloncurry.
They found that Darwin W/T station had not been informed of their flight in time to warn Koepang W/T station to be on the air the following morning.
They were a little anxious about the flight over the Timor Sea as their compass had been 10° awry on the outward journey though it was correct at Melbourne.
As a QANTAS flight was due to come through the following day, they hoped that Koepang W/T would be on the air before their arrival at Timor.
They took-off at 4.47am, well before dawn, and set a compass course of 282° for the western end of the island of Timor, allowing 4° magnetic variation and 1° of drift.
Twenty-five minutes later they received their first back-bearing from Darwin, indicating that they were one degree north of track.
Wood changed the compass course and flew on for 20 minutes, but their next bearing from Darwin indicated that they were even further north of track.
Suspecting that the compass was playing up again, Wood altered course by 5° but after another 20 minutes Darwin still informed them that they were north of course.
This seemed very strange, and Gillroy, the W/T operator, asked Darwin to confirm their bearing.
Darwin told them that it was ‘First Class’, that is within plus or minus one degree.
Wood arrived at the conclusion that the compass error they were experiencing was opposite to the error they had found coming south over the Timor Sea, and decided he had to trust Darwin's bearings implicitly.
To get back on the track he flew on 270° for 20 minutes, but was then informed they were still one degree north of track.
It was now 6.22am, and their ETA at Koepang was 7.15am, so Wood decided that altering course any further was not worthwhile, as they were near enough to Timor for it not to make much difference.
At 6.40am he tried for another bearing, but their signal was now so weak, Darwin were unable to comply.
Wood descended to 3,000 ‘ft ‘to improve their view, as visibility was hindered by wisps of cloud and the early morning sun shining through the haze.
At 8.00am they sighted a circular reef, just below the surface of the sea.
Believing that land would not be far away, they began searching, mainly to the north, using the reef as a base.
They found two more reefs, but no land.
Gillroy could no longer raise Darwin, and Koepang seemed to be off the air.
The Croydon's last resting place, Seringapatam Reef in the Timor Sea
They had started with 235 gallons of fuel, enough for 5.22 hours of flying, but things were now getting critical.
Then they spotted a fishing boat, near the northernmost reef.
They flew low over it and dropped a can asking for directions to Koepang.
There was no response and they were now getting very worried.
It was now 9.00am, they only had about one hour's fuel left, enough for 180 miles at the most.
With the reef below, and a boat nearby to give them assistance they decided to try and land.
At 9.15am Wood made a trial approach with the under carriage down.
He just touched the surface with the wheels to test it.
It seemed firm but covered with a thin layer of seawater.
Wood circled for the last time, as Gillroy and Davies went aft to strap themselves in.
Fred Crocombe put the flaps half down, and Wood flattened out and made a fine three-point landing, pulling up quickly and successfully avoiding several groups of boulders.
The reef looked higher a litter further on and Wood started to taxi forward.
it was rough going for the tailwheel, and there was a sharp crack aft.
The tailwheel, dropped through the coral surface, and the elevator control went soggy.
They switched off the engines and climbed out.
They were about 10 yards from the western side of the reef, where it fell away sharply and waves were pounding on its shore.
The tailwheel has fallen through the surface and the yoke was broken, so an immediate take-off was out of the question.
Examining the surface of the reef, Wood decided, that even if the tailwheel could be repaired, a take-off would be highly dangerous.
They ran out the aerial, using the two oars of their collapsible boar to keep it clear of the reef.
Gillroy could hear both Darwin and Koepang, but they could not hear him.
In an attempt to recharge the battery, Wood started the port engine, which powered the generator, but radio contact still proved impossible.
At 11.15am they gave up the attempt, and as the tide was rising over the reef, decided to seek the help of the fishermen in the lagoon.
They were taken aboard the fishing boat, and they found the only word they had in common with the fishermen was Koepang.
All shipping in the area had been alerted when they went missing, and at 3.30pm the following day the SS Nimoda came across them, and they were taken aboard.
They were interested to discover that the fishermen were steering a direct course for Koepang, without such marvellous modern aids as charts, wireless, or navigational instruments!
They had landed on the Seringapatam Reef, 600 miles form Darwin and 267 miles from Koepang.
They were exceedingly lucky as the reef was only clear enough of water at low tide for an aircraft to land on three days each month.
At high tide later the same day it was covered to a depth of three feet, and the following week, it was covered to a depth of 14 ‘ft ‘, so salvaging the Croydon was out of the question.
A Committee of Inquiry was instituted in Australia to examine this extraordinary affair.
The Report criticised the crew of the Croydon for not doing more to rectify the compass problems which they had experienced and for relying too heavily on D/F bearings, but it implied that the Darwin W/T station should not have stated the bearings of ‘night error’, they should have known they were nothing of the sort.
It was the end of the ST–18, General Aircraft did not have the money to build another one, and perhaps did not feel inclined to, with the lukewarm interest they had experienced.
They were in the throes of obtaining a contract to build 87 hawker Furies, the first military order placed outside the close knit ring of SBAC constructors, and must have felt this was where their immediate future lay.
Fred Crocombe went on to work for Boulton Paul Aircraft, and often reflected on how close he came to being one of those many aviator's lost mysteriously without a trace over the wide expanse of the sea.
ROAR of the CHEETAH
In Port Elizabeth, within the fold of the South African Air Force Museum, a small group of volunteers have taken on not only the genesis of a regional museum, but the task of bringing an Airspeed Oxford back to life.
Oxford G–AITF as she was in her days with Air Service Training at Perth, Scotland, as an instructional airframe in the early 1960s.
(MAP)
BY NOW a small museum will have been open a couple of months, located on the edge of the airport at Port Elizabeth on the eastern side of the Republic of South African Air Force Museum (of which more in the December FlyPast ), acting as a regional ‘draw’ for aviation enthusiasts of all ilks in a land that is very air-minded.
During Flypast's visit in early March, preparations were at a frantic pace for a limited opening in April, with progressive expansion as and when time and money permitted.
The band of volunteers were quite happy to admit that they had kick-started an endless pursuit, ‘a museum is never finished’ was the comment from one.
Former gunnery training hall from the days of 42 Air School, now a new division of the SAAF Museum.
Until very recently, the SAAF maintained units at Port Elizabeth (or just PE to everyone within the RSA).
16 Squadron, operating Alouette III and Puma helicopters were the last residents.
Defence cut-backs have seen the last of the choppers in a resident form and the SAAF now maintains a Forward Air Force Command Post with a basic infra-structure to handle SAAF operations from the airport, should they be required.
PE is also a natural staging post for SAAF aircraft transiting up and down the coast.
Personnel from the resident SAAF cadre, with the guiding light of the CO, are giving a helping hand in the creation of PE's own aviation museum.
Long before there was the clatter of rotor blades above PE, a major base could be found on the southern edge of the airfield, this was 42 Air School (AS), established at south End, in 1940, and opened ‘for business’ in April 1940 as part of the joint Air Training Scheme.
The base was big, boasting 11 hangars and a large supporting ‘township’.
Main types used were the Airspeed Oxford, Avro Anson, Fairey Battle and the Northrop Nomad.
What remains of the 42 AS buildings are employed for a variety of uses, including a company making boats and the compounds provide open storage for governmental vehicles.
But in a former gunnery hall on the extreme southerly edge of South End camp, Friends of the SAAF Museum have established a foothold which looks set to prosper.
That the building was a gunnery school is beyond doubt.
Within this hangar-like construction six or seven ‘turrets’ were housed, giving student gunners their first taste of their chosen art.
Along the walls a series of graticule markings give witness to the patterns gunners had to follow (using light beams, not tracer!) to appease the instructors.
These will be kept in place.
The Museum site includes a hard-standing and all the volunteers are keeping a covetous eye on a nearby T2-type hangar.
Work started on the former gunnery school in April 1991.
Some 13 tons of iron scrap dumped within by the previous occupants had to be removed.
The Friends had proved themselves to be ingenious and enterprising in their adaptation of the building and in procuring items needed in the refurbishing for little, or no, cost.
For example, the donation of some R25,000 worth of roofing material has come from a French company.
All of this activity has meant that aircraft and artefact restoration has necessarily taken to the back-burner, but, to quote one of the volunteers: ‘no building, no aircraft in the long term’.
Within the mass of timbers, display boards, tools and artefacts, Vampire FB.9 205 awaits its turn.
The item that makes everyone tick at PE also lies within the former gunnery hall, but it has been receiving attention since its arrival — within the hold of a Safair L–100 Hercules.
This is Airspeed Oxford l G–AITF and it marks the return of an Oxbox to a area that once buzzed with them.
Much work has been undertaken on this aircraft and it has clearly got into the blood of those at PE, so much so that should the SAAF Museum at Swartkop, near Pretoria, ever wish to move there, they would find a fearsome fight on their hands!
In February 1984, the SS Elgaren sailed from the UK with a precious cargo on board, Oxford G–AITF (formerly RAF ED920).
The Oxford and been a parts donor in the restoration of the RAF Museum's Oxford l MP425 (G–AITB) which is now on show at the Newark Air Museum.
The SAAF Museum had long wanted an Oxbox and an exchange was arranged, with Lockheed Ventura II 6130 (one time AJ469) coming the other way.
The latter is currently stored at Cosford.
Until suitable workshop facilities could be made, it was clear that little could be done on the Oxford's airframe.
Instead, great progress has been made with the pair of Armstrong Siddeley Cheetah X 375hp seven cylinder radials.
Until very recently, the SAAF has had the praiseworthy policy of flying as many of its historic airframes as possible, and the Oxford's restoration has been undertaken with this in mind, or at the very least to allow the aircraft to ground-run.
And so the Cheetahs have come to life.
Using an old Bedford truck chassis, itself a museum piece, as a test-bench the volunteers and SAAF technicians have allowed the magical sound of an all-too-rare radial to reverberate around PE again.
The engine that was fired-up in honour of the FlyPast visit, had clocked-up just over 90 minutes of running time at that point and sounded as sweet as a nut.
The other engine,Bert has clocked some 10 hours in all.
That Cheetah has the name ‘Bert’ engraved on it as a permanent memorial to Bert Mason who has worked unstintingly on bringing the Cheetahs back to life and had worked at 42 AS during the war years.
He died early in 1992 and one of his engineering progeny honours him.
As the nascent museum beings to find its feet, the determined band at PE look forward to more airframes coming their way from the SAAF Museum and the work on the Oxford will gain in pace.
They are naturally keen to have contact with anyone who can help them with Oxford spares of all kinds.
The wider world of aviation enthusiasts is equally a s keen for the day that the two Cheetahs can be harnessed to the completed Oxford airframe.
If the Oxford cannot fly for one reason or another, she will still be the only ‘live’ Airspeed aircraft in the world.
We wish all at PE well with their endeavours.
NEWS
Newsbreaks
LONE STAR FLIGHT Museum have added Howard 500 N3831Y to their already impressive collection at Galveston, Texas.
At the time of writing the aircraft is based at Toluca, Mexico, and is being overhauled prior to its ferry flight to Galveston.
ROLLED-OUT earlier this year at the Belgrade Aviation Museum was fully-restored fuselage of Short Sealand l 9662.
One of only two left in the world, it has been returned to its Yugoslavian Air Force colours.
ELMER WARD ‘S Grumman G–58 Bearcat N3025, flew for the first time after rebuild on July 27, after a ten year and $2m restoration programme.
Flying to Oshkosh later in the week, the fighter was awarded the Judges’ Choice in the Special Awards category.
FIRST of its type to be entered on the Slovenian civilian aircraft register UTVA–66 ex Yugoslavian Air Force 51103, how SL–DCO, was seen on June 6 at an airshow held at Bled in Slovenia.
A FORMER ROYAL CANADIAN Navy Sea Fury is being restored to flying condition by Sanders Aircraft at Chino, California.
One of two originally purchased by the late Frank Sanders, many parts from this ‘Fury have been used in other rebuilds over the years.
On completion the Sea Fury will be powered by a Wright 3350, replacing the original Bristol Centaurus.
TWO MORE Phantoms have been allocated to gate guardian duties — further to the September issue, p44.
FGR.2 ZT891 is now in place at Coningsby, Lincs.
A former 56 Squadron example has flown into Woodvale, Merseyside, to replace Meteor T.7 WA591, which will be put up for disposal.
Weston's new arrivals
ARRIVING at the International Helicopter Museum (HM), Weston-Super-Mare, on August 29 was Bell UH–1H Iroquois 66–16579.
Donated to the IHM by the US Defence Department, this Vietnam veteran entered service in 1967 and was shipped immediately out to ‘Nam, where it is believed to have participated in the Tet Offensive of 1968.
Moved on behalf of the IHM by Bristow Helicopters, the Huey , once reassembled will be the only example of its type on display at an aviation museum in Europe.
Arriving at IHM earlier in the year was G–HAUL, the sole Westland TT300, built in 1986 to participate in an RAF competition, for a tactical helicopter to replace the ageing Wessex and Puma.
The ultimate version of the WG–30 helicopter, the TT300 suffered form changing RAF requirements.
The TT300 programme was not supported by the Ministry of Defence and was dropped in favour of the larger EH.101 utility variant.
Flat into Duxford
ONE TIME RESIDENT in the Southend Historic Aircraft Museum, Fiet G.46–IV MM53211/BAPC 79 has, after many years for storage and neglect, surfaced at Duxford in the capable hands of the Aircraft Restoration Company (ARCO), builders of Blenheims and other interesting aircraft.
ARCO Director Graham Warner told FlyPast, ‘There are very few, if any, Italian aircraft participating in airshows, and we think that it will be an interesting addition to the display circuit, once completed’.
Hampden stays
HANDLEY PAGE Hampden P1344, imported into the UK from the former USSR by collector Jeet Mahal, is destined for the RAF Museum, after a series of negotiations.
It has been exchanged for Spitfire XVI SL542, currently in store at RAF St Athan.
Jeet is now open to offers on SL542.
The Hampden will be transferred to the RAF Museum's storage and restoration facility at Cardington, Beds, as soon as space has been arranged for it.
Hendon has secured for itself a once ‘extinct’ bomber, filling a decided ‘hole’in the RAF Museum's coverage.
Dodo emigrates
Forward fuselage of Shackleton WR967 seen at Liverpool Docks in August for export to Cyprus.
WR967, the former RAF Lossiemouth Shackleton MR.2C fuselage AEW procedures trainer was noted at Liverpool Docks in August, awaiting shipment to Cyprus.
Dodo , as the ground trainer was known, has been purchased by Savvas Constantinides as a source of spares for his two Shackleton AEW.2s WL747 and WL757.
Meanwhile, speculation continues that the Greek collector is looking for more aircraft for his collection and is working hard to return one of his Shacks to airworthy condition and back to the UK!
Delightful prospect that this is, it is felt that certification problems will frustrate any such plans.
US Iskra flies
N501SH, pictured outside the Spartan Aeronautics hangar at Tulsa, Oklahoma, prior to its successful test flight.
FIRST OF 25 Polish-built WSK–PZL Mielec TS–11 Iskra jet trainers recently took to the air in Tulsa, Oklahoma.
Flown by Polish-trained Iskra pilot, Janusz Abczynski, the aircraft, N501SH, is one of 25 such machines that were imported into the USA by Wilke Associates, who have also established parts support, service and training for what they see to be a top contender in the sport jet market.
Well known aerobatic pilot, Jim Franklin, as purchased two of the Iskras for use in his airshow act, which he performs all over the USA.
Make-a-Date
Register News
Loch Hurricane
HURRICANE IIA Z2505, looks set to return to Scotland once aviation archaeologists at Duxford have examined the remains for parts that may be useful in any future rebuilds of the rare fighter type.
Raised from Lock Oich in the Scottish Highlands in July, the Hurricane crashed there on August 31, 1941 after an engine fire disabled it over the Highlands.
Pilot F/O E Foit bailed out of the stricken Hurricane, and the aircraft crashed almost vertically into the Loch.
Although the aircraft was severely broken-up on impact, the remains of its compressed wreckage have been well preserved in Peaty silt for 51 years.
After salvage of any potentially useful parts has been accomplished, it is hoped that the wreck will be donated to the Inverness-based Fresson Trust, who are establishing a new museum at Inverness Airport.
In Dunning's  footsteps 
AUGUST 2 1917 witnessed the first landing of an aircraft on a moving ship.
This act was achieved by Commander E H Dunning in a Sopwith Pup on the adapted ‘carrier’ HMS Furious .
Sadly, Dunning was killed five days later trying to repeat the event.
During the Portsmouth Navy Days, the 75th anniversary of this act was marked on HMS Ark Royal when the Fleet Air Arm Museum's Sopwith Pup replica N6452 was shown off below decks alongside a Navy Sea Harrier FRS.l.
Had August's weather been kinder, the duo would have been displayed on the Ark's famous ski-jump!
Vulcan countdown
MONDAY September 7 saw the last flying Vulcan formatting with an RAF Hercules over Stamford, Lincs.
On the 16th, the mighty delta was due to leave her home at Waddington, Lincs, for the Channel Islanders and their Battle of Britain displays.
Beyond that would be a ferry flight to Leuchars in Scotland for the northern Battle of Britain display before settling upon Finningley the same day (19th) for a display and a nightstop.
On the 20th she is due to make her last RAF-owned display at Dreamflight , Cranfield, Beds, with an emotional return to Waddington on the 21st.
Upon arrival at base, XH558 will be open to those who have tendered for her, with a decision on her next home, or otherwise, to be given in due course.
And no, as of September 9, when these words are put together, the Ministry of Defence have not changed their minds….
Nieuport flies away
ODD-SOUNDING Nieuport 28C–1 6531/G–BSKS, part of the Historic Aircraft Collection of Jersey, is leaving its temporary home of Old Warden for pastures new.
Reportedly leaving these shores to become part of the National Air & Space Museum in Washington, DC, the Nieuport was a show-stealer during its sojourn with the Shuttleworth Collection.
Cockpit trio
BROOKLANDS MUSEUM have recently added three unique aircraft cockpit sections to their collection Hawker Typhoon 1A, Vickers Supermarine 544 prototype WT 859 and BAC TSR.2 cockpit sections will soon be on public display at Brooklands.
The Typhoon and Supermarine 544 are on loan from private owners (Peter Smith and Alan Allen respectively) and the TSR.2 has been donated from the Defence Research Agency (DRA), formerly the Royal Aerospace Establishment, at Farnborough.
TSR.2 nose section seen here at Brooklands Museum, after arriving from the DRA at Farnborough.
Twin appeal
NEWARK AIR MUSEUM have launched an appeal to raise funds for the restoration of their General Aircraft Monospar ST.12 VH–UTH.
Museum directors have decided that now is the time to proceed with this daunting project which is estimated to cost between £15,000 to £20,000 to complete VH–UTH to static display standards.
Newark's recently-completed Avro Anson C.19 VL348 has been short-listed for an award in the Scania Transport Trust Award Scheme.
‘By short-listing the Anson project for an award, the Transport Trust have recognised the hard work and dedication of all those who were involved in this daunting rebuild’, commented Newark Air Museum's Curator, Mike Smith.
Work on the restoration of DH Heron 1 G–ANXB, which is now sporting its BEA Scottish Airways livery once more.
Inside Newark's award-winning display hangar, Prentice T.1 VR249 is receiving a repaint, the silver finish achieved being all the more remarkable because it has been rollered on, not sprayed.
During the winter months, an above-ground replica of an underground Royal Observer Corps bunker will be erected in the display hangar.
Hendon as hosts
AFTER celebrations at Coventry in May to mark the 100th meeting, the British Aviation Preservation Council's 101st quarterly conference, staged at the RAF Museum at Hendon on August 22, returned to its usual format, reports Trevor Green .
Dr. Michael Fopp greeted delegates and then Bruce James of the Restoration Centre at Cardington gave a presentation on the work and policies of the facility including mentioning the good news about the Hampden — see separate feature.
Michael Fopp also revealed encouraging news about Hendon's famous Grahame White hangar on the site adjacent to the RAF Museum.
This has now become a listed building and should a buyer be found for the surplus Ministry of Defence land, a pre-requisite would be the dismantling of the hangar and its re-erection on RAF Museum land.
Four groups were accepted as provisional members of Council at the meeting; the Fresson Trust, the Hovercraft Museum at Calshot, the royal Berkshire Aviation Society and the Vampire Preservation Group.
Belgian Spitfire
Spitfire FR XIV RM921/SG–57 immaculate in its No 2 Wing de Chasse colours, ‘on the move’ to its new display building at Florrenes in July.
MOVING INTO ITS purpose-built building at Florrenes Air Base, Belgium, at the end of July was Spitfire FR.XIV RM921/SG–57. coming to the end of a restoration programme that was started in 1986, the fighter wears the colours and markings of Col Avi R A Lallemant, commanding Officer of 609 Sqn in 1944.
From 1951 until 1986 the aircraft was displayed atop a pole in front of the HQ building at Florrenes.
P–38 for sale
WHITE LIGHTNIN, Lefty Gardner's famous 38L Lightning N25Y, well-known for its airshow appearances all over the USA, is to be included in the Rick Cole Reno Warbird and Classic Aircraft Auction on September 18/19 (see September's FlyPast, p45).
Other aircraft to be included in the auction are reported to include: Avenger, Mustang, Nanchang CJ–6A, Sea Fury, Skyraider and T–28 Trojan.
Thameside Harvard
JOINING THE THAMESIDE Aviation Museum recently for restoration to SNJ standards was AT–16 42–12417.
Originally destined for RAF service as RE905, the aircraft actually ended up in charge with the RCAF until 1946.
Owner Gordon King acquired the aircraft from Aces High in an exchange arrangement for an original B–25 nose section, to replace the panoramic camera nose fitted to N1042B (see July's FlyPast, p58).
Thameside Aviation Museum is open to the public on the last Sunday of every month and Bank Holidays, it is planned to have the Harvard on display throughout its restoration.
Further details can be obtained on 
Putzer progress
GOOD PROGRESS is being made by Marsonair Ltd at Humberside Airport of the restoration to flying condition of Putzer Elster C, D–EDEZ/G–BOPY, which has now bee re-registered as G–LUFT.
Repairs to the fuselage are almost complete apart from the main cabin area.
Wooden repairs to flying and control surfaces have been finished and 90% of metal repairs have been carried out.
New suspension rubbers have been specially manufactured, although the undercarriage has yet to be re-assembled.
The engine has been overhauled and is now inhibited until needed.
Accidents
December 26, 1991 : Auster J/5F Aiglet Trainer VH–CDL destroyed by fire on the ground at Coldstream, Victoria, Australia together with a spare set of wings.
Arson suspected.
February 4, 1992 : DHC–3 Otter floatplane N13GA of Taquan Air Service crashed after on approach to Mrtlakatla, Alaska.
February 9 : Stinson 108–1 N905D landed short at Cube Cove, Alaska, and crashed killing the pilot.
March 15 : Erco 415D N86952 crashed during attempted go-around at Winthrop, Washington State.
One killed, one injured.
April 5 : Globe GC–1B Swift N90379 crashed into mountain at Rancho Cucamonga, California, killing the pilot.
April 9 : Globe GC–1B Swift N90379 crashed at Miami, Florida after right wing separated in flight.
Both occupants killed.
April 22 : Navion A N4904E crashed into lake in adverse weather conditions at Monteverde, Florida.
May 3 : Piper PA–18–150 Super Cub N13910 crashed into water after steep climb at St Augustine, Florida.
Pilot killed.
May 9 : Nanchang CJ–6 crashed into a nursery near Flushear, Texas, after attempting a roll following a pass over Covey Trails Airport.
Both occupants killed.
June 27 : Yak–52 crashed through the roof of a newly-built printing works following engine failure during air display at Amsk, Russia, killing pilot.
July 21 : C–47A Dakota LX–DKT of Legend Air picked up by gale force winds while parked at Ostend and thrown against Boeing 707 Z–WKV, breaking off the tail of the Dak and damaging the nose.
Probable right-off.
July 24 : Viscount 816 PK–RVU of Mandala Airlines crashed into Mount Liliboy on Ambon Island, Indonesia during bad weather 10km from touchdown at Pattimura Airport after circling in the hope of a break in the poor visibility.
All 63 passengers and seven crew killed.
July 28 : YAK–18T crashed and caught fire 50km north of Baraul, Russia, due to pilot error.
Pilot and four passengers killed.
July 30 : DHC–2 Beaver floatplane N67151 crashed in bad weather near Dillingham, south west of Anchorage, Alaska.
Five passengers on board killed but the pilot and one passenger were thrown clear and survived although both were seriously injured with severe burns.
August 19 : Cessna 185F Skywagon II floatplane of Hammonds Air Service crashed on take-off from a canal and inverted at Houma, Louisiana.
Aircraft extensively damaged but pilot and three passengers escaped injury.
August 21 : Convair 440–80 CP–1961 of Servicios Aereos Santa Ana crashed into a mountain near La Paz, Bolivia, killing all three crew and seven passengers on board.
August 27 : DHC–4T Turbo-Caribou N400NC of NewCal Aviation crashed on take-off from Gimi, Manitoba, Canada.
After a normal steep climb-out, at about 120m the aircraft's nose dropped and it dived into the ground killing all three crew and destroying the aircraft.
August 28 : Vickers Viscount of Bouraq Indonesia Airlines suffered engine trouble and caught fire on take-off from Banjarmasin Airport, Kalimantan Island.
Only four of the 77 passengers were slightly injured while escaping from the emergency exits but the aircraft was badly damaged.
August 31 : C–47B Dakota (turbo-conversion) ZS–DHX of Professional Aviation Services crashed shortly after take-off from Jamba, Angola, due to engine problems.
Aircraft destroyed and three crew killed but only two of the 14 journalists on board were badly hurt.
Final Varsity flight
LAST AIRWORTHY Vickers Varsity, in the distinctive livery of the DRA (formerly RAE) at Farnborough, was ferried to the Aerospace Museum at RAF Cosford on July 27 (photo:Aerospace Museum .
Released from the Vickers factory at Brooklands on September 25, 1953, Varsity T.1 WL679 spent most of its life at Farnborough, although for several years it was based at Pershore.
With the flight into Cosford on July 27, WL679 marked the end of an era that stretched over 43 years of sterling service for the type.
Moving gesture
ROYAL BERKSHIRE AVIATION Society and the Herald Society have recently announced a major sponsorship deal which will help their plans for the establishment of the Museum of Berkshire Aviation.
Berkshire-based transport company, Frequent Mailing Services (FMS), have agreed to provide transportation of exhibits for the museum.
The Herald Society will be a recipient of this sponsorship programme, as officials of FMS have inspected herald G–APWA, which will be transported back to its birthplace at Woodley in the near future.
Airship Museum
Remains of a TBF Avenger recovered from the hills near Barbers Point NAS by Shore Aviation Service.
STUMBLED ON whilst on holiday in Hawaii recently was an airfield approximately 40 miles outside of Honolulu.
Known as Mokuleia, the airfield was formerly Dillingham Field and was constructed late in World War Two, with some of the fortified revetments from that period remaining.
A number of vintage aircraft and gliders operate from the field, the runway runs parallel to the beach.
Shore Aviation Service Corporation, owned by Peter Crown and Mike Can Arkel (both avid readers of FlyPast) specialise in vintage aircraft and film work.
An Avenger, Helicat, T–33, F–101 and DC–3 survive in the airfield scrapyard, whilst types like Cessna 0–1, T–6 Texan, Navion and Naval Aircraft Factory N3N, plus various gliders fly from the airfield on a regular basis.
West Country Noratlas
KEPT ON PRIVATE land near the International Helicopter Museum, Weston-Super-Mare, is the fuselage of an ex-French Air Force Nord Noratlas.
Purchased in France by the current owner, it was used as a parachute trainer.
The present owner has plans to convert it to a travelling theatre.
US Viscount
ONLY AIRWORTHY Vickers Viscount in the USA, N555SL, has been donated to the Mid Atlantic Air Museum (MAAM), of reading, Pennsylvania.
After laying dormant for two years at Chino airport, the aircraft made a successful test flight on June 23, departing for a respray in Capital Airlines' colours at Clarkesburg, West Virginia.
Scheduled to arrive at MAAM on August 14, the aircraft will be maintained in airworthy condition to participate in east coast airshows.
TYPE REPORT
SPITFIRE
38 and RISING!
This feature was designed to cover the first flights of three Spitfires, during the time of its production that statistic changed to four!
First off was TE566, seen here in her Czech colour scheme with TP280 and the Historic Flying Limited hangar behind, July 2, 1992.
(Author)
TP280 undertaking final engine runs on July 2, with the cowling yet to be sprayed up.
She went aloft three days later.
(Author)
Firing-up TP298 at Chino ready for her debut, July 6.
Stephen Grey at the helm of MV293 at Duxford, August 14, 1992 ready for the first flight.
(Author)
Contemporary shot of what is claimed to be TE566 ‘DU–A’ in Czech service.
(Authors collection)
WITH THE TRAGIC loss of Dave Moore and the Rolls-Royce Spitfire RM689 it is perhaps an appropriate time to reflect on the current status of airworthy Spitfires.
With the cessation of the civilian-operated THUM flights of RAF PR.
XIXs in 1957, the grounding of two Mk.XVI aircraft of the Battle of Britain Flight due to incidents a year or so later, 1960 probably saw the lowest dip in the airworthy Spitfire population.
Ten aircraft, give or taken one, by my count and half of those resident in Belgium with the COGEA target-towing operation.
And how many today?
And this might come as a surprise to our brethren in the popular national press —Thirty-eight .
Thirty-eight and rising.
And rising fast.
Indeed by an irony of timing, within a week of the Rolls tragedy, three further restored Spitfires have returned to the air and these will be the subject of some study to follow.
Perhaps even more surprising is that there are further 30 plus Spitfires dotted around the world, on the stocks and in private hands, proceeding at various rates towards flying status.
Certainly a further ten flying within the next two years is not an over optimistic estimate.
Over the past 30 years there has been a sprinkling of repairable incidents and three Spitfires totally lost with pilot fatality.
The overall quality levels of restoration and maintenance are probably higher now than ever before and market values have aided this aspect.
All single-engine, high performance, military aircraft fly with a degree of inherent risk.
Statistically this loss rate is low seen in the perspective of the number of flying Spitfires over this time span.
Spitfire restorations to airworthy status have notoriously exceeded initial estimates of timing and cost, irrespective of start point condition.
When Historic Flying Ltd of Audley Eng, fresh from the completion of David Tallichet's machine RW382, set the date of completing TE566 within on year and targeted the premier Duxford weekend Classic Fighter show of July 1992, it was going to be a hard one.
When substantially into this period, the plan was mooted that TP280 also, with effort, might make the show, few in the Spitfire fraternity thought it possible.
They did it — just.
How many, I wondered, who visited the show would realise just how much blood, sweat, and tears were shed to get the two aircraft on the ramp.
Few would know, seeing two ‘new’ Spitfires in fresh interesting livery, parked against the crowd line, that for TE566/G–BLCK it would be its second flight and for TP280/G–BTXE its first.
That is cutting things a smidge fine.
Jeffrey sign's Rudy Frasca's Spitfire (Rudy pictured standing behind Quill) at Audley End, August 15, 1992.
On the occasion of the 60 Squadron reunion.
TP280 carries the livery of the last Spitfire operation in Malaya, black and yellow bands.
(Author)
With the build-up towards the deadline, Tim Routsis and his team piled on the pressure, round the clock, with determined dedication.
Key players snatched sleep when and where they could.
The workshop hangar was a shambles of activity.
The test pilot quietly waiting, literally for the paint to dry.
The last thing this scene needed was a non-participating spectator and I am indeed grateful for that privilege.
On the evening of Thursday July 2, TE566 eased into the air for a short test flight in the capable hands of John Allison.
A brief pass through the check list, the required stall, all within sight of the field and then touch down to much relief of the owners, Historic Aircraft Collection Ltd.
The champagne popped.
TE566 lying at Alonim, Israel, as discovered by Robs Lamplough.
(Authors collection)
TP280, a Mk.XVIII, a Griffon-powered machine, longer and much heavier than the ‘lX TE566, was running a little behind schedule and perilously close to the show deadline.
Audley End is a relatively small grass field with a slope.
It had previously been decided that the first landing should be away on the metalled runway of Duxford or Cambridge.
Finally there was just the fitting of the cowlings for the last time.
It was Saturday, the first day of the show.
The weather was not kind.
Drizzle and low cloud.
It would be a prime requirement that the airspeed and behaviour at the stall be determined prior to the first landing.
Today would not be the day.
TE566 and RW382 launched off into the gloom for nearby Duxford.
Maybe tomorrow.
A certain Spitfire historian set his alarm for six o'clock on Sunday.
Looked out of the window at rain, no horizon and a cloud-base under 500 ‘ft ‘and went back to bed for another hour.
Another look.
The same.
How could it be any different 40 miles away?
A check phone call at 9.30 to confirm.
There were gaps in the weather.
They were running the engine.
I was going to miss that magic moment of seeing air under the tyres for the first time.
Damn it.
I set off for Duxford  cursing.
The aircraft looked magnificent in its 60 Squadron markings and Malaya campaign stripes.
The team had done it.
The aircraft had won the unofficial award of ‘best presented aircraft’ by display director David Henchie.
The owner Rudy Frasca, I knew, would be supremely delighted.
There were wan smiles on the faces of some who did not think it was possible.
Is it really 14 years ago that Wensley Haydon-Baillie recovered that well publicised clutch of eight Spitfires form the Indian sub-continent?
Two pairs went direct to the USA.
TP276 and TP280 to Rudy Frasca in Champaign, Illinois.
SM845 and TP298 to Dick Boolootian in California.
Four came to the UK.
MV370, NH749 and HS649 IAF (RAF serial not known) to the Wickenden brothers and the prize, MT719, via Wroughton, to Franco Actis in Turin, to be restored as I–SPIT and latterly G–VIII.
Over the intervening years the inter-action and travelling of these eight aircraft is intricate.
Englishman Craig Charleston restore NH749 to fly for the Wickendens, becoming G–MXIV.
It now resides in Santa Monica, California, in the David Price stable as NX749DP.
Charleston has continued to supervise its health in the US.
MV370 and HS649 IAF have been restored to static display for museums in Hanover, Germany, and Overloon, Holland, respectively.
The Dick Boolootian machines (SM845 and TP298) were acquired by the David Tallichet organisation and placed under contract restoration in the US with an operation in Tulsa, Oklahoma.
Although outwardly a lot of disassembly, cleaning, refurbishing and re-riveting was accomplished, it was to US spec rivets and fixings, largely unco-ordinated and more importantly, undocumented.
The contract came to grief and the projects passed briefly through another restoration house, then into the Tallichet storage facility in Chino, California.
A complex negotiation was made between the Davids Price and Tallichet for aircraft and services, the result in Spitfire terms would be that Tallichet would receive TP298 in flying trim and SM845 was free to float away if appropriate.
In the event SM845 passed to Adrian Reynard and was shipped to the UK.
The task of rebuilding TP298 fell logically on to the able shoulders of Craig Charleston, who temporarily imported the aircraft to his workshop facility near Colchester in February 1988.
Boxes of partially dismantled components, the incomplete rebuild of structures, the intermingling of two projects, the ‘Americanisation’ of the hardware, the lost parts.
It was an engineer's worst nightmare.
In truth, although a large amount of dollars had been consumed, it would have been easier and cheaper task to have started from scratch.
Charleston systematically and meticulously set to with the assistance of one man, Mike Cloxam.
Fully re-riveted wing structures were again a hundred pieces spread round the workshop as this spec was checked, as that mod was verified, as this was rectified and that adjusted.
The list of missing potentially serviceable parts was daunting.
A spinner nose cone assembly to be built to drawing.
Doesn't sound much, but over 350 pieces had to be fabricated and machined.
The months rolled by, the timing and costs spiralling.
Some might have walked away, but that would not be Charleston's style.
By December 1990 the airframe and the majority of the systems were ready to re-ship back to Chino to be mated with the Nixon-built Griffon engine.
Commuting to the US, Charleston stroked the project along until finally and thankfully, resplendent in 152 Squadron leaping panther livery, it flew, piloted by Skip Holm.
US registration — N41702.
The date — Monday July 6.
That it should fly within hours of its Indian stable mate TP280, having traversed an independent route starting at the edge of Kalaikunda airfield in 1978, is an astonishing co-incidence.
If Craig Charleston said that he never wanted to see another Spitfire project, I would not be surprised, I'll wager that he does though!
None of these three new flying Spitfires has much of a History with the RAF.
TE566 was taken on charge in June 1945 and issued to 312 (Czech) Squadron and immediately flown to Czechoslovakia.
With the RAF roundels removed it was repainted as ‘DU–A’, the commander's machine, and it now proudly again carries this livery.
After a spell of squadron service the aircraft was transferred to the Air Force Academy.
In 1948/1949 TE566 was sold to the Israelis to become 20–32 (or ‘32’ of 101 Squadron).
Finally relegated to a Kibbutz at Alonim it was recovered to the UK in 1978 by Robert Lamplough.
He passed the aircraft on to Guy Black's Aero Vintage Ltd.
Black in turn, after substantially advancing the project, parted with it to Historic Aircraft Collection Ltd and continued to oversee the project management for the current owners.
TP280 and TP298 were both taken on charge RAF in mid 1945 and independently shipped to Air Command South East Asia at Karachi.
To date nothing is known to their service with the RAF in India up to their transfer to the Indian Air Force on December 31, 1947.
TP280 and TP298 became HS654 and HS662 respectively.
The code ‘NG’ was found on TP280 and this is believed to indicate service with 14 Squadron IAF.
Despite several requests, the paint evidence on TP298 was lost in the ‘American’ restoration.
Final days were spent in revetments on Kalaikunda airfield, 100 miles west of Calcutta, where they were used as decoys with the propellers sawn off and the tails lifted to look like tri-gear machines.
The Pakistan Air Force didn't get them.
The Haydon-Baillie brother did!
STOP PRESS!
SINCE PREPARING Type Report, a further Spitfire has clown.
Stephen Gray all but completed the full flight test programme, with four flights in one day, August 14, of the Fighter Collection's Mk.XIV, MV293.
A fine tribute to the workmanship of Dave Lees and Peter Rushen.
A stunningly simple silver paint scheme makes the aircraft almost blend against dull cloud, transforming to radiance in bright sunshine against an airfield backdrop.
Painted in the markings ‘L–C’ of 2 Squadron when at Wahn, Germany, in 1948, retention of the thin yellow fuselage roundel and thin white fin flash would seem incorrect.
Period photos, however, confirm a sprinkling of roundel variations on the Squadron how ‘L–C’ was, official or not.
TP298 in Craig Charleston's workshop near Colchester Essex, October 1990.
(Author)
MV293 is another ex-Indian Spitfire, recovered in 1978 from Bangalore, but this time by Doug Arnold.
It had carried the training serial T20 and evidence of a code ‘48’.
The logbooks indicated service with 8 Squadron RIAF.
The civil registration G–BGHB was originally allocated but with the vogue for out of sequence personal registrations this was changed to G–DPIT.
After completion of the initial strip down and partial restoration, Stephen Grey acquired the machine in September 1985.
A somewhat deeper restoration was initiated in the Lincolnshire area, prior to transfer to Duxford.
MOTHS
Six examples of the Bell P–59 Airacomet (50 years old this month) survive
WHEN ASKED to list the aeronautical contributions made by the Bell Aircraft Corporation, most enthusiasts would begin talking about the P–39/P–63 line of fighters.
Or they would mention the role Bell's XS–1 played on that historic day in October, 1947 when the ‘sound barrier’ was finally conquered.
But to those who know their history, the contribution Bell made in pioneering America's entry into military jet operations is just as significant as their other accomplishments in fighter or research programmes.
America, having no domestic jet development programme to match either of these two aircraft, was struggling just to keep up with large French and British orders of existing fighters and light bombers let alone worry about ‘jets’.
That situation was to change when USAAC General Hap Arnold decided, based upon information he had received from the British about a new aircraft power source, to get the Air Corps involved in jets.
General Arnold was suitably impressed with the potential of this new jet technology and requested that General Electric (GE) be allowed, as a time-saving expedient, to build some examples of the Whittle jet engine under licence.
Permission was granted and GE started working on an American adaptation of Britain's first operational jet powerplant.
The US engine was initially designated as GE's model l–A (later improved and redesignated as the 1–14 for use in the three XP aircraft) and with continued improvements, evolved into the l–16/J–31 series turbojets.
With the engine development well under way, an airframe for the new powerplant was now needed.
Bell Aircraft was located in close proximity to the GE facility and while Bell was producing P–39s at an heroic rate, its design engineers were already looking beyond the end of the production contact to new, future fighters.
America's jet project was initiated under the tightest possible secrecy.
Bell had done original design work on a defunct prop-powered XP–59 and that designation was carried over to the new effort in an attempt to mask the true nature of the project.
What rolled from the Bell plant was a twin-engined, mid-winged tricycle-geared fighter armed with two 37mm cannons.
After the initial roll-out, the first assembled airframes were dis-assembled for secret shipment out to the Army Air Force flight test facility at Muroc Dry Lake (now Edwards Air Force Base) in California, re-assembled and prepared for flight.
Security was paramount even at the then-remote Muroc location.
There are XP–59s being towed between locations with dummy propellers attached to their nose cones in attempts to make the jet look like a prop fighter.
The XP–59A first took to the air on October 1, 1942.
America, with help from English engine technology, entered the jet age just 10 months after the attack on Pearl Harbor!
Soon after the initiation of flight testing Army Air Force officials realised that the P–59 was not going to soon replace any current fighters.
Results of these early test flights were hardly spectacular in terms of speed and indicated that the P–59 had some very significant things going against it.
Primarily, it proved to be no faster than contemporary piston engined fighters then flying, it was a poor gun platform due to a tendency to ‘snake’ while in flight and its range suffered from high fuel consumption.
Understanding that their design needed some improvements, Bell started to work on the basic airframe as GE started to improve the powerplant.
A ventral fin was added in an attempt to increase lateral stability and more powerful engines were installed on YP–59A, P–59A and P–59B models.
And while the improvements helped somewhat, Air Force planners must have realised that the combination of poor flight stability, lower than anticipated speed and range limitations would place the Airacomet at serious risk if ever sent to engage enemy aircraft.
The initial production contract was therefore reduced from 300 to 100 aircraft and was eventually changed again to just 50 production aircraft.
The P–59 Airacomet was produced in both the ‘A and ‘B versions, the ‘B featuring squared-off wings and stabilisers, the aforementioned higher thrust engines and greater fuel capacity.
Standard armament on all the ‘A and ‘B models was changed to three .50 calibre machine guns and one 37mm cannon.
P–59s never fired their guns in combat.
They did however eventually see World War Two service, initially with the 412th Fighter Group and its 29th, 31st and 445th Fighter Squadrons, all units being assigned to the 4th Air Force and stationed in the western United States.
Interestingly enough, the US Navy took a few on board for evaluation, designating them XF2L–1s, but placed no orders.
Airacomet No 3 (42–108773) made its first flight on September 28, 1943 in RAF ‘prototype’ colours and the guard-at-all-times suffixed serial of RJ362/G.
It was tested at RAF Farnborough from November 5, 1943 to April 1944, but flew only rarely.
Going the other way was Meteor F.1 EE210 which was on charge at Muroc from February 18, 1944, returning to Glosters in April 1945.
Left: XP–59A 42–108784 at Washington.
(NASM).
Above: YP–59A 42–10877 at Chino, note forward ‘cockpit’.
(Author)
P–59B 44–22633 on display at Edwards.
(USAF)
XP–59A 42–108784
National Air & Space Museum, Washington, DC
The very first XP–59 to fly, affectionately (or otherwise) known as Miss Fire , survived the rigours or early jet testing and was put on public display in the Smithsonian collection during June, 1945, and remained on display until 1958. she was then moved to the Silver Hill facility for storage, eventually reappearing in the new NASM building's ‘Flight Testing’ gallery in 1976 and is currently on display.
A NASM official indicates that, according to their records, ‘108784 has but 59 plus hours on the airframe with the last flight occurring in February 1944. 42–108784 is currently displayed with an original 1,250lb thrust 1–A engine installed on the right side of the aircraft, one engine access panel being removed to enhance viewing.
Another 1–A engine has been sectioned in order to show its inner workings and is also on display.
YP–59A 42–108777
The Air Museum/Planes of Fame, Chino, California
this Airacomet has been in Ed Maloney's collection for a number of years.
This aircraft is historically significant because, according to a Museum official, many famous Air Force leaders such as Generals Arnold and Vandenberg and Mr Larry Bell, founder of Bell Aircraft, got their first jet ride in this very aircraft.
To accommodate a passenger, a second seat was installed in an open cockpit (later glazed) forward of the pilot (as was done on NASM's XP–59A) and the VIPs or observers were strapped in for their first ride.
One can only wonder where the base Safety Officers were while this was going on!
The Air Force assigned 42–108777 to the Santa Maria Air Base where her two-seat capability was put to good use.
when ‘777’ s flying days were over she was donated to a California Polytechnic Institute campus and remained there until acquired by Mr. Maloney.
This aircraft is reported to have been shipped to an East Coast workshop where work is currently under way with a view to making it fly again.
Several organisations have been signed-up to the rebuild and the schedule has the aircraft flying on the 50th anniversary date.
We await developments!
P59A 44–22614
March AFB Museum, Riverside, California
the completely restored fuselage of the only production P–59A thought left existing is currently on display inside the March AFB Museum.
Volunteers from the Air Force Reserve's 452nd Air Refuelling Wing, based at march, poured countless man-hours into the fuselage of this Airacomet and produced an outstanding restoration.
Work on the Museum now reports that the wing control surfaces have recently been reworked and they hope to have on the wings themselves restarted soon.
The Museum also has two General Electric 1–16 engines (one reportedly restored to operational status) and, at one time, was exploring the possibility of remounting them in the aircraft in order to make some taxi runs.
This P–59 was also based at the Santa Maria Air Base until the Air force donated her to a local technical school.
The Air Force regained control of 42–22614 in what has been termed as a ‘complicated swap’ that involved a C–118 and other aircraft in trade for the P–59.
USAF officials originally placed her at Edwards AFB but she was moved to the nearby March facility for restoration and display.
This Airacomet is significant to the Museum in that she actually flew from March while assigned to the 420th Base Unit, Continental Air Command, during that Unit's posting to March Field in late 1945.
Museum officials plan to make her a prominent part of their new facility when they relocate the Museum to a new off-base location on the west side of March's main runway, adjacent to a nearby major highway.
P–59A 44–22614 at March.
(Author)
P–59B 44–22650 at Wright-Patterson.
(USAFM)
P–59B 44–22633
Air Force Flight Test Centre, Edwards AFB, California
The Air Force Flight Test Centre's (AFFTC) P–59B is actually a composite aircraft.
Airacomet 44–22633 flew out of Edwards in the late 1940s, finally ending up on a target range along with some sister ‘59s.
When Base officials decided to display one of our first jet aircraft, ‘633 was chosen as it was the most complete remaining airframe.
Whatever parts she was missing came from other surviving hulks on the range.
Edwards’ P–59 was the last one to be flown by the Air Force, remaining in the inventory until October 1948.
While at Edwards she was flown in tests designed to evaluate the potential of jets as drone aircraft and as such ‘633 was called the Reluctant Robot.
Robot , much to the dismay of those who knew the history of the type, was originally displayed as an X P–59.
After some time she was removed from her mounting pedestal, stripped down to bare metal and repainted in an accurate B-model colour scheme.
This P–59 is to be cared for by members of Edwards’ 6515th Organisational Maintenance Squadron so her preservation and upkeep seem assured.
P–59B 44–22650
USAF Museum, Wright-Patterson AFB, Dayton, Ohio
The USAAF assignment history of this P–59B–1–BE of somewhat obscure.
Her record card gives no clear understanding of her AAF service, the first entry seemingly indicating a transfer from Bell Aircraft to the National Advisory Committee on Aeronautics (NACA) facility at Cleveland, Ohio on April 19, 1945.
Once source indicates the possibility of service with the 412th Fighter Group at either Palmdale or Santa Maria AAF fields.
Eventually she ended up at Kirtland AFB, New Mexico, and after a less than spectacular career as a war memorial she was in danger of imminent scrapping.
A foresighted Air National Guard officer was instrumental in having the Airacomet saved and in 1955 the Air Guard transferred the airframe back to the Air Force for placement in the USAF Museum.
44–22650 is complete down to her engines and is now displayed inside the Museum's giant buildings.
P–59B 44–22656
Harold Warp Pioneer Village Museum, Minden, Nebraska
Again, as in the case of 44–22650, we have an example of an historic aircraft being saved by the intervention of a dedicated individual.
Mr. Warp obtained this P–59 by the fact that he was the highest bidder at a Government scrap sale!
The Airacomet was first held by Purdue University for some time after the war, evidently being utilised in an instrument testing programme.
The airframe, apparently in excellent shape, is complete with 1–16 engines installed and is currently displayed in the Pioneer Village Museum located in Nebraska.
FlyPost
Canine aircrew?
In the June issue (P48), I read with interest the article by Geoff Nutkins —Unintentional Gift .
Only about a month earlier, I had been told the same story (of the landing) by a friend.
He was one of a party installing lights on the runway in question as the FW 190 came in.
He says it can in, then went round again before landing.
As he walked across to the aircraft — which by then had taxied towards the buildings — he says he saw a dog jump down from the cockpit, before the pilot.
Was this the pilot's dog?— it did happen sometimes!
Whilst at 1 SFTS on Harvards my instructor brought along his spaniel for a ride on cross-country exercises!
Incidentally, the dog at Pembrey was wearing a harness, according to my friend.
Yugoslav Spitfire
Type Report on Yugoslav Spitfires by Peter Arnold in the April issue (p70) evoked many memories for me and caused me to rummage around for some half-forgotten photos of nearly half a century ago, and there it was, Mk VcJK808 ‘B’ with yours truly in attendance.
Somewhere along the line my name must be on the airframe section of the Form 700.
On the right of one photo is partisan, Leo Vincitic, who combine his duties on the unit with those of interpreter.
We became firm friends and corresponded long after the war ended, but sadly he died in Zagreb in 1975.
The photos were taken at Prkos, Dalmatia, a few weeks before VE Day.
We had just finished the DI (daily inspection) when a very elderly photographer wandered up with a rickety tripod and ancient camera.
A conversation in Serbo-Croat followed and he said ‘He'll take our photo for 20 fags’, A deal was struck — fags on delivery! he re-appeared next day as promised with two sets of prints.
I felt quite sorry for the old boy, for our ‘issue’ that week had been a notorious brand of Indian manufacture called ‘Vs’.
They were ghastly, the more discerning smokers vowed they were 50% weed, 50% elephant dung!
On the spur of the moment I offered him 40 — he almost wept in gratitude.
I've often wondered if he survived!
Two views of Spitfire Vc JK808, the identity now worn by the Spitfire on show in Belgrade.
Tired, hopeful, early 20s
They also serve…
A belated reply to the Help ! query in the June issue (p69) regarding the three BOAC names on the 1942 War Graves Commission's monument.
I've dug out our wartime BOAC accident files in the archives and revealed the following:
Flt Number 4W118 September 14,1942
First Officer Cundy, Radio Officer Brent, and R/O Wycherly were crew members on C-Class flying-boat G–AFCZ Clare, which took-off from Bathurst at 2007 GMT September 14, 1942 northbound for the UK with six crew and 13 passengers.
About one hour out Captain Musson radioed that he had an engine failure and was returning to Bathurst.
He then requested flares for landing and then put out an SOS that they were on fire.
No more messages were received.
An immediate search was started with a Sunderland aircraft but no trace could be immediately found.
Further searches were continued on the 16th with Sunderlands and Catalinas of the RAF and wreckage was finally sighted on the night of September 16/17 14° 50'N and 18° W. Only six bodies were recovered (all passengers).
The aircraft had broken-up when hitting the water.
I am not certain why the other three crew members were not included on the memorial as none of the bodies were recovered.
Boeing 'boat
June's Type Report (p65) dealt with, amongst other things Catline house-boats.
Lorence R Fizia of Bathgate sent in this shot of a cruiser at Fort Lauderdale in December 1991 — this has to be form a Boeing 307 Stratoliner!
This is the one-off SB–307B NC19904 which was built in 1938 for Howard Hughes for his attempt on the round-the-world record (then held by himself in a Lockheed 14!).
The war prevented this flight and instead the Stratoliner was to become his executive run-about and was fitted with a sumptuous interior.
In typical Hughes fashion, the machine was not flown from 1939 to 1947, initially defying the US Army to impress it.
Next owner was Glen McCarthy, another of the large wallet league.
It was sold again in 1963 and became a well-known, principally grounded, sight around Miami.
A hurricane in the mid-1970s cause much damage and the fuselage was turned into a superb house-boat by David Drimmer.
Who has it now?
Letters and illustrations from readers are always welcome.
Items published in FlyPost will receive a hot-off-the-press hardback book as a reward.
Readers requiring a reply and/or return of illustrations should enclose a stamped addressed envelope or an international reply coupon.
finals
project Help! line
A LARGE COLLECTION of 1/72 scale model aircraft is available for permanent loan to an aviation museum or society.
Models range from World War One to present day aircraft, all flown in RAF and RN service (including captured types).
Display cases can also be supplied to suit the display site.
Museums and collections interested in these models are asked to contact:
CONFEDERATE AIR FORCE's Atlanta, Georgia (Dixie) Wing has been assigned the CAF's Douglas SBD Dauntless for restoration (illustrated).
The aircraft has been on the airshow circuit for a number of years and now needs a lot of tender loving care to bring it back to pristine condition again.
Most of the restoration work can be done in-house, however the greatest problem is the loss of the aircraft's rear armament along with the centre and wing bomb racks.
At some time while the aircraft was based at Harlingen, these items were removed from the aircraft and have disappeared mysteriously.
If any reader can help locate either replacement parts or drawings that will help to fabricate new ones, we would be very grateful.
ULLAPOOL MUSEUM seeks information and photographs on the fate of, or whereabouts of, Unteroffizier  Heinz Josaf who baled-out of a Ju88 in December 1944 over Loch Ullapool, and was last heard of as a PoW.
Also any information on a Handley Page Hampden which force-landed on Achnahaird sands and was recovered by an RAF unit by road.
These sands are near Achiltibuie, situated midway between Ullapool and Lochinver.
Any photographs of Capt Fresson's GAL Monospar on this beach would also be welcomed.
FLYING FLEA Newsletter.
A newsletter concerning the Flying Flea/Pou du Ciel is under consideration by an American writer, with the basic aim of uniting all with an interest in this diminutive aircraft.
All those with an interest in the Flying Flea, and who would be able to contribute to any such undertaking are asked to contact:
RON SPRINGALL is searching worldwide for someone, somewhere who knows the wartime role of his 1943-built Piper L–4H during the period March 1944 to December 1945.
Ron flies G–BMKC with a 381st BG, 533rd BS tail codes and the name Little Rock-ette Junior , markings suggested by Col C S Hall, who flew the B–17 of that name.
(Aircraft c/n 11145, USAAF 43–29854.)
Details forwarded.
VAMPIRE PRESERVATION GROUP have recently acquired Sea Venom XG737 from the Wales Aircraft Museum, which will be put on a long term restoration programme after completion of the group's Vampire T.11 and Jet Provost T.4.
Any leads to acquiring a Sea Venom control column and various cockpit equipment will be eagerly followed-up.
CANADA MEMORIAL FOUNDATION (cmf) has been set-up to commemorate nearly one million Canadians who served with the British and Canadian Armed Forces during World War One and World War Two.
CMF plan to erect a statue in Central London and to establish an exchange scholarship scheme for Canadian and British students.
Permission has been granted to erect a monument in Green Park, close to Canada Gates, London.
Further details and very welcome contributions to this venture can be obtained from:
BRAKE UNIT ASSEMBLY destined for the Cranwell Aviation Heritage Centre in need of identification.
RAF Stores Ref 27G/4005, Dunlop Pt No AH8189/20, Issue 8.
Serial No HR2113/2.
Others like it available for interested groups.
RESTORING THE COCKPIT section of Hunter FGA.9 XE650.
Many parts are required to complete the interior — can you help?
Also details on the history of the aircraft and contact with former aircrew or groundcrew appreciated.
FRANK BARRATT, formerly of the Royal Aircraft Establishment, Farnborough, a great world traveller and sage on all thing aviation, sadly passed away earlier this year.
His friends are arranging a benchchair in his memory to be erected at Duxford.
Contributions, payable to the Frank Bennett Memorial Trust,
BRITISH AEROSPACE at Woodford are nearing the end of their restoration to flying condition of Acro XIX (Anson) G–AHKX.
The project urgently requires the following items before the aircraft can be considered for flight: two front undercarriage tyres (950 × 12) port and starboard; one tailwheel tyre 945 × 12; two Graviner fire bottles No 15 1136/E/L; two head supports No 12Z 5850 and two pilot seats (port and starboard) 1–2 N 899.
All offers of help will be greatly appreciated.
KEENAIR WARBIRDS need the following to help in the repair of Fairchild Argus G–AJPl following an undercarriage collapse at Liverpool Airport on May 16: starboard windscreen, both undercarriage legs, belly cowling, Hoffman prop and bottom exhaust ends.
TAILPIECE
‘Fence No 7 is not an easy one, but quite nimble in the climb…’ jet Provost T.4 fuselage at RAF Halton, adapted into a specially strengthened horse jump for a recent event there.