

Europe Goes to War August 1914
World War I ranks high among the disasters to have afflicted mankind.
The war's complex origins — political and economic — date from the 1870s, when Germany defeated France and caused lasting resentment by seizing Alsace and Lorraine.
Germany then rapidly emerged as the greatest industrial and military power in Europe, an object of fear and envy to other states.
Alliances fluctuated over the years but by 1914 the alignment was clear: on one side Germany and Austria-Hungary, the ‘Central Powers’; and on the other the ‘Allies’, Great Britain, France and Russia.
This alignment, designed by diplomats to maintain the balance of power and thus ensure peace in Europe, was in fact potentially  inflammatory .
By 1914 it needed only a spark to start the conflagration.
In the event, as historians have observed, the spark was trivial — a man's signature on his marriage contract.
The Archduke Franz Ferdinand, heir to the throne of Austria-Hungary, had in 1900 married the Countess Sophie Chotek.
Her rank, though high, did not meet the level protocol demanded of future empress.
She was not accorded the title of archduchess, nor could she appear with her husband as an equal in public.
This never ceased to aggrieve the Archduke, but he found a way publicly to show his love for his wife.
He was a field marshal and, when acting in his military capacity as Inspector General of the Imperial forces, his wife could accompany him in public.
To enable her to drive through the streets with him in an open carriage and be jointly greeted at receptions, he decided in 1914 that, on the anniversary of his marriage, he would inspect the army in Bosnia, of which the capital was Sarajevo.
Thus his marriage certificate became also his death warrant
Bosnia and Herzegovina had both been administered by Austria-Hungary since 1878 but had been formally annexed only in 1908.
The people of the area were Bosnians, Croats and Slavs.
A Serbian minority wanted to join Serbia, and deeply resented Austrian annexation.
On 28 June 1914, as the Archduke and his wife drove through Sarajevo, a student with nationalistic sympathies, Gavrilo Princip, encouraged by a Serbian secret society called the ‘Black Hand’, shot both of them dead.
Austria-Hungary, supported by her more powerful ally, Germany, sought redress and proof that the government of  Serbia had instigated a plot.
None could be found; nevertheless, on 23 July the Imperial government sent Serbia an ultimatum, so worded as to be unacceptable.
Serbia, however, abjectly stomached the terms, save for two which violated her status as an independent country.
Austria-Hungary broke off diplomatic relations and mobilized.
European diplomacy had begun its ponderous, grimly inevitable march to war.
Russia, self-proclaimed protector of the Balkan Slavs, could not permit Serbia to be overrun; she, too, mobilized.
But Russia mobilized as a political bluff, playing a card to trump Austria-Hungary's.
Others, however, could also bluff.
Germany sent an ultimatum to Russia, demanding that she demobilize within 12 hours.
Russia refused, and on 1 August Germany declared war on her and, shortly afterward, without pretext, on France.
Great Britain, bound by treaty to maintain Belgian independence, declared war on Germany when German troops crossed that country's border.
World War I, the most avoidable but most terrible of wars, had begun.
In the following weeks, Montenegro and Japan joined the Allies, the Turkish Empire the Central Powers, with whom it had a secret treaty; Italy and Portugal were later to join the Allies.
The combatants were — on paper, at least— evenly matched.
The German Army, with the Prussians at the core, had been emerging since the Napoleonic Wars as the supremely efficient fighting machine.
By the Franco-Prussian War of 1870 it had become the most professional in Europe.
Conscripts were trained to a high pitch and could be called upon in war, not merely as reserves but as front-line troops.
In this way, Germany in 1914 was able to throw into her initial onslaughts far greater numbers of trained fighting men than the Allies had thought possible.
Germany's ally, Austria-Hungary, was not so formidable.
A conglomerate of disparate races and ridden with bureaucracy, Austria-Hungary, since the time of Napoleon, had, in the main, a history of military ineptitude.
Conscription, though operated on the German model, produced more problems than solutions, since units of a racial group had to be allocated to positions where they would not have to engage their kinsmen across the border.
Troop dispositions were, therefore, made for ethnic, rather than strictly military, considerations.
Allied armies were raised differently.
France, with a much smaller manpower than Germany (at most some 6 million potential servicemen to Germany's nearly 10 million), also employed conscription but with a different object, for the French regarded their conscripts principally as reserves for such tasks as garrison duty, while relying on the professional army of some 1 million men quickly to win an opening campaign and then the war.
Russia, for her part, was possessed of almost limitless manpower, but this was in large measure negated by her chronically inefficient rail system, so large numbers of men could be transported across country only with difficulty and by laborious stages.
The conscript troops were, however, generally fervent and courageous, and many senior and middle-rank officers had gained valuable military experience in the war against Japan (1904–5), which the Austrians lacked.
Telephone and other communication systems were both inadequate in number and doubtful in operation.
Nor did Russia possess the industrial might of Germany.
She had to rely largely on imports from her allies (notably Great Britain) brought over long and hazardous distances.
Great Britain was in another category.
She was traditionally a great, indeed the leading, sea power; she had neither conscription nor a large standing army, and her original expeditionary force numbered a mere 160,000.
This comprised, however, in the historian Basil Liddell Hart's felicitous phrase, ‘a rapier among scythes’, for of all the European armies Britain's alone had seen repeated, though limited, action in the colonial campaigns.
Battles of Mons and the Marne August–September 1914
Germany declared war on France on 1 August 1914; she invaded Luxembourg on the 2nd and the following day Belgium.
On 4 August, Great Britain, with the overwhelming support of her people, declared war on Germany for violating Belgian sovereignty.
By the 6th, Germany had reached maximum deployment against Belgium and France, and some 550 trains carrying men and munitions were crossing the bridges of the Rhine every day.
Within a week, one and a half million men, with abundant supplies, were in position for a massed attack.
Deployed near Aix-la-Chapelle in northeast Belgium was the First Army (General Alexander von Kluck), with the Second Army (General Bernard von Bülow) assembled near Limburg on its left.
These two armies comprised the German right wing, entrusted with the task of encircling Paris.
On the left of Bülow's army lay the Third Army (General von Hausen) and the armies of Duke Albrecht of Württemberg, of Crown Prince Wilhelm of Prussia, and of Crown Prince Rupprecht of Bavaria.
The German left wing was held by the army of General von Heeringen.
As the German advance progressed, however, these formations were modified.
Von Kluck on the right wing was to strike at the French left, through Brussels, Mons and Le Cateau, toward the River Somme near Amiens, while Bülow wheeled south of Liège, up the River Sambre.
The armies of the centre group were to move through the Ardennes in the direction of Rheims, the central Meuse and Verdun, and Heeringen's force was to repel any French offensive into Alsace.
By the afternoon of 4 August, leading formations of Kluck's First Army were before the great city of Liège, with its ring of six major and six minor forts.
It was here that the Germans experienced their first unpleasant surprise of the campaign.
The assault was stiffly resisted and at no time in their planning had the Germans calculated that the Belgians would do anything other than tamely submit.
Though the city itself was speedily taken, the forts held out stubbornly, obliging the attackers to bring up heavy howitzers, whose huge, destructive, armour-piercing shells swiftly demolished the concrete and steel fortifications and turned them into death traps.
Belgian resistance in the last of the untaken forts continued until 15 August.
This delayed the advance of the German right wing but of even more importance — it revealed to the Allies the full and deadly impact of the hitherto unknown and undeployed German howitzers.
The brave Belgian resistance gave rise to two further factors of the greatest importance.
Additional time in which to gather forces to resist the invasion was granted to the French, and the Belgian Army, without support from her allies, was forced aside and, on 20 August, took refuge in the fortress town of Antwerp.
Thus placed, however, it remained a potential danger to the right and rear of the advancing German Army.
On the same day, the invaders appeared before the fortified city of Namur, the last citadel barring the route up the Meuse into France.
Having learned their lesson at  Liège, the Germans immediately used howitzers and took the city in two days.
While these momentous events were unfolding in Belgium, on 7 August the French had improvidently launched their long-planned assault into Upper Alsace and on 14 August a greater force — the First and Second armies — thrust into Lorraine, south of Metz.
These formations, 19 divisions in all, were broken within a week at the Battle of Morhange-Sarrebourg by the machine-gun, the second weapon to emerge in great numbers; with it, entire ranks of advancing men could be cut down.
More than 300,000 French soldiers were killed, maimed or taken prisoner in this futile exercise.
By repelling the French attack, the Germans had, however, in some measure abandoned their potentially lethal Schlieffen Plan, for the late Chief of Staff's intention had been to offer only weak resistance in this area, so luring the French forward.
Moltke, by reinforcing his left wing at the expense of his right, had given it sufficient strength to resist attack but insufficient to mount a crushing counter-attack.
Thus the French were here driven back to their defensive fortifications but no farther.
Moreover, benefiting from their interior railway network, the French were able to move troops from this area to the now crucial sector of the campaign: the threatening German swing through Belgium and northeast France.
This was to have decisive consequences .
Meanwhile, the British Expeditionary Force (BEF) had been safely ferried to France under the watchful eye of the British Navy.
Between 12 and 17 August, about 80,000 soldiers, together with their equipment, ammunition and horses, had been landed at the channel ports of Le Havre and Boulogne, and at Rouen on the River Seine.
There had been much dispute in the British Cabinet, and among the higher ranking military, as to where this relatively small but experienced and professional army should be deployed.
Some, including Field Marshal Lord Roberts, at one time Commander-in-Chief of the British Army, were for landing at Antwerp to sustain the Belgian Army and pose an inhibiting threat to the German right wing.
Others, notably Field Marshal Lord Kitchener, newly appointed Secretary of State for War, advocated concentrating it around Amiens.
In the end, however, the view of Field Marshal Sir John French, the BEF's commander, prevailed.
It was decided that the British should move forward, as  agreed with the French High Command some years earlier, to latch on to the extreme left wing of the French Army: at this time General Charles Lanrezac's Fifth Army.
Lanrezac had moved his force forward to the northeast into the angle formed by the Rivers Sambre and Meuse, roughly between Givet and Charleroi.
The BEF was, therefore, concentrated in a strip of country some 40km/25mls wide between Maubeuge and Le Cateau to the south-west, on the left of Lanrezac's army.
The flaw in this disposition was that the advancing Germans were not only more numerous than the Allies had supposed but they were also moving in a more extended arc than had been expected.
The ten divisions of the French Fifth Army and the four divisions of the BEF had, therefore, on the instructions of General Joseph Joffre, virtually put their heads into a noose, for they could easily he assailed from the north by the German First and Second armies and by the Third Army from the east.
This perilous situation was unrecognized at the French Supreme Headquarters, but was swiftly apparent to the watchful and questioning Lanrezac.
To avoid strangulation, retreat was the only option.
The four divisions of the BEF had moved up to Mons on 22 August, in full expectation of forming part of an offensive on the Allied left wing.
On arrival, however, Sir John French heard that Lanrezac's Fifth Army had been attacked the previous day and was no longer able to cross the River Sambre.
The next day, Lanrezac was warned that Namur was about to fall and the German Third Army appeared at Dinant, on his exposed right flank.
This led him, correctly, to withdraw at once.
But Joffre thought Lanrezac lacked fighting spirit and dismissed him on 3 September.
The BEF, having stubbornly resisted repeated German attacks at Mons, was now in a dangerously exposed position and was likewise obliged to withdraw.
This move was executed overnight, with little time to spare, for Kluck, believing both French and British forces already defeated, was still marching westward at maximum speed and would shortly have been able to envelop the BEF's left flank.
Although Joffre, who seems at this time not to have been in touch with military reality, even now expected his left wing to advance and halt the invasion.
The Western Allies' retreat had, however, been saved from degenerating into panic and rout by the intervention of the Russians on the Eastern Front.
On any sound military precept, the Russians should have withdrawn eastward until the mobilization of their limitless manpower had been achieved.
Instead, at the urgent appeal of the French, on 17 August they had loyally struck not only at Austria but into East Prussia.
Their reward was to be defeated at the Battle of Tannenberg, but this gallant westward thrust had an overwhelming impact on the timorous and unsure Moltke.
As Winston Churchill was to write: ‘Honour must ever be done to the Tsar and Russian nation for the noble ardour and loyalty with which they hurled themselves into the war.’
Moltke's nerve failed him, and on 25 August — when the campaign in the west was reaching its decisive moment — he removed two army corps and a cavalry division from the German right wing for dispatch to the east.
It was a foolhardy decision: these formations arrived too late in the east to affect events there, but their transfer so weakened the German thrust in  the west as to make material success in that theatre improbable.
That, however, was not immediately evident on a map.
On that day, 25 August, the Germans had seemed on the point of victory.
Although the French right-wing armies held their stations, those of the centre and left, including the BEF (shortly to comprise five divisions) were retreating steadily south toward Paris.
But Moltke's misgivings now began to grow.
True, his western armies were pushing forward rapidly as planned, but danger lay even in this, for the troops were becoming exhausted and famished as they moved far ahead of their supply trains.
Moreover, Lanrezac's army had put up a stiff resistance at Guise, and the British (the unexpected joker in the pack, for German calculations had  contemptuously dismissed their strength and effectiveness) had inflicted great slaughter as they turned on their tormentors at Mons, Le Cateau, Néry and Villers-Cottérêts.
Moltke, initially so confident of quick and overwhelming victory, now had uncertainty added to his natural timidity.
‘Where are the prisoners?’ he is reported to have asked.
There was another worrying sign on his map.
Not only did the Belgian Army remain threateningly ensconced in Antwerp, but Winston Churchill, First Lord of the Admiralty, had ordered a brigade of 3,000 British Marines to Ostend on 17 August.
Their presence was given the utmost publicity, and soon their numbers (and the numbers of a mythical Russian landing force) menacing his armies' rear, had multiplied in Moltke's fretful imagination into a mighty host.
These anxieties were shortly to lead to his mental collapse.
Events were now reaching the crisis point.
Joffre, calm and impassive — still enjoying his two massive daily meals, consumed at leisure and followed by deep slumber — planned to counter-attack sooner or later.
But when?
Plan 17 was in tatters and, to stem the German advance and prepare for a decisive riposte, a new French army (the Sixth, under General Michel Maunoury) was still assembling near Amiens.
The troops comprising this army were largely those brought by rail from the area of the eastern fortresses, and their designated task was the defence of Paris.
But soon this force also was obliged to retreat and thus came within the grasp of a new figure, General Joseph Galliéni, the recently appointed Military Governor of the French capital and the man who, above all, was to save France from conquest.
The Germans were now faced with an insoluble strategic problem, perceived but not resolved by von Schlieffen: they had insufficient strength to wheel west of Paris and subdue it.
Kluck, therefore, decided to march east of the capital to strike the French centre and right armies in rear and destroy them.
This decision to pass obliquely across the Paris defences became evident to the French on the morning of 3 September, when British air reconnaissance revealed that his First Army was no longer moving toward Paris but had wheeled southeast toward Compiègne.
Kluck's was a fateful decision, and Galliéni, studying maps and reports in his Paris headquarters, saw at once the manner in which to deliver a decisive blow.
‘It is too good to be true’, he is reported to have said in astonished delight, for he now had in Paris the new French Sixth Army, and Kluck, by his change of direction, would shortly expose his right flank and rear to shattering attack from the west.
In the early evening of 3 September, Gallièni asked Joffre's permission to make the attack, despite the fact that the Sixth Army was designated specifically for the defence of Paris and nothing else.
But even more was required.
The French, along the whole line from Paris to Verdun, must turn and counter-attack; and Galliéni needed also the active cooperation of the BEF.
But Sir John French, already disheartened by the news that the French Government was leaving Paris for new headquarters at Bordeaux, was thinking of retreat to the Channel ports.
Galliéni went by motorcar to French's headquarters, where he saw only Major-General Sir Archibald Murray, Chief of Staff, who declined to make a decision in his superior's name.
Galliéni returned to  Paris, but later again reached Joffre by telephone and, with passionate argument, finally wrung from the Commander-in-Chief acceptance for his plan to strike north of the River Marne.
It was now Joffre's turn to convert the doubters, and on 4 September he went to BEF headquarters at Melun and in an emotional meeting won French's support for the proposed attack.
Kluck, meanwhile, had lost contact with both the BEF and the French armies and, supposing them still in retreat, was reluctant to obey Moltke's instructions of 4 September to stand fast.
Consequently his First Army continued its advance south of the River Marne.
The Battle of the Marne — if it can be called a battle — began at about 14.30 on the afternoon of 5 September, when the advance guard of Maunoury's Sixth Army encountered a corps on Kluck's flank, north of Meaux.
But it was 6 September before all the Allied left-wing armies could turn about and launch a full-scale attack on the invaders.
Belatedly aware of the grave situation in which he had foolishly placed himself, Kluck now had no option but to turn his army to face westward to counter Maunoury's ever-growing threat.
This manoeuvre, however, opened a gap of some 48km/130mls between the German First and Second armies, inviting disaster.
Meanwhile, all attacks by the German centre, west of Verdun and at Nancy, had been halted with heavy loss.
Since these armies could not break through, the crucial sphere of activity became the gap that had developed between Kluck's and Bulow's armies, and which the Germans had no reserves to fill.
Into this gap were now marching 20,000 highly trained men in five columns — the counter-attacking  BEF and left-wing formations of the French Fifth Army, under its new commander General Franchet d'Espèrey.
This advance could, in fact, have placed the BEF in a dangerous salient, for strategists did not yet comprehend the crippling defensive effectiveness of machine-guns and artillery.
Moltke, studying the situation on his maps, seems to have collapsed mentally.
Colonel Bauer, a German staff officer, wrote: ‘He sat with a pallid face gazing at the map, dead to all feeling, a broken man.’
The actors in this moment of high drama at German headquarters in Luxembourg are all long since dead and much of their discussions cannot be verified.
What is certain, however, is that Moltke, on 8 September, for the second time instructed a young staff officer, Lieutenant-Colonel Hentsch, to visit the command centres of all the German armies to assess the situation.
If it were found that the BEF was indeed across the River Marne and moving into the gap between Kluck and Bülow, then Bülow should retreat to the River Aisne.
British movements in that direction were verified, and on 9 September Bülow ordered the Second Army to withdraw.
Once this had been resolved upon, Kluck's position became untenable and he, too, was obliged to withdraw to the Aisne.
By afternoon the Battle of the Marne was over, but the slow-moving Allies failed to consolidate their gains.
Sir Basil Liddell Hart, the military historian, justly describes the Marne as ‘The battle that was not, yet turned the tide.’
He observed: ‘For the profoundest truth of war is that the issue of battles is usually decided in the minds of the opposing commanders, not in the bodies of their men.’
Moltke lost his nerve, Joffre and Galliéni did not.
Though widely reported, it is uncertain whether on 10 September Moltke, in fact, informed the Kaiser, ‘Majesty, we have lost the war’; if so, it showed a flash of strategic prescience that he displayed at no other moment in his military career.
Rival German and French Plans
German strategy in 1914 was based on a plan devised by Field Marshal Count Alfred von Schlieffen (1833–1913), Chief of the German Great General Staff 1891–1905.
His plan, accepted in 1905, was designed to solve Germany's potential problem of having to fight simultaneously on two fronts, west and east.
A massive blow, delivered at maximum speed, was to knock France out of the war in the first six weeks; then, using Germany's efficient interior rail system, the victorious troops were to be rushed east to destroy the Tsar's armies before Russia's cumbersome mobilization could be completed.
Schlieffen planned to leave his left wing in Alsace and Lorraine lightly manned, while an immensely strong right wing was to execute a rapid enveloping movement through Flanders and Picardy —‘brushing the Channel with their sleeves’— and lay siege to Paris from the west.
The beauty of this strategy lay in the fact that, if the opening manoeuvre were successful, the Germans would take the French centre and right wing armies in rear, with the added bonus that these troops would then have to fight with their backs to their own line of fortifications along the German border.
The plan had one drawback: the advancing Germans would violate Belgian and Dutch neutrality, guaranteed by Great Britain, Austria, France, Germany and Russia, thus bringing Great Britain into the war on the Allied side.
Schlieffen was dead by 1914 (his dying words are reported to have been, ‘It must come to a fight.
Only make the right wing strong’), and his successor as Chief of Staff, General Helmuth von Moltke, while broadly adopting Schlieffen's plan, had already fatally modified it through timidity.
Fearing that a weak German left flank might enable the French to invade the Fatherland (which Schlieffen had been prepared temporarily to tolerate), Moltke allocated eight of his nine new divisions to the left flank and added only one to the right — precisely the reverse of what Schlieffen had intended.
Moreover, his nerve deserted him when Russia invaded East Prussia, and he transferred two army corps from France to the East.
These modifications virtually ensured that Germany could not win the ensuing battle and would ultimately lose the war.
The French General Staff were utterly astonishing in their misreading of the situation.
Following France's defeat by Germany in the war of 1870-1 and her loss of Alsace and Lorraine, her strategists had devised numerous plans in the event of another war.
All hinged on the newly strengthened eastern frontier forts, such as Verdun, and a strategy of an initial defensive campaign, followed, when opportune, by a powerful counter-stroke.
But in the last few years before the war, a new military mentality had dominated French planning, the leading exponent of which was Colonel de Grandmaison, Director of Military Operations.
His Plan 17 rejected any form of defensive strategy, claiming that the French national character was more suited to attack, in the manner of Napoleon.
An attack to the utmost — offensive a l'outrance — was to be made into Lorraine by the First and Second armies, while the Third and Fifth armies, on their left, would take the offensive north of Metz or, if the Germans did indeed come down through Belgium, strike them in flank.
Plan 17 ignored all historical evidence of the militarily possible, particularly in French miscalculation of German strength: in the first week of conflict, the French counted only 45 German front-line divisions while, in fact, 83 were deployed.
All experience showed that an attack had some prospect of success only if it had numerical superiority in a ratio of at least 3: 1.
And at this time the Germans outnumbered the French on the Western Front 3:2.
The British Expeditionary Force
In 1914, the BEF comprised some 160,000 men, formed into six infantry divisions, one cavalry division, two additional unattached cavalry brigades and a complement of services troops.
By comparison with the vast conscript armies of Europe, the BEF was indeed small —‘a contemptible little army’ in the Kaiser's words — but it was the most professional in the world.
The men were volunteers who had undergone a long and thorough training, and most had also had battle experience in South Africa, India and Egypt.
The aim of British governments had, for a century, been to possess a small, highly professional army of volunteers, with a second-line volunteer citizen army intended for home defence.
But the real defence lay with the supremely powerful Royal Navy.
Between 9 and 22 August 1914, the BEF was safely ferried across the Channel under the watchful guardianship of the navy.
Of this the Germans were unaware, and their astonishment was great when, on the 23rd, they found themselves opposed at Mons by the entire BEF.
The force was virtually destroyed in its gallant endeavours at Mons and the First Battle of Ypres, with losses amounting to 95,654 by the end of 1914.
Thereafter, the British relied on ‘Kitchener's Army’— hundreds of thousands of volunteers, all of whom required training — and Empire troops.
The German Army
The German army system of 1914 dated from the reorganization of the Prussian Army after its defeat by Napoleon at the Battle of Jena in 1806.
It was based on the principle of ‘a nation in arms’, much as Napoleon had employed a levee en masse.
Every able-bodied male was liable for conscription, from the age of 17, for two years' full-time training in the infantry, three in the cavalry or horse artillery.
Subsequently, although a civilian, the German conscript was still obliged to serve in the Regular Reserve for four or five years, according to his arm.
He next went into the ‘first levy’ of the Landwehr for five years, then the ‘second levy’up to the age of 39, and the Landsturm until he was 45.
The army was organized into 25 army corps, each comprising a unit of staff, two infantry divisions of two brigades, two regiments of field artillery, a battalion of riflemen, cavalry, and corps troops.
On mobilization, the first-line army for an offensive operation would have numbered some 761,000 men, with a second line of about 1 million.
But far greater numbers were available: the total figure for both fully and partially trained troops was around 2,398,000, with a further 2–3 million available if needed.
Masterminding this great force were the best brains in Germany, for the military profession carried a prestige unequalled by any other.
Early air reconnaissance
In 1914 many senior commanders could see no military role for aircraft.
Indeed, only a month before war began, General Haig stated that it would be foolish to think ‘that aeroplanes will be able to be usefully employed for reconnaissance’; he believed that only cavalry could gather information.
The value of aircraft in this capacity was, in fact, at once proved, when the Royal Flying Corps monitored the German offensive in August.
As soon as machines landed, pilots' written reports were sent by dispatch rider or telephoned through to GHQ.
In this way, Sir John French was warned of large-scale German movements to his front before the Battle of Mons and later of Kluck's attempts to envelop the BEF.
Crucially, it was air reconnaissance that informed the Allies, on 3 September, of Kluck's change of direction from west to east of Paris.
German reconnaissance was less reliable, and Kluck was largely misled as to Allied movements.
The RFC machines — mainly BE2s, Bleriots and Henri Farmans — operated individually and came under attack not by enemy aircraft but by artillery, and even by rifle fire from their own troops.
Field artillery
The purpose of field artillery is both to destroy enemy assaults and to support one's own infantry as it attacks.
The field artillery weapons with which the combatants entered the war in 1914 had been designed also for use in short-range battles.
Thus the standard British field gun, the 18-pounder, had a range of only 6,400m/ 7,000yds; the range of equivalent guns in the French, Austrian, German and Russian armies was similar.
To demolish enemy fortifications, heavy guns had also been developed.
Of these, the Austrian 30.5cm Skoda was by far the most versatile.
In 1914 batteries of these weapons were lent by Austria to Germany's right-wing armies to reduce the Belgian fortress-cities.
The corresponding German guns — the 30.5cm and the large 42cm — lacked the mobility of the Austrian pieces, which were those most frequently used during the war of movement in the early months of the conflict.
Guns increased in size and range during the war to enable targets far behind the front line to be hit.
On the Somme in 1916, the British used 15in weapons, while in 1918 the Germans produced a long-range gun with which to bombard Paris.
Toward the end of the war, many artillery pieces were of such a size and weight that they could only be moved around on specially strengthened railway freight wagons.
Galliéni: defender of Paris
Debate continues as to whether General Joffre or General Joseph Galliéni (1849–1916) deserves most credit for the Allied victory on the Marne.
Galliéni, who was senior to Joffre, had been offered the supreme command, a post he turned down on the grounds that all his experience had been as a colonial soldier and administrator.
On 25 August 1914 he was, however, appointed Military Governor of Paris, and its defence became entirely his responsibility.
During the Franco-Prussian War of 1870–1, in 1914 still within living memory, Paris had been besieged for four months and forced to surrender.
Mindful of this, Galliéni took immediate precautions to prevent its happening again.
He knew that the city was unready, and its defences inadequate, to withstand a siege, despite the two rings of forts and redoubts, which had been constructed after the debacle of 1871 but neither properly maintained nor modernized.
Galliéni, therefore, ordered huge amounts of munitions to be stockpiled; all roads, rail tracks, even sewers leading into the city were barricaded, and bridges prepared for demolition.
Farm animals were brought into the woods and parks to provide food if Paris were to suffer a prolonged siege.
Nevertheless, when the Government removed to Bordeaux, many thousands of civilians also fled.
In the event, Paris was saved because Galliéni recognized that the moment had come to strike at the Germans when Kluck, wheeling northeast of the city, exposed his right flank to the Sixth Army.
Galliéni was posthumously made a marshal of France in recognition of his great services.
‘Attack!
Attack!
Attack,!’
Some of the most decisive fighting in the battle of the Marne took place in the centre of the line, in the St Gond Marshes, where Foch's Ninth Army was stationed.
The left wing of General von Bulow's Second Army mounted a bayonet attack on Foch's forces at dawn on 5 September, capturing the French outposts and driving back their advance units.
But spurred on by their determined commander, whose reaction was ‘My flanks are turned; my centre gives way; I attack!’, the hardpressed French rallied and held.
Gradually they gained the upper hand and after almost a week of savage fighting the Germans began to fall back.
It was during this time that Foch showed his unshakeable courage.
As one of his staff officers later wrote, Foch conceived of war as ‘essentially a struggle between moral forces’.
‘Victory’, Foch asserted, ‘means will-power…
The day will be carried by the side which holds out longest.
Battles are won with remnants.’
Germany's missed opportunity
The consequences of the First Battle of the Marne were profound; arguably they were decisive.
In retrospect one can easily detect the miscalculations of the German staff: exaggerating the defensive potential of France's great concrete and steel fortresses, underestimating both the courageous tenacity of Belgian resistance and the ability of Russia to debouch early into East Prussia.
Although the Schlieffen Plan, if faultlessly executed, might just have brought about the fall of France, in the event it failed because Moltke depleted, rather than strengthened, his right flank, and because, at the crucial moment, he lost his nerve.
The price Germany had to pay was dreadful.
Total defeat might yet be averted; military successes elsewhere might lead to a negotiated peace, but the chance of quick and absolute victory was gone forever.
It had been a chance perhaps worth taking to violate Belgian neutrality, but this had brought Great Britain, with her Empire and her naval supremacy into the War, with the inevitable result that Germany would, by blockade, eventually be brought to starvation.
This could only be averted by unrestricted use of submarine warfare, which in turn would bring an enraged United States into the conflict.
Now the Germans had little choice but to dig trenches and hope to win a war of attrition: a forlorn expectation, with the enemy ranks gathering against them.
Moreover, the Germans had made a further — and fateful — error: they had omitted to occupy the Channel ports, as they might easily have done, without loss, during their initial advance.
Now, belatedly, they tried to take them by force, an exercise in which they failed despite the loss of tens of thousands of irreplaceable soldiers.
Attempts by both Germany and the Allies to turn the other's flank, the so-called ‘race to the sea’ followed.
Russia's war plans
Germany's principal problem at the outbreak of the war was to avoid having to fight on two fronts, east and west, at the same time.
Russia's problem was strategically different but no less daunting, for though she had only one front she faced two enemies: Germany and Austria-Hungary.
The Russian General Staff(Stavka) had to prepare for two eventualities, dependent on whether Germany's main opening blow was directed into France or into Russia.
Two plans were therefore devised, although Russia's military dispositions remained identical for both.
The First and Second armies were to be stationed in the north, facing East Prussia, the Third, Fifth and Eighth armies in the southwest facing Austria-Hungary.
The Fourth Army could be deployed either to the northern or southern sector as circumstances dictated.
If Germany attacked in mass eastward, all Russian formations were to retire, in the manner prescribed by Field Marshal Kutuzov in the face of Napoleon's onslaught in 1812, then counter-attack when the opportunity arose.
If, however, the Germans maintained a defensive stance in the east while attacking France, both army groups were to advance immediately — the northern group into East Prussia, the southern group into Galicia, where the Austro-Hungarian army was strongest.
If these manoeuvres were successful, the whole might of Russia could then be redeployed for an attack on central Germany, thereby bringing the war to an end.
The Russian Army
The Imperial Army was a conscript force, with a peace-time strength of 1,200,000, making it by far the largest standing army in Europe.
General mobilization was designed to raise the strength to 32 million, but this number was almost doubled in 1914.
Reservists made their way by train to western Russia, picking up other reservists en route, and so forming the ‘Russian steamroller’, a great force that could, in theory.
overwhelm all opposition.
The army was a mainly infantry force, with a light cavalry screen, supported by a strong artillery arm.
Although multi-national and multi-lingual, it was united in loyalty to the Tsar; the cavalry was well led and the infantry competent and brave.
Experience in the Russo-Japanese War had led to an understanding of modern warfare: the army was equipped with machine-guns and howitzers and knew how to use trench systems and barbed wire to effect.
A dynamic partnership
Field Marshal Paul von Hindenburg (1847–1934) and General Erich Ludendorff (1865–1937) formed a uniquely successful military partnership during World War I. Hindenburg had fought in both the Austro-Prussian War (1866) and the Franco-Prussian War (1870–1).
In 1878 he was appointed to the Great General Staff.
He retired in 1911 but, having unrivalled knowledge of the Eastern Front and its terrain, was recalled in 1914 to assume command in the east, with Ludendorff serving as chief of staff.
The decisive victories at Tannenberg and the Masurian Lakes gave both great prestige in Germany.
In 1916, following General Erich von Falkenhayn's dismissal after the disasters of Verdun, Hindenburg was appointed commander of all German armies, with Ludendorff as Quartermaster-General, and the two became, effectively, dictators in both military and civilian affairs.
Hindenburg was elected President of the Republic in 1925; he was re-elected in 1932 but in the following year, by then virtually senile, he was persuaded to appoint Adolf Hitler chancellor.
Ludendorff demanded an armistice in 1918, when Germany's offensive collapsed, and was summarily dismissed.
He fled to Sweden but returned to Germany in 1919.
He subsequently supported Hitler and took part in his abortive putsch in 1923.
He was a National Socialist member of the Reichstag (1924–8) but later fell out with Hitler.
The ‘Russian steamroller’ in reverse
The Russian Commander-in-Chief, the Grand Duke Nicholas, was appalled by the news of Tannenberg.
But even worse tidings were to follow, since, as Hoffmann wrote: ‘Our hands were free to act against Rennenkampf.‘
That general's position was parlous; for with the two army corps withdrawn from the Western Front, the German Eighth Army was now a force of 17 divisions.
On 5 September, it made a sustained attack on Rennenkampf to hold his attention, while, on the 9th, a turning movement under Francois, was directed from the south through the area of the Masurian Lakes to sever Rennenkampf's communication lines to the rear.
Rennenkampf now had no option but to order First Army to retreat eastward and, but for two factors, his entire force might yet have been cut off.
He ordered two divisions to counter-attack in the centre, an action that was executed with such vigour that the German 20th Corps was brought to a halt for 48 hours.
This led Ludendorff o counter-order Francois’ great northeastward thrust and turn it closer to the main body of the German army in readiness for a possible battle.
Thus the bulk of Rennenkampf's army, streaming back along the route they had earlier taken westward, contrived to escape.
Even so, the Russians suffered possibly as many as 100,000 casualties and some 45,000 men taken prisoner; they also forfeited 200 guns and great quantities of supplies and ammunition they could ill afford to lose.
By a curious paradox of war, the Schlieffen Plan had been completely reversed: the Germans had been reduced to stalemate in the west while in the east they had inflicted an almost knock-out blow.
Battle of Tannenberg August 1914
On paper, the strategy of the Russian advance of August 1914 was sound.
East Prussia, jutting out from the River Vistula almost to the centre of the River Niemen, was penned between the Baltic Sea and the northern frontier of Russian Poland and so could be attacked from either, or both, east and south.
Under the terms of a new military agreement with France, Russia was committed to fielding 800,000 men fifteen days after mobilization started.
Given the size of the country and the poor communications, this was an impossibility, and by mid-August the army was still in a state of unpreparedness, with many problems unresolved.
Nevertheless, at France's repeated entreaty and in a spirit of generous cooperation, two Russian armies now advanced into East Prussia in order to honour that commitment.
General Yakov Jilinski, then in overall command of the Northwest Front Group, on 17 August directed the First Army, under General Pavel Rennenkampf, comprising six and a half infantry divisions and five cavalry divisions, north toward  the fortified area around Königsberg.
On 19 August, the Second Army, under General Aleksandr Samsonov, was ordered to advance toward Danzig (Gdansk), with the idea of cutting off the German forces from the River Vistula.
Both Rennenkampf and Samsonov had distinguished military records as cavalry commanders in Manchuria, but they had quarrelled and become bitter enemies.
Indeed, so violent was their hatred for one another that, in a much-quoted scene, they actually came to blows when they met by chance on the railway platform at Mukden.
This animosity boded ill for their future cooperation in East Prussia.
Moreover, advancing west and northwest respectively, as the two armies were, produced a potentially calamitous separation of the two forces, for between them lay the Masurian Lakes, a complex of waters stretching some 80km/50mls north to south.
Each army could, therefore, be attacked individually.
Von Schlieffen had applied his fertile brain to this eventuality and had stipulated that, since any advancing Russian armies must inevitably become divided by the lakes, first one, then the other, was to be attacked by the full weight of German forces in East Prussia.
Once one army had been crushed, the efficient German rail system was to convey the victorious troops to engage the second Russian army.
This situation, as Winston Churchill succinctly observed, was one to stimulate invention in a Marlborough or Napoleon.
Unfortunately for Germany, however, the commander on the spot was the timorous  General Max von Prittwitz, who failed to exploit the opportunity through fear of his numerical inferiority.
Apprehensive of defeat, he sent one reserve corps to bolster the northern sector, another to the southern sector, while holding those remaining between the two.
Rennenkampf's First Army crossed the frontier during 17–18 August, and on 19–20 August eight of his divisions encountered seven German divisions, forcing the Germans to withdraw.
Although a small engagement by later standards, this battle at Gumbinnen, and the fact that Samsonov's encircling movement to the south had been detected, induced Prittwitz to call off the action.
He also informed General von Moltke, Chief of the Great General Staff, that he intended to retire behind the defensive line of the River Vistula.
The reverse had a marked impact on Moltke, whose mental concentration was at that time directed to the western theatre.
He was so horrified by Prittwitz's proposed withdrawal that he immediately replaced him with Generals Paul von Hindenburg and Erich Ludendorff.
The battle also convinced Moltke that he had seriously underestimated Russian strength and capability.
And since, up to the night of 25 August, German victory in the west seemed assured, he dispatched to the Eastern Front two corps from the supposedly invincible German right wing in France.
But they reached East Prussia too late to intervene in the coming battle.
The Russians, too, misread the new strategic situation.
Jilinski, now overconfident and desirous of seizing the opportunity to destroy the German Army in East Prussia, urged Samsonov and his five corps, a total of some 200,000 men, to advance at maximum speed.
This in turn encouraged Samsonov to drive farther to the west than originally intended, before turning northward, in the hope of encircling even greater numbers of Germans.
This mighty host crossed the German-Polish frontier during 21–22 August.
But the troops were already fatigued by an unremitting nine days' marching on inadequate rations, and the communications and organization were so poor that no supplies could be brought up to them.
Samsonov's westward drive took him even farther from Rennenkampf, who after Gumbinnen had remained stationary in the north to enable Samsonov's now wider sweeping movement to complete the German encirclement.
Of all the consequences of the Battle of Gumbinnen, the most significant was the appointment of Hindenburg and Ludendorff to command, for they quickly formed a superlative military team, for a time as successful as that of Marlborough and Prince Eugene in the early years of the eighteenth century.
A special train was arranged for Ludendorff, the hero of the siege of Liege and newly appointed Chief of Staff in the east.
And at 21.00 on 22 August, the day of his appointment, having been received by the Kaiser and awarded the order Pour le Mérite , he left German headquarters at Coblenz for East Prussia.
The train steamed at speed through the night and at 04.00 halted briefly at Hanover where, on the platform, waited the portly figure of General von Hindenburg, who had been brought out of retirement to become Commander-in-Chief.
It was the first time the two men had met; they briefly  discussed the dangerous yet promising situation in the east and then retired to their beds.
Ludendorff has widely been given sole credit for the great German victory at Tannenberg, but before he and Hindenburg had even arrived at their new post imaginative steps had been taken by Colonel Max Hoffmann, Deputy Chief of Operations of the Eighth Army, which  made that victory possible.
Employing his considerable powers of persuasion to the full, he convinced his superiors that the German Eighth Army should disengage from Rennenkampf's First Army near Gumbinnen, leaving merely a cavalry screen, and strike with every available man at Samsonov's advancing Second Army.
Both 1st Corps (General Hermann Francois) and 3rd Reserve Division, recently engaged at Gumbinnen, were to be conveyed by train to the right flank of 20th Corps, which was barring Samsonov's advance.
Meanwhile, 17th Corps (General August von Mackensen) and his 1st Reserve Corps (General Otto von Below) were also to withdraw from the Gumbinnen area and march southward to take up station on 20th Corps' left.
Thus, when Ludendorff arrived at his new headquarters at Marienburg, orders had already been given for the mass of the Eighth Army to form a half-moon facing southeast, toward the centre of which' Samsonov, urged on by telegrams from Jilinski, was now marching his weary men.
These movements of German troops calculatedly left an ominous and potentially fatal ingredient: Rennenkampf's First Army.
If this army moved west and then south, there was no German force to prevent its taking the Eighth Army in rear and crushing it against Samsonov's Second Army.
Indeed, even if Rennenkampf marched directly south and joined Samsonov, the Germans would be heavily outnumbered.
But Rennenkampf did not move and one can only conjecture why.
Many have cited treason (he was of German descent) or his hatred of Samsonov.
A more likely explanation is that, seeing that the Germans had vanished overnight from the field of Gumbinnen he judged his outnumbered foe to be in full retreat, either to the fortress city of Konigsberg or over the Vistula.
A comforting conclusion, but one which was wholly divorced from the actuality.
In all their subsequent movements during the campaign, the Germans were immeasurably helped by the Russian staff practice — inexplicably naive even for the militarily inept — of sending radio messages and orders ‘in clear’ rather than in cypher.
Thus the Germans were alerted to almost every Russian tactic in the coming days.
Hindenburg and Ludendorff endorsed all Hoffman's proposed dispositions.
Meanwhile, Samsonov's fully stretched men, spurred on by Jilinski, were pressing northeastward, over exhausting sand tracks through forests and between numerous lakes.
In front of this already fatigued force were arrayed some of the best-equipped and best-trained troops in the world.
Russia's one advantage was numerical superiority, but for this to be effective Rennenkampf's and Samsonov's armies needed to unite.
Jilinski, however, seemed oblivious to Samsonov's ever more perilous situation, and as late as 26 August — when the hapless Samsonov was just about to be  engulfed from all sides — he commanded Rennenkampf to employ two corps for the investment of Königsberg and with the rest of his army to press on to the Vistula.
Thus, though the Russians in total outnumbered the Germans, Samsonov's Second Army was outnumbered by 180 battalions to 150.
During 23 August, Samsonov's centre (13th, 15th and 23rd corps) made contact with the German 20th Corps.
Second Army was now extended over a front of some 97km/60mls, with its two wings separated from the centre.
As the Russians advanced, so the German 20th Corps gave way, for the formations sent from the north by rail were not yet in position on the right.
To Samsonov, all seemed to be proceeding as he most desired, and he, like Rennenkampf before him, with mistaken confidence, began to believe that the enemy were all in retreat to the Vistula.
Throughout 24 and 25 August, the gallant Russians, exhausted, without adequate provisions, and lacking the organization, communications and armament of the Germans, fought with stubborn resolve.
By their greater numbers in this sector — seven divisions to half that number of German — the Russians slowly drove the German centre back.
Once again the problematical question arose as to what Rennenkampf would do.
German formations from the north were now marching into position on either side of 20th Corps, but those assigned to the left wing — called by the Germans the ‘Eastern Group’— might have to face about if Rennenkampf marched south.
Then, acting as a screen, they would not be able to take part in the action against Samsonov.
A crucial decision must be made without hesitation.
To hesitate now — to leave the Eastern Group to guard against a southward march that Rennenkampf might or might not make — was to jeopardize the encirclement of Samsonov's Second Army.
As before, Hoffman's arguments were persuasive, and orders were issued for the entire Eastern Group to march southward on 25 August to be in position to attack Samsonov's right wing.
Hoffman's reading of the situation was shortly to be justified, for two Russian radio messages again, astonishingly, sent in clear — proclaimed to the German wireless station in Königsberg that Rennenkampf, soon belatedly to be on the move again, would drive west in leisurely fashion and not reach the Gerdauen-Allenburg-Wehlau line until 26 August.
Thus it became certain that Rennenkampf could not, for at least two, possibly three, days, come to Samsonov's aid and that the entire German Eastern Group could, therefore, assail Samsonov's right wing with impunity.
The scene was set for a Russian calamity.
The German 20th Corps was still slowly withdrawing in face of the Russian centre on 26 August, when, to prevent further retreat, Ludendorff ordered Francois's 1st Corps to smash the Russian left wing.
Francois, however, was a commander of independent mind.
He was determined to get behind the Russians and cut them off from the east.
Therefore — rightly claiming that his force was as yet incomplete and most of his field guns not brought up — he made only a token attack on the Russian left, while positioning his troops as they detrained and making his own tactical preparations.
On that same day — 26 August — the Russian right wing, already separated from the Russian centre, came into contact with two corps of the German Eastern Group near Lautern.
The Russians were thrown back; and although they retired in reasonably good order, some became trapped with their backs to Bossau Lake, in which a number drowned.
The Russian right flank guard was, in any event, beaten and fell into retreat southward until it reached Olschienen and Wallen, more than 32km/20mls away.
The next day found François, with his troops in position and his artillery and ammunition brought up, ready to attack the Russian left near Usdau.
The artillery bombardment was such that the starving and bewildered Russians could not withstand it; they retreated in disorder over the frontier.
Francois now moved in the general direction of Neidenburg to get behind the Russian rear, despite the fact that  Ludendorff had ordered him to march rapidly northeast toward Lahna.
By that evening, both his right and left flanks having been broken, Samsonov's position was untenable.
He had but one course open to him: to order his reassembled flanks to attack, while he withdrew his centre corps to safety.
Instead — inexplicably — he ordered his centre to strike northward again.
Did he not choose to retreat when his old enemy Rennenkampf was advancing?
Did he merely obey Jilinski's orders unquestioningly?
Was he courting disaster with Russian fatalism?
Hindenburg certainly thought the last, for he later wrote: ‘…they were no longer seeking victory, but destruction.’
The entire German Army attacked at first light on 28 August.
François pushed eastward and reached Neidenburg by nightfall.
He then thrust on to Willenberg to plug the Russian line of retreat, creating a string of pickets along the way to prevent any Russians escaping the trap.
The moment of Russian collapse had now arrived, for Second Army's rear was closed, its flanks broken.
The entire Russian centre 13th, 15th and much of 23rd Corps degenerated into a largely bewildered, starving, uncoordinated melee of ill-trained and illiterate peasants, struggling through thick forests, intent only on escape from the encircling fire of a well-fed, highly trained army.
The dissolution of the Russian centre continued throughout 29 August.
That evening, absenting himself from his staff officers, Samsonov stumbled, asthmatic and exhausted, into a solitary part of the forest and shot himself.
During 29 and 30 August the desperate
Russians made repeated attempts to break through the encircling enemy — only and always to be driven back by the murderous fire of Francois's 1st Corps, which barred the line of retreat along the route by which they had earlier advanced.
Some Russians, still fighting, tried to break through, many formations led by a priest holding high a cross; all were cut down.
By 31 August, all Russian troops emerging from the forest did so carrying the white flag of surrender on poles and rifles.
How many Russian soldiers were killed or later perished from their wounds in the dark glades of the forest is not precisely known, but the Germans took prisoner 92,000 unwounded men, some 30,000 wounded and 500 guns.
Of this total, 60,000 were taken by Francois and his 1st Corps.
The German Eighth Army lost 10,000 to I–, 000 men.
Battle of Lemberg September 1914
The aggressively minded General Conrad von Hötzendorff, Chief of the Austrian General Staff, had long been avid for a pre-emptive war.
On the outbreak of hostilities with Russia, he intended to open an immediate offensive with the object of swiftly crushing her hastily mobilized armies.
By the twentieth day of mobilization, 18 August, Conrad calculated that Russia would be able to deploy approximately 31 divisions, including 11 cavalry divisions, to Austria's 20 infantry and 10 cavalry divisions.
By 28th August, the thirtieth day of Russian mobilization, their array would, however, have increased to 52 divisions, while Austria would have no more than 39.
Conrad did not recognize that a mere equality of strength was, for an attacking army, inadequate in the face of modern, though as yet undeployed, defensive weaponry.
In addition, there were imponderables, indeed miscalculations, in his planning, and most particularly in his underestimation of the speed of Russia's mobilization and his misinterpretation of her strategic intentions.
Although the numerous rivers flowing from the Carpathian Mountains offered Conrad abundant lines of defence against any Russian invasion, it seemed to him that the sooner the Austrians attacked, the more auspicious the prospects, since they would shortly be heavily outnumbered.
Also, the more likely Austria would be to avoid Germany's fate of having to fight on two fronts if neutral Italy entered the war on the Allied side.
The clinching argument for Conrad's offensive strategy was his expectation of German aid.
He assumed, as he had been led to believe at meetings with General Helmuth von Moltke immediately prior to the war, that Germany would at the outset deploy some eight corps in East Prussia.
If this considerable force struck toward Siedlice, some 160km/100mls east of Warsaw, Conrad's northward drive could, in combination, cut off all Russian forces in the salient.
Russia for her part, conscious that the main German blow was directed against France, was bound by military treaty to  attack in the east.
The ensuing campaign, generally known as the Battle of Lemberg, was fought over a period of three weeks (23 August–12 September) along a front of some 322kms/200mls between the rivers Vistula and Bug.
It was characterized by each commander misinterpreting the intentions of his rival.
General Ivanov, who commanded the Russian armies in the south, believed the Austrians would strike eastward, and that the northern armies of his group could then march south and take the invaders in rear.
Conrad, meanwhile, was marching northward in the mistaken belief that desultory Russian mobilization would present him with little opposition from the east.
In fact, a heavy Russian attack was shortly to be mounted from this direction.
Conrad's first manoeuvre was to send massed cavalry forward on 15 August to reconnoitre on a huge front, some 400km/ 250mls wide.
Because of their ill-fitting saddles and the fact that the Austrians did not follow the practice of the British cavalry of riding for an hour and walking for an hour to rest their horses, most of the animals developed sore backs.
Their riders had then to cover long distances on foot, leading their mounts.
Such information as the reconnaissance gleaned convinced Conrad that there was inadequate Russian strength to resist him to the north.
So, on 20 August, he confidently gave the order for an Austrian advance, believing there were no Russian formations to imperil his right flank.
The forces engaged in this advance were formidable: three armies with a total strength of some million men.
The Austrian First Army (General Dankl) was given the task of reaching Lublin and Cholm.
If this were achieved, it would sever the Warsaw-Kiev railway and also give Austria command of the road to Brest-Litovsk, thus threatening all the Russian positions to the east of Warsaw.
To the immediate right of the First Army lay the Fourth (General von Auffenberg) and to the right of that General Brudermann's Third Army.
The.
entire mass was guarded, on its left flank, by Kummer's Army Group — in reality no more than a cavalry division, 44 infantry battalions and some artillery and bicyclists — and on the right, by the Kovess Army Group of two corps.
Arrayed in a crescent against these Austrian formations were four Russian armies, comprising some 1,200,000 men.
The Fourth (General Salza) and, to its left, the Fifth (General Plehve), faced south; the Third Army (General Nikolas Ruzski), on the Fifth Army's left, south-west; while on the extreme left flank the Eighth Army of General Alexei Brusilov faced due west.
When General Dankl's First Army marched, to reach and take Lublin and Cholm, Auffenberg was to move in unison in the same direction.
Brudermann's Third Army was, meanwhile, to stand fast in front of the city of Lemberg (Lvov) and guard it against any Russian threat that might materialize.
The first clash of arms in the campaign came on 23 August, when Salza's Fourth Army, moving southward in expectation of cutting off the rear of the Austrians — who he deemed to be driving east — ran into Dankl's advancing First Army at Krasnik.
The Austrians, by weight of numbers, won the day; the Russians fell back and held their foe only some 18km/ 11mls from Lublin.
Conrad was determined to capitalize on the victory of Krasnik.
On 25 August, he withdrew three divisions from the Third Army to support Auffenberg's right flank, in the hope of winning a decisive victory.
General Brudermann, commanding the Third Army, although being depleted in numbers, ordered his army, and much of the Kovess Army Group on his right, to move northeast to strike at the encircling Russian forces then marching on the town of Zloczov.
On 26 August, Brudermann ordered an advance to the Gnila-Lipa, a tributary of the River Dneister, and from there to the Zlota-Lipa, another tributary.
He planned to engage what he believed to be weak Russian formations advancing from the east.
Conrad and Brudermann had seriously misjudged Russian strength and intentions, for the combined armies of Ruzski (Third) and Brusilov (Eighth), with 336 battalions, 264 squadrons and some 1,200 guns, outnumbered Brudermann by two and a half to one.
And Brudermann was the only defence on the right flank of the Austrian First and Fourth armies in the north.
On the 28th, the Austrian Second Army, withdrawn from Serbia, entered  the battle forming to the south of Brudermann's Third Army.
On the Russian side, the Battle of Krasnik had been a disagreeable surprise to Grand Duke Nicholas, but he persisted in the belief that Dankl's First Army was no more than an Austrian flank guard.
He therefore ordered Plehve's Fifth Army to turn west to overlap and cut off the intruding and, so he supposed, insignificant Austrian thrust.
This manoeuvre exposed the Russian Fifth Army's flank to Auffenberg's Fourth Army, still advancing northward, so Conrad commanded it to turn about and strike at the left flank of the Russian Third Army.
At the same time, the Army Group led by Archduke Joseph Ferdinand, was to confront and hold the Russian Fifth Army, and the Austrian Second and Third armies were to strike eastward.
The Battle of Komarov that followed went largely in Austria's favour, since while Plehve was urging his army westward in accordance with the Grand Duke's instructions, the advancing Austrians were, in fact, forcing them to turn about and face south.
The Austrians were not able to trap Plehve, and Conrad's plan was brought to nought, with consequences that were to prove disastrous.
The much-reduced Austrian Third Army, advancing toward the Zlota-Lipa, had been flung back by Brusilov's more numerous Eighth Army.
The Austrians fell back first on the Gnila-Lipa, and many withdrew to the city of Lemberg 40km/25mls distant.
The Russians, needing to regroup their forces, delayed their pursuit for some 48 hours.
So it was not until 30 August that  Brusilov struck hard at the Austrian right, causing it to collapse and its formations to retreat westward in panic and confusion.
On 3 September, Conrad was obliged to order the evacuation of Lemberg.
But all was not yet lost in Conrad's sanguine view, for his armies had been victorious in the north.
By 30 August Auffenberg was behind Plehve's flanks and Dankl was thrusting deep between the Russian Fourth and Fifth armies — and a successful and decisive conclusion might yet be arrived at.
He resolved to push on, despite the fact that Ruzski and Brusilov, though advancing tardily, were now at most 48km/30mls from severing the northern Austrian armies from their line of retreat and Plehve had succeeded in  extricating his army from encirclement.
Conrad now conceived a new and even more grandiose strategy.
With Plehve far from the field, Auffenberg, rather than going in pursuit, should change direction and strike the advancing armies of Ruzski and Brusilov from the north, while the Second Army, from Serbia, at last in position, struck from the south.
These manoeuvres were doomed to failure, for both Ruzski and Brusilov had been ordered to turn northwest, with the object of taking in rear all Austrian forces engaged with, or pursuing, Plehve.
Furthermore, the Russian right wing had recently been reinforced by a new army, the Ninth, which had been raised for a drive on Berlin but was instead deployed against Austria.
The Russian Fourth and Ninth armies were charged with thrusting around the Austrian left wing and then encircling their left-flank armies.
Despite numerous orders and changes in strategy, Conrad's position was now rapidly becoming untenable.
To the northwest, Dankl's army was at bay before the combined might of the Russian Fourth and Ninth armies, and on 9 September it was obliged to retreat to the River San.
Meanwhile Plehve's undefeated Fifth Army had turned about and was threatening to engulf Dankl's now unprotected right flank.
Conrad, faced with the crisis of the defeat of his plans, and with the destruction of his armies, on the 11th gave the order for overall retreat.
Russian generalship was bold, sound and greatly superior to that of the Austrians and after Lemberg there was no halt in their pursuit.
In the fight for Lemberg itself, the Austrians lost, at a conservative estimate, 130,000 killed, wounded or taken prisoner.
It is certain, however, that some 64,000 prisoners were taken.
Most of these are thought to have been Slavs, whom the retreating Austrians had stationed in the rear to sustain the impact of Russian cavalry attacks.
The Russians are believed to have detected this deployment and fired their shells at a high angle over the heads of the Slavs to hit the Austrians ahead.
Russia's strategical options
The governing factor on the Eastern Front was the vast salient of Russian Poland.
In the middle of this probing mass lay the fortress city of Warsaw, guarded by a ring of forts, while diagonally through the area ran the natural obstacle of the mighty River Vistula.
To the north of the salient, along the Baltic shore, lay German East Prussia; to the south, the plain of Galicia, backed by the barrier of the Carpathian Mountains.
The Russian frontier, running some 1,450km/900mls from Memel on the Baltic Sea to the Bukovina in northern Romania, was highly vulnerable to a German attack southward from East Prussia, especially if this were matched by an Austrian advance northward from Galicia.
The Russians could avoid the danger of encirclement by withdrawing entirely from the salient, or advance in overwhelming numbers to seize both East Prussia and Galicia.
Their front would then run roughly straight from Danzig (Gdansk) to Cracow, enabling them to undertake an advance into either Germany or Austria.
Russia chose the latter option, and her campaign in the south was at first to have a most promising outcome.
The Austro-Hungarian Army
The army of Austria-Hungary comprised three separate forces: the Imperial and Royal force, the Royal Army of Hungary and the Imperial Army of Austria, which combined in time of war.
The principal arm was the infantry, with 169 line regiments, 4 regiments of Kaiserjaeger, 33 battalions of light infantry and 4 regiments of Bosnian troops.
The cavalry comprised 15 regiments of Dragoons, 26 of Hussars and 29 of Uhlans.
The artillery arm was divided into four: Horse, Field, Mountain and Fortress regiments.
The peacetime strength of the army was 415,000; on mobilization this was expected to rise to 1,800,000, but in fact it grew to nearly twice that number.
The army was raised by conscription from all the countries of the empire and thus contained 11 different nationalities, with an even greater number of languages and several different religions.
Despite this, and despite being equipped with largely obsolescent arms and trained principally to attack, the army fought throughout the war without major dissensions.
Its cohesion stemmed entirely from the almost feudal loyalty the troops accorded the Emperor.
Galicia's great fortress
Przemysl, the principal Austrian fortress in Galicia, was also a beautiful town with a  population in 1914 of some 50,000, mainly Poles and Ruthenes.
The fortress was rebuilt in 1896 and by the outbreak of war had been further improved to accord with its new function as the Austrian Army's forward base against the Russians.
It guarded the gap between the San River in the west and the upper Dniester in the east.
Standing on hills rising to a height of 420m/1,378ft, the fortress was a large, enclosed camp, mainly of earthworks strengthened by armoured cupolas.
The heavy armament comprised 1,000 artillery pieces, but many were obsolete or short range.
The main weapons were the lo and 15cm cupola guns, dating from 1898, the 24cm mortars, and four of the new 30.5cm mortars.
The defences were increased by a million metres of barbed wire and extensive minefields in 1912.
Russian forces invested Przemysl in the third week of September 1914, but it was only on 22 March 1915 that it fell, soon to be recaptured.
Germany's ailing ally
As a result of the campaign, Austria lost Lemberg, the gateway to eastern Galicia and centre of all its rail and road networks.
And shortly, in her armies' unremitting retreat, the great fortress of Przemysl was abandoned to siege.
It finally fell, together with its garrison of 120,000 men, on 22 March 1915.
Just on two-thirds of the retreating Austrians reached the temporary sanctuary of the River San; then, on 16 September, Conrad was obliged to order a further retreat to the River Dunajec, 12gkm/30mls farther west.
Soon all Galicia was abandoned.
The Russians lost some 250,000 men, 40,000 of whom were taken prisoner, and loo guns.
But from an original total of about one million Austrian soldiers, more than 350,000 were lost, as were 300 guns.
This was grievous enough, but there was worse: the confidence and coherence of the Austrian Army had been broken in these first weeks of the war, and it was never again to comprise an efficient military weapon.
Moreover, Germany was obliged to hurry from the west troops that could ill be spared, in order to succour her enfeebled and demoralized ally.
For Germany, the military situation was transformed by the end of 1914: in the west, stalemate; in the east, danger.
During 1915, Germany and her bolstered ally, Austria, were to achieve great successes in the east and make large conquests of territory, but any prospect of a quick victory for the Central Powers, upon which all had been so confidently staked, were now forfeited beyond redemption.
Battle of First Ypres October–November 1914
World War I was characterized by lack of invention and stubborn adherence to discredited strategy in the higher staff ranks; occasionally, however, the rival staffs produced manoeuvres of brilliance.
Among these must rank the transference of the BEF from the Aisne to Flanders.
In the closing days of September 1914, following the Battle of the Marne, stalemate ensued on the line of the Aisne.
Sir John French, Commander-in-Chief of the BEF, proposed to General Joseph Joffre, French Commander-in-Chief, that the British Army should be moved northward.
He had two persuasive arguments to support this: not only would the BEF's line of communications to their bases in England be shortened, but the British troops, constantly being ferried across the Channel, could be concentrated in one area.
Joffre was convinced, and the BEF reached its positions in Flanders between 16 and 18 October.
To remove an entire army in this way, secretly while within sight of the enemy, was a remarkable achievement of staff work.
The complex procedures were executed without a hitch: artillery positions were abandoned by the British and smoothly taken over by French units; as British battalions moved out at night, their French replacements moved in — and all the while without any sign that the Germans recognized what they were about.
As General Joffre ordered his troops northward, the Germans followed suit.
As they did so, their southern line became depleted, allowing more Allied units to be taken north from that sector.
The BEF now comprised six divisions, an infantry brigade and two cavalry divisions.
Meanwhile, the siege of Antwerp was entered upon.
Mindful of the manner in which the fortresses of Liege and Namur had been taken prior to the Battle of the Marne, at relatively little cost, by the use of the new and highly effective howitzer, General Erich von Falkenhayn ordered up a 42cm version of this formidable weapon and commenced the bombardment of the city's outer fortifications on the night of 27/28 September.
Belgium's allies were unable to offer any real assistance, but at least Winston Churchill, then First Lord of the Admiralty, understood the immense strategic importance of Antwerp.
With passionate argument, he finally wrung permission from the British War Cabinet for three naval brigades to be dispatched to fortify the city, with himself in attendance.
This was no more than a gesture but it helped sustain the morale of the Belgians.
Partly because of this British presence, the Belgian Army was able to begin evacuating Antwerp on 8 October and to make an orderly retreat along the coast.
It was covered by Lieutenant-General Sir Henry Rawlinson's 4th Corps, which two days before had landed at Ostend and  Zeebrugge .
The inhabitants of Antwerp surrendered on 10 October.
By the second week of October, the Allied line, running almost 800km/500mls from the North Sea to Switzerland, comprised, first, the retreating Belgian Army, then the French Eighth Army with, farther to their right and south, the British Expeditionary Force (BEF).
Beyond this the line became the responsibility of the French Tenth Army.
During that week, the BEF advanced eastward: the 2nd Corps toward La Bassée, the 3rd in the general direction of Armentieres and the 1st Corps to the north, past Ypres.
Neither Marshal Joffre, General Foch (his deputy in the north) nor Sir John' French had expected a German attack in Flanders.
Indeed, they had reckoned German strength in the area to be at most one corps although British Intelligence had estimated it at three and a half corps and even this, in the event, proved an underestimate.
Thus, while the Allies thought they were embarking on an outflanking movement, they were in fact about to be attacked themselves.
The British 2nd Corps encountered the enemy on 10 October west of La Bassee, but, in face of heavy fighting, the German thrust petered out 10 days later with the British still about 1.6km/1ml west of the town.
The 3rd Corps, meanwhile, though at great cost, had pushed eastward and reached Armentieres.
From here they hoped to command the bridges over the River Lys while the Cavalry Corps, under Major-General Sir Edmund Allenby, came up on their left; they could then, so they assumed, take the Germans in their right flank.
The Germans were temporarily secure behind the bridges, however, and remained poised while they awaited the arrival of a new army of volunteers.
The advance of 1st Corps, commanded by General Sir Douglas Haig, to the north through Ypres had created an eastward-facing bulge in the line.
When, on 21 October, their left wing became imperilled, the troops dug in and the line of the salient was formed.
The First Battle of Ypres fell into three distinct phases: the manoeuvres that brought the four Allied armies into position by about 20 October; the German attacks on the River Yser and at La Bassee and Arras; and the blows on the British  salient that was forming east of Ypres.
Throughout the early days of October the Allies blithely assumed that Antwerp could withstand investiture.
And Joffre, planning to extend his left flank, prior to  enveloping the German right, appealed to King Albert of the Belgians to abandon the North Sea coast and thrust inland with the Belgian Army to join his swinging manoeuvre.
With supreme strategical insight, King Albert declined to accede to the French commander's plea.
Most fortunately for the Allies as it turned out, since within days Falkenhayn was to unleash all his troops from the area of fallen Antwerp, together with supplementary formations of volunteers, stiffened by regulars, in a massive stroke down the coastline, with the object of encircling the sanguine Joffre's left flank.
Through King Albert's foresight, the Belgian Army, though retreating, remained intact on the coast.
Nevertheless, the Belgians were hard pressed and contrived to halt the German advance only on the River Yser and near Dixmude.
On 24 October, the Belgians opened the locks on the canalized river at Nieuport, southwest of Ostend, allowing the sea gradually to flood great areas of the low-lying fenland in the enemy's path of advance.
By 28 October the Germans were forced back by the rising waters, many were drowned and masses of weapons were lost.
This watery bulwark gave the Germans no option but to turn the mass of their force against the British salient, north, east and south of Ypres.
From 29 October onward, fighting was continuous, both night and day, in conditions dominated by mud and  wintry cold.
At first, the Germans succeeded in penetrating a single point in the British line to the north.
Then the southern British flank was broken open by a new German army of six divisions and massed artillery moving toward the Zandvoorde and Messines ridges.
Here German numerical superiority of 2:1 made a hole in the line that could be only inadequately plugged.
The blow fell on the 7th Division and on Allenby's cavalry, which connected Haig's Corps with the 3rd Corps to its south.
On 31 October — the third day of unremitting German attack — Haig's centre caved in at Gheluvelt and he ordered a withdrawal to a line just covering Ypres.
Shortly afterward, however, a British counter-attack took the victorious and complacent Germans by surprise and ferreted them out of Gheluvelt, restoring the situation.
Later the troops were again withdrawn to straighten the line.
French, it would seem, was no longer in touch with events, but German ineptitude came to his aid, for his enemy failed to exploit the penetrations they had achieved.
On 1 November, the Germans again attacked the salient's belly, but this time at night, a ruse that enabled them to capture the Messines Ridge.
The following morning, French forces arrived to succour the battered British line.
Then, on 10 November, the Germans launched a massive attack against the  French in the north of the salient toward Dixmude.
This was arrested, but the following day — 11 November — a renewed German attack by the 4th Guards Division was launched in the southern sector against the British 1st Guards Brigade: the two crack units of the opposing armies.
The Germans broke through the British line, but seemed unable, once again, to follow up their success, and were driven back by the last Allied reserves.
With that German failure the Allied crisis at Ypres ended, for more and more French troops had been brought up to sustain the salient's southern flank.
German attacks wavered, then virtually ceased; though spasmodic fighting continued until 22 November, intense cold brought large-scale activities to an end.
A truth of modern warfare, which was first disclosed in the Russo-Japanese War (1904–5), had been underscored though leaders on neither side fully comprehended it as yet; defensive weaponry was more than a match for charging infantry.
The Germans, indeed, had been so confused by British musketry that they had assumed the enemy was equipped with a plethora of machine-guns.
In fact, the British had hardly any (often fewer than two to a battalion) but their infantrymen had mastered rapid rifleshooting.
Fifteen aimed rounds a minute was usual, but many experienced marksmen would be able to discharge 30.
But, the British paid an inordinately high price for their prolonged, stubborn and ultimately triumphal resistance.
Between 14 October and 30 November losses amounted to some 58,000 men.
In all, from the war's outbreak to 30 November, the total was nearly 90,000; of these a disproportionate number were young officers and long-serving regular soldiers.
The 7th Divison alone lost all but 44 of its 400 officers and 2,336 of its 12,000 men.
German losses in the fighting at Ypres are not precisely known, but their total losses on the Western Front from mid-October to 30 November appear to have been not far short of 150,000.
The ‘race to the sea’
It was only after their defeat on the Marne and enforced retreat to the River Aisne that the Germans came to appreciate the importance of the Channel ports, ignored in the Schlieffen Plan.
Dunkirk, Boulogne and Calais, through which British munitions and troops could pass in growing numbers, might have been taken at little cost during the Germans' initial advance, now they would have to be fought for.
General Erich von Falkenhayn, who had replaced the discredited Moltke as Chief of Staffon 14 September 1914, determined as a first measure to reduce the fortress of Antwerp, where King Albert, with the tenacious Belgian Field Army of six divisions, had taken refuge in August.
In accordance with Schlieffen's plan, the Germans had brushed it aside during their thrust into northern France, but Antwerp had now become of crucial importance.
If not taken, it would pose a grievous threat to the Germans' right when they made — as Falkenhayn planned — a second attempt to outflank the Allied left.
Large numbers of troops on both sides were moved from the south to the north of the front, following the deadlock on the River Aisne.
These manoeuvres, expedited by good lateral railway systems in both France and Germany, became misleadingly known as ‘the race to the sea’.
In fact, neither side was at first attempting to reach the defensive flank of the North Sea; rather, each was hastening to get around the enemy's northern flank in the only area where mobile warfare was still possible on the Western Front.
The rifle: weapon of the infantryman
The firearm of the infantry soldier of World War I was the bolt-action rifle, and the rifles of all the armies were fundamentally much the same.
Some had certain advantages, or were more reliable, but none was markedly superior.
Since the rifle was the infantryman's main weapon for both defence and attack, he took great care of it.
Indeed, in Slav armies, the formal ceremony during which the rifle was presented to the soldier marked his transition from raw recruit to warrior.
The difference in attitudes to musketry between British and European armies was pronounced.
The British, with experience gained in the Boer War, had designed a standard rifle, light and holding the maximum number of rounds for fast, aimed fire at a specific target.
The Lee-Enfield had a magazine which held 10 rounds and rapid-action bolt which turned down; this gave the rifleman a rate of fire of 15 aimed rounds or more a minute.
The European powers produced heavier rifles, which held fewer rounds.
They were used for unaimed shots, fired from the hip by men advancing in mass, while a British infantryman was trained to shoot from a prone position at a target.
The beginning of stalemate
The First Battle of Ypres ranks as one of the great Allied, principally British, victories of the war.
Between Armentieres and the North Sea the Germans had massed 402 battalions, against which the Allies had only 267.
Moreover, the Germans were twice as strong in cavalry.
The consequences of the battle and campaign were momentous.
The Germans were denied the Channel ports, but the small, victorious British professional army was almost destroyed.
The battle was also a landmark in the conduct of the war, for henceforth both sides dug in and a complex line of trenches soon stretched from the North Sea to the Swiss frontier.
For three and a half years these lines would be advanced less than 16km/10mls in either direction, and Allied strategy would be devoted to penetrating this formidable barrier.
The Germans, halted at Ypres, now adopted a defensive stance in the west while trying to reach a victorious conclusion in the east, where much of the military activity of 1915 was to take place.
The Gallipoli Campaign March 1915–January 1916
The Dardanelles, a strait some 60km/40mls long and varying from 1.6–6.4kml/1–4mls wide, connect the Aegean Sea with the Sea of Marmara.
The strait separates the Gallipoli Peninsula of European Turkey from Turkey in Asia and, with the Bosporus, is strategically of the utmost importance, since it is the only naval route from the Mediterranean to the Black Sea.
The Dardanelles were, in 1915, also crucial to the defence of Constantinople (Istanbul).
The first phases of the campaign were exclusively naval operations, since it had been assumed by the British War Cabinet and the French that a naval force could not only bombard and destroy the Turkish forts on the peninsula but in some way occupy Constantinople.
Winston Churchill repeatedly urged the Russians to cooperate by mounting a local offensive, but they declined.
The outer forts on the Dardanelles were bombarded on 19 February 1915, and the Greek island of Lemnos occupied as a base.
Treacherous weather held up operations, but Marines were landed on the tip of the peninsula to demolish Turkish guns, which they achieved unmolested.
Bombardment of the inner forts followed, and for some three weeks attempts — desultory at best— were made by trawlers to sweep the first line of mines.
At this point Vice-Admiral Carden, commanding the squadron, fell ill and was replaced on 16th March by Vice-Admiral de Robeck, his second in command.
When the attempt to force the passage with naval craft on 18 March went disastrously wrong, de Robeck soon persuaded not only himself but many of the senior Allied commanders that the passage could not be forced by ships alone; a military expedition was also required.
Thus the naval bombardment, which had, in fact, opened the way to Constantinople were the attack pressed home, served only to alert the Turks and their German ally to their peril in this area.
As a result of de Robeck's change of mind, on 26 March Lord Kitchener dispatched the Mediterranean Expeditionary Force from Egypt to make landings on the peninsula.
This force of some 70,000 men, mainly Australians and New Zealanders, or ‘Anzacs’, with little battle experience, was commanded by Lieutenant-General Sir Ian Hamilton.
He was reluctant to exercise authority over his subordinate generals, in direct contrast to the German General Liman von Sanders, in overall command of the Turkish forces.
This was to have decisive consequences in the ensuing campaign.
Matters went awry for the Allies from the start.
It was belatedly discovered at Lemnos that the transport ships had been incorrectly loaded so that crucial material, required immediately on landing, had been packed at the bottom of the holds.
The ships were obliged to return to Alexandria for their contents to be bestowed, causing a delay of almost a month.
The chance of surprise had already been forfeited.
At the time of the preliminary naval bombardment the Turks had only two divisions at the Dardanelles; these had been raised to four when the naval attack began and six by the time Hamilton made his first landings, giving the defenders a numerical superiority of six to five divisions.
Moreover, the north  shore of the strait consisted mainly of steep sandy cliffs, rising from the sea to a height of 30–90m/100–300ft, terrain that provided ideal cover and artillery sites for the Turks, while leaving the invaders perilously exposed.
Preparations for the landings were mostly inept and inadequate.
Although a Turkish Army handbook existed, the command structure of the Turkish Army had not been studied, nor its dispositions and strength verified.
No thorough reconnaissance of the landing sites had been possible and maps had largely been taken from tourist guide books.
Despite being outnumbered, unaware of the enemy's dispositions and ignorant of the terrain, Hamilton was ordered to make the first British landings on 25 April at the southern tip of the peninsula near Cape Helles, while Anzac troops went ashore about 24km/15mls farther up the Aegean coast near Gaba Tepe.
At about the same time, French units made a diversionary landing at Kum Kale on the Asiatic side of the strait to confuse the Turks as to the Allies' true intentions.
The invading force left Mudros on the island of Lemnos on the morning of 23 April and moved toward its stations off the landing beaches.
Some 200 ships were involved and by midnight on 24 April they were in position off the Gallipoli coast.
All engines were stopped, the troops given a meal and then, in orderly fashion, embarked on lighters and later transferred to rowing boats, which put them ashore.
That part of the operation — and almost solely that part — went according to plan.
Hamilton elected to station himself on the Queen Elizabeth , de Robeck's flagship.
He would have done better to hoard a fast, independent ship with good signalling equipment, for on the Queen Elizabeth , which had been given tasks of her own, he became a virtual prisoner, unable to respond to events or give directions.
Thus Hamilton cruised up and down the coast, out of touch with what was happening on the beaches.
All decisions had to be made by his two corps commanders.
Lieutenant-General Hunter-Weston (whose pre-battle proclamation to his troops pessimistically stated that heavy losses were to be expected) commanded British 20th Division, which landed at Cape Helles, and Major-General Sir William Birdwood the Anzac forces.
However, these two commanders also remained at sea throughout the landings and so had as little idea as Hamilton of what was going forward.
Each unit, once landed, had therefore to make its own decisions undirected by the higher command, with the result that one company, though separated by only a short distance from the next, could be unaware of what their comrades were attempting.
But there was worse.
Shortly after 04.00 on 25 April, 1,500 men of the first Anzac assault wave got safely ashore — at the wrong place.
Unknown to the insufficiently briefed navigators, a strong current had swept the boats about 1.6km/1ml north of the intended spot.
Instead of landing on a sandy beach stretching some way inland, the men were trapped on a rocky shore north and south of the craggy headland of Ari Burnu.
Nevertheless, because the Turks thought it inconceivable that their enemy would land in such an inhospitable situation the Anzacs met little opposition, and, four hours after the initial landing, some 8,000 men were safely ashore.
They made good progress and some were soon scaling the dominating ridge leading to Chunuk Bair.
Now another misfortune befell the invaders.
Mustafa Kemal, the one Turkish soldier of genius in the area, arrived on the scene.
He immediately garrisoned the crucially important Chunuk Bair and Sari Bair ridges and halted the Anzac advance.
Had the attack been properly organized and coordinated, these vital heights might have been taken with little loss and the successes consolidated.
As it was, some 50,000 soldiers were to lose their lives during the next few months in fruitless attacks on Chunuk Bair.
Around Cape Helles, inefficiency and disorder likewise reigned.
Shortly after  the 29th Division began landing, officers walked unmolested to the village of Krithia some 3km/2mls inland and to the 180m/600ft high summit of Achi Baba, commanding positions from which it would have been easy to repel any Turkish counter-attack.
But the officers had been given no orders to occupy these positions, so they simply returned to their lines to await instructions.
By the time the order to push forward was given, Turkish forces had moved up; and here also thousands of lives were to be lost to gain positions which had, in effect, already been won.
Thus, almost immediately, the chief object of the campaign — a quick victory to restore mobile warfare in contrast to the stalemate on the Western Front was forfeit.
The troops began to dig trenches, as their comrades had in France.
For the next three months virtual deadlock ensued, troops dug in as best they could, and lives were lost through disease and fruitless assaults.
In July, fearful of a disaster, the British Government dispatched a further five divisions to bolster the seven already deployed.
But by the time of their landing the Turks had massed 15 divisions.
Hamilton, faced with this in equality of manpower, resolved on a master stroke: a further landing, this time to the north at Suvla Bay.
He hoped to sever the peninsula and, in company with the troops at Anzac Bay, to gain the high ground dominating the Narrows to the cast.
The plan, although strategically sound, was doomed from the beginning, for the officer appointed to command the undertaking was Lieutenant-General Sir Frederick Stopford.
He was an ailing man of 61 who had never commanded in the field, knew nothing of Gallipoli and was appointed solely because of seniority on the army list.
The result was predictable.
The landings on the night of 6–7  August, though safely made, were not exploited.
The troops, lacking adequate maps and orders, wandered about the shore in disarray; many had been landed indiscriminately (often in the wrong place) and stores and ammunition had been stockpiled without regard to their future use.
Along the length of the coast the story was now everywhere the same: Allied troops hanging on to vulnerable footholds, saved from annihilation only by their dogged courage.
The British Government had, by late autumn, begun to sense that the situation was hopeless and was veering toward an immediate withdrawal.
Hamilton, asked for his views, advocated continuing the struggle and, in consequence, was recalled on 15 October.
His replacement, Lieutenant-General Sir Charles Monro, who did not even bother to land on the peninsula, declared for evacuation.
Winston Churchill was to sum up his appraisal in a contemptuous phrase: ‘He came, he saw, he capitulated.’
The withdrawal — the one successful feature of the entire campaign — began at Suvla Bay and Anzac Beach during the night of 18 December, and from Cape Helles on 8 January 1916.
High-ranking officers, notably Hamilton himself, estimated that as many as 50,000 lives might be lost in the operations: in the event every surviving man was taken safely away.
Nevertheless, the Allies had suffered 252,000 casualties out of a total commitment of 480,000.
The Turks admitted similar losses, but the correct figure is generally believed by historians to be considerably higher.
Going in by the back door
By the end of 1914, in the west, both the Germans and the Allies were digging trenches; and in the east, the advent of winter had also temporarily brought the war of movement to a halt.
In October, however, Turkey, hoping to gain territory from Russia and to reinforce her flagging influence in the Balkans, had entered the war on the side of the Central Powers.
The bulk of her army was speedily dispatched to attack Russia in the Caucasus; the result, for Turkey, was disastrous.
By January 1915, when the Turks were thrown back, they had lost some 70,000 men of an original total of 100,000, either killed or frozen to death.
The Commander-in-Chief of the Russian Army, Grand Duke Nicholas, then appealed to Field Marshal Lord Kitchener, British Secretary of State for War.
to provide some relief from enemy pressure.
When a British and, to a lesser extent, French landing in Turkey was resolved upon, the site was obvious: the Gallipoli Peninsula.
If the assault proved successful, Egypt would no longer be vulnerable to attack (the Turks had already sent a force to attempt to seize the Suez Canal) and Turkey's traditional enemies in the Balkans might be won over to the Allies.
In addition, once Constantinople (Istanbul) was taken, Russia would have a year-round, ice-free sea passage, allowing her to export much-needed wheat to the western Allies and to receive arms and ammunition.
The strategic concept had everything in its favour; for success it required efficient planning and ruthless aggression.
In the event, neither was to be forthcoming.
Naval action in the strait
The Allied attempt to force the passage of the Dardanelles with capital ships on 18 March could well have succeeded, had it not been for a seemingly insignificant event.
The main lines of Turkish mines were laid in the Narrows, but on 8 March a small Turkish vessel had laid another line of 20 mines close to the shore of Eren Keui Bay.
Three of these were cleared on 16 March but, believing them to be floating mines, the Allies did not completely sweep the area.
By about l3.30 on 18 March, the guns of the main Turkish batteries had almost all been put out of action by long-range bombardment by Allied ships.
The mine-sweepers were, therefore, sent even farther into the Dardanelles to complete their work, while the French warships, hitherto in the van of the fleet, were withdrawn.
As they passed back through Eren Keui Bay, at 13.55 Bouvet struck a mine and went to the bottom with her crew within two minutes.
Some two hours later, shortly after 16.00, the British vessels Irresistible and Inflexible were holed; Gaulois, too, was holed.
Ocean, ordered to the aid of Irresistible, was struck in turn, and later both sank.
Vice-Admiral de Robeck, unaware of the true cause of the disaster and fearing the presence of land-based torpedoes, seems either to have lost his nerve or simply to have resolved on caution.
He ordered a general retirement of the flotilla, not realizing that the Turkish guns were mostly destroyed and the surviving gunners exhausted.
The opportunity to press home the naval attack was thus lost and with it the possibility of the overthrow of Turkey.
The penalties of failure
The Gallipoli campaign was a daring, imaginative scheme, thrown away, as Field Marshal Montgomery was to write, ‘because of every conceivable mistake in its execution by the commanders’.
For the Allies the consequences were dire.
Many lives had been lost, Turkey continued active on the side of the Central Powers, and the passage from the Black Sea remained closed to Russia, leaving her still separated from, and unsupplied by, her allies.
This was to prove crucial to her collapse, revolution, and withdrawal from the war in 1917.
Although a signal failure, the campaign produced one benefit for the Allies: it destroyed some of the best Turkish units, facilitating Allenby's later victories in Palestine.
This advantage was, however, more than offset by the fact that those senior Allied officers and statesmen who had advocated the invasion of Turkey, in order to step up the pressure on the Central Powers in the Middle East and so save lives in the war of attrition in France, had lost the argument.
More years of trench warfare and carnage on the Western Front.were now almost unavoidable.
Action & Stalemate 1915
It was already clear by November 1914 that the war would not ‘be over by Christmas’, as so many had optimistically supposed.
Deadlock, total and seemingly unbreakable, obtained both at sea and on the Western Front.
Lying idle in impregnable harbours, the German fleet could not be enticed to battle by the British, while on land the trench line — now being hastily dug and fortified ran without interruption along the entire battlefront.
Moreover, hitherto unexploited elements of warfare — defensive barbed wire and massed machine-guns — were being deployed along the whole front of some 563km/350mls, manned for the first time in history by millions of men.
This produced a tactical problem as yet unknown.
Until 1915, there had always existed the possibility of making a short or wide turning movement of one or other of an enemy's flanks; that option no longer existed.
But a frontal attack in the face of barbed wire and entrenched machine-guns was unlikely to succeed, and it guaranteed heavy losses.
There was a further problem: to destroy the barbed-wire obstacles necessitated a prolonged artillery barrage, which in turn removed the crucial element of surprise.
So on the Western Front a monstrous war of attrition developed in which hundreds of thousands of soldiers were thrown in repeated and hopeless assaults against their enemy.
The spring of 1915 thus found the Allies dug in opposite the German Army, which had been halted on the Marne.
The immediate victory on which Germany had counted had been denied her, though she had overrun Belgium and now occupied the industrial districts of northeastern France.
In the east, despite Germany's great success at the Battle of Tannenberg, Russian mobilization of her limitless manpower enabled her again to threaten East Prussia and, in the south, Galicia.
Furthermore, the Central Powers were virtually besieged and cut off from their new ally, Turkey, which had entered the war in October 1914.
Italy was to join the war on the Allied side on 23 May 1915, although at first her declaration of hostilities specified Austria-Hungary only.
Moreover, the German Navy, blockaded in harbour, was unable to succour German colonies in Africa and Asia, which by 1915 were being rapidly overrun.
Japan, too, had joined the conflict on the Allied side on 23 August 1914 and had swiftly helped herself to German possessions in the east, including the Carolina group of islands on 7 October and Kiauchau on 7 November.
All the evidence seemed, at first glance, to indicate Allied victory during the course of 1915.
However, there were other, potent factors involved.
The Allied command was not unified.
In Great Britain, Lord Kitchener was the commanding voice; in France, General Joffre; and in Russia, the Grand Duke Nicholas.
Each was capable in his way but no overall strategy for 1915 was devised between them.
Furthermore, Germany was making offensive preparations with Teutonic  thoroughness, producing munitions and enlisting soldiers at a far greater rate than the more sanguine Allies.
Hindenburg, following the triumph of Tannenberg in August 1914, was now a German hero and could, in effect, reverse Schlieffen's plan: that is, seek a decisive victory in the east while merely containing the Western Front.
New tactics were to be used against the Russians in which the destructive power of artillery fire would be the principal weapon.
Heavy guns would support the fire of the usual fieldpieces.
Before the Germans were ready to attack, however, the Russians renewed their thrusts westward in the spring, both into East Prussia and toward the Carpathians.
During the latter offensive, they captured the great Austrian fortress of Przemysl on 22 March.
But in the north they suffered a great defeat in the area of the Masurian Lakes ('The Winter Battle', 7–21 February) and retired behind their frontier, never again to mount an attack on East Prussia.
Russia's success against the Austrians on the southern front marked the high point of her advance, for she was doubly burdened.
Her industries produced an inadequate supply of munitions and weaponry and, in 1915, with stalemate in the west, she had to bear the full offensive impact of the Central Powers.
With the Russian advance everywhere either stemmed or repulsed, the Central  Powers (or rather Germany, who was now obliged to sustain her flagging ally) implemented earlier plans for massive drives eastward.
The main blow, under General August von Mackensen, was to be delivered in Galicia, with a subsidiary thrust in the north, through Courland toward Riga, by General Otto von Below.
The German attack in Galicia, centred on Gorlice, began on 28 April and, by the concentrated deployment of great quantities of artillery, swept the Russians east in disarray.
And by the first days of May, the entire Russian line in the area was in flight.
This, in turn, exposed the flank of Russian troops in the Carpathians under General Brusilov, and they, too, were obliged to withdraw.
On 3 June, the fortress of Przemysl was retaken as the Germans thrust east toward Lemberg.
In the north, the German advance from East Prussia had taken them as far as Windau, near the Gulf of Riga.
But now a more menacing threat was posed for Russia: massed German units were attacking the Polish salient from the north, while Austro-German armies thrust up from the southeast — precisely the strategy that the Austrian commander General Conrad von Hötzendorff had advocated in 1914.
The great German superiority in artillery made the outcome inevitable: the Russians abandoned Warsaw and the city was occupied by the Germans on 5 August.
The Austro-German advance became an irresistible tide, forcing the Russians to retreat to a line running almost straight, north to south, from Riga to Czernowitz.
Russian losses were massive — General Falkenhayn estimated human loss at about ‘three-quarters of a million men in prisoners alone’— and artillery and weaponry of all kinds had been taken in great quantity.
For Russia, for the Allies, the brief campaign had proved a disaster of unsurpassed magnitude and marked the beginning of the disintegration of the Russian Army.
As a result, Mackensen was freed to attack the northern region of Serbia; and Bulgaria, which had been watching the fortunes of war, anxious to identify the winning side, joined the Central Powers on 6 September 1915.
She, too, invaded Serbia, which was overrun and virtually ceased to exist as a nation.
Thus the Central Powers had conquered the neutral region that separated them from their ally in the east, Turkey.
The gloom was equally profound for the Allies elsewhere.
Stalemate prevailed on the Italian Front and all their offensives on the Western Front had been frustrated with heavy loss — at Neuve Chapelle (March), at Ypres (April) and in Champagne and at Loos (September).
The Gallipoli campaign ended in dismal and costly failure, with withdrawal from the peninsula commencing on 19 December.
Germany and Austria had begun the year of 1915 besieged in central Europe; now the strategic situation was transformed in their favour.
As 1916 dawned, the Allies were unable to plan any immediate offensive, since the new British armies were not yet ready; but the Central Powers could plan two: one at Verdun and an Austrian attack on Italy.
Battle of Verdun February-December 1916
Verdun was the longest battle of World War I, among the most costly in life and militarily the most pointless.
In February 1916, when the battle opened, the Western Front ran south from the Ostend area, east to Verdun and then roughly southeast to the Swiss frontier.
Verdun itself was situated on the River Meuse in the middle of a horseshoe-shaped salient.
Even a glance at the map shows that the French would at this time have been strategically much better placed without Verdun, for withdrawal would have straightened and shortened their line, thus strengthening it.
Another factor also should have brought the French staff to this conclusion: the great fortress, and its double defensive ring of 21 smaller forts, had recently been shorn of many guns for service elsewhere on the Western Front.
General Joseph Joffre, the French Commander-in-Chief, following Germany's easy capture of Liege and Namur early in the war, had lost all confidence in the defensive capability of fortresses.
In reality, though this was not generally known, Verdun was now guarded by a single line of trenches — and a single line could be penetrated by the enemy with relative ease, whereas two could not.
A certain Lieutenant-Colonel Driant, the Deputy (parliamentary representative) for Nancy, who in 1916 was serving in the Verdun sector, took the opportunity, when on leave in Paris, to inform the Army Commission and his brothel deputies of the true state of affairs.
This was duly reported to General Joseph Galliéni, now Minister of War, who had heard similar disquieting news from other  sources.
Galliéni at once wrote to Joffre, calling for a full report.
Joffre was outraged.
He replied that there was no substance in the allegation of French unpreparedness in the Verdun sector and asked for the names of those who had given Galliéni the information so that they might be admonished.
‘I cannot’, he wrote, ‘be party to soldiers placed under my command bringing before the Government, by channels other than the hierarchic channel, complaints or protests concerning the execution of my orders.’
This petulant and bureaucratic state of mind did not bode well for the conduct of a battle that was now plainly imminent.
Falkenhayn gave Crown Prince Wilhelm, commanding the Fifth Army, a clear assurance that the object of Operation ‘Gericht’ was to seize the fortress.
Yet, if that were so, why did his plan entail an attack from the east bank of the Meuse only, and not from the west bank also, to achieve a successful pincer operation?
Some have argued that the first attack was intended to lure the French forces to the east bank, so leaving a German attack on the west bank relatively unopposed.
Indeed, Falkenhayn never attempted to break through the enemy lines — so far the sole tactic attempted by both sides — but planned rather to bleed France white by attacking that which the French nation would not tolerate being taken.
To this end he had devised a new strategy: the assault was not to be made by men but by guns.
By massing overwhelming artillery strength on a short front, and replacing prolonged duration of fire (which had hitherto given ample warning of attack to the defenders) by the number of guns employed, he hoped so to disrupt French trench lines that, when the bombardment ceased; a relatively small German force could advance with little loss.
Then the depth of the massed artillery fire could be extended and the process repeated.
More than I, 200 guns of every type — including 42 cm mortars, known as ‘Big Berthas’— were brought forward and  closely packed on a front only some 13km/ 8mls long.
Opposed to this formidable array of artillery, the most powerful in history, were a mere 270 guns, mostly with insignificant stocks of ammunition.
All depended on the French falling into the trap; this, as Falkenhayn had predicted, they immediately did.
Had the German attack been mounted on 12 February, as planned, the French, caught as it were in transit — for though now aware of the impending peril they were only beginning to bring up reinforcements — must have been overcome in a total and horrible manner.
But at that precise moment Nature intervened.
The great bulk of German artillery and manpower had been assembled in the area due north of Verdun between the River Meuse and the Woevre, a boggy plain.
Ammunition, provender, railway lines — all had been provided with Teutonic thoroughness.
During the night preceding the planned offensive, however, the weather suddenly deteriorated: the temperature dropped, snow soon covered the ground and a blizzard reduced visibility to  an arm's length.
The German plan of attack was delayed by 24 hours.
Then, as the fog, rain and snow persisted, it was  further delayed; then again and again, until at dawn on 21 February the weather and visibility improved sufficiently for the bombardment to be opened.
During those nine days, the concealed German troops remained, like hibernating animals, in the reinforced, underground galleries that they had methodically constructed.
The French meanwhile, now belatedly alert to the impending peril, were frenetically bringing up reinforcements and more armament.
It is perhaps no exaggeration to suggest that the weather saved France from a catastrophic defeat, for by 21 February there were still only two French divisions in position, facing six German divisions and their massed arsenal.
The opening shot of the battle has often been described.
A gigantic 38cm gun, a product of Krupp's munitions factory, disgorged a shell to a distance of 32km/20mls.
The projectile was imperfectly aimed but exploded in Verdun, smashing down part of the Archbishop's palace.
For a terrible nine hours, the bombardment continued, constantly intensifying in its ferocious impact.
Tree branches, whole trunks, were blasted into the air, then fell to the ground, only to be interred or repeatedly thrown upward by further explosions; likewise mangled machinery and dismembered human bodies and those of horses.
Soon the landscape was one of lunar bleakness.
Nothing stirred, save involuntarily from the impact of unremitting bombardment.
The entire scene was overcast with clouds of débris and pock-marked by shell holes.
Severed human limbs, heads and trunks lay scattered over a wide area; other human remains, accompanied by tattered shreds of uniform, hung grotesquely from the remaining tree branches.
The dead and dying lay either interred or where they fell.
Many soldiers, still manning their guns, were bespattered with the bowels, blood and brains of their stricken comrades.
The bombardment continued unabated until, at 16.00, it reached its maximum intensity, inflicting such destruction that the Germans supposed nothing — man, horse, even rodent — could have survived.
Then, at about 16.45, the deluge of shells suddenly ceased.
French troops, deafened by the thunderous roar, felt  yet more deaf with the unexpected, but long-prayed-for, silence.
Tranquillity however, they knew to be the harbinger of attack.
Soon, the grey-clad German infantry, equipped with a new and revolting weapon — the flame thrower — advanced in small formations on the French, along a 3.3km/4ml front between Bois de Haumont and Herbevois on the east bank  of the Meuse.
Driant's men in the Bois de Caures bore the brunt of the attack and he himself was killed.
The French line was destroyed and its troops nearly annihilated, but a few remained and, farther back, still more.
Their minds concentrated by the proximity of the detested enemy, the French soldiers resisted with the utmost stubbornness and, to German surprise and dismay, began to inflict heavy casualties.
Fighting ceased only with the advent of darkness — but the respite was to be brief.
The following morning, the bombardment was resumed as a preliminary to a stronger infantry attack by the German 3rd, 7th Reserve and 18th corps in the general direction of Fort Douaumont, the largest in Verdun's defensive ring.
The procedure was repeated the next day, 24 February, the Germans suffering unexpectedly high casualties but remorselessly, if slowly, pushing the French back.
On 25 February, the Germans gained their greatest triumph of the battle when advance units penetrated the great fort of Douaumont and, finding many of the ill-armed French soldiers asleep through exhaustion, seized the citadel without loss of life.
By now all was confusion: the streets of Verdun presented a scene of total disorder, not unlike a disturbed ant heap, for troops and transport (all civilians had earlier been evacuated) milled about in congested and seemingly pointless movement.
At the front, orders and conflicting counter-orders were adding to the general chaos, as was the badly damaged, and anyway inadequate, telephone system.
The horror of the battle and the danger to France of those first days had, however, at last become imprinted on Joffre's sanguine and complacent mind.
General de Castelnau, Joffre's right-hand man and chief of staff, extracted from him permission to move General Henri Pètain's Second Army to join the Third at Verdun, with Petain in command of the entire sector's defence.
Whatever judgement is ultimately made of Pètain's conduct during World War II, nothing can detract from his achievement at Verdun.
‘They shall not pass!’ was not just a battle cry; it was a national cry that all of France echoed.
Not only did he immediately assume overall  direction of the battle, organizing his forces and ever-increasing artillery power, but he at once ordered the reoccupation and rearming of the outlying forts, to each of which two weeks' supply of food and water for every man was dispatched.
Most importantly, since the rail links to Verdun had been severed by artillery fire, he enlarged the road for trucks between Bar-le-Duc and Verdun the ‘Sacred Way’ the only supply line to the front.
By the end of February, a week or so after the battle opened, the German advance had been stemmed.
However, it was a temporary hold, for on 6 March the three original German corps were reinforced by the three flanking corps: the 6th Reserve on the German right, the 15th and 5th Reserve on their left.
They mounted a bloody attack throughout that month and the next, directed mainly at the ironically aptly named hill of Mort Homme — the dead man — on the river's left bank, and at the Côte du Poivre.
But now troop numbers and artillery were more nearly matched, and the renewed German attack gained little ground.
Men on both sides were dying in scores of thousands all the same, and the casualty trains homeward-bound became both more frequent and more crowded.
The Germans inevitably lost heavily in attack, the French through their stubborn but misguided determination to fight for every metre of ground.
As Winston Churchill put it: ‘The French suffered more than the defence need suffer by their valiant and obstinate retention of particular positions.
Meeting an artillery attack is like  catching a cricket ball.
Shock is dissipated by drawing back the hands.
A little‘give’, a little suppleness, and the violence of impact is vastly reduced.’
This the French did not grasp.
Mort Homme was ultimately taken by the Germans, though at terrible cost.
More and more men were thrown into the struggle on both sides; even so, it was May before the French were completely cleared from the left bank of the Meuse.
By now German commanders were beginning to lose their nerve.
The Crown Prince, who had never favoured Falkenhayn's plans, was adamant in his belief that the offensive should be called off; Falkenhayn himself wavered — as well he might, for his reputation and professional future depended on success at Verdun.
Only General Schmidt von Knobelsdorf, Chief of Staff to the Crown Prince's army, was resolved to continue.
The French commanders also were in an indecisive state of shock.
Petain, a general considerate of his men, was promoted to command of the Army Group and two lesser generals assumed immediate responsibility — Nivelle, who was to bring the French Army to the point of mutiny in the following year, and Mangin, dubbed ‘the heroic defender of Verdun’ by some, ‘the butcher’by others.
By making repeated attacks, Nivelle and Mangin played into Falkenhayn's hands and incurred horrendous casualties.
On 7 June, after a week's resistance by Major Sylvain Raynal and 600 men, with a heroism hardly equalled in the war, Fort Vaux finally fell.
Then, on 20 June, the Germans for the first time employed a new type of diphosgene gas shell.
The effect was dramatic, paralysing French artillery support and enabling the Germans to make deep advances that brought them to within striking distance of Verdun itself.
In reality, however, the German advance was losing momentum.
As early as 11 June, Petain had asked Joffre to bring forward the Allied attack in the Somme area.
This had been scheduled to open earlier in the year but had been pre-empted and postponed by Falkenhayn's attack at Verdun.
Since French troops had been removed from their positions on the Somme to bolster their imperilled comrades at Verdun, this offensive was to be undertaken largely by British troops.
The objectives had also been changed; now it was designed to take pressure off Verdun.
In this — though in nothing else — it was to prove successful.
The British bombardment on the Somme began on 24 June (the infantry attack went in on 1 July) and  on that same day Falkenhayn stopped the massive flow of ammunition to Verdun and cancelled all reinforcements.
The German advance came to a halt, and during the autumn months the French were able to retake all the ground that they had earlier lost.
It is a cruel irony of the Battle of Verdun that the outlying forts that Joffre, deeming them useless, had stripped of their guns, were found to have withstood constant bombardment by both sides for many months almost unscathed.
Verdun was saved for the French by the British Somme offensive.
A reasonable estimate is that the French lost some 377,200, the Germans 337,000, the only occasion in the war when the defenders lost more than the attackers.
Moreover, the French Army's spirit was broken, its men on the verge of mutiny.
Germany, too, had lost the best of her young manhood.
It was a high price to pay for anything; it was an intolerable price to pay for nothing.
Falkenhayn's fateful scheme
By 1916, bereft of most of its heavy guns for service elsewhere, the fortress of Verdun was of little strategic importance to France, still less to Germany.
To the French, however, it was a symbol of national pride.
Verdun had a long history: it was an important city in Roman times; Vauban, the great fortress builder of Louis XIV's reign, had fortified it with ditches and bastions; in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870–1 Verdun had withstood a siege of 10 weeks, falling only through lack of supplies.
Most important of all; Verdun was the principal eastern bulwark of France, standing opposite the enemy's citadel of Metz.
Verdun epitomised France's grandeur, in some measure her history, and above all her proud independence.
The fortress and city could be ceded without great military significance, but the blow to the national spirit of France would be calamitous.
Therein lay the cunning intention of the German Chief of the General Staff, General Erich von Falkenhayn.
This enigmatic man — one reluctant to disclose his plans even to his closest associates and so often the military miscalculator — in this instance judged the French national character correctly: if the Germans attacked Verdun, the French would resist.
Once it was shown that Verdun was deemed worth capturing, it must be worth defending; if worth defending, then worth taking.
In this way, the bulk of the French Army would be drawn into the battle, bled white, and its spirit broken.
Thus the two powers became locked in a struggle for a citadel of no military value to either.
The ‘Sacred Way’
All rail links with Verdun were soon destroyed by the German bombardment, so Petain ordered the improvement and widening of the sole remaining road to the fortress that from Bar-le-Duc, 48km/30mls to the south.
This route, the ‘Sacred Way’ as it came to be called, saved Verdun.
For the first time in warfare, motorized trucks were the sole means of transport, for to have used horses would have choked up the whole movement of supplies.
Along this road, which was nowhere wider than 6ml 20ft, some 3,000 French trucks passed night and day for seven months, at the rate of one every 14 seconds.
Each week, an average of 50,000 tons of food and material was brought up and some 90,000 men transported in one direction or the other, for Petain's policy was to rotate his troops so that none should be in the ‘cauldron of fire’ for long.
One American war correspondent wrote of this incessant traffic; ‘The one sight of the battle of Verdun that will always live in my memory is that of the snow-covered and ice-coated road…constantly filled with two columns of trucks…
For long hours at night, I have watched the dim lights of all these trucks winding their way from north to south like the coils of some gigantic snake which had no end to it.’
Impassable potholes rapidly developed in the iron-hard, frosted road once the spring thaw set in.
So vast quantities of stone were stockpiled along the way, and gangs of territorials, perhaps 1,000 in all, were set to work around the clock filling in and levelling the holes as they formed.
By this and other stratagems, the Sacred Way was kept open throughout the battle.
The defender of Fort Vaux
Major Sylvain Raynal was a man of great courage who had risen from the ranks.
He had twice been badly wounded and was still hobbling around with a stick when he was given command of Fort Vaux, the smallest of the forts ringing Verdun but crucial to the defence of the important Fort Souville.
Raynal's task was daunting.
The fort had been subjected to ceaseless bombardment from the start of the German offensive and had been almost flattened, bottom .
The garrison of some 250 had been more than doubled by soldiers seeking refuge, and the corridors were crowded with dead and wounded.
The men were tormented by fleas and suffered agonies of thirst; by the end they were forced to drink their own urine.
The picture, below , taken when the French recaptured the fort later, gives some idea of the conditions.
Raynal limped among his men, calm and kindly, organizing a fighting defence.
But on 7 June, when all attempts to relieve the fort had failed, the exhausted survivors had no option but to surrender.
Shortly before the fort was captured, Major Raynal was appointed commander in the Legion of Honour; he learned of the award from his admiring German captors.
Later, in a special review at Les Invalides in Paris, the insignia was bestowed upon his wife.
Raynal's gallant defence so impressed Crown Prince Wilhelm that he personally returned Raynal's officer's sword to him as a mark of respect.
‘Unity of front’
After the bitter Allied reverses in 1915, a new effort was made at Chantilly, Joffre's headquarters, to devise a coherent military strategy —‘Unity of front’, in the phrase of the new French prime minister, Aristide.
Briand.
And, as 1915 drew to its close, some overall plan could be formulated.
A joint British and French attack on the Somme was part of this coordinated strategy, designed to hammer the Central Powers simultaneously from all sides.
Once the great armies had become locked in senseless slaughter at Verdun, however, the plan had to be revised.
Sir Douglas Haig, British Commander-in-Chief, reluctantly agreed to bring forward from 1 August to 1 July 1916 the Somme offensive.
This was to achieve little save loss, but it was at least a factor in bringing the German attack at Verdun to an end.
Meanwhile Russia had re-equipped and enlarged her army to an astonishing degree, considering her antiquated and corrupt administrative system.
She was now ready to launch a major attack.
An Italian attack on Austria-Hungary was also planned.
It was not only strategy that was affected by Verdun; personalities, too, were involved.
Falkenhayn was relieved of his command by the Kaiser in August and replaced by Hindenburg and Ludendorff.
In France, Joffre, though discredited, was appointed Chief Military Adviser to the Government, a titular post that gave his incompetence less scope.
Verdun was a watershed in World War I: before it, all were confident that victory was attainable, albeit with great sacrifice; after it there was a ghastly realization that no one had the solution to the war.
Battle of Jutland 31 May 1916
At the outbreak of World War I, both informed and common opinion held that a major, probably decisive, naval action would soon take place between the British and German fleets.
At first appraisal, Great Britain was, in 1914, undisputed mistress of the seas, as she had been since 1805 when Admiral Lord Nelson destroyed the combined Franco-Spanish fleet at the Battle of Trafalgar.
But many of her ships, though more numerous than Germany's, were obsolescent and lacked new, virtually impenetrable armoured plating.
By contrast, the German Navy, created under the compulsive ambition of the Kaiser, had newer and better-armed and armoured ships.
In the event, the two great fleets — the British Grand Fleet under Admiral Sir John Jellicoe, and the German High Seas Fleet, commanded by Admiral Reinhard Scheer — were not to engage until 31 May 1916.
The origins of the battle, however, can be traced to 29 July 1914, before the outbreak of war, when the British Fleet was prudently dispatched by Winston Churchill, First Lord of the Admiralty, to its war station at Scapa Flow, off the northeastern tip of Scotland.
The British Navy thus became the dominant force between northern Britain and Norway, so poised as to frustrate any German sortie into the North Sea.
The German High Seas Fleet was locked into its harbours; nevertheless two questions remained.
Would the Germans put to sea and, if so, when?
As on land, new weapons developed prior to the war played an important part in future operations.
Mines and submarines now posed a potent peril to an enemy's ships, and the Germans, conscious of their numerical inferiority at sea, at first resolved to deploy these rather than risk a major naval battle.
However, they made various sorties to test Great Britain's coastal defences: as early as 1914, German squadrons had bombarded the Norfolk coast and, farther north, Scarborough and Whitby in Yorkshire.
To protect Britain's east coast, a new battle-cruiser squadron, under Vice-Admiral Sir David Beatty, moved south on 7 May 1916 to Rosyth.
The German submarine offensive in the first 18 months of the war was largely contained.
Indeed, the torpedoing of the liner Lusitania , also on 7 May, in which some 1,100 people, including a number of Americans, perished, outraged world opinion.
It brought a virtual ultimatum from US President Woodrow Wilson, so strong that Germany temporarily gave up unrestricted submarine warfare.
What could Germany now do, and achieve, at sea?
The German plan was simple yet subtle.
Scheer resolved to use Vice-Admiral Franz von Hipper's battlecruisers again to bombard towns on the east coast of England; this, he judged, would bring Beatty and his battle-cruisers down from their anchorage at Rosyth.
Scheer himself, steaming some 80–90km/50–60mls behind Hipper, would then fall upon Beatty before Jellicoe and his Grand Fleet could reach the fateful scene from Scapa Flow, far to the north.
Unfortunately for Scheer, however, an earlier provocative raid by Hipper's ships had resulted in the Seydlitz being struck by a mine.
Though she reached harbour safely, considerable repairs were necessary and Scheer's projected sortie had to be postponed.
This event had two consequences: the German submarines stationed off Scapa Flow, with the task of harassing Jellicoe when he put to sea, were running out of fuel; and, on the new date set for sailing — 31 May — strong winds prevented Zeppelins from reconnoitring ahead of the High Seas Fleet.
Scheer, therefore, reverted to an earlier, alternative plan.
Late on Tuesday, 30 May 1916, the British Grand Fleet left its bases for one of its occasional reconnaissance sweeps across the North Sea.
Early on the following morning — 31 May — the German High Seas Fleet also left harbour in Jade Bay.
Hipper's battle-cruisers, light cruisers and destroyers steamed northward parallel to the Danish coast with the intention of attacking merchantmen off Norway.
Their objective was to lure Beatty to the scene so that they might trap and destroy some small portion of the British Fleet before retiring to sanctuary in their harbours on the German mainland.
Meanwhile Scheer, who had now decided to reduce the gap between the two German fleets to a mere 32km/20mls, would be close behind and in position also to strike at the outnumbered Beatty.
Again unfortunately for Scheer, the British possessed a copy of Germany's naval code and were aware, minute by minute, of her ships' movements.
Thus Jellicoe, on his flagship, the dreadnought Iron Duke , and Beatty, on his battle-cruiser Lion , were fully aware of developments and accordingly prepared their courses to intercept the German fleet.
Beatty, whose force comprised 52 ships, including four of the most powerful and sophisticated super-dreadnoughts of the day —Barham, Malaya, Valiant and Warspite — sailed from Rosyth shortly after 21.30.
At about the same time, given by flags, which for a time went undetected by the 5th Battle Squadron, commanded by Rear-Admiral Sir Hugh Evan-Thomas.
It was only a good six minutes later that this squadron of battleships, which had been steaming some 8km/5mls behind Beatty in his flagship Lion , turned; this delay left the squadron about 16km/10mls behind Beatty's battlecruisers.
Beatty consequently had a momentous task: to entice the Germans north toward Jellicoe, then hurrying south, without himself being overwhelmed by the superior enemy forces that he at present faced.
At about 15.20, Hipper sighted Beatty and turned south, hoping to lure the British toward Scheer's advancing fleet.
Then, 10 minutes later, Beatty in his turn detected Hipper, and the action between the opposing battle-cruiser fleets, which lasted some 80 minutes, shortly began.
The two fleets were steaming roughly abreast, about 13.3–16.6km/8¼–10¼mls apart, on a course SSE — that is, directly toward Scheer.
Jellicoe and his battle fleet were still well to the north.
Beatty's aim was to keep Hipper so closely engaged that the Germans could not break off the action until Jellicoe arrived; Hipper's task was to lure Beatty to destruction at the hands of Scheer.
The two fleets were vigorously engaged when suddenly disaster befell the British.
The Indefatigable , the last ship in the line, sustained a hit and sank with the loss of all but two of her crew of goo officers and men.
Fortunately, Evan-Thomas in Barham , steaming at maximum speed with his four battleships, had come within firing range.
Nevertheless, the Germans had the advantage, for the British ships, silhouetted against the western sky, made ideal targets and, shortly after 16.20, the battle-cruiser Queen Mary was hit by a salvo and also sank.
Beatty, who had begun the engagement with a numerical superiority in battlecruisers of six to five, was now inferior by a margin of five to four.
Nevertheless, the crisis had passed with the timely appearance of Evan-Thomas.
This changed the entire tactical situation, for Scheer, steaming toward the scene, had no option but to go to Hipper's assistance.
Beatty sighted Scheer's fleet shortly before 16.40 and, being greatly outnumbered, turned north to join Jellicoe.
The signal to turn about was, like Beatty's earlier order, missed by Evan-Thomas, who continued on his original southward course until he ran into Scheer's battleships and came under heavy fire.
By now the two great flotillas — Jellicoe's and Scheer's — were rapidly closing with each other and the second major engagement of the action was about to open.
The problem for the British was that they had seriously miscalculated their  own positions.
Thus, Beatty, when he came within sight of Jellicoe, was more than 8km/5mls west of the spot at which his Commander-in-Chief had been led to expect him; moreover, the German fleet was to Jellicoe's starboard rather than, as he had thought, straight ahead.
Jellicoe had sent Rear-Admiral Sir Horace Hood and his 3rd Battle-cruiser Squadron to aid Beatty but, because of the misreckonings of position, this force moved too far eastward.
Paradoxically, the error was to assist the British fleet.
Hipper, steaming northward parallel to Beatty, again sighted his enemy to the west at about 17.40; he immediately turned east but was then bombarded by Hood, who had inadvertently taken up a wrong station.
Hipper, by now apprehensive, turned away, first to the southeast, then to the southwest, in order to avoid what he thought was the vanguard of Admiral Jellicoe's battle squadrons.
Jellicoe's fleet was coming southward in six columns, running parallel and stretching 6.4km/4mls from side to side.
At 18.15 he deployed his port wing column, while his starboard wing, presently manoeuvring to the left, or port side, opened fire.
His decision to turn east enabled him to steam across the head of the German line, a manoeuvre, potentially lethal, known as ‘crossing the T’.
Scheer, observing this, at once turned about: he had no intention of engaging the greater firepower of the British Grand Fleet in its entirety and was by now thoroughly alarmed for the safety of his ships.
But Scheer turned westward, away from the sanctuary of his harbours in northern Germany, so Jellicoe then deployed his fleet in a curving line between the Germans, now again out of sight, and their bases.
This was a skilful manoeuvre but it risked frustration because the combination of fog, dense smoke from guns and funnels, and failing light, was making visibility increasingly poor.
Scheer continued steaming westward for a further 20 minutes; and then, for reasons never adequately explained, turned cast again.
In any event, this move, made in ignorance of Jellicoe's true position, brought him shortly after 19.00 opposite the centre of Jellicoe's fleet.
The distance between the fleets was no more than 8km/smls and soon most of the ships in both flotillas were engaged.
Scheer quickly decided to attempt escape from what was potentially a disastrous situation by executing the manoeuvre known as the  a ‘Gefechtskehrtwendung ’, a ‘battle turnabout’ in which all his ships turned 180° to starboard, reversing his line.
As he steamed off southeast, he came intermittently under heavy fire from ships in Beatty's and Hood's squadrons.
At about 21.00, nightfall came to his aid, giving him nearly six hours of darkness, and he slipped away from his enemies.
Scheer had three possible routes through German minefields to his harbours and safety; he elected to take the shortest, via the Horn Reefs, since most of his ships were slower than those of the British.
During the hours of darkness, Jellicoe was bedevilled by conflicting and often inaccurate messages, both from his scout ships and the Admiralty.
Thus, when the first flicker of daylight broke on the horizon at about 02.30 on 1 June, Jellicoe found the sea empty: Scheer had eluded him and was even then reaching sanctuary.
The British Commander-in-Chief, having searched for stragglers and stricken seamen in lifeboats until 13.15, ordered his ships to return to their harbours.
Early naval battles
In 1914 there were several German warships scattered throughout the Atlantic and Pacific oceans.
The most powerful flotilla was the East Asiatic Squadron based on the China coast.
It was commanded by Vice-Admiral Maximilian von Spee.
By the late autumn Spee's flotilla of five ships had moved to the Juan Fernandez Islands some 644km/400mls west of Chile.
His approximate area of operation then became known to Rear-Admiral Sir Christopher Cradock, whose responsibility it was to guard the southern tip of South America.
Cradock's force, based in the Falkland Islands, comprised two obsolescent armoured cruisers, Good Hope and Monmouth, which were heavily out-gunned by Spee's formation; a modern cruiser the Glasgow; and the armed merchantman Otranto.
The out-of-date battleship Canopus was yet to join him.
On 14 October, Cradock left the Falklands and steamed around Cape Horn to intercept the Germans.
Spee, meanwhile, moved south along the.
coast to Chile, and the two formations met, in heavy seas, on the evening of 1 November not far from the port of Coronel.
The result was inevitable: Good Hope was sunk, as later was Monmouth; Glasgow and Otranto fled south, seeking the protection of the fast approaching Canopus.
The British lost 1,654 officers and men, including Cradock; the Germans a mere two men wounded.
Retribution, however, was at hand.
The Admiralty had dispatched two battlecruisers — Invincible and Inflexible — to the south Atlantic, where they were joined by six light cruisers.
This flotilla reached the Falkland Islands on 7 December; the following morning, the victorious Spee also arrived.
His flotilla was taken wholly by surprise when fired upon by the British warships and turned tail.
The weather was bright, providing the British guns, now superior in range and number, with clear targets.
Spee, knowing he was doomed, ordered his light cruisers to escape southward while his flagship, Scharnhorst, and Gneisenau delayed the enemy in hopeless contest.
At about 16.15 the Scharnhorst succumbed to ceaseless bombardment and sank; and at 17.45, having fired all her ammunition and riven by shell bursts, Gneisenau's captain ordered her to be scuttled.
These gallant efforts failed to save the light cruisers.
British ships overtook and sank two of them, the third, the Dresden, escaped but was sunk in March 1915.
The raider ‘Emden’
Early in the war, the menace of German raiders in the waters north of Australia delayed the sailing of the first convoy of Anzac troops for Europe.
But by November 1914, the Allies knew that Spee's squadron had moved to the coast of South America and only the Emden could intercept the convoy.
Despite her record of 25 merchantmen and 2 warships captured or sunk, she was no match for the escort vessels: the cruisers Sydney, Melbourne and Minotaur, and the Japanese battle-cruiser Ibuki.
On the morning of 9 November, Sydney sighted Emden and pinned her to the shore of Keeling Island, one of the Cocos group, on which a German party had been landed to destroy essential cable and wireless installations connecting Australian, African and Indian telegraph systems.
Abandoning his landing party, Emden's captain Karl von Muller made at once for the open sea and opened fire with his ten 10.5cm guns, destroying Sydney's fire-direction system.
Sydney withdrew out of range and bombarded Emden with shells from her 6in guns until she caught fire.
Rather than be blown up, Muller grounded his ship on a coral reef and surrendered.
The landing party escaped in an old schooner and, after a harrowing and adventurous journey, managed to reach Arabia and finally made their way back to Germany.
Development of the dreadnoughts
For many decades Great Britain had undisputed mastery of the seas.
Then, toward the end of the nineteenth century, Germany emerged as a rival, increasing the size of her navy to support her expansionist policy.
This was made possible by her great industrial centres, which by 1910 were producing twice as much steel as the British and three times that of the French.
Sir John Fisher, the First Sea Lord, was determined to maintain Great Britain's supremacy and quickly grasped the potential of the design of a new warship, to be named Dreadnought.
A great advantage was that her four-shaft Parsons steam engines were both more reliable and cheaper to run than earlier engines, and she was at least three knots faster than any other warship.
As well as increased speed, her design gave her ten I z-in guns in five twin turrets, without any reduction in armour.
The drawback to Dreadnought, which gave her name to a whole era of warships, was her cost — I, 783,883.
Fisher to some extent solved this problem by scrapping many older ships of doubtful value.
The launching of Dreadnought on 10 February 1906 both infuriated and dismayed the Germans, who at once deepened the Kiel Canal and widened its locks to accommodate larger, more powerful vessels.
A massively expanded naval programme was inaugurated.
The race for naval domination accelerated.
Submarine warfare and the convoy system
On 1 February 1917, Germany declared unrestricted submarine warfare, with the object of starving the British into surrender; the prescribed areas encircled the British Isles and covered large areas of the Mediterranean.
And some 200 U-boats, capable of remaining at sea for up to four weeks and armed with torpedoes and guns, were deployed in the Atlantic, covering the approaches from North America along which most merchantmen passed.
Sinkings by U-boats rose steadily, from around 100 merchant vessels in January 1916 to about 800 a month in the spring of 1917.
In reply, the British equipped a number of merchantmen, called Q-ships, with torpedo tubes and concealed guns.
They acted as bait and, once a U-boat surfaced, could out-gun her.
But Allied and neutral losses continued to mount so steeply that the Germans supposed a further five months would see Great Britain subdued.
The final remedy was found in the convoy system.
Each convoy comprised 40 or more merchantmen, with escort ships, mostly destroyers equipped with depth charges, stationed on either side.
On sighting a U-boat, they would at once break away in pursuit.
Advance patrols acted as look-outs and another ship took station in rear to rescue survivors from any stricken vessel.
To the end of October 1917, of more than I, 500 vessels in homeward-bound convoys, only 24 were lost.
So successful was the system that it was reintroduced at the beginning of World War II.
The young lion
The Victoria Cross, the highest British accolade for bravery in action, was awarded posthumously to 16-year-old John Travers Cornwell, serving at Jutland on the light cruiser HMS Chester.
He held the rank of Boy First Class, and his duty was to help sight Chester's forward s.sin gun.
At about 17.30, Chester came under heavy fire and all the gun crew except Cornwell were killed.
Although severely wounded in the chest and under continuous fire, with the greatest fortitude, he stood by his gun for more than 15 minutes.
Cornwell died in hospital on 2 June.
In his battle dispatch, Beatty described Cornwell's bravery and recommended him for ‘special recognition…as an acknowledgement of the high example set by him.’
The poster below, commemorating Cornwell's courage was signed by Edward Carson, First Lord of the Admiralty, Jellicoe and Beatty.
Who won Jutland?
The Battle of Jutland has often been judged a ‘draw’; but in warfare there is really no such thing.
Although losses may be equal, the side that is the better able to sustain them will derive most benefit from any encounter.
Certainly the British suffered the more serious loss: three battle-cruisers, three armoured cruisers and eight destroyers against Germany's one battleship, five cruisers of various types and five destroyers.
Moreover, the British had lost 6,097 sailors to Germany's 2,545.
Yet those British ships that reached harbour undamaged on 2 June were refuelled and made ready for sea within five hours, whereas the Germans took nearly four months to prepare their fleet to sail.
The Germans made further, but limited assaults on the British coast, but the High Seas Fleet never again put to sea with the intention of engaging the Grand Fleet.
The lesson of Jutland for Britain was that it should never have been fought.
As long as the British had numerical superiority in ships, as long as Nelson's unbroken string of victories remained unblemished by subsequent defeats, the authority of the Royal Navy was a generally accepted truth.
Although after Jutland Britain still had more ships than Germany, as the Kaiser remarked, ‘The spell of Trafalgar has been broken.’
Uncertainties in the minds of Britain's allies were increased by Jellicoe's delay in making a report, and the German version of the battle, couched in biased terms, became widely accepted.
The Brusilov Offensive June–September 1916
Russian offensive strategy for 1916 had been designed to coincide with Anglo-French assaults in the west.
The plan called for a main attack by 26 divisions in July on a 40-km/25-ml front running north and south of the village of Krevo, west of Molodetchno.
Meanwhile, to ensure that the Germans did not rush reinforcements by rail to the threatened area, General Alexei Alexeievich Brusilov, commanding the South West Front, was ordered to make menacing probes in his area.
In effect, these were intended to be little more than reconnaissance raids on a large scale.
Brusilov's extensive command, which stretched from east of Kovel in the north to Czernowitz on the Romanian border, comprised four armies under generals of proven worth.
North to south, these were the Eighth Army (Kaledin), Eleventh (Sakharov), Seventh (Scherbachev) and the Ninth (Lechitski).
Brusilov, who had directed Russia's southern thrust during the Battle of Lemberg, had already proved himself a redoubtable commander of troops in mass.
The Russians were opposed by the Fourth Austro-Hungarian Army (Archduke Joseph Ferdinand) just south of the Pripet Marshes with, on its right, the First Army (von Brlog).
Into these was merged in an undefined manner the army of the German General von Linsingen, whose forces consisted of both Austrian and German formations.
The Second Austro-Hungarian Army (Bö-Ermolli) held the front between Dubno and a point a little north of the Tarnopol-Lemberg railway.
The rest of the line was held by the Prussian Count Felix von Bothmer and General von Pflanzer-Baltin's Seventh Army, which had a strong Hungarian contingent among the Austrian troops.
Although the Austrian and Hungarian armies were ethnically very mixed and contained Germans, Magyars, Poles and even Italians, there were very few Czech, Slovene and Ruthenian regiments on the Russian Front.
Since at heart these men were friendly to the Slav cause, Allied propaganda claimed that those who were posted to the east were always stationed in the most exposed positions, and at the slightest sign of wavering, or what might be termed ‘treason’, were shot at from the rear.
Near the end of May, Italy, suffering reverses at the hands of the Austrians, besought her Russian Ally for assistance.
Indeed, the King of Italy telegraphed the request personally to the Tsar.
The Stavka, Russia's supreme war council, asked Brusilov what he could do to take  pressure off the Italians by preventing even more Austrian troops being taken from the Eastern Front to the Trentino.
Brusilov, a thrusting and optimistic commander, replied that he was as well placed to advance against Austria now as he would be in July.
Nothing, he was informed ‘by his superiors, was to affect the main blow to be delivered in the area of Krevo; but apart from that Brusilov was virtually empowered to do whatever he thought fit.
Brusilov's response was, typically, unconventional.
He had bare parity of strength with the Austrians — 38 divisions to 37 — a wholly inadequate number with which to mount an attack, since all evidence had shown that a ratio of 3:1 was the least that could reasonably be expected to ensure success.
However, he had one potentially decisive factor in his favour: the element of surprise.
To utilize this to the full, Brusilov resolved to launch all four of his armies at once over a wide front, rather than concentrating them as dictated by contemporary military thinking.
The timing of these concerted attacks to the same day, along the entire front, made it impossible for the Austro-Hungarian forces to be switched back and forth behind their line, with the result that they had to fight each battle with the support of no more than local reserves.
In addition, Brusilov eschewed the current strategy of first pounding the enemy with prolonged artillery fire.
On his instructions, the bombardment was intense but lasted less than a day, its object being to take out selected points in the enemy's defence, rather than to destroy the Austrian trenches.
The effect was dramatic.
Since Brusilov had not concentrated his troops in any one area, nor made tactical probes, and since the artillery bombardment lasted so short a time, the Austrians had no inkling of his intentions.
As General Erich von Falkenhayn, in overall command of the German forces on the front, was later to comment: ‘After a relatively short artillery preparation they [the Russian troops]had got up from their trenches and simply marched forward.’
Both officers and men of the Austro-Hungarian Army had, too, a handicap of their own making: complacency, for they thought their positions impregnable.
Indeed, on the eve of Brusilov's offensive, General Conrad von Hotzendorff, the Austrian supreme commander, told a Swedish journalist: ‘We are not to be conquered again.’
The only justification for Austria's  misplaced sense of security was the strong front-line defences.
In most sectors there were five lines of trenches, one behind the other, many as much as 6m/20ft deep, with dug-outs similar to those on the Western Front.
These were all covered over with baulks of timber secured with concrete and well stocked with food and weapons.
Convinced of the impossibility of ever again having to retreat, the Austrian Army had settled into a comfortable, almost rural, existence.
There were bakeries, sausage factories, and plants for pickling and smoking meat just behind the front, and cold stores had been established.
Large numbers of men were employed, too, in growing vegetables and grain for the army; but it was not they who were to reap the harvest, for their crops and granaries were either captured by the Russians or burned.
The very suddenness of Brusilov's attack, on 4 June, caught Austria militarily off balance.
As the Russians neared the enemy lines, their artillery used curtain fire to trap the Austrian forces in their deep trenches, which now became prisons from which the could not escape.
Death or surrender became the only options.
Brusilov's attack broke through his enemy's line on a front of nearly 320km/ 200mls, throwing the Austro-Hungarian Army into bewildered retreat, and they began to surrender in large numbers.
On the first day alone, the Russians captured 13,000 men; by noon on 6 June, the third day, the tally had risen to 900 officers and 40,000 other ranks, together with 77 guns and 134 machine-guns.
Although the Eleventh and Seventh armies in the Russian centre made only little immediate headway, in the north General Kaledin's Eighth Army advanced farther than 16km/10mls along a 48-km/ 30-ml front.
And in the south General Lechitski's Ninth Army had even more spectacular successes in the region of Czernowitz.
The situation was transformed.
The advance gathered momentum and within the month, Brusilov had penetrated nearly 16km/60mls along the entire front.
He captured almost the whole of the Bukovina, and the important towns of Lutsk, Dubno and Czernowitz fell to his troops.
In addition, he took 350,000 prisoners, some 400 artillery pieces and I, 300 machine-guns.
The Stavka, though astonished, were quick to reinforce Brusilov.
The proposed and prepared offensive in the Krevo area now became of secondary importance; all reinforcements, weaponry and supplies must be hastened to Brusilov's support.
Here, however, the inadequate Russian railway system was yet again to play its inhibiting part.
Although from about 10 June, troops were transferred southward to Brusilov's aid, they could not be carried in sufficient numbers to provide the necessary support to maintain his attack or greatly to affect its outcome.
Early in July, it also became evident that while the Austrian troops were falling back in collapse, German formations on the front fought stubbornly and retreated with discipline.
General von Bothmer's Sürmé sited roughly between the Russian Eleventh and Seventh armies, delayed Brusilov's advance, as did General von Linsingen's troops opposite the extreme Russian right in the area of Kovel.
For the Central Powers, however, the situation remained perilous in the extreme.
Falkenhayn was obliged to gather German reinforcements from wherever he could: three divisions from the north of the front, more from reserves, and four from the Western Front, where they were sorely needed.
Conrad, too, had no option but to break off his offensive in the Trentino and, in an attempt to halt Brusilov's threatening advance, return to the Eastern Front the troops he had earlier withdrawn.
By mid-July, the situation had again changed.
Austria was chastened and had to submit to Germany in all strategical decisions and Conrad was shortly relieved of his command.
German railways, always more numerous and efficient than those of Russia, enabled reinforcements to be brought in rapidly, and the German line was now uninterrupted along the whole front.
Some of the earliest reinforcements were used for a counter-attack by Linsingen and Bohm-Ermolli on the northern edge of Brusilov's offensive.
This was the moment for Brusilov to call a halt.
Instead, urged on by his military and political masters, he pressed on throughout July and into August, while at the same time fresh Russian attacks were made to the north of his armies.
In the south, the Russian armies reached, and then foundered on, the great barrier of the Carpathian Mountains.
By the end of August, Brusilov had advanced so far as to make replenishment of men and matériel difficult, often impossible.
The impetus was spent.
The casual bravery of the Russian troops was no match for German massed artillery and machine-gun fire, and the Russians suffered nearly a million casualties; the Germans had relatively few.
Romania's entry into the war against Austria at the end of August served only to lengthen Russia's frontier, laying her open to further attack when Romania collapsed in December 1916.
But by this time, the great loss of life, and the increasing difficulties in obtaining weapons and supplies, had sapped the will of the Russian troops to attack, and the situation drifted into stagnation.
Russian resurgence
Russia had been mauled in 1915 and forced into general retreat, but she had not been destroyed.
To the Germans, however, it seemed she was incapable of further immediate offensives; so, late in 1915, General Erich von Falkenhayn felt secure enough to transfer troops and artillery to the Western Front.
At the same time, General Conrad von Hotzendorff syphoned off large numbers of Austrian troops to pursue his offensive in Italy.
Given this period of respite during the winter of 1915–16 and the following spring, Russia had, in fact, made an astonishing recovery.
She was producing some 100,000 rifles a month; many more were received from her allies; and hundreds of thousands of recruits had been enlisted and partly trained.
But she was still seriously underarmed and undersupplied.
Nevertheless, the Russians planned a new offensive for the summer of 1916, to be mounted in unison with Anglo-French attacks on the Somme and Italian thrusts against Austria.
But Falkenhayn's assault on Verdun disrupted the Allied plans.
The offensive on the Somme was in jeopardy, and the Italians were suffering in Austrian attacks in the Trentino, where they lost some 300 guns and 150,000 men.
Both France and Italy implored Russia to attack to relieve their distress.
Although the appeals came when Russia was not yet ready to advance, for the second time she went immediately and unhesitatingly to the aid of her allies.
The Romanian debacle
Romania entered the war against Austria on 28 August 1916, when Brusilov's offensive seemed irresistible.
For two years she had awaited the turn of events before deciding which side to join, while maintaining a mobilized army.
Her objective was to acquire Transylvania, and she now at once invaded that country and quickly occupied the greater part of it.
But seldom has a military miscalculation been so gross and retribution so immediate.
The German supreme command had long foreseen Romania's strategy, and two powerful armies had been quietly assembled to counter just this eventuality.
The First Austrian Army, under General von Falkenhayn, attacked Romania's left wing, while a second army group, under General von Mackensen, invaded her Black Sea province of Dobrudja from Bulgaria.
The Romanians, trapped in the pincers, were swiftly thrown out of Transylvania.
Then, with Falkenhayn invading northern Romania, Mackensen's reinforced army was free to cross the Danube and assault her from the south.
During November, Romania was occupied by the Central Powers, and on 6 December the capital, Bucharest, fell.
Her remaining troops fled into the northern province of Moldavia, where they were in some measure protected by their Russian ally.
Within the space of some three months, Romania's ambitions had been frustrated and her territory overrun.
Most significantly, her great reserves of wheat and oil had been lost to the Central Powers, who now also had direct access to their eastern satellites Bulgaria and Turkey.
Victory heralds disaster
The Brusilov Offensive, at first so unexpectedly successful, in fact marked a fatal reverse.
Few had realized that, despite Russia's remarkable recovery after 1915, her effort must be limited by inadequate weaponry and supplies.
Fewer still realized that initial Russian successes were made possible mainly because the elite Austrian forces had been transferred to Italy.
Nor did the Allies appreciate how great the loss of life would inevitably be, underequipped as Russia was.
But Brusilov understood this and was prepared to pay the price, for he later wrote: ‘An offensive without casualties may be staged only during manoeuvres…to defeat the enemy, or to beat him off, we must suffer losses, and they may be considerable.’
And so they were.
Although Brusilov's achievements were great — the captured 350,000 prisoners, took the Bukovina and huge areas of Galicia — he sustained his offensive past the point of reason and in the process lost a million men.
The blow to Russia was mortal.
Such sacrifice, without significant lasting reward, was beyond human bearing, and the ingredients were now marinating for Russia's collapse into confusion, anarchy and, shortly, revolution.
Revolution in Russia
Russia's huge wartime losses in both life and material, culminating in those sustained during the Brusilov Offensive, were instrumental in bringing about the Russian Revolution in 1917.
At the end of February, supported by many of the intelligentsia, workers in Petrograd and Moscow were incited to riot for better food rations.
Mutiny followed.
The Tsar, Nicholas II, dissolved the Duma, or parliament, but was compelled to abdicate after the Duma appointed a moderate provisional government under Prince Lvov.
This satisfied few but left the way open for the Bolsheviks who soon controlled the army and all communications and transport in Petrograd.
They also set up ‘soviets’, or councils, in opposition to the liberal government.
In April, Lenin and other Bolsheviks abroad returned to Russia, aided by the Germans.
The failure of the army's July offensive increased discontent, and on the night of 6/7 November the Bolsheviks staged an armed coup, and established a government under Lenin.
Battle of The Somme July–November 1916
Thus the scene was set for the worst disaster in the history of the British Army.
Yet Haig was hugely confident; so confident, in fact, that his enthusiasm engulfed even those of his subordinate commanders who had been critical of the undertaking.
The one chance of Allied success lay in speed of advance; that is, for the troops to reach the German line of defence before those soldiers who might have survived the artillery bombardment had time to emerge from their dug-outs and man their guns.
Haig had ordered the artillery to bombard not merely the enemy front-line trenches but those to the rear, to prevent German reinforcements coming up.
Moreover, British and French cavalry had been stationed close behind the Allied line, with the object of quickly exploiting a breakthrough.
But for the British infantryman, overburdened and attacking up  the slope, speed was the one thing of which he was incapable.
The British Fourth Army attacked with 13 divisions north of the River Somme on a front of some 24kml/15smls; five divisions of the French Sixth Army attacked astride, but mostly south, of the river.
Because German opposition was light in this sector, and because the Germans thought that, after their bleeding at Verdun, they were incapable of massed attack, the French made some gains.
These were, however, insufficient to enable them to break through and then turn the German lines.
The British did not fare so well.
Haig had hoped, on the first day, to penetrate the German lines opposite Albert from Serre in the north to Maricourt in the south.
In the second phase, the British planned to take the high ground running between Bapaume and Ginchy, while the French took that in the region around and north of Rancourt.
Then the British were to turn left toward Arras and, in conjunction with a supportive attack southwest of the town, face the German flank and enlarge the penetration.
Once all this was achieved, a general advance was to be made eastward in the direction of Cambrai.
As Liddell Hart later observed: ‘What a contrast between intention and achievement!’
Northwest from Péronne there runs a line of low hills, broken only by the valley of the River Ancre.
German defences were sited in depth all along the ridge, giving them an uninterrupted view of British movements.
Moreover, Allied artillery during the bombardment had been evenly spread along the whole front, not concentrated; in consequence, the fire was too thin to achieve the intended level of destruction.
The first day of the offensive broke with cynical summer loveliness on a scene shortly to be one of unmitigated horror.
Rawlinson wished to attack at first light, or even earlier; the French insisted on waiting until daylight so that they might gauge the effect of their all-night artillery fire.
The British reluctantly agreed.
At 07.30, the Allied artillery, which for the previous 65 minutes had been firing at its greatest intensity, lifted.
Along the entire front the British and French struggled up out of their trenches and advanced in successive waves.
The consequences were inevitable, immediate and annihilating.
Those Germans not knocked out by the week-long bombardment were given time to reach their gun positions, and they poured an unremitting enfilade of lead at the doomed British soldiers.
Prime targets  in the bright light of a summer morning, they fell in their thousands.
Many did not even get past their own wire defences.
A single machine-gun, two at most, could bring down an entire battalion, as the men advanced, on Rawlinson's orders, at a steady 90m/100yds a minute.
Soon the ground was smothered with British dead and dying; by 08.30, an hour after the attack started, losses, at a conservative estimate, were in the region of 30,000.
Rawlinson continued to throw in his troops and by midday some 100,000 men had been engulfed in the carnage.
The unexpected French attack on the right made good headway.
So, too, did the British right wing, where two divisions of 13th Corps captured Montauban and Mametz, thereby isolating Fricourt — which nevertheless the Germans held until the following day.
To the north, however, all reports were of failure.
Repeated attempts to capture La Boiselle and Ovillers were repulsed, while farther north the three divisions of 10th Corps, designated to take the strongly fortified area around Thiepval, were beaten back with heavy loss.
From the extreme British northern flank, the same dismal reports came in.
The attack against Beaumont-Hamel proved abortive, and a thrust made by the Third Army against Gommecourt failed utterly.
By nightfall on this first day of the battle, about 60,000 British troops, nearly half the original attack force, had fallen or been taken prisoner.
The medical services, not expecting such large losses, were incapable of caring for all the wounded and there were insufficient ambulance trains to take the thousands of serious cases to base hospitals.
The day belonged unquestionably to the Germans, for their six divisions had withstood the heroic, doomed assault of 18 Allied divisions and had relinquished only a small area of ground.
Here for all to see was the great lesson of World War I: the machine-gun made direct attack too costly even to contemplate.
Yet Haig was unchastened, indeed remained supremely confident.
It is curious, therefore, that he did not immediately exploit the worthwhile gains that had been made on the right.
It was some days before he resolved on this, but he then met with strong opposition from both Joffre and Foch, who wanted him first to penetrate the centre ridge between Pozières and Thiepval.
Haig wisely refused to do this until he was fully prepared.
The battle continued, but temporarily with less ferocity than on the terrible first day.
On 20 July, however, a new offensive on a great scale was launched by 17 British and French divisions on the line Pozières-Foucaucourt.
A few hundred metres were overrun but at heavy cost in life.
Winston Churchill was to write: ‘The conflict sank once more to the bloody but local struggles of two or three divisions repeatedly renewed as fast as they were consumed, and consumed as fast as they were renewed.
By the end of July an advance of about two and a half miles had been made on a front which at this depth did not exceed two miles.’
Meanwhile, both sides were bringing up more and more artillery pieces and vast numbers of shells to feed them: the pattern of Verdun was repeating itself.
The struggle now became more equal, for the churned, blood-stained mud affected both sides; and both were short of food and ammunition, since their supply lines had been largely demolished by rival artillery fire.
Shell holes made the scene one of pitted lunar desolation, with rotting corpses and mangled abandoned weapons littering the ground.
The battle, never dormant, again erupted on a great scale on 25 September, and then once more on I3 November, when a massed British attack was launched along the River Ancre and Beaumont-Hamel was stormed.
Before that, however, the British High Command had made a decision of the utmost ineptitude.
By September Haig was desperate to achieve a significant breakthrough.
Casualties were mounting by the minute; in the United Kingdom more and more homes were receiving the brief and dreaded telegram, beginning, ‘It is my painful duty to inform you…’.
Hitherto, confident reports from senior commanders and censorship had between them created an impression of light losses, but great numbers of prisoners taken.
Now the truth was emerging; the British, though pushing forward with undiminished tenacity and courage, were suffering a disaster of gruesome proportions, with hundreds of thousands of men perishing for little territorial, and no strategic, gain.
It was in this month that Haig decided to play his trump card: a new British invention, the ‘tank’.
This was a potentially decisive arm in warfare, and some 50 of them had been transported to France in the greatest secrecy.
Haig, once sceptical, now sought their immediate deployment on the Somme.
On 15 September the first tanks went into action on the Fourth Army's front between Combles and Martinpuich.
Through mechanical defects, not all the tanks reached the battlefield and of those that did only 31 crossed the German lines.
Nine of these broke down, five ended up, like beetles on their backs, immobilized in shell craters, and only nine managed to operate fully with the infantry.
Their appearance on the field was nonetheless dramatic.
British infantry advanced in their protective wake with relative safety; German soldiers were  taken prisoner in their hundreds, while others, astonished and terrified, fled.
But the gain hardly offset the premature revelation to the Germans of this promising new weapon.
Thus the Somme offensive dragged on until, with the advent of winter rains in mid-November, when the exhausted, hungry men could no longer drag themselves through the deepening mud, it died away in disappointment and despair.
By then the BEF was astride the ridge originally occupied by the Germans.
For this the British and French between them lost in the region of 600,000 men; the Germans more than 440,000.
In the opinion of their High Command, ‘The Somme was the bloody graveyard of the German Army.
’ A decision on the Western Front remained as elusive as ever.
Trench warfare
Although trenches had been constructed on a limited scale in the Russo-Japanese War of 1904–5, they became a significant factor in warfare only in World War I. By the end of 1914, the conflict had developed into what amounted to a siege and both Allied and German soldiers dug trenches to protect themselves from enemy small-arms and machine-gun fire.
At first the trenches were merely lines dug to the depth of an average man's height, with little attempt being made to shore them up, so even a little rain could cause the sides to collapse.
The excavated earth was used to make a parapet in front of the trench and a reredos behind it; the front was further protected by barbed wire entanglements of varying depth and complexity.
As time passed and stalemate continued, trenches were more stoutly constructed, with sandbags, wooden — sometimes concrete — sides, and duckboards.
Allied trenches and dug-outs, however, never had the same air of permanence that many German ones exhibited, with brass bedsteads, carpets and other comforts.
The slightest movement above trench level drew rifle fire.
Initially the Germans were more proficient at this than the Allies, for they kept their snipers in the same sector for long periods so they became familiar with the enemy's trench systems there, while the Allies rotated their snipers with the units to which they belonged.
Chief among other trench weapons were grenades and trench mortars, which fired several types of shell, shrapnel, incendiary and gas among them.
Gas was one of the most dreaded weapons, blinding men and often destroying their health for the rest of their lives.
Troops in the trenches were also subjected to artillery barrages.
Even at times of little activity, life in the trenches could be grim.
Rations were monotonous, sanitation was rudimentary, and many physical disorders resulted from the constant water and mud.
Among the most common were trench foot, trench mouth, causing severe ulceration, and trench fever.
This was transmitted by fleas from the rats that flourished in the trenches to man.
For almost four years, the rival armies faced each other in these primitive conditions, during which time the line did not move more than 16km/10mls either way.
‘Every step in my plan has been taken with the Divine help’
General Sir Douglas Haig (1861–1928) took command of the British Expeditionary Force in succession to Sir John French on 10 December 1915.
His appointment was not greeted with universal enthusiasm, for while his tenacity and methodical approach were respected, his mind was slow and he lacked any spark of technical brilliance.
Haig had seen action in the Sudan in 1898 and at the Battle of Omdurman, where he served with the Egyptian cavalry.
During the Boer War he acted as chief of staff to French.
His early rapid promotion was certainly due in some measure to his friendship with King Edward VII.
Silent, humourless and reserved, Haig was also shrewd and ambitious and had unbounded self-esteem.
Perhaps his greatest failing was his eternal, often unfounded, optimism, which seemed to stem from his belief that he had been chosen by God to ‘do much good and benefit’ to his country.
It was probably this inability to recognize defeat that led to his continuing attacks on the Somme and to the prolonged bloodbath at Passchendaele.
Haig was made a field marshal on 1 January 1917.
Controversy continued to surround his tenure as Commander-in-Chief of the BEF.
But, in his favour, Haig strongly advocated Foch's appointment as generalissimo in 1918, and he handled the last British actions of the war with resolution and thoroughness.
Haig was made an earl in 1919 and after the war devoted much of his time to organizing the British Legion and to work on behalf of disabled ex-servicemen.
The most devastating weapon of the war
All the combatant armies went to war with machine-guns.
Initially there were only two to a battalion, but as the weapon's capabilities in defence and attack were realized, more and more were issued and soon whole units were armed with only these fast-firing automatic weapons.
There were two basic types of machine-gun.
One was a tripod-mounted, water-cooled gun with a belt feed containing 250 rounds, of which the British Vickers and German and Russian Maxim were examples.
The other was an air-cooled weapon, of which the French Hotchkiss and the American Lewis were representative.
Both of these had magazines, that of the Hotchkiss held 30 rounds, of the Lewis 47.
Most machine-guns had a cyclic rate of fire of 500–600rpm, which necessitated a great number of ammunition carriers.
The tripod-mounted weapons were heavy; indeed the Austrian Schwarzlose had, in addition to barrel and tripod, a third load, the metal shield.
The Schwarzlose could also be fired from a monopod, turning it into a light machine-gun.
The Russians towed their machine-guns on small wheeled carriages.
Early German Maxims had their own gun carriages, while the British broke their guns into two loads — barrel and tripod — carried either by mule or the men themselves.
The Hindenburg cult
One of the most interesting phenomena of the war was the growth of the Hindenburg cult.
It arose after the victory of Tannenberg, as a deliberate attempt by the German General Staff to distract attention from the failure of the Schlieffen plan in the west, and to associate themselves with Hindenburg's triumph.
Hindenburg, who had taken part in the victorious campaigns of the Franco-Prussian War of 1870–1, was now built up into a father figure: the old general who had again thrown back the invaders of the Fatherland.
Significantly, Hindenburg and not the Kaiser became the focus of the German will to resist.
As the war progressed, and the civilian population became increasingly disillusioned, the more important it was to foster a belief in his invincibility, and his image was widely used in propaganda.
Most bizarre was the creation of great wooden statues into which people then drove nails to turn Hindenburg into an ‘Iron Man’, paying toward war funds for the privilege.
The practice has its roots in the symbolic importance of iron in German culture.
Bismarck, the creator of a unified Germany in the late 1800s, was known as the ‘Iron Chancellor’, and Germany's most frequent honour to valour was the Iron Cross.
Great Britain's first conscript army
Conscription, the compulsory enlistment of civilians into the armed forces, was the standard form for recruiting servicemen in most European countries.
Great Britain, however, relied for her defence on her naval supremacy, and in 1914 the army consisted wholly of volunteers in the regular and territorial forces.
This small but experienced professional force, the BEF, was, however, largely destroyed in the first four months of the war.
If Great Britain were still to play a significant role in military operations in Europe, massed levies would be needed.
The ‘New Army’ was comprised of volunteers only, who poured into recruiting stations in their thousands.
By the end of 1915, the British Army in France, thus reinforced, had risen to 38 divisions, more than 3 million men having come forward to serve in ‘Kitchener's Army’.
Even so, this did not provide sufficient manpower, together with that of France, to contain the German Army of millions of conscripted levies.
The first British scheme for conscription entailed the limited enrolment of single men; those in essential work in industry and on the land were excused.
This did not suffice, but the national mood had changed.
There was no justice, so most people thought, now that the war was so costly in life and likely to be prolonged, in returning the middle-aged and wounded to the front while healthy, strong young men remained safely at home.
As a result, a Conscription Bill was introduced into the British parliament on 6 January 1916 and quickly passed with large majorities in both houses.
In May, conscription was extended to married men.
Thus, for the first time in recent history, Great Britain fielded a mass army in Europe, in contrast to her earlier, limited excursions, supported by her navy.
The new army had to hold the Western Front after the demoralization of the French, following General Nivelle's failed offensive of 16 April-21 May 1917 and did it with such success, that Allied victory became a possibility in 1918.
The holocaust of Delville Wood
Delville Wood, lying on a ridge of high ground, was crucial to the Somme offensive, for its capture would allow the British to penetrate the second line of German defences.
But first it was necessary to take the village of Longueval: the two positions were considered as one objective, since neither could be held without the other.
The Highlanders suffered such heavy losses in the assault on the village that the attack on Delville Wood was assigned to the South African Infantry Brigade, who had earlier been allotted merely mopping-up operations.
They attacked at 05.00 on 15 July, making slow progress through the tangled undergrowth and dense trees of the 155-a/67-ha wood.
But by midday they had taken most of it and had begun to dig in.
They came under rifle and machine-gun fire, strong counter-attacks and a three-hour bombardment with shells and tear gas, which also affected their rifles and machine-guns.
On 16 and 17 July the South Africans resumed the offensive and strove to take the northwestern corner of the wood; both attacks failed for lack of artillery support.
On the night of the 17th and into the next day, the Germans mounted a massive bombardment; shells are said to have fallen at the rate of 400 a minute.
Then at 03. o on 19 July, nine crack German battalions attacked.
They were repulsed by the South Africans, who, when they ran out of ammunition, charged with bayonets fixed.
The dwindling band of men held on until they were relieved on 20 July.
The death of idealism
‘Idealism’, the historian A.J.P. Taylor has written, ‘perished on the Somme.’
Before that sanguinary campaign, in which the British lost some 450,000 men for an advance nowhere more than 8km/5mls, volunteers had poured in their hundreds of thousands to the recruiting offices.
Now the men in the trenches had lost faith in their leaders; many lost faith even in the cause for which they fought and all had but one overriding loyalty — to their comrades.
Before the Somme campaign, the spirit of patriotic young Britons was epitomised by the poetry of Rupert Brooke — a belief in the justice of their cause and their hope for a better world.
After it the national mood was caught by such disillusioned poets as Siegfried Sassoon, Isaac Rosenberg and Wilfred Owen.
Ordinary soldiers, who had enlisted with equal patriotic fervour, took comfort in simple but pungent humour, typified by Bruce Barinsfather's cartoon showing ‘Old Bill’, a war veteran, taking refuge in a shell hole and remarking to a young recruit, ‘Well, if you knows of a better ‘ole, go to it.’
Although the men fought doggedly on, a sense of hopeless despair now engulfed soldiers and civilians alike all over Europe.
The poppy legend
Genghis Khan, the Mongol war lord, is said to have brought seed of the white poppy with him on his advance on Europe during the thirteenth century.
Legend has it that the flowers turned red, with the shape of a cross in the centre, when they sprang up after a battle.
Certainly, on the Western Front, it was found that the scarlet poppy proliferated on devastated battlefields, particularly those of the Somme.
For this reason, the poppy has been adopted as the flower of remembrance, and a shower of poppies, representing British and Commonwealth fighting men who have died since 1914, is released at the annual service of remembrance in the Albert Hall, London.
A battle with only losers
Thousands of young volunteers, who had abandoned civilian safety to enlist in Kitchener's great New Army, were cut down at the Somme, and their comrades disillusioned.
Mankind, it seemed, had created a monstrous unending carnage.
It was the same for the Germans.
The official history of the German 27th Division, which defended Guillemont, records: ‘In the Somme fighting of 1916 there was a spirit of heroism which was never again found in the division…the men in 1918 had not the temper, the hard bitterness and spirit of sacrifice of their predecessors.’
German losses at Verdun and on the Somme were so severe they were driven to enlist the entire male population between the ages of 17 and 60 for service in the forces or for war work.
But the fighting had left the British and French armies even weaker.
In addition, as Winston Churchill wrote, ‘…the actual battle fronts were not appreciably altered…no strategic advantage of any kind had been gained.'
Battle of Messines June 1917
General Robert Nivelle's plan caused early friction between himself and General Sir Douglas Haig.
To give it a chance of success, some French troops had to be withdrawn from south of the Somme and their lines taken over by Haig's men, disrupting his own long-planned attack in Flanders.
In addition, although Haig was reinforced with eight divisions, he was placed under Nivelle's overall command; matters did not auger well for harmonious Anglo-French cooperation.
In the event, Nivelle's plan of attack became disjointed when Field Marshal Paul von Hindenburg and General Erich Ludendorff, now in supreme command of all German armies, resolved to eschew attack in the west.
They waited to gauge the effect of unrestricted U-boat warfare, which had commenced on 1 February 1917 in the hope of starving the British into submission.
The submarines’ main areas of activity were in the waters around the British Isles and in much of the Mediterranean.
Ludendorff, rightly expecting that the Allies would attack again in the Somme region, began to withdraw his forces eastward from the bulge in the German line between Arras and Rheims to the heavily defended Siegfried Line, known to the Allies as the Hindenburg Line.
The main withdrawal was accomplished on 16 March; the entire abandoned area was laid waste, strewn with mines and booby traps, and the water supplies poisoned.
The situation had altered dramatically, but Nivelle remained confident that he could break through German lines with little loss of life.
He could not have been more misguided, for in the sector he had chosen to attack the Germans now had 43 divisions and the French only slightly more: a totally inadequate margin with which to launch an offensive.
On 9 April, the British Third Army, under Lieutenant-General Sir Edmund Allenby, attacked at Arras, while farther north the Canadian Corps stormed and took Vimy Ridge.
Early gains, however, could not be exploited as German resistance stiffened.
Nivelle's campaign in Champagne opened on 19 April and met with the same fate as most earlier attacks: some 120,000 Frenchmen fell before the German machine-guns and by the day's end an advance of only 550m/600yds had been made, in tragic contrast to Nivelle's expected g.6km/6mls.
The bombastic, vainglorious Nivelle had virtually announced to the world his grandiose expectations, making the dreadful defeat doubly damaging.
The next month — 15 May he was replaced in command by General Henri Pétain, the hero of Verdun; at the same time, General Ferdinand Foch was made chief of the French General Staff.
Petain resolved to stay on the defensive until American troops arrived and tanks were available in great number.
But Haig, ever the optimist, intent on winning the war with the BEF, now had the opportunity for his long-cherished  campaign in Flanders.
Repeated warnings from Petain, Foch and numerous others that the plan was attended by great danger went unheeded.
Nevertheless, a successful attack would produce positive results.
It would incapacitate German submarine bases in the west; restore to Belgium her occupied territory, thereby depriving Germany of a prime bargaining asset at a future peace conference; and disrupt German communications to the Western Front from their depots in the lower Rhineland.
While Pétain strove to reanimate the French Army, many units of which had mutinied after the collapse of Nivelle's ill-judged offensive, Haig moved the weight of the BEF to Flanders to pursue his plan.
This entailed, first, an attack on the Messines Ridge to straighten the salient just south of Ypres which included the towns of Messines and Wytschaete.
The main attack, entrusted to General, Sir Herbert Plumer, was to prove one of the few in the war that was immaculately planned and achieved all its objectives.
Preparations had started almost a year earlier, but it was not until winter 1916/17 that they were fully implemented.
The Messines-Wytschaete Ridge, some 24km/15mls long and at most 76m/ 250ft high, lay between the towns of Ypres and Armentières.
Since 1914, it had been fortified high ground from which the Germans could overlook and bombard British positions.
The ruined village of Messines, on the southern spur of the ridge, commanded a dominating view of the Lys valley, while Wytschaete overlooked Ypres itself.
The Germans were fully cognisant of the strategical importance of this high ground and had developed the position to the utmost, using forced labour and  that of unwilling prisoners.
Not only were the two villages — Messines and Wytschaete — heavily fortified, but so, too, were the surrounding woods, derelict farmhouses and clusters of cottages.
A British attack on the Messines Ridge would meet with the most resolute and entrenched defence.
General von Laffert, the German commander on the spot, had ordered that both villages ‘must be defended to the utmost and be held to the last man, even if the enemy cuts the connections on both sides and also threatens them from the rear.’
The German front line was a network of trenches, concrete dug-outs and pill-boxes.
There were also artillery batteries and thousands of yards of interlocking systems of barbed wire defences.
To overcome and penetrate this formidable barrier, the British would have to devise some new tactic.
They found it in the simultaneous detonation of 454,000kg/ 1m lb of explosives in deep tunnels under the German front line.
Since January 1917, engineers had been employed, quietly but persistently, in tunnelling into the ridge.
The Germans were aware of this, but not of its extent, and they, too, dug tunnels.
Some eight weeks before the assault on 7 June, Plumer was informed that German engineers were within 46cm/18in of a British mine under Hill 60 in the north of the sector, but it was never detected.
In fact, the Germans detonated only one of the British Army's mines before the massive explosions that were to herald the attack.
Of the remaining 21 mines, 19 blew up German fortifications on a curving front of just less than 16km/10mls, running from St Yves to Mount Sorrel.
Forming the chord of this arc lay the so-called Oosttaverne Line, some 4km/2½mls in length the German trench system that had been selected as the final objective of Plumer's attack.
For roughly a week beforehand, this area had been the object of concentrated bombardment, with the purpose of cutting German wire entanglements and demolishing gun batteries and strongpoints.
By the concentrated bombardment the element of surprise was relinquished, but at Messines this was of no moment, for surprise was to be achieved by the detonation of the mines.
Although forewarned by the bombardment, the Germans had not temporarily withdrawn from the heights; so the troops in their trenches were bombarded for the best part of a week and could receive no food or relief from the devastating artillery fire.
The British plan allocated nine infantry  divisions to the assault, with three more in reserve.
On the south, or right flank, stood General Godley's 2nd Anzac Corps; in the centre, General Hamilton-Gordon's 9th Corps; while on the left, or northern, flank, was General Morland's 10th Corps.
Early in the night of 617 June there was a great summer storm, with thunder, lightning and heavy rain; when the storm subsided, it was replaced by the uninterrupted flashes of bursting shells.
Then, at precisely 03.10, there gushed up, as Gibbs recorded, ‘enormous volumes of scarlet flame from the exploding mines and of earth and smoke, all lighted by the flame, spilling over into fountains of fierce colour, so that all the countryside was illuminated by red light.
Where some of us stood watching, aghast and spell-bound by the burning horror, the ground trembled and surged violently to and fro.’
It was, he wrote, ‘the most terribly beautiful thing, the most diabolical splendour, I have seen in war.’
The first German trench system was assailed immediately; then the British and  Anzac troops stormed the crest lines.
Within two hours some Allied troops had already reached their second objective, and by 07.00 Messines itself had fallen.
The defences of  Wytschaete were penetrated early in the morning and British troops immediately began to move down the eastern slopes of the ridge.
Guns were brought forward to continue the bombardment and more than 7,000 German prisoners taken, as well as 67 artillery pieces, 94 trench mortars and nearly 300 machine-guns.
In the early afternoon, Allied reserve divisions and tanks passed through their comrades' lines and by about 15.10 the ridge in its entirety was securely held and all objectives taken.
For the price of 16,000 casualties, success was complete.
British and Empire troops dug in and organized their defences so rapidly that all German counter-attacks the following day were thrown back and even more ground gained.
by the Allies.
The victory was both immediate and absolute; equally important, it provided a tonic for the Allied civilian population, who were becoming increasingly war-weary and despondent.
Messines also provided a sure lesson for future campaigns: surprise and limited, attainable objectives that could subsequently be held should be the tactical aim.
Nivelle's misplaced optimism
The military situation at the beginning of 1917 was unfavourable to the Allies.
True, Germany was beginning to feel the strain of war, particularly after her heavy losses on the Somme and at Verdun, but her armies stood on foreign soil.
Romania and Serbia had been subdued and the Central Powers now had direct access to their allies Bulgaria and Turkey.
Moreover, Russia was tottering toward revolution and collapse.
Despite that, Allied leaders were optimistic as the year opened.
In Great Britain, the high cost of the Battle of the Somme had led to the fall of Asquith on 11 December 1916 and to his replacement as prime minister by David Lloyd George, in whose leadership the British people placed high trust.
General Robert Nivelle, who had taken Joffre's place as French Commander-in-Chief at the end of 1916, was particularly confident.
Largely as a result of Great Britain's increased munitions output and her stronger military presence on the Western Front.
Early in 1917, her army numbered some 1,200,000 men, and there were some 2,600,000 French troops, including her colonial levies.
So, taken in conjunction with the small but resolute Belgian Army, the western Allies fielded some 3,900,000 troops, against whom the Germans could deploy only about 2,500,000.
Yet, as events had invariably shown, numerical superiority in attack was not necessarily the deciding factor in the face of modern artillery and machine-guns.
Nevertheless, Nivelle resolved to attack, certain that he could achieve a decisive breakthrough.
His plan entailed preliminary distracting thrusts north and south of the River Somme, to be followed by the main French blow in Champagne, between Soissons and Rheims.
A soldiers' general
General, later Field Marshal, Sir Herbert Plumer (1857–1932) was the embodiment of the traditional virtues of the British soldier.
He was 60 years old at the time of Messines, with wide and varied military service behind him, including fighting in South Africa during the Boer War (1899–1902), when he played a distinguished part in the relief of Mafeking.
In 1915 he replaced Sir Horace Smith-Dorrien as commander of the Second Army, and at the Second Battle of Ypres displayed great decisiveness and coolness of mind.
Arguably, however, his most brilliant work was done during the many months of relative inactivity that followed, for it was then that he remoulded his demoralized command into a confident, compact fighting unit.
There were no jealousies under his command; subordinates could contribute to his planning, yet every decision was, in the end, his alone.
Plumer's preparations for the action at Messines, ‘methodical and patient’, were in John Buchan's words ‘carried to the pitch of genius’.
Roads and railways were improved; frequent patrols were made to assess the enemy's strength and positions; and aircraft not only kept constant watch on the German lines but prevented their aircraft from taking off.
The regard Plumer had for his men's well-being was epitomised by his efforts to provide clean drinking water during the attack: crucial in midsummer.
Lakes and ponds were tapped, water from the Lys sterilized and stored in barges, and cisterns built to trap rainwater.
Pipelines, extended as the men advanced, took the water to the front; within 30 minutes of gaining an objective men could receive fresh water.
The reward for Plumer's dedication was the respect of all, and a totally successful action with minimum loss of life.
Mutiny in the French Army
His offensive in ruins, General Nivelle was relieved of his command on 15 May 1917 and replaced by General Henri Petain.
The new Commander-in-Chief was faced with a disastrous situation: mutiny.
Revolutionary propaganda inspired by events in Russia had an effect, but the chief cause for mutiny lay in the soldiers' disgust at their commanders' inept leadership, Nivelle's in particular.
There were other grievances: leave was difficult to get; their women at home were struggling to keep small businesses and farms going, while thousands of fit young munitions workers were exempt from military service.
The first outbreak of mutiny occurred on 3 May, and it spread rapidly until 16 corps were affected.
The men claimed that they were willing to hold the trenches but not to advance against German machine-guns to their certain death.
Pètain travelled along the entire French front, addressing the dispirited, surly men and inspiring them with his solid resolve and sense of discipline.
He restored morale by instituting equal and regular tours of duty at the front and leave periods for all units, as well as improving rest camps behind the line.
By mid-June the danger was past, but Petain had still to nurse the army back to full health.
Mining the Messines Ridge
Limited British mining operations in the Messines Ridge were stepped up in September 1915, and galleries began to be dug that reached a depth of 27m/90ft.
Eventually they ran so far that mines were sited as much as 55m/60yds behind the first German line; the longest, at Kruisstraat, ran for some 658m/720yds.
The soil formation of the ridge was of crucial importance.
The top sandy layers were underlain by a deep layer of blue clay, into which the tunnels were dug.
Great care had to be taken to hide this tell-tale clay, since its detection by aircraft would have betrayed the mines' position and depth.
Tunnelling was a laborious and dangerous job.
Most of the work was done by gangs of miners, many of them ‘claykickers’ who sat in the tunnel, leaning against a wooden backrest with their feet at the face, and dug out the clay with a light spade.
Apart from lack of oxygen, there was the constant hazard of earth collapsing and of German bombardment or breakthrough into suspected shafts.
Soon, however, sophisticated listening instruments, such as the geophone, and silent air and water pumps were produced, and ammonal was used in place of the more volatile gunpowder and guncotton.
Nevertheless, it is a tribute to the miners' ingenuity and  perseverance that 19 of the 21 mines laid were successfully detonated.
Women at war
World War I transformed Western society, not least in its emancipation of women, largely because of the enormous contribution they made to the war effort.
This was particularly great in Britain after the introduction of male conscription in 1916, but in some other countries, including Germany, many tasks were considered unsuitable for women and initially their employment in war work was discouraged.
But later on, the shortage of manpower reversed the situation.
In the field, women proved themselves capable ambulance drivers, and many drove trucks bringing up supplies to the troops.
But perhaps their most important role was as nurses, selflessly caring for the wounded, often in dreadful conditions close to the front.
On the Home Front, women's tasks were diverse and often physically taxing.
All over Europe they worked in agriculture, producing food, while in Britain many were employed in the shipyards and in the coal fields.
In Britain: also, in the summer of 1914, some 200,000 women were employed in making munitions, by November 1918, the last month of the war, 947,000.
In the other belligerent countries, fewer women worked in munitions, but they played a significant part in the total war effort.
Many women took over men's duties in the public services, operating railway signals, acting as porters, driving buses and working in the Fire Brigade and the Police.
By 1916, however, unpaid volunteer service was no longer adequate, and in Britain officially recognized, paid bodies of women were established.
The Women's National Land Service Corps, The Women's Auxiliary Corps and the Women's Royal Naval Service and several others were in existence by 1917.
Women's immense contribution during the war led directly to their enfranchisement and to greater professional and social opportunities than they had ever before enjoyed.
Haig ignores the lesson of Messines
The brilliant success at Messines had a regrettable repercussion.
Haig came to believe that what had once been achieved, so swiftly and at relatively little cost, might be repeated.
In his mind, it seems, now reposed a conviction that, in Flanders, he could defeat the German armies.
Heavy bombardments of the Ypres area prior to attack had, however, highlighted a singular danger: to the north it was largely reclaimed marshland and once the drainage system was destroyed by artillery fire, it quickly reverted to bog.
To this the expectant Germans had devised an answer.
They abandoned the concept of several lines of dug-outs and instead relied on machine-guns in strongpoints, while husbanding their troops for counter-attack.
In the flattering afterglow of Messines, Haig's confidence was unbounded.
He had not learned the right lesson, however, nor did he have a solution to the problem that would be posed by the mud created by rain and his own artillery.
Once more he was resolved upon a decisive breakthrough; once more he was to be disabused and thousands of his men laid low in the mud of Passchendaele.
Battle of Passchendaele July–November 1917
Field Marshal Sir Douglas Haig's plan for the British attack in Flanders was to break through the German line from the Ypres salient and then encircle the German right flank resting on the North Sea coast.
He was not dissuaded from this strategy by the awesome losses of the Somme offensive in 1916, nor by the doubts expressed regarding the scheme by his Intelligence staff and his fellow commanders.
Pétain thought Haig's attack toward Ostend was ‘certain to fail’, while Foch described the enterprise as ‘futile’ and ‘fantastic’.
Nor was Haig deterred by the fact that German U-boats operated in the main from home ports, and even if Zeebrugge and Ostend were taken, the submarine peril would persist.
As early as June 1917, the Germans were aware that Haig intended to strike in Flanders, probably from near Ypres, for imprudent, almost public debate by Allied politicians had made this evident.
In any event, the land' near the mouth of the River Yser, flooded by the Belgians in 1914, now provided the German right with a defensive barrier.
There were further objections to the plan.
The French Army was still in a state of convalescence following the mutinies, and there was the inevitable problem of mud in terrain dependent on artificial drainage.
But in his euphoria, Haig had become convinced that he could defeat Germany with the BEF alone before the Americans arrived to steal his glory.
Haig had one compelling argument in favour of attack — the decisive, though limited, victory at Messines, although the credit for that was rightly ascribed almost entirely to General Sir Herbert Plumer.
Despite all the irrefutable objections to his plan, Haig astonishingly got his way and the Third Battle of Ypres (commonly known as Passchendaele) was reluctantly sanctioned by his political masters.
The new offensive was launched north of Messines, on a 32-km/20-ml front between Warneton and Dixmude, on 31 July 1917.
Speedy success was essential, since records gathered over the previous 80 years showed that at best only three weeks of rain-free weather could be expected at that time of the year.
In the event, there was to be an early and continuous downpour.
The preliminary bombardment was the heaviest so far mounted: over two weeks 3,100 guns fired some 471/2 million shells.
It served, however only to churn up the sodden land, whose drainage system had long since been destroyed by years of artillery fire, into a vast morass of craters  filled with water, through which the British were expected to advance.
Because of the nature of the terrain, the Germans had abandoned the building of lines of defensive trenches in the northern part of the Ypres salient in favour of concrete pillboxes housing machine-guns.
The advancing British — if advance they could through the craters and mud — would, therefore, come under remorseless, raking fire.
The principal part in the attack was given to General Sir Hubert Gough's Fifth Army, with one corps of Plumer's Second Army on its right flank and the French First Army, under General Francois Anthoine, on its left.
The German forces in the area — Prince Rupprecht's Fourth Army — were commanded by General Sixt von Armin, who had led them at Messines.
At 03.50 on the first day of the attack, 12 infantry divisions went forward in heavy mist.
It quickly became evident that the attack was not going according to plan.
On the left flank, three ridges north of Ypres — Bixschoote, St Julien and Pilckem — were taken in an advance of some 3.2km/2mls; but on the right, the thrust southeast of Ypres, toward the Ypres-Menin road, was halted short of its objectives.
Nonetheless, some 6,000 prisoners, including 133 officers, were taken.
Ceaseless rain made further progress impossible, not merely for the infantry, who were sinking up to their thighs in mud, but for the tanks held in readiness to exploit a breakthrough.
Gough, earlier a convinced supporter of the attack, now expressed himself uneasy to Haig, but the Commander-in-Chief was fatally confident of a successful outcome.
The rain was so heavy and continuous, however, that it was another two weeks before a second thrust could be mounted.
During that period rain fell without pause.
‘Even when it stopped on the 5th’, the historian John Buchan was to write, ‘there followed days of sombre skies and wet mists and mucky clouds.
The misery of our troops huddled in their impromptu lines or strung out in shell-holes, cannot be pictured in words.’
Haig, though still hugely optimistic, reported later in a dispatch: ‘The low-lying clayey soil, torn by shells and sodden by rain, turned to a succession of vast muddy pools.
The valleys of the choked and overflowing streams were speedily transformed into long stretches of bog, impassable except by a few well-defined tracks, which became marks for the enemy's artillery.
To leave these tracks was to risk death by drowning, and in the course of the subsequent fighting on several occasions both men and pack animals were lost in this way.’
It was a neat description by a commander who had been forewarned of just this certainty.
Farther on in his dispatch, Haig wrote: ‘…this unavoidable delay in the development of our offensive was of the greatest service to the enemy.
Valuable time was lost, the troops opposed to us were able to recover from the disorganization produced by our first attack, and the enemy was given the opportunity to bring up reinforcements.’
But despite all this, Haig never deviated from his original plan to renew the offensive at the earliest favourable moment.
Conditions were little better for the Germans.
As Philip Gibbs, correspondent for the London Daily Telegraph who was  present at the battles as an observer, wrote: ‘The suffering of all the German troops, huddled together in exposed places, must be as hideous as anything in the agony of mankind, slashed to bits by storms of shells and urged forward to counter-attacks which they know will be their death.’
The next Allied blow fell on 16 August when Gough's Fifth Army assaulted the Gheluvelt-Langemarck line, stretching from the Ypres-Menin road to the north-west.
The earlier pattern was repeated.
The left wing advanced a short distance beyond the Steenbeek rivulet and Langemarck, a village now reduced to rubble.
On the right, the advance was once more quickly halted before worthwhile gains could be made or a significant number of Germans captured.
Now the morale of the British Army began to deteriorate.
As Liddell Hart observed, men did not ‘feel that the enemy's skilful resistance and the mud were the sole explanation of their fruitless sacrifice.
Complaints against the direction and staff work in Gough's Army were general and bitter…’.
Perhaps for this reason, Haig now extended the front of Second Army northward to include the crucial Menin Road area, thus giving Plumer the principal target: the Gheluvelt plateau due east of Ypres.
Plumer determined to take the plateau in four meticulously planned stages; he opted, as he had at Messines, at each stage to concentrate his effort, going for limited objectives with strong artillery support.
This tactic would leave his army capable of repelling the counter-attacks that would surely follow.
Although thick mist persisted so air reconnaissance was ineffective, Plumer's initial thrust was made at 05.40 on 20 September.
Four divisions, two of them Australian, went in on a limited front of about 4.5km/24mls, with 1,300 guns massed along the line between Klein Zillebeke and Westhoek.
The men of Second Army, pushing either side of the Menin Road, made significant gains.
Within 45 minutes the first targets had been seized.
By midday, the 23rd North of England Division south of the road was only about 0.8km/ ½ ml from Gheluvelt, while north of the road Nonne Bosschen, Black Watch Corner, Veldhoek, and half of Polygon Wood had been taken.
Farther north, Fifth Army's forces had advanced astride the Ypres-Roulers railway to a point just short of Zonnebeke.
All objectives had been overrun and counter-attacks thrown back.
The Allied line had been pushed forward an average of 823m/900yds and, at the farthest, near Langemarck, about 1.6km/1ml.
The southern end of the Passchendaele Ridge, upon which German security there depended, had been taken, although the British were not yet in striking distance of the northern part.
The second phase of the attack went in on 26 September, a day when the weather was unusually fine, although the churned up, sodden ground remained impassable  and treacherous.
The infantry advanced at sunrise, and the Australians had soon captured what remained untaken of Polygon Wood.
German counter-attacks, though frustrated, followed, as did more torrential rain.
Then on 4 October, the Allies attacked again, this time on a front of 13km/8mls with 12 divisions (eight from Second Army and four from Fifth Army), four of which were Anzac divisions.
The principal ridge east of Ypres, from Gheluvelt to Broodseinde, was gained.
Despite these limited, hugely costly successes, the British strategic situation was now evident to all but the deliberately obtuse as one of stark and undeniable failure.
Ten weeks of fighting had achieved what Haig had calculated would take two days.
Winter was approaching, and the main British objectives beyond the Passchendaele Ridge had not been attained.
There was no longer a possibility of a decisive operation in Flanders, still less the seizure of Zeebrugge and Ostend.
Now was the moment for Haig to abandon his abortive offensive.
But, still an optimist and misinformed by his sycophantic staff as to the true gravity of the situation, Haig determined to press on.
If October were to bring its usual weather, as indicated by the records, and as it had the previous year on the Somme, conditions would be almost beyond endurance and attack impossible.
Moreover, Russia was now out of the war and German divisions were being moved rapidly by train from the east to the Western Front.
But Haig had persuasive arguments to support his inflexible resolve.
The French were preparing a great attack on the heights of the Aisne for the end of the month, and so it was, he claimed, essential to keep the Germans occupied in Flanders.
In addition, an attack toward Cambrai had been scheduled for November, and an offensive was due to begin in Italy.
Haig won his point, although the scale of his attacks was to be reduced.
‘The last stages of the Third Battle of Ypres’, John Buchan was to write, ‘were probably the muddiest combats ever known in the history of war.’
This was certainly true.
In his memoirs General Gough wrote of a countryside ‘battered, beaten, and torn by a torrent of shell and explosive…the soil shaken and reshaken, fields tossed into new and fantastic shapes.’
On this already immensely difficult battlefield, then fell the incessant rain.
‘Still the guns churned this treacherous slime, the surplus water poured into the trenches as its natural outlet, and they became impossible for the troops…men staggered warily over duckboards.
Wounded men falling headlong into shell-holes were in danger of drowning…
Guns sank till they became useless; rifles caked and would not fire; even food was tainted with the inevitable mud.’
Haig, it is only fair to say, was never informed of the ghastly horror at the front; nor did his senior staff know, or choose to imagine, the true situation.
The shock of realization is exemplified by an oft-quoted incident, when Lieutenant-General Sir Launcelot Kiggell, Haig's Chief of Staff, paying his first visit to the front, was reduced to tears as his car lurched and slithered over the battleground.
‘Good God,’ he muttered, ‘did we really send men to fight in that?’
He was dryly informed that conditions were much worse farther up.
Despite the appalling conditions and human suffering, despite warnings by meteorologists that the torrential downpour on 8 October would continue, Haig resolved to pursue the attack the next day on a 13-km/8-ml front, stretching from Veldhoek in the north to near Broodseinde in the south.
The result was as before: huge losses of men and little ground gained.
Nevertheless, and again despite ceaseless rain, Haig ordered yet another attack on the Passchendaele Ridge.
Once more the result was certain, with the ‘attacking troops…back almost on their starting line.’
But Haig, though by now probably at last disabused as to the prospect of a decisive breakthrough, persisted in gaining his objective: the high ground around the village of Passchendaele.
An attack by the French First and British Fifth armies was launched on 22 October; another by the Second Army on the 26th; and yet another on 30 October.
As before, progress was trivial, losses high.
And the already intolerable misery of the attackers was now exacerbated by the Germans' increased use of mustard gas.
Then, on 2 November, a sudden dash by the 1st and 2nd Canadian divisions finally secured the high ground on which stood the destroyed Passchendaele village.
Haig was at last content.
The Ypres salient, where since 1914 the Allies had been prime targets for the German guns, had been flattened, leaving only a small salient around Passchendaele itself.
But Zeebrugge and Ostend had not been taken, nor the enemy rolled back.
Still less had the war been won.
Victory for the Allies remained as elusive as ever, despite some 250,000 casualties.
Of these, 90,000 were reported ‘missing’; almost half that number — little more than 40,000 — were never found.
Most of them had drowned and been interred in the mud: even today more than 70 years later, farmers ploughing the fields unearth the bones of these unidentified men.
German losses, though unrecorded, were described by the official history as ‘excessive’.
Strategy for disaster
By the middle of 1917 the Allied military situation was grave.
The German submarine offensive was at its height; Italy was unable to make progress against Austria; and Russia, on the point of collapse, would shortly unilaterally sue for peace.
There was only one hopeful prospect: the unrestricted sinking of neutral and unarmed ships by German U-boats had brought the United States of America into the war.
But her contribution could not be felt in full until her troops arrived in France in considerable numbers.
The German U-boat offensive had a profound effect on Allied military plans in the second half of 1917, for the German submarine base at Bruges was within 48km/ 30mls of the Allied front line.
An advance through Flanders was, therefore, resolved upon, in part to deprive the Germans of this sanctuary for their submarines.
Field Marshal Sir Douglas Haig's other concern was to dislodge the Germans from their dominating positions on the ridge of high ground running from Westroosbeke to Broodseinde before winter set in.
The Lewis gun
One of the most successful machine-guns of World War I was the American designed, air-cooled, drum-fed Lewis.
It was bi-pod mounted, which kept its weight down to 11kg/25lb, so increasing its mobility.
Its weight could be further reduced by removing the cooling jacket, and it was like this that the Lewis gun was used as a hand-directed weapon on Allied aircraft.
The Lewis's lightness and versatility made it useful in close-support infantry attacks also.
It did, however, tend to jam in damp or muddy conditions, and it suffered from feed blockages caused by the spring mechanism of the 47-round ammunition drum which fitted over the breech.
It fired the ordinary British .303 round and had a rate of fire of 500–600rpm.
Germany's frontier forts
The building of small, defensive forts, or blockhouses, is as old as the history of formal warfare.
Although quite early in World War I both sides moved underground into elaborate trench systems, there were areas where it was not possible to dig deep trenches.
This was particularly so in the Passchendaele sector of the Ypres salient, for the ground was reclaimed swamp and water was met at a depth of 45cm/ 18in.
Since the construction of trenches here was so difficult, the Germans constructed concrete blockhouses, or pillboxes.
These boxes stood above ground and were, therefore, visible and obvious targets, but they were so solidly made that only a direct hit by a heavy shell could destroy them.
Thus the pillbox garrison was immune to normal shell and machine-gun fire and was to a certain extent protected from the weather.
Because the men were serving together in what was essentially a small box with loopholes for machine-guns, their morale was high, for they gave each other mutual psychological support.
The siting of the machine-guns inside the pillboxes provided interlocking zones of fire, which meant that each position had to be attacked and taken out individually.
The advantage of a pillbox line was that it could be held with fewer men who could, therefore, be rotated more frequently: another morale-boosting factor.
Coupled with pillboxes, the Germans employed barbed wire to great depth.
Experience had shown early on in the war that a trench line defended by two or three belts of uncut wire (this rose to as many as 18 in some sensitive sectors) held up an infantry attack.
Attempts to smash wire defences by artillery barrage were seldom successful.
Later, in addition to the standard type, with barbs every 30cm/12in, the Germans introduced a new type of wire with steel strips cut into sharp-edged and pointed triangles.
The Flandern Zaun (Flanders hedges) were almost indestructible, and no infantry could penetrate them.
It was not until the advent of the tank, which simply rolled over barbed wire, that a counter was found to this simple but effective means of halting an attack.
Canadian capture of Passchendaele
Haig selected the Canadians to achieve his ultimate aim: the capture of Passchendaele and Mosselmarkt and the ridge beyond.
The Canadian Corps commander, General Arthur Currie, planned a step by step advance, backed by well-organized artillery support.
The first two phases of the attack, on 26 and 30 October, along the ridges on either side of the Ravebeek Valley, made solid progress.
Then at 06.00 on 6 November, men of the 1st and 2nd divisions, covered by a heavy barrage from the guns, made the final spurt forward.
Passchendaele, now only a ‘brick-coloured stain' in the mud, with just the church recognizable as a building, was heavily defended by Germans with machine-guns in concrete pillboxes.
By 08.00, fighting with great bravery, the Canadians had taken both villages for the loss of 2,238 men.
Keeping in contact
Methods of communication during the war, though primitive by today's standards, were diverse and inventive.
Telephones were the main means of oral communication.
Thousands of miles of cable linked the armies of both sides, but reception was often poor and the cables were repeatedly severed by bursting shells.
Radio technology was still experimental.
One British Tank Brigade commander commented: ‘Many times it was impossible to hear or be heard when speaking to Corps Headquarters at a distance of five or six miles.’
But by the Battle of Cambrai, wireless signalling had become more efficient and proved valuable in keeping the tanks in touch with the rear.
On the first day, five tons of cable were towed forward on sledges by tanks, together with 120 poles, numerous telephones and their exchanges.
They proved almost useless, for the ebb and flow of the fighting hindered the collection of accurate information, and such as was gleaned was usually out of date by the time of its transmission.
To overcome this, a new method of relaying information was devised: collecting points were established at intervals some 550m/600yds behind the front line.
There, specially trained officers correlated all incoming information before signalling a general report to the rear.
Other manual methods of signalling included flags, arc lights operated by gas, and heliographs whose flashing signals could be read by telescope.
Tanks again encountered special problems.
A hand, or Aldis, lamp for signalling in Morse code was found unsatisfactory; a more efficient method was for tank to signal to tank, or to the supporting infantry, by means of discs of different colour.