

THE HIGH ELVES
Elves are the oldest and most civilised race on the known world.
The birth place of their race, the island realm of Ulthuan, has a recorded history going back over 8000 years.
Their great ships dominate the sea-lanes from the Old World to Cathay and their armies command grudging respect from even their most bitter foes.
Elves are pale-skinned with fine, aesthetically beautiful features and hair fine as flax.
They are tall and proud in their bearing and though they have a slim build they are surprisingly strong and agile for their size.
Elves are long-lived, some say immortal, and less vulnerable to disease than humans.
Their movements are graceful and controlled, their minds are quick and clever with an intensity and depth of insight which makes them seem fey and strange to other races.
Indeed, more than once the Lords of Ulthuan have made war amongst themselves or upon other races for some real or imagined slight, for though they are a noble people the High Elves can be cold and haughty, quick to anger and slow to forgive.
Elves are taught the arts of war from an early age and swiftly master the sword, the bow and the spear.
Those of noble birth learn to ride with exceptional skill, and are taught to bear the arms of the Silver Helms, the magnificent Elven knights who fight in the vanguard of the High Elf army.
All Elven weaponry and armour is finely crafted.
Swords are often passed down from father to son, and may be extremely ancient family heirlooms that have drawn blood in thousands of battles.
Armour is beautifully made from a myriad of tiny metal scales making it lightweight and very flexible but stronger than steel.
Their tall, shapely helmets are intricately carved and often encrusted in precious gems, for Elves love gemstones and use them to decorate their wargear.
The High Elves have developed sorcery far beyond the accomplishments of any other race.
They were the first to study magic and remain the greatest masters of it in the known world.
The forces of magic have been harnessed to protect the land of Ulthuan, for without the conjurations of the High Elves the entire island would sink beneath the waves forever.
High Elf mages are mighty spell casters whose fiery blasts and awesome energies have won many a battle.
It is the Elves who in years past taught magic to men, although the Elf Mages far surpass the human wizards of the Old World in their skill and knowledge.
THE LAND OF ULTHUAN
The island continent of the Elves is situated in the Great Western Ocean between the Old and the New Worlds.
It resembles a hollow ring of land surrounded by scattered archipelagos.
The ring is broken only at its southernmost point by the Straits of Lothern.
These provide the only sea route between the island's Inner Sea and the ocean.
The Inner Kingdoms lie on the shores of the Inner Sea, and the Outer Kingdoms lie on the wild ocean shores and the island chains.
Here lie the northern Kingdom of Cothique and the mountainous realm of Chrace.
To the west and east lie the fertile but sparsely populated kingdoms of Tiranoc and Yvresse.
In the south lies Eataine with its fortress city of Lothern glittering like the gemstone in a giant ring.
A range of titanic cloud-piercing peaks, known as the Annulii, separates the Inner and Outer Kingdoms.
The highest valleys and plateaux of this region disappear into a strange, glittering mist of raw magic so strong it becomes visible even to those without the wizard sight.
Within this realm the stuff of dreams and nightmares can coalesce from the very air.
The sun is never visible; it is eternal twilight.
Time flows strangely and travellers become lost for years although they think they have been walking only hours.
Even the use of magic becomes unpredictable in the mountains.
This unstable region of Ulthuan has a strange other-worldly quality more akin to the realms of Chaos than to mortal lands.
The mountains are riven with magic because Ulthuan itself acts as focal point for the winds of magical energy which blow across the known world from the Northern Wastes.
These drifting energies are drawn to Ulthuan, like water in a whirlpool, forming a vortex of magic.
In this way Ulthuan drains magic out of the known world and prevents the tide of magic overwhelming everything and turning it into a seething realm of Chaos.
The creation of this magical vortex was one the first and greatest acts of the High Elf mages of Ulthuan.
The Annulii is almost impossible to cross save by certain passes and tunnels guarded by massive fortified gates.
Many wild and evil creatures are spawned in the mountains or drawn there on the winds of magic.
For the most part they are confined there by the same spell which draws the magic to Ulthuan, but some things manage to find their way down to ravage the lands below.
Griffons, chimera and other monsters find their way into the hinterlands of the Inner Kingdoms where they are hunted for sport or captured as war mounts by the High Elves.
So few passes breach the near impenetrable mountains that most communication between the inner and outer realms takes place by sea.
Thus the Inner Kingdoms are unspoilt wildernesses for the most part, covered by huge, ancient forests or grassy, rolling plains, utterly free of the stamp of habitation.
In contrast to the storm-lashed Outer Kingdoms and the twilit Annulii the Inner Kingdoms bask in eternal summer, filled with a dazzling selection of exotic plants and animals unknown in other lands.
Even near the settlements of the Elves the land is unscarred by the mark of hoe or plough for Elf agriculture is magically efficient and their diet is supplemented by hunting and fishing.
The High Elves possess a great respect for their land and build their cities in harmony with nature as much as possible.
Using sorcerous building techniques they craft mighty cities of tall white towers that blend into the surrounding landscape like groves of great pale trees.
A network of great menhirs crosses the continent of Ulthuan from shore to shore and channels the magical energy of the vortex ever inward.
Each standing stone collects the raw power and channels it to its inward neighbour.
Many mages build their dwellings along these channels and many places of power occur where the lines intersect.
The Elves have been known to bury their dead at these points in great high mounds or barrows.
This pins the souls of the dead to these places, letting the ghosts guard the lands they love and saving their spirits from the terrible prospect of being devoured by the Gods of Chaos.
All magic is dangerous and the titanic forces drawn into the realm of Ulthuan are more dangerous than any other.
Should the network of stones be damaged the fine balance of energies could collapse in upon itself and consume Ulthuan in a holocaust of raw power, turning it into another Realm of Chaos which the Dark Elves would return to claim for their Chaos Gods at last.
THE KINGDOMS OF ULTHUAN
The kingdoms of Ulthuan are ruled by a collection of princes, princesses and mages, above all of whom preside the King and Queen.
The relationship between these rulers and the princes of Ulthuan is not as simple as the titles would suggest.
The kingship is not hereditary and the King and Queen maintain separate courts.
The Queen of Ulthuan is always the Queen of Avelorn.
Her realm is the site of the  principal shrine of the Earth Mother and she is regarded as the spiritual leader of the whole Elf realm.
The position of Phoenix King is elective.
He is chosen from among the Princes of Ulthuan on the death of the previous Phoenix King and crowned at the massive pyramid Shrine of Asuryan located on an island in the Sea of Dreams, outside the borders of any of the kingdoms.
Naturally, since having their ruler become the Phoenix King enhances the prestige of a kingdom, the selection of the new ruler of Ulthuan is a process fraught with diplomatic manoeuvring as the interests of various political factions have to be juggled.
Since the king controls the foreign policy of Ulthuan the character of the various Phoenix Kings defines periods of Elf history.
An isolationist king means that the land of Ulthuan can turn in on itself for a thousand years or more.
The current king, Finubar the Seafarer, is from the trading state of Eataine which accounts for Ulthuan's renewed and vigorous interest in distant lands.
Since most foreigners know only of the Phoenix King and the pre-eminence of Eataine they tend to assume that Ulthuan is a far more homogeneous bloc than in fact it is.
The Inner Kingdoms
The Elven Kingdoms can be divided into two groups: the Outer Kingdoms and the Inner Kingdoms.
The Inner Kingdoms are set within the twilit ring of the Annulii, shielded from contact with the outer world by the mountains and buffer states of the Outer Kingdoms.
The inhabitants of many of the inner lands tend to be introverted and dreamy.
They are scholars, mystics and sorcerers without peer, but are affected by a languor that means they rarely bestir themselves except for the most pressing and dire of circumstances.
The Outer Kingdoms are more worldly as one would expect from nations that have to deal with marauding Norse and Dark Elf raiders.
Pre-eminent among the outer Kingdoms is Eataine, within whose borders lies Lothern, the greatest seaport in all the world.
Eataine's control of the straits of Lothern makes it unique in Ulthuan because it straddles both the Inner and Outer Kingdoms.
Eataine
As the realm from which the current Phoenix King comes Eataine (pronounced Ay-a-tain) is considered first among the Elf Kingdoms.
However, Eataine is simply the hinterland of the vast city-state of Lothern.
Its lands are dotted with vineyards, villas and summer estates to which the noble families of the city retire.
The city is the real centre of power and source of Eataine's prosperity.
It is one of the wonders of the known world and no-one who has ever visited it can forget it.
Approaching Lothern the first thing a mariner sees is the Glittering Tower, a great lighthouse filled with thousands of lamps, situated on a rocky isle in the mouth of the treacherous waters of the Straits of Lothern.
This titanic fortress guards the approach to the Emerald Gate, the first sea-gate of Lothern.
Any attackers approaching the Emerald Gate can easily be caught in a crossfire between the great war-engines in the Glittering Tower and those on the Gate.
The sight of these great bastions gives any would-be attacker just pause for thought.
Guided by an Elf pilot the ship then passes through the Emerald Gate, a great fortified arch filled with war machines and the cloaked spearmen and archers of the Lothern Sea Guard.
Two gigantic valves of carved bronze set with monstrous emeralds bar the way but as the ship approaches they smoothly swing back through the churning waters to reveal the Straits of Lothern.
The craft passes down a wide channel between sheer cliffs lined with castles, ramparts and defences, before passing through the second portal, a gate of shining silver set with sapphires the size of a man's head.
Beyond the Sapphire Gate lies a huge lagoon ringed around with the shining towers of Lothern.
The city fans upwards from the coast, its white towers climbing gracefully into the foothills of the distant mountains.
Bobbing at anchor are thousands of vessels ranging from the trading ships of the merchant princes to the fanciful pleasure barges of the people of Lothern and  the sleek, deadly warships of the High Elf fleet.
The city of Lothern is not simply built around the lagoon; at some points artificial islands have been built within its waters.
On these rest great palaces, temples and storehouses forming an intricate network of canals.
Towering two hundred foot-high statues of the Phoenix King and the Everqueen face each other across the mouth of the bay and around the harbour are other great statues of the Elf Gods: Asuryan, Lileath, Kurnous and Isha and many others.
This is as far as any non-Elf can go.
He is free to sample the delights of the city but is forbidden to pass through the third gate of ruby and gold into the Inner Seas.
The two most sacred shrines in all Ulthuan lie in the Inner Seas to the north of Lothern, as well as the strange and terrible area known as the Isle of the Dead.
The Inner Sea
The area known as the Inner Sea is divided into the eastern Sea of Dreams and the western Sea of Dusk.
The waters here are magically calm and peaceful.
Trading ships from the Inner Kingdoms ply these placid waters bearing horses from Ellyrion and the magical wares of Saphery to Lothern and returning laden with the wares of half the world.
Many pilgrims take passage on these seas en route to the Shrine of Asuryan in the Sea of Dreams and the Earth Mother in the Sea of Dusk.
Once a year the sacred white barges of the Phoenix King and the Everqueen ply the waters to their respective shrines.
These stately craft are an awe-inspiring sight, each carved from the bole of single great ironwood tree.
Each ship is built for the coronation of the ruler and on his or her death bears them off to the Isle of the Dead to rest at last with the ancient rulers of Ulthuan.
As the barges plough the blue waters nothing slows their stately progress, no wind fills their sails, no hand guides their tiller.
They follow the lines of power that run through the Inner Sea to their destination.
In times of great trouble, the ghostly outlines of the White Ships can be seen sailing the waters of the Inner Sea.
The shrine of Asuryan, the Phoenix King, is located on the Island of the Flame due north of Lothern.
Within this ancient pyramid the eternal fire of the phoenix burns.
This pure white flame leaps from a great fountain of fire in the central chamber of the pyramid.
The new king bathes in the fires when he is crowned, passing miraculously unscathed through the inferno before emerging to be clad in ceremonial white and gold coronation robes and to have the great feathered cloak of kingship draped around his shoulders.
The shrine of Asuryan is guarded by the formidable warriors of the Phoenix Guard.
During their term of service these warriors take a vow to speak no word.
They fight in a silence that is terrifying to their foes.
After their term they never speak of the mysteries they have witnessed.
To the north of the Shrine of Asuryan, at the centre of the Sea, indeed at the centre of Ulthuan, is the Island of the Dead.
This is the secret heart of Ulthuan, the nexus of the great spells of the ancient High Elf sorcerers to which all the magical power drawn into the vortex eventually flows.
The Isle of The Dead is so suffused with sorcerous power that time has been destroyed, and the island exists outside time, beyond the reach of the physical world.
If Elves were to sail to the Isle today they would find the High Elf mages of old, caught like flies in amber, still chanting their ages-long spells to preserve the balance of the world.
North of the Isle of the Dead is the shrine of the Earth Mother.
Here is located the great cavern-temple of the Mother Goddess within which dwells her oracular priestesses.
The Temple is located in the Gaean Vale, a long and beautiful valley, lined with wild apple trees and nourished by waterfalls and clear springs.
Within the underground complex many mysterious rites take place which it is forbidden for any male to witness.
Every Elf woman is expected to make a pilgrimage here once in her life.
It is here that the Everqueen is crowned in a week-long ceremony.
Caledor
Caledor is a thinly populated, mountainous realm to the west of Eataine.
In elder days several of the Phoenix Kings of Ulthuan came from here and the kingdom enjoyed a power far beyond its sparse population would suggest.
The reason for this can be summed up in one word — dragons.
These mighty creatures made their lairs beneath the blazing peaks of the Dragon Spine Mountains.
Nestled within these bleak volcanic highlands are fertile valleys filled with game plentiful enough to satisfy even the appetites of dragons.
Here, long ago, came Caledor Dragontamer.
This mighty High Mage bound the fearsome dragons to his will, using harnesses of enchanted truesteel smelted in the fiery heart of Vaul's Anvil.
His descendants named their kingdom Caledor in his honour.
Great granite fortresses sprang up in the misty vales and from them Dragon Princes rode the thermals over sullen volcanoes.
In battle none could stand against them, for the Dragon Princes of Caledor were fearsome mages as well as mighty warriors, and their steeds were terrible to behold.
Though the Dragon Princes were few the destruction they could wreak was unmatched then as it is now and few dared the wrath of Caledor.
Eventually the mountains cooled, and the volcanoes erupted less.
Even as the peaks lost their fire so did the dragons lose theirs.
One by one, they drifted into slumber, becoming ever more difficult to rouse.
Those that remained awake became sluggish and temperamental, and their riders became reluctant to use their mounts save in times of direst need.
As the strength of the dragons waned so did the power of the Dragon Princes.
The long reign of the Dragon Princes ended and their grip on the throne of the Phoenix King was lost.
The old realm of Caledor was eclipsed by other realms including the fast-rising mercantile city-state of Lothern.
Even in their weakened state the Dragon Princes are still formidable.
They are fierce and noble warriors and though the dragons are few they can still rouse some in times of great need.
At other times the Dragon Princes ride to war on mighty Elven steeds fully armoured and caparisoned as dragons.
Caledor is also famous as the location of Vaul's Anvil, fiercest of all volcanoes.
On this blazing black island at the very tail of the Dragon Spine is the great shrine of Vaul, god of smiths.
His temple is to be found on a great tower of black adamant rising out of the steaming lava within the volcano's crater.
The temple can only be approached over a narrow drawbridge of truesteel.
Within this shrine the Blind Smiths of Vaul forge weapons of power and devices of infinite cunning for use by the Elf Lords.
Ellyrion
North of Caledor, bordering on the Inner Sea, is Ellyrion, the realm of the Horse-Lords.
Tor Elyr is its single great city.
Great herds of horses thunder across the sweeping plains of Ellyrion.
It is a land of gentle summers and mild winters.
Touched by beneficial magics and feeding on the long grasses of the steppe, the steeds of Ellyrion are the swiftest and most noble of four-legged beasts.
Fast as the wind and loyal unto death, they are the perfect mount for Elf nobility.
The Horsemasters of Ellyrion live in harmony with their mounts.
They prefer not to break the beast's spirit with harsh treatment.
Rather they enchant them magically and the horses serve willingly.
The Elves repay this loyalty with kindness.
They hunt down any who harm their steeds and treat them with the utmost severity.
‘Better to harm the brother of an Ellyrian than his horse,’ is a well known saying in Ulthuan.
The Horsemasters are proud and haughty.
They are a wild, free-spirited people, quick-tempered as Elves go, and swift to avenge any stain on their honour.
They are flamboyant and skilled riders, capable of performing staggering feats of archery and acrobatics on horseback.
It is said that they learn to ride before they learn to walk, and this is almost true.
While still very young each Ellyrian child is bonded to a specially selected foal.
When they are older this chosen steed will bear its rider into battle.
The loyalty of these horses to their masters is legendary.
They stand over their riders while they sleep and watch for any danger.
The Ellyrian cavalry is constantly called to battle, for Ellyrion is one of the main areas that the Dark Elves of Naggaroth raid if they can get across the mountains.
The Dark Elves often steal the black horses from the great herds to act as their steeds.
As a consequence of this black horses have a bad reputation in Ellyrion.
An Ellyrian mounted on a black horse can often find himself a prime target for Dark Elf attacks
The Horsemasters maintain constant cavalry patrols across their lands to warn of any incursion.
The Ellyrian Reaver Knights are a force famed throughout Ulthuan for their hardiness and prowess in battle.
They are often expected to spend days on the march, even sleeping in the saddle, and then fight a pitched battle.
Tor Elyr is a beautiful city on the coast of the Sea of Dusk.
It is built on a series of island castles linked by a web of silver bridges.
Each castle is a palace, sculpted from the living rock of a peaked island.
It is here that the dauntless cavalrymen of Ellyrion rest when they return from their long sweeps through their embattled land.
Avelorn
North east of Ellyrion, across the river Arduil, lies the great forest of Avelorn, most ancient of all the Elf realms.
Upon its tangled groves ancient glamours lie and under its eaves creatures of legend still walk.
The largest population of treemen in the world tend their wild gardens of oak and suntree.
Great eagles nest in the enchanted hills, and unicorns walk in its sun-dappled glades.
The Elves that live here are a strange, fey breed with more kinship to the Wood Elves of Athel Lothern in the Old World than many in Ulthuan.
Summer lies eternally on Avelorn's enchanted glades.
Beneath the leafy bowers the golden subjects of the Everqueen dance and sing.
The court of the Everqueen moves through Avelorn from place to place like a great carnival, pitching silken pavilions of myriad colours wherever it halts.
By day, silver laughter rings through the forest as the Elves make sport.
By night, faery lights flicker in the darkness, drifting behind the Everqueen's courtiers and illuminating the revels and feasting.
With its perfect weather, bountiful forests and beautiful near-immortal inhabitants Avelorn seems the sort of rustic paradise of which mortal men can only dream.
Yet beneath this carefree surface bitter enmities stir.
Factions at the Evercourt vie for the favour of the Queen.
Old rivalries are barely submerged and every quip has a deadly double meaning.
For prestige is treated as a matter of life and death in Avelorn.
To be chosen as the Queen's handmaid is the highest honour for an Elf-maid or her family, just as to be chosen as her consort is the dream of every youth of Avelorn.
All seek to enhance their status at the cost of their rivals.
The handmaids of the Everqueen are not mere courtiers; they are her warrior guard — a hundred beautiful Elf-maids schooled in the arts of war till they exceed or even surpass the greatest of Elf knights with sword, bow and lance.
They guard the Everqueen as her court travels through Avelorn for the forest contains many dark and dangerous places where the hearts of the trees are rotten and great spiders lurk.
The tainted places near the mountains are shunned by all but the boldest Elves for lurking evil can strike the unwary even here.
At times Great Chaos beasts find a way down to Avelorn from the Annulii and ravage the land, but they are swiftly and ruthlessly hunted down by the Everqueen's would-be consorts in an effort to gain her favour.
Avelorn is ruled by the Everqueen, the chosen of the Earth Mother, mistress of the undying forest, preserver of green fastness, observer of the rites of the golden spring, occupant of one of the Twin Thrones of Ulthuan.
The Queen of Avelorn is the firstborn daughter of the previous queen conceived after her year-long ritual marriage to the Phoenix-King.
After this they go their separate ways.
Both can take new consorts but only their daughter can be the new Everqueen.
Hence the Queens of Avelorn have always been the Everqueens of Ulthuan, forming an unbroken chain from ages past.
Gifted by the goddess the current queen, Alarielle, is extraordinarily beautiful.
She is an accomplished mage and oversees all the complex fertility rites of Avelorn and Ulthuan.
As such she holds tremendous power and prestige in Ulthuan.
Her only real rival in these stakes is the Phoenix King himself.
Often there is rivalry between the two Thrones.
The Everqueen's policies may be at odds with those of the Phoenix King.
The Phoenix King's are often war-like and expansionist and the Everqueen's peaceful and introverted.
But this balance of opposites is at the very heart of the High Elves' concepts of rulership — being ruled by a single all-powerful dictator would be unthinkable to them.
One thing unites both factions: an abhorrence of the Dark Elves of Naggaroth and all they stand for.
Between Ulthuan and Naggaroth there can exist only war unto the death.
Saphery
South and east of Avelorn, on the shores of the Sea of Dreams, lies Saphery, the land of wizardry.
The heart of Saphery is the Tower of Hoeth, the shrine of the God of Wisdom.
This is the greatest repository of magical knowledge in the world, compiled down the centuries by High Elf mages and scholars, who dedicate their lives to the accumulation of magical lore.
The Tower of Hoeth rises high above the forest.
This bone-white structure is almost half a mile high, a feat of engineering made possible only by magic.
It was built over twenty centuries ago on the orders of the Phoenix King of the time, Bel-Korhadris, the Scholar King.
The tower stands at the point of a great confluence of the coursing magical energies of the vortex, a fact that lends it a greater strength than any creation of mere bricks and mortar.
The tower is visible tens of miles away, a sharp white needle of stone thrusting into sky.
Its approaches are guarded by rings of illusion and mazes of spells which means only those selected by the Loremasters of Hoeth ever find the true path to the tower.
Those who seek wisdom at the shrine will find it.
Those who seek power for power's sake are never seen again.
The Tower of Hoeth is also the home of the Sword Masters, warrior-ascetics who dedicate their lives to the pursuit of wisdom and learning carefully controlled violence.
They study meditation and martial arts until they are capable of super-human feats of arms.
They favour the Elven greatsword above all other blades; a wicked weapon a full five or six feet in length, double-edged and razor sharp.
The Sword Masters are so superlatively trained that they can wield these mighty swords as fast as an ordinary warrior can a normal sword.
A Sword Master always seeks to master new killing blows and different individuals perfect their own personal sword strokes, giving them a style of fighting as distinctive as a signature.
The Sword Masters are the agents of the Loremasters and of the Phoenix King.
They wander the land seeking news and reporting back to the tower.
The Supreme Loremaster often dispatches them to deal with threats to the interests of the Tower and the Kingdom.
Beyond the spell-walls of the Tower of Hoeth are the domains of the nobles of Saphery.
All of the Princes and Dukes of this realm are mages of awesome power.
They are reclusive and idiosyncratic, dwelling in exquisite mansions far from each other with their families and a select band of retainers.
Each noble's home has its own character reflecting the interests and magical researches of its patrons.
The palace of Anurion the Green, for example, is surrounded by terraced gardens containing many strange and exotic plants, some carnivorous, some sentient, some both.
Many of his collection are not even of this world.
The mansion of Hothar the Fey drifts gently across the sky of Saphery, landing at its owner's whim.
The crypt of Mad Chasyrion is avoided by everyone since its owner is misanthropic and known to perform many strange and dangerous sorceries there.
Not all the inhabitants of this realm are solitary.
Some are great warriors and statesmen.
These mages of Saphery and their personal guards are often summoned by the Phoenix King to aid him in his wars.
Many are dispatched on missions by the lord of the Phoenix Throne and can be found leading armies in strange and out of the way parts of the world.
The Outer Kingdoms
Tiranoc
Tiranoc is the westernmost realm of Ulthuan.
Once it was the fairest of the Elf lands.
Majestic snow-capped peaks towered over sweeping flower-strewn plains.
The people were great sailors who colonised much of the eastern New World.
Wealth flowed from these colonies: gold to gild the city spires, silver to be wrought into the bodywork of their chariots, furs for winter wear and medicinal herbs to cure the sick.
The charioteers of Tiranoc, famed throughout the land for their skill and daring, raced between their white marble cities.
The folk were content and peaceful and their lives golden.
But this time of happiness was to pass.
In the dark time of the Sundering when the Dark Elves broke with the people of Ulthuan Tiranoc suffered grievously.
Though close kin to those who would follow the dark paths the folk of Tiranoc remained loyal to their Elven heritage and paid a dreadful price.
At the climax of the Wars of Sundering the Dark Elf mages unleashed such mighty magics and the High Elf mages responded with such mighty counter spells that the whole of northern Ulthuan was devastated.
The Shadowlands crumbled and disappeared below the hungry waves.
The heartlands of Tiranoc were swamped by a succession of enormous tidal waves that drowned the plains and smashed the cities.
Only the mountains were left above water, islands rising from the turbulent waves.
A few small towns clung to the slopes of the lower peaks.
To the east was a thin strip of coast, all that remained of the sweeping plains of Tiranoc.
When the colonists returned from the New World they found their homeland drowned and their kinsmen dead.
What had once been the greatest and most prosperous of Elf realms had effectively ceased to be.
Saddened, many of the colonists returned to the New World.
Others, unable to bear the grief, swore to remain in their homeland and rebuild it to its former glory.
Over the millennia they have slowly done so, and now there are once more prosperous cities in the west, and although the folk are few in number, they are hardy.
The new coast of the continent, although less fertile than the plains of old, has been planted and cultivated and once more chariots run along the coastal strip.
The folk of Tiranoc have grown as hard and bitter as their land.
The long struggle to reclaim what was theirs has made them cold and deadly.
The songs of ancient times remind them of what they lost and there is a savage hatred in their hearts towards the Dark Elves of Naggaroth.
Many a Dark Elf army has been lost in Tiranoc while trying to make its way to the more populous lands of the south and east.
In the north a constant war is waged against incursions from Naggaroth and the folk of Tiranoc and their kinsmen from the New World are always to the fore.
The Isles
The Isles of the North suffered most during the Wars of the Sundering.
Here cataclysmic forces were unleashed that drowned the land and shattered the northern part of the continent.
The remaining islands are tortured and twisted places, blasted by fire and death, and near lifeless.
Such life that does survive is warped from contact with the pools and flows of dark magical energy left over from the war.
Monsters, stirred from the lightless ocean depths by the sinking of the lands, sometimes come ashore here in search of prey.
This realm once belonged to the Elves of Naggaroth and they still seek to reclaim it.
The Elves of Ulthuan maintain fortresses and watchtowers in these desolate lands to warn them against invaders.
Year by year war is waged here.
Sometimes the Isles are in possession of the Dark Ones, sometimes in possession of the warriors of the Phoenix King.
This is truly a sundered land.
Rising over the misty wilderness of the Blighted Isle, largest of the surviving islands, is the great shrine of Khaine the Elf war-god.
This shrine has long been abandoned but it is still a place of great power and of deep significance to both the Elves and the Dark Elves.
Both worship Khaine as a god and both claim his shrine.
The shrine itself is a massive black altar within which is embedded a weapon of power.
Everyone who looks upon it sees a different weapon.
Some see a spear, others a sword, others an axe.
All agree that the weapon drips blood.
The altar sits on a vast plain over which many battles have been fought.
The bodies of the dead are left unburied, so the plain is covered in the bones and skulls of Elf and beast.
Spirits of the dead drift over the battlefield locked in eternal battle.
The mist itself is red-tinted and smells of blood.
On certain nights all the ghosts do battle and the distant echoes of their screams and war-cries are born on the wind.
The boundaries of the sacred battlefield are marked by a thousand great carved menhirs.
These represent the various aspects of Khaine.
Some have been toppled, and some are so eroded that they appear to be nothing more than wind-scoured boulders.
Others carry the image of swooping hawk, the blood-maddened bull, the scorpion stinging, the wounded warrior.
All these obelisks are dark and sinister, their hulking forms glowering over a carpet of white bones under leaden skies.
The Elves see Khaine as a god of unleashed violence.
For them he is a dark god but a necessary one, for they live in a violent world and must be able to fight when called upon to do so.
Khaine is part of every Elf soul, a part they would rather never have to confront, but a part that they need.
His murder lust is there to be used when danger threatens but it must be controlled and used wisely.
Elf rituals of Khaine worship stress this need for control.
The Dark Elves see Khaine in a different light.
His Dark Elf followers have given themselves over entirely to his worship.
They let their dark sides control their lives and actively seek opportunities to cause death and carnage.
They revel in their bloodlust and gratify it at every opportunity.
In a way, the struggle for the Shrine Of Khaine is symbolic of the greater struggle in the soul of the Elf race, between those who follow the darkness and those who seek some measure of harmony.
None know how the struggle will end.
Chrace and Cothique
These are the northernmost Elf realms and they share many characteristics.
In the elder days they were relatively empty lands, occupied by those who sought to escape the more civilised realms and return to nature.
Now they exist in a state of permanent war
Chrace is the main route through which the Dark Elves seek access to the Inner Lands.
Elf troops constantly move through en route to war with the Dark Elves.
As the war has gone on, the lands have become perilous.
The isolated communities of the wooded highlands have been fortified.
The locals are great hunters and scouts, adept at guerilla warfare and skilled with bow, sword and axe.
The mountains of Chrace are the home of the fearsome White Lion.
This mighty beast ranges the wilderness in search of living prey.
To be counted a real hunter, an Elf of Chrace must hunt and kill one of them single-handed.
The beast also gives its name to one of the most legendary units in the service of the Kings of Ulthuan: the White Lions, a picked group of warriors who guard the person of the Phoenix King.
The founding of the White Lions dates back to the time of the bitter civil war with the Dark Elves when Caledor the First was recalled from hunting in Chrace to become the new Phoenix King.
He was attacked by Dark Elf assassins on the road to Avelorn and was only just saved by the timely intervention of a party of Chracian hunters.
They then fought their way past the Dark Elf patrols and back to the Inner Sea.
Since then a unit of tough Chracian warriors has traditionally guarded the Phoenix King, resplendent in their White Lion skins and armed with fearsome double-handed war axes
Cothique is a coastal kingdom, peopled by shrewd and hardy seafolk.
Their graceful vessels plough the turbulent northern waters in search of food and trading with distant lands.
This is a highly dangerous area to sail in because the seas contain many monstrous creatures which were stirred up by the collapse of northern Ulthuan centuries ago — Kraken, huge shark-like megalodons, Behemoths and even the dread Black Leviathan are all commonly seen in the waters north of Ulthuan.
The sailors of Cothique actually seek out these monsters in great sea-hunts, matching their skills and the speed of their light craft against brute strength and animal cunning.
The brunt of Norse raids from beyond the Old World also fall upon Cothique and the Elves of Cothique have been toughened by centuries of warfare with these fierce human warriors.
The small harbours that line the rocky coast of Cothique hold many craft which double as warships in times of need.
Yvresse
Yvresse is the land of mists.
The mainland of Yvresse lies along the eastern coast of Ulthuan but the realm also encompasses the islands of the Eastern Ocean.
The mainland is a wild coastline fringed by deep coniferous forests.
Long fjords thrust inland from the coast.
The forests tumble down the mist-shrouded valleys right to the water's edge.
The foothills of the Annulii march off to the distant peaks that tower dramatically into the clouds.
This is the wildest, bleakest and least densely populated area of Ulthuan.
To the east of the mainland are the Shifting Isles.
This is an area shrouded in legend and dark rumour where ancient spells of illusion shield the eastern coast of Ulthuan from intruders.
The whole area is wreathed in mists.
Within these billowing clouds strange and terrifying things are often seen; whether these are the products of men's ensorcelled imaginations or whether they actually exist is something not often discussed.
What is known is that some of the islands definitely do move and this is no mere illusion.
This creates treacherous mazes of shoals and sandbars which can confuse even High Elf pilots.
Yvresse has only one major city: Tor Yvresse.
The Warden of the City is the great Elven hero Eltharion.
He dwells in a high tower looking down on the metropolis and can often be seen flying high above it on his War Griffon Stormwing.
Tor Yvresse itself is one of the oldest and most beautiful of all Elf settlements but its time of glory is long past.
Many of the old mansions are uninhabited and the great amphitheatres, once host to plays and masques, are silent and empty.
Elves live long lives but their children are few and in recent centuries the birthrate has declined steeply.
The population of Tor Yvresse is less than half what the city was built to accommodate and the wide boulevards seem empty even when the entire population takes to the streets during the great Festival of Masques.
The mighty old walls are wide and deep but the city has barely enough warriors to protect them.
Fortunately the city has long been protected by the sorcerous Shifting Isles but its ability to defend itself in the event of a serious invasion has long been in doubt.
Less than a century ago Yvresse was almost overrun by a Goblin horde led by the notorious Goblin Warlord Grom the Paunch.
The almost innumerable Goblins ravaged a large tract of Yvresse and were barely turned back at Tor Yvresse by the heroic efforts of Eltharion.
The old Warden of the city, a great High Elf mage, was slain in a magical duel with Grom's greatest shaman, and the people of Tor Yvresse beseeched Eltharion to become their new warden.
Eltharion accepted and has busied himself strengthening the land of Yvresse ever since.
THE CHRONICLE OF THE PHOENIX KINGS
A Note On Chronology
Elves reckon time differently from Men, and their history is divided into reigns, not centuries.
Each Phoenix King's reign is regarded as a separate historical epoch.
In addition, Elves do not reckon in months as Men do.
Their years are divided into four seasons: the season of Frost, the season of Rain, the season of Sun, and the season of Storm.
These roughly correspond to winter, spring, summer and autumn.
In Elf records the reign of the Phoenix King comes first, followed by the year, then the season, then the day.
Thus V) 114, 3, 90 means on the ninetieth day of the season of Sun in the one hundred and fourteenth year of the reign of Caradryel the Peacemaker.
For the sake of consistency we have given the length of the Phoenix King's reign and the rough dates in the Sigmarite calendar of the Empire.
When looking at the calendar it's worth bearing in mind that there is usually a year's grace between the death of the previous Phoenix King and the coronation of his successor.
Usually these years are counted as the last year of the dead king's reign.
Elves traditionally date their calendar from the day that Aenarion passed through the flame in the Shrine of Asuryan.
Before that is the reign of the Single Throne when Ulthuan was ruled by the Everqueen of Avelorn.
This is a period about which little is known for few records survive of those days.
I) The Defender Aenarion, 1–80 (Imperial calendar -4500 to -4920)
It was a time of darkness.
It was an age of strife.
It was an era of terror and rage.
The nightmare creations of Chaos swept across the land.
The Old Slann had fallen, leaving their lost children to battle the daemons alone.
The polar gates, once used by the star-walking Slann to step from world to world, had collapsed, and a tide of uncontrolled magical energy swamped the Known World.
From the gates emerged the spawn of chaos: daemons, sorcerers, the lost and the damned.
They marched forth to devour the world.
On Ulthuan, the island home of the Elves, the long golden age of peace came to an end.
From the turbulent seas the Hosts of Chaos emerged to slaughter the defenceless Elves.
They fell on the children of the Everqueen like wolves on newborn lambs.
Unused to war, unschooled in conflict, the Elves could not stand against them.
Black-armoured warriors burned the sacred groves.
Hideous beastmen massacred entire villages and towns.
Daemons howled and gibbered in the ruins of ancient settlements.
All the Elves could do was flee.
Their bows and spears, used only for hunting and duels of honour, were useless against the armour of the Chaos warriors and the brazen hides of daemons.
The Elves hid themselves in caves, woods and mountainsides and prayed to their gods that they would not be found, and that a hero would emerge to deliver them from this evil.
From the red murk of this terrible age emerged Aenarion, greatest and most tragic of all Elf heroes: a doomed champion, a fallen god, mightiest warrior of an age of constant warfare; the first, the best-loved and the most accursed of the Phoenix Kings of Ulthuan.
This flawed titan bestrides the history of his age like a colossus.
Little is known of Aenarion's early life.
It is said that he was an adventurer, one of those restless souls who led a small band of followers from the eternal peace of Avelorn to seek his fate in distant lands.
When Chaos came he fought as best he could but he saw that the pitiful weapons of the Elves and the peaceful sorceries of the Everqueen could not stand against the might of the dark.
Sick of the slaughter of his folk he journeyed through the war-torn land to the Shrine of Asuryan, determined to invoke the aid of his god.
Even as the armies of Chaos laid siege to the shrine Aenarion stood before the ever-burning flame and begged Asuryan to aid his people.
If the god heard, he gave no sign.
Aenarion burned offerings, and the god did not respond.
He sacrificed a white lamb.
No aid came.
Finally, in desperation, Aenarion offered himself, saying he would cast himself into the sacred fire if Asuryan would only save his people.
As the god made no response Aenarion kept his promise and threw himself into the raging, white-hot inferno.
Agony wracked his body.
Pain seared his limbs.
His hair caught fire.
His heart stopped.
Those who watched thought he was dead.
Then a miracle occurred.
Aenarion refused to die.
Slowly, painfully, he staggered through the fire.
As he did so his burned skin healed and his scorched hair re-grew.
He emerged from the flame unscathed, transformed by the cleansing fire.
His skin was clear and translucent.
The spirit of Asuryan had entered him.
There was a light about him that all onlookers could see.
All were aware that he had become the vessel of a  transcendent power.
When he spoke, Elves hastened to obey.
Aenarion emerged from the shrine to lead the Elves to war.
Outside the walls he faced the howling Chaos horde.
He picked up his hunting spear and cast it at Morkar, the Chaos general.
The weapon tore through the Chaos Lord's body then through the chest of his standard bearer before coming to rest in the neck of a minotaur.
Weaponless, Aenarion strode down the steps of the shrine towards the stunned enemy.
He stooped and picked up Morkar's blade.
Howling for vengeance, the followers of Chaos closed in.
They might as well have assaulted a wall of blades with their bare hands.
The power of Asuryan was strong in Aenarion.
His blade was laden with death.
Every  Chaos worshipper who came within his reach was cut down.
Single-handedly Aenarion could have destroyed an army that day.
Seeing him wreak such havoc among a supposedly invincible foe, the Elves within the shrine were heartened.
They seized up spears and charged forth to his aid.
Great was the slaying that day, and merry was the feasting afterwards.
The Elves had won a tremendous victory.
All those present swore allegiance to Aenarion.
From the Shrine of Asuryan he took ship to Caledor, the only place in the lands of the Elves where a successful stand had been made against the powers of Chaos.
There he met with the first Dragon Prince of Caledor, Caledor Dragontamer, greatest of the High Mages of old.
Caledor perceived Aenarion for what he truly was, a mortal god, and bent the knee immediately.
Mounted on dragons, the two of them flew to the Fortress-Shrine of Vaul's Anvil.
It was here that Aenarion's sacred armour was forged, along with enough swords and suits of armour to outfit an army.
For a brief time there was a respite from conflict.
Aenarion took the time to raise his standard, and many Elves, survivors of the initial invasion, flocked to it.
They were the perfect soldiers for Aenarion's holy war.
Many had lost their families to the spawn of Chaos.
They had true grievances to settle and were ready to lay down their lives for vengeance.
Under the supervision of Aenarion and his advisor Caledor the Elves learned all the arts of battle.
A mighty war host was assembled to protect the Elf homeland and not a moment too soon, for the armies of Chaos returned with redoubled strength.
Like a thunderbolt the Elves descended from the mountains of Caledor.
Dragon-mounted knights smashed the armies of beastmen.
Forces of heavily armed and armoured infantry drove the followers of the four Powers before them.
In the campaign that followed Aenarion forged his army the way a smith would temper a sword.
Mounted on Indraugnir, eldest of dragons, he led the way into every battle.
Great flights of fire-breathing beasts swooped on the armies of the night, and drove them back from the heart of Ulthuan to the shores of the island-continent.
At Korumel, in present day Ellyrion, Aenarion slew the Keeper of Secrets, N'kari, banishing the daemon from the mortal plane for centuries.
In the foothills of southern Chrace he smashed the Khorne-worshipping army of Vorghan the Slayer.
He cleared the boundaries of the sacred grove on the Island of Apples from the Skull Dancers of Slaanesh, and their mistress Aazella Silkenthighs.
Dragonfire incinerated Hugin the Plaguelord, and the rotting legions of Nurgle.
Then for a moment, the war seemed to end.
Brief peace settled over Ulthuan, like the shroud over a corpse.
It was the peace of death and sorrow, in a land weary of war, and made listless by loss.
It was a time of brief liaisons and temporary gladness.
The northern gate continued to run out of control, gnawing into the heart of the world like a cancer.
The tide of magic continued to rise.
Ulthuan, on a natural fault line in the fabric of reality, was saturated with the energy of magic.
The Annulii mountains glittered with polychromatic light.
Maids gave birth to monsters.
The voice of Chaos thundered in the valleys.
Terrible laughter filled the burning night.
Strange events and portents abounded.
Oracles went mad with fear.
The Keeper of the Shrine of Asuryan plucked out his eyes but even this did not stop the terrible visions.
When questioned about the fate of the world he refused to speak.
During this time Aenarion came to the court of the Everqueen.
He was a striking figure, a tired giant in golden armour.
There he met and married the Everqueen, Astarielle.
Little is known of their courtship but it is said that, for a brief time, they were happy.
Their first born children were twins, a daughter, the future Everqueen Yvraine and a son, Morelion.
Then the forces of Chaos returned once more, and the silver horns summoned Aenarion again to battle.
War surged over the length and breadth of Ulthuan.
At first the Elves and their draconic allies had the mastery.
But slowly and surely the followers of Chaos gained the upper hand.
Their numbers were inexhaustible.
More and more daemons and corrupt things emerged from the warp gates.
More and more men were transformed by the mutating power of the great clouds of Chaos magic drifting from the poles.
More and more monsters swarmed down from the glowing mountains.
Every  Elf warrior who fell was well nigh irreplaceable.
For every Chaos worshipper who fell there were two more to take his place.
The war dragged on for decades.
At times, by dint of heroic effort, the Elves achieved a breathing space and cleared their lands.
Sometimes they even launched expeditions to other continents to aid the Dwarfs and humans.
But it was obvious that the war was being lost.
Any victory merely slowed inevitable defeat; any defeat accelerated the process immeasurably.
In the end, all of the Elves, even Aenarion, grew tired of the unceasing conflict.
The forces of Chaos fought on showing neither weakness nor mercy.
They were relentless, insane and deadly.
Then came the two incidents that were to echo down the long ages of Elf history and set the stage for the great dramas that were to follow.
After nearly a century of fruitless experimentation Caledor managed to divine the cause of the Chaos Invasion and devise a desperate plan for containing it.
He now knew that the old Slann gates had collapsed, sending surges of transmuting energy through the remnants of their old network of gates.
It was these ancient devices that allowed the followers of darkness to move so swiftly about the world, and the cataclysmic release of their corrupting energies which was responsible for the spawning of so many beastmen and monsters.
Caledor devised a plan to gather these energies and return them to the Realm of Chaos, to create a cosmic vortex that would drain the magic from the world, and save its inhabitants from Chaos.
It was a desperate plan, with little hope of success, but Caledor and many like him thought a last desperate gamble would be preferable to the slow death the Elf people were enduring.
Aenarion opposed this, calling it the council of despair.
Although in his heart he knew that the war was unwinnable, he determined that he would put off the end for as long as possible.
In the camp of the Elf army Aenarion and Caledor were in the midst of their last great argument when fatal news was brought to Aenarion.
An army of beastmen and Chaos warriors had descended on Avelorn.
The Everqueen was dead, and the bodies of their  children had not been found.
It was presumed they were dead or the playthings of the Dark Ones.
Overcome with grief, Aenarion retired to his tent.
When he emerged the next morning he had changed.
No-one who looked at him could meet his gaze.
He was overcome with rage and bitterness and titanic fury.
He swore that he would kill every Chaos worshipper on the face of the world.
Few who heard him doubted his resolution or its madness.
The dark powers were too strong to be overcome.
Aenarion did not think so.
He announced that he was going to the Blighted Isle.
Dread filled those who heard his words.
All of them knew that this could mean only one thing: Aenarion was going to draw the Sword of Khaine, take up the Widowmaker, to wield the ultimate and deadly weapon.
From the beginning of time it had waited, embedded in the great black Altar of Khaine on the Blighted Isle.
The weapon was old as the world and deadly as poison, a shard of the fatal weapon forged by Vaul himself for the death god Khaela-Mensha-Khaine, a fragment of crystallised death capable of slaying daemons and gods alike.
No mortal could wield it and live, but Aenarion had passed beyond hope and beyond despair.
He lived to slay.
Caledor knew what would happen and tried to warn Aenarion.
He told Aenarion that he would be accursed if he drew the weapon, that such power was too great for any mortal being, and it could only be bought at the price of Aenarion's immortal soul.
Seized for a moment by the power of prophesy, Caledor spoke words that would ring down the ages.
He told Aenarion that if he sought such corrupt power he would bring eons of tragedy to the Elves, that he and his line would be accursed to the last generation, that the gods would turn their faces from him and that Aenarion himself would surely die.
The first Phoenix King made no response, merely climbed onto the back of Indraugnir and flew off into the dreadful night.
Little is known of Aenarion's quest to the Blighted Isle.
What is certain is that he made his way there, ignoring all warning from mortal and immortal alike.
As he flew portents abounded.
Daemons tried to turn him from his path.
The Elf gods whispered warnings in his ear.
A great storm blew up as he approached the island, as if the elements themselves were trying to drive him from his chosen path.
Indraugnir was mighty even as dragons measure strength but even he was weary by the time he bore Aenarion to his destination.
Aenarion walked the last few leagues over the haunted plains on foot.
There it is said the ghost of his departed wife pleaded with him to proceed no further.
Hardening his heart, Aenarion ignored her entreaties and wrenched the great blood-dripping blade from the altar, sealing his fate and that of his people.
Aenarion returned to the fray and carried everything before him.
The power of the sword was so great that nothing could stand against him.
It filled his enemies with terror and his own troops with unshakeable faith and unquenchable blood lust.
The followers of Aenarion became ever more brutal, cruel and merciless, lost in a dream of endless slaughter.
With each victory they became ever more heedless of their fate, they fought with no thought for their own lives, possessed by a desire to spill the blood of their enemies.
All the Elf warriors became heedless of danger and most heedless of them all was Aenarion.
Old longings, deeply buried in the Elf soul began to stir, and a darkness of spirit descended on their armies.
There were those who fought for the joy of fighting and those who slew for the sake of slaying.
Aenarion carved himself out a new kingdom in northern Ulthuan, in the bleak land of Nagarythe, a place that mirrored his own dismal mood.
Many of the most savage Elf warriors were drawn here.
To everyone's surprise, Aenarion took another wife, the strange, mysterious and beautiful seeress Morathi whom he had rescued from a band of Slaanesh worshippers.
To them was born another child, Malekith, who was to become the most hated of Elves.
The court of Aenarion was a wild place, full of desperate gaiety and feverish mirth.
Many cruel sports were practised, such as hunting captured prisoners.
Dark rumours abounded.
Others, sensing the growing evil in the land, withdrew.
Caledor led his Dragon-riders south to his own land.
He was dismayed by the change in his old friend and could see the darkness in his soul warring with the light.
Aenarion decried the departure of the Dragon-riders as a betrayal and swore he would be avenged on their prince.
Before he could take action new Chaos forces arrived in the Elf heartland.
The war reached its final stage, an unequal contest of might between the Elves and the innumerable legions of the four Powers.
Touched by Asuryan and marked by Khaine, Aenarion was an all but invincible warrior, a child of darkness and light.
His blade lent him power beyond mortal reckoning; the eternal flame gave him the strength to use it.
In battle, Aenarion slew foes beyond reckoning.
His loyal mount Indraugnir was a match for any daemon.
And yet there was only one Aenarion, and the number of his followers was finite.
During the long years of war, their numbers slowly dwindled till only the most savage, cunning and ruthless survived to carry the war to Chaos.
It became obvious to all but Aenarion and his followers that the war was lost and the world was doomed.
Caledor decided that there was only one thing left he could do.
Up to then he had respected his old friend's command abjuring him from creating the vortex.
But now there was nothing left to lose.
He called a convocation of the greatest High Elf Mages and they assembled on the Isle of the Dead to begin the great ritual.
Somehow the minions of Chaos received word of the ritual and determined to stop it.
All the forces of Chaos were brought to bear, and the mightiest sorcerers of the Chaos army set to work to breach the spell-walls around the island.
Aenarion was left with no choice.
He assembled his forces and moved to defend the Isle of the Dead.
At the centre of Ulthuan the two forces met.
Dragons so numerous that their wings darkened the sky descended on the Chaos Host.
On land and sea total war was fought between Elf and daemonic minion.
The death agonies of monsters filled the sea with foam.
Dead dragons  plummeted earthward, killed by fatal spells.
As the creation of the vortex began, the seas churned and a terrible wind blew from the north.
The skies darkened and lightning bolts split the sky.
In the centre of the field Aenarion faced four greater daemons: a Lord of Change, a Great Unclean One, a Keeper of Secrets and a Bloodthirster.
He barred their way to the shores of the island.
Blood dripped from his sword, smoking when it touched the scorched earth.
His burnished armour glinted in the light of the setting sun.
Flame leaked from the nostrils of his proud old dragon.
For long moments the combatants glared at each other, their gazes burning with unimaginable hatred.
The daemons spoke, calling Aenarion brother.
Then with a roar the combatants closed.
Aenarion lashed out with the Sword of Khaine.
He tore a great gash across the brow of the Keeper of Secrets.
Indraugnir breathed a sheet of searing flame at the howling daemons.
They shrieked and gibbered as blazing air surrounded them.
The Lord of Change cast a bolt of magical power.
Aenarion deflected the pulsing energy with his shield but the power of the daemon's attack cast him from the saddle.
Aenarion rose and smote the daemon mightily, cleaving its head in two and shearing its arm from its body.
The Bloodthirster cast itself forward at Indraugnir and slowly wrestled the dragon down.
The Great Unclean One vomited forth a stream of corruption.
The foul liquid overwhelmed Aenarion.
His head whirled and he felt giddy, virtually unable to stand upright for the foul vapours about him.
The High Elf sorcerers chanted the spell that would create the vortex.
Chain lightning flickered.
The world shuddered.
For a moment all was calm, all was silence.
Then the mountains shivered.
Terrible energies pulsed between earth and sky.
From the mountain tops bolts of pure power leaped to converge over the Island of the Dead.
The clouds swirled and rushed inward, vanishing in on themselves like waves in a whirlpool.
The air grew thick and clotted with magical power.
All present found it hard to breathe.
Their lungs tingled with magical energy.
The ground was split and vast chunks of rock were carried into the sky by the rising tide of magic.
Atop one such floating island Aenarion continued to fight.
The Keeper of Secrets cut at him with its great claw.
Its terrible grasp could not cut Aenarion's armour but the pressure was too much for any mortal to bear.
Aenarion's ribs snapped like twigs under the awesome stress.
The pain would have killed a lesser being but Aenarion had passed through the fire of Asuryan and agony could not slow him.
He reversed his grip on the blade and drove it through the daemon's chest.
With a terrible scream the thing faded and vanished.
In Aenarion's hand the Sword of Khaine dripped smouldering blood and the daemonic blade took on a life of its own.
It whispered terrible threats and promises into his mind.
Having drunk the daemon's soul it filled Aenarion with new strength.
The Phoenix King staggered towards the towering form of the Great Unclean One.
It loomed over him chuckling with preternatural malice.
On the Isle of the Dead the Elf sorcerers died, one by one.
The least powerful fell first, their brains burned and their flesh stripped to the bones by the corrosive power they had unleashed.
Still they kept chanting, knowing that if they stopped now the spell would run out of control and all their work would be undone.
Aenarion drew his blade across the Nurgle thing's gut, slicing through the fleshy sac and unleashing a seemingly unending tide of foulness.
A wave of corruption, pus, bile and writhing white maggots threatened to fill Aenarion's lungs.
The thing's entrails writhed around him like the tentacles of a daemonic octopus.
Slowly, Aenarion was drawn down into the daemon's innards.
Even as he hacked his way free more tentacles looped around him and dragged him into the filth.
He called to Indraugnir for help.
The old dragon turned its head and sent another blast of cauterising flame towards the daemon, searing its flesh.
Protected by his enchanted armour Aenarion stood unscathed at the centre of the firestorm.
The Bloodthirster took advantage of Indraugnir's distraction to strike a mortal wound.
Its mighty talons sliced through the dragon's scaly hide.
Indraugnir howled and lashed out at the Bloodthirster with renewed fury, using the last of his fading strength to keep the Blood God's follower at bay.
Barely able to remain upright, Aenarion staggered into the fray.
The Bloodthirster lashed out and struck him a terrible blow, breaking the bones of his left arm so that his shield hung useless at his side.
Another blow fractured his skull and almost buffeted him into unconsciousness.
The Phoenix King refused to fall.
He called on all his strength and brought the Sword of Khaine round in an enormous arc of death.
The blow could have split a mountain.
It carved the daemon in two.
On the Isle of the Dead the last surviving mages completed their chant.
For a moment all was quiet.
The mortally wounded Aenarion clambered into the saddle of his dying dragon and they took to the air on their last flight.
 Buffeted by the raging winds Indraugnir carried the dying Phoenix King high above the battlefield.
Looking down he saw the final fearful act of that day.
With a terrible flash that all but blinded the onlookers the island vanished, around it the storm of magical energy.
The ritual had been partially successful.
The vortex had been created.
The tide of magic ebbed and the daemons were suddenly left stranded and dying, like fish caught out of water.
But the price was terrible.
The High Elf sorcerers had succeeded in opening the vortex but were trapped within it, eternally keeping it open, eternally trapped in the last moments of their battle with Chaos.
After the silence came the thunder.
Tidal waves rippled across the Inner Sea, great walls of water that sank ships and brought the trees on distant shores toppling down.
Those who could fled.
Those who could not died.
It seemed as if all the magical power in the world was being trapped in the centre of the storm that would last three days.
Indraugnir bore the dying Aenarion outward to the Blighted Isle.
The receding tide of magic had reduced his power.
The touch of Asuryan was no longer so strong in his mind, and the Sword of Khaine no longer provided him with near limitless strength.
The great days of High Magic were over.
As the power withdrew the madness lifted from Aenarion's mind.
The first Phoenix King had time to think of the daemons' taunts.
His conscience warred with the whispered promises of the semi-sentient sword.
He knew that whoever found it could rule the new world.
Indraugnir's strength failed just as they reached the Blighted Isle.
As they made landfall on the Plain of Bones the old dragon reared, gave one last bellow of defiance, and toppled to the earth, dead.
With the last of his strength Aenarion crawled to the altar and drove the blade back into its resting place, embedding it so deep that none could ever draw it forth again.
Then, it is said, Aenarion lay down beside his steed and passed from that age of the world.
II) The Explorer Bel-Shanaar, 1 –1669 (Imperial calendar -4419 to -2750)
After the disappearance of Aenarion the lands of Ulthuan were thrown into confusion.
The Everqueen was dead, the Phoenix King was lost, and Dragon Prince Caledor was imprisoned forever on the Isle of the Dead with the greatest and wisest of the High Mages.
With the loss of their own leaders the armies of Chaos were in retreat and the Elves swiftly hunted them down and destroyed them.
The land was at peace but the golden age was lost forever.
The coming of Chaos had taught the Elves many bitter lessons.
They vowed that never again would they be surprised by any foe.
The land was ravaged but there were now many strong realms in Ulthuan.
Cities sprung into being round the old fortresses.
Most of the old great Elf towns date from this period and it goes some way towards accounting for their remoteness.
The princes of the realms decided that they needed someone to rally round and lead them in the event that war should come again.
The First Council was called at the Shrine of Asuryan, a year to the day after Aenarion disappeared.
There it was revealed that the first born children of Aenarion still lived.
Sensing impending doom, their mother had sent them to be hidden in the Gaean vale.
Lost on their way, they had been rescued from a Chaos attack by the Treeman Oakheart and his people.
The Treeman had kept them safe in the deepest wildwoods while war raged.
Yvraine was ready to be crowned the new Everqueen.
In her the spirit of Astarielle would live on.
The obvious choice for the next Phoenix King was Malekith, Aenarion's son by Morathi.
He had grown to be a mighty warrior, a great sorcerer and an excellent general.
He was fair and a persuasive speaker with a natural talent for diplomacy and leadership.
But there were those who remembered the cruel days of Aenarion's court in Nagarythe and they doubted that any child who grew up there could be entirely wholesome.
There were also those who remembered Caledor's words concerning the curse on the line of Aenarion, who thought it wise to remind others.
Still others desired a marriage between the two thrones to symbolise the renewal of the Elf Kings and the unity between the old rulers and the new.
It was pointed out that Malekith was hardly suitable for this.
Ever fair-spoken, Malekith said that he desired the kingship not for himself but in honour of the memory of his father.
However, if the princes did not call upon him to serve it was of no matter.
He would willingly do homage to whoever was selected.
The princes thought this handsomely said and took him at his word.
From their own number they chose Bel Shanaar, Prince of Tiranoc, an Elf who had distinguished himself in the war and yet was seen as a voice of peace and reason.
Morathi shrieked her protests at her son not being chosen but he calmed her and agreed that the selection was a good one.
He was the first to bend his knee to the future Phoenix King.
Elf astrologers and geomancers studied the portents to divine the best time for the new king to begin his reign, and calculated the best time for him to pass through the flame.
On the day of his coronation the Priests of Asuryan chanted the warding spells that enabled Bel Shanaar to pass unscathed through the flame.
The Phoenix Guard, survivors of those warriors who had witnessed the Ascension of Aenarion, waited beyond the flame to drape the newly woven feathered cloak of kingship round his shoulders.
Malekith's voice was the first to be raised in acclamation.
So began the great days of exploration and building.
In the initial centuries of Bel Shanaar's long reign the Elves busied themselves rebuilding their land and exploring the surrounding world.
Elf ships raced across the seas and charted the coasts of the continents.
Colonies were planted in Lustria, the New World and the Old World.
Contact was established with the Dwarfs and a great era of trade and friendship began.
The people began to recover from the horrors of the long war with Chaos and for a while the population grew.
Bel Shanaar, a seaman of wondrous skill, personally visited all the new colonies and even ventured to Karaz-a-Karak in the World's Edge Mountains to swear the Oath of Friendship with the Dwarf kings.
Malekith became his personal ambassador here and thus were sown the seeds of tragedy.
In this age the Elves spread and multiplied.
Wealth flowed back to Ulthuan and great were its riches.
The cities were beautiful and adorned with all the fine things of the globe.
And though the folk did not realise, slowly, softly and insidiously Chaos returned.
It came back in a form against which there could be no defence.
No army could turn it back from the borders, no weapon could be wielded against it.
It came back in the form of the Cult of Slaanesh.
As new found wealth arrived, the Elves became ever more indolent and luxury loving.
Yet for a long time the Cult of Pleasure was respectable and none connected it with the hidden worship of Chaos.
Meanwhile Malekith had begun his many journeys and won renown.
In the colonies he led successful armies against the Orcs and the remnants of Chaos.
He ventured to the Blighted Isle in search of his father's armour.
It is said that he stood transfixed before the Altar of Khaine, and even laid his hand on the hilt of the great weapon.
To him it appeared as a sceptre, not as a sword, and perhaps he took this as a sign.
Of his father and Indraugnir he  found no trace.
His expedition took him ever onward to the cold colonies of the northern New World.
Here in the rubble of an abandoned pre-human city he found the Circlet of Iron, a talisman of awesome sorcerous power.
On his return he found an island in the grip of suspicion.
The Cult of Pleasure was strongest in Nagarythe, his homeland and the site of his father's court.
His mother the Lady Morathi had long been a devotee of the cult.
Indeed, legend has it that she was one of its founding members and was its High Priestess.
The Phoenix King was growing worried about the Cult of Luxury.
Its excesses had already degenerated into the sacrifice of living beings and its Chaotic nature was increasingly evident.
The dark name of Slaanesh was increasingly associated with it.
Malekith was apparently horrified by what he found in Nagarythe.
He denounced the entire coven of Slaanesh worshippers, including his mother, and handed them over to the Phoenix King.
This was the last straw for the people of Nagarythe.
They felt themselves the most slighted of the folk of Ulthuan.
They had taken the brunt of battle during the war against Chaos and yet they were reviled by their fellows.
The princes had obviously refused to select their prince as Phoenix King although he was obviously the rightful heir to Aenarion.
Now their Cult of Pleasure was being persecuted by the agents of the distant Phoenix King.
The realm became ever more rebellious and unco-operative with the Phoenix Throne, and became a haven for the persecuted followers of the Cult of Pleasure.
There was talk of enforcing the Phoenix King's edict against the cult by military force.
Ulthuan teetered on the brink of civil war.
Once again Malekith stepped in.
His loyalty to the king and his hatred for the cult was indisputable.
He personally took charge of the war against the cult.
A shroud of fear descended once more over Ulthuan.
No-one knew whether their neighbour was a member of the proscribed sect.
The agents of the Phoenix King could appear at any time and drag away the most reputable people.
It seemed that the servants of Slaanesh were everywhere.
Malekith himself remarked that there was no telling how high the corruption might reach.
Meanwhile, in Nagarythe, the worship of the Cult of Pleasure became ever more corrupt, frenzied and perverse.
There was little the Phoenix King could do but finally declare war against one of his own realms.
He called together his generals and summoned a Council of War at the Shrine of Asuryan.
On the eve of the council the worst of horrors was revealed.
Malekith claimed that the Phoenix King himself was a secret worshipper of Slaanesh.
Rather than face the shame of interrogation, the Phoenix King took poison.
Malekith moved swiftly to restore order.
Now Malekith had gone too far.
No-one could seriously believe that the king had been a worshipper of the cult.
Certainly not the assembled princes who had all known Bel Shanaar too long and too well.
At long last the light of suspicion fell on Malekith, but it was too late.
Malekith and his followers already had the Shrine of Asuryan in their possession, and Malekith possessed the crown that he had taken from the dead Phoenix King.
The truth about him was revealed.
Malekith was mad.
He coveted the throne and had done so for a long time.
He had been prepared to sacrifice anyone and anything to his ambition.
Now it was within his grasp.
The princes and their bodyguards were trapped within his grasp.
He had a secret treaty with his kin in Nagarythe.
An army of Slaanesh worshippers would be available to impose his will on the leaderless Elves.
Believing that all he had to do was crown himself and slay the princes, Malekith marched into the sacred flame, confident that like his father before him he could endure the ordeal.
He was wrong.
The flame of Asuryan would not suffer his polluted body to pass through it.
His screams were so terrible that none who ever heard them forgot them till their dying day.
Malekith was caught within the flames, his body terribly scarred and burned.
Unable to pass through the flame, he managed to cast himself back onto the side of the platform he had entered from.
His body was seared and blackened.
Where once he had been beautiful now he was hideous; where once he had been mighty, now he was maimed.
Where once he had been fair-spoken now his voice was horrible, forced out by ravaged lungs through a ruined throat.
Believing their leader on the verge of death and the vengeance of Asuryan about to descend upon them, his discouraged followers took up their leader's body and fled the shrine, leaving the best and the noblest of the Elf princes dead within.
An age of tragedy and conflict was about to begin.
III) The Conqueror Caledor 1–550 (Imperial calendar -2749 to -2199)
Once more the Elf realms were plunged into chaos.
Malekith and his followers fled north to Nagarythe.
Leaderless, the Elves did not pursue.
Frantic consultations were held between the few surviving princes, the Chief Priest of the Shrine of Asuryan and the Captain of the Phoenix Guard.
It was decided that there was only one Elf capable of the task.
The third Phoenix King was to be Imrik, who upon his succession took the name Caledor the First.
He was the grandson of the famous mage of that name and brother to the murdered prince of the realm of Caledor.
Although he lacked his grandsire's gift for magic, Caledor was a great warrior and general.
At the time of the murders in the Shrine of Asuryan he was hunting in Chrace with his old friend Koradrel of Chrace.
Caledor was famously brusque and curt.
When the messenger arrived in his camp bringing news of his call to the throne, all Imrik said was ‘Why?’, and upon being told of the murders, he commented ‘Bad, very bad’, which was considered quite long-winded for him.
The messenger asked him what was going to happen, he simply replied ‘War’.
War was indeed what happened.
It was just after this moment that one of the most famous events in Elf history took place.
Malekith despatched a band of assassins to slay the new Phoenix King.
They arrived just after the messenger from the shrine and jumped on Caledor by surprise.
There were dozens of them and they would have overpowered the future king had not a band of Chracian hunters seen what was happening and intervened.
These powerful mountain-dwelling Elves leapt among the Naggarothi assassins and chopped them down with their great axes, saving Caledor's life.
Afterwards, when told he had best wait for his bodyguard, Caledor replied that he could expect no better bodyguards than these hunters, and asked them to accompany him on  his quest to the shrine.
The hunters accepted, and thus were founded the famous White Lions of Chrace, so called because they were garbed in the furs of the white lion.
Swiftly Caledor took ship for the shrine.
With full and proper ceremony he walked through the sacred fire and was accepted as pure by the god Asuryan.
He had no time for the ritual marriage with the Everqueen since the legions of Nagarythe had swept down from their grim realm, bearing the banner of Malekith before them.
Caledor raised his own standard and called for all true Elves to join him in defence of the realm.
Civil war raged throughout Ulthuan.
It was a period of great confusion and conflicting rumour.
Brother fought brother.
In the far realms and colonies no-one knew who the true king was.
Some spoke for Caledor, some spoke for Malekith.
Devotees of the cult of Slaanesh spread confusion everywhere.
In strength the two sides were equally matched.
The Elves of Nagarythe were numerous and well-versed in sorcery, being descendants of those grim Elves who had followed Aenarion after he took up the Sword of Khaine.
There were no fiercer warriors among Elvenkind.
Monsters were plentiful in the still magic-rich mountains of Nagarythe and these were captured and tamed by the Naggarothi.
Their mountainous homeland with its fortress valleys was a near impregnable base from which to sally forth.
At first they were as organised and disciplined as their enemies were confused.
However, the new Phoenix King could call on the mighty Dragon-riders of Caledor and the legions of the Phoenix Guard.
Many Elf communities in Tiranoc and Ellyrion fell to the followers of Malekith aided by traitors within their own gates.
In Saphery, even then a realm famed for its sorcerers, Wizard Prince fought Wizard Prince.
For there were many in that land who had taken their magical researches too far and into whose souls darkness entered.
Slowly, as the followers of the Phoenix King gained the upper hand, these mighty mages fled to Nagarythe and lent their strength to Malekith.
Malekith himself recovered his strength and called his armourers to him.
With the aid of the Sapherian wizards and Hotek, a renegade Priest of Vaul, he forged a great suit of black armour which would lend strength to his withered and fire-blasted body.
To the brow of its great horned helm was welded the Circlet of Iron.
On the day of its creation he had his armourers fuse the suit directly to his body.
After passing through the fires of Asuryan even the infernal heat of their forges could not hurt him.
After that day those who looked upon Malekith shuddered, for he was a figure of dread.
The armour was covered in vile and evil runes which drew their power directly from the Realm of Chaos and hurt and baffled the eyes of all those who looked upon them.
On his shield was the rune of Slaanesh whose patronage he claimed from his mother's side.
On his sword was the rune of Khaine, a reference to the blade wielded by his mighty sire Aenarion.
Mounted on a fell steed, a dragon warped by the power of Chaos, he was ready to lead his armies to war.
Ever afterwards, Malekith was to be known as the Witch King.
Fell he was and many were his victories but to no avail.
Slowly and surely the truth of what had happened came out, and slowly and surely the Elves rallied to the side of Caledor.
Time and again the new Phoenix King proved his cunning as a general.
He sprang traps and ambushes on the Witch King's forces.
He crushed them on the open field of battle.
The White Lions protected him from many assassination attempts and his personal retinue of Sapherian wizards countered all death-spells.
Finally at the field of Maledor at the very entrance to the passes of Nagarythe Caledor faced the Witch King himself in battle and defeated the mightiest of his armies, driving them into the marshes of Maledor.
Malekith himself was forced to flee in a great black chariot drawn by cold ones.
His dragon had taken a mortal wound as he and Caledor clashed on the battlefield.
After this the folk of Nagarythe became ever more desperate, relying more and more on the blackest of sorceries for their defence.
They called daemons and allied with Chaos and so their evil was plain for all to see.
Thus they came to be known as Dark Elves.
But not all their black arts could save them now that the full strength of Ulthuan was brought to bear.
The Witch King decided on a final gamble.
He gathered all the renegade magicians together and revealed a plan as mad as it was bold.
They were going to undo the spells that held together the vortex and bring back Chaos to the world.
The daemonic legions would march once more to the aid of their new allies.
The Witch King and his fellows would draw on the power of Chaos and become like unto gods.
So far lost to sanity were many of the Dark Elves that they readily agreed.
One though, Urathion of Ullar, saw it for the world-destroying madness that it was.
In the middle of the night he slipped away from the Witch King's palace and brought word the Phoenix King.
He was slain by a poisoned crossbow bolt fired by a Dark Elf assassin after bringing word to the Dark Elves' enemy.
So began a last deadly conflict.
The Witch King and his councillors began a terrible ritual that would unbind the vortex.
The High Mages of the Elves attempted to stop them, but such was the power of the Witch King's magic that he slowly and inexorably gained the upper hand.
The mountains shook and the earth trembled.
Once more an eerie glitter sprang up over the mountains and clouds of magical energies surged from the erupting peaks into the sky.
In the far north of the world the Realm of Chaos churned and prepared to advance once more.
In the camp of the Phoenix King, Caledor prayed to all the gods and to his grandsire to aid him.
At dusk as the sky shimmered with weird many-coloured lights, the Witch King and his followers began their final push.
The daemons of Chaos came to their aid, and the last spells of the defenders went down.
In the sky the triumphant laughter of dark gods was heard.
Then, as the Witch King's dark magic touched the Island of the Dead, at the very heart of the Vortex, new players entered the game.
Mighty figures clad in light sent the surge of mystical power tumbling back to Nagarythe.
The trapped mages of the Isle of the Dead refused to let their work be undone.
The colossal power of those energies lashed Nagarythe.
Many of the Witch King's coven fell stone dead.
The land bucked and heaved like a terrified horse and a storm of baleful magic raced over the land.
Nothing could withstand the terrible forces unleashed.
The earth itself buckled under the titanic stress, and across the island continent earthquakes cast down the cities and levelled the mountains.
A wall of water a thousand feet high smashed down on Nagarythe.
The sea rushed in to cover all of Nagarythe and most of Tiranoc besides.
Tens of thousands were slain, drowned by waves, buried by earthquakes, struck by magical lightning.
The shock of the sinking was felt as far away as the World's Edge Mountains and is recorded in the chronicles of the Dwarf kings.
The power of the Witch King was reduced but not broken.
In those last hours as the seas rushed in to devour the land the mightiest of the sorcerer lords of Nagarythe cast dark and terrible spells upon their keeps.
As the waves crashed round the hilltops the wizards' palaces broke free and floated on the surface of the waves.
Large as icebergs they drifted off to the north carrying the remaining followers of the Witch King.
Thus were created the infamous Black Arks of Naggaroth.
The cataclysm destroyed much of what had been built up during the long reign of Bel-Shanaar and left the Elves temporarily too weak to pursue their dark kinsfolk.
The Black Arks made landfall in the bleak north of the New World, near where Malekith had found the Circlet of Iron.
Their towers became the cores of new cities.
A few Black Arks were left to patrol the stormy northern seas.
There they drew the sea monsters cast up from the ocean bottom by the sinking of the land into the service of their evil master.
The Dark Elves named their new land Naggaroth after their old homeland.
After a century there began a long period of sea warfare and skirmishing over the north of Ulthuan.
The Dark Elves sought to reclaim what was left of their old lands and the High Elves sought to prevent them.
Neither side had the strength to gain the mastery and the Blighted Isle where the Sword of Khaine still rested changed hands several times.
It was during this period that Caledor oversaw the building of the fortresses at Griffon Gate, Phoenix Gate, Eagle Gate, Dragon Gate and Unicorn Gate.
He personally led the last expedition to the Blighted Isle and reclaimed it from the Dark Elves.
It is said that he stood before the altar and for a moment the Blade called to him.
He stood there for a time, head bowed and in the end, simply said no.
On the way home Caledor's ship was separated from the rest of the High Elf fleet by a freak storm.
It was attacked by Dark Elf reavers, who set the ship alight.
Rather than fall into the hands of the Witch King's servants he jumped into the sea in full armour.
Thus passed Caledor the Conqueror.
It was a bad end for a great king.
IV) The Warrior Caledor the second 1–598 (Imperial calendar -2198 to -1600)
The loss of Caledor the first was a grievous blow to the Elves.
The old warrior had steered the realm of Ulthuan through its greatest crisis and held the kingdom together when it could have easily splintered and been conquered.
He had prosecuted a war against the Dark Elves.
He had left the next Phoenix King with a strong army, a secure line of fortresses in the north and the most powerful navy in the world.
Tragically, it was all for nought.
The Council of Princes met at the Shrine of Asuryan.
Remembering the events of the fatal Second Council the strength of Phoenix Guard was doubled, and they were sworn to silence lest word of the princes' deliberations fall into the hands of spies.
Seeking continuity, they chose Caledor's son, who was to become the Phoenix King Caledor the Second and taught the Elf princes the folly of hereditary kingship.
Where his father had been wise, Caledor was foolish.
Where the father had been a great general, the son was rash and impetuous.
Caledor II was vain, pompous, overweening and bombastic.
He shared only one of his father's gifts: he was a mighty warrior.
But to an Elf people desperate for stability, shocked to the very core by their sundering with their kin of Naggaroth, he promised a familiar hand at the tiller.
His reign began well.
The Elf fleets cleared the northern seas of their Naggarothi kinsfolk.
Trade routes lost during the Sundering were re-opened.
The Elves once more made contact with the Dwarfs.
Karaz Angkor was then at the zenith of its power.
This was the great age of Dwarf civilisation.
Their runesmiths had codified all the many magical runes.
Their alchemists were experimenting with gunpowder, their engineers had grasped the basic principles of steam propulsion.
Dwarf-forged steel was the finest in the world, and their intricate clockwork toys were the delight of Elf children.
Through the World's Edge Mountains great fortified underground roads linked their underground cities.
Rumours of the civil war had reached the Dwarfs but they didn't really understand the situation.
Reaving and kinslaying were completely alien concepts to them, and no Dwarf would ever break his oath to his liege lord.
Save for a few naval battles, the war had never reached the Old World.
Secure in their mountain fortresses, the Dwarfs didn't give it a second thought.
Such confidence was to be their undoing, and that of the Elves.
The Witch King of Naggaroth hatched a new plot.
As the Elves returned to the Old World in strength, trade between the two realms grew once more.
Malekith had been shown the secret trade routes of the Dwarfs during his period as Bel Shanaar's ambassador, and he now used that knowledge to his own benefit.
Dark Elf reavers, garbed as warriors of Ulthuan, fell upon the Dwarf caravans, seizing their goods.
Naturally, suspicion fell upon the High Elves.
King Gotrek demanded recompense from the Elves.
When word of this demand reached the Phoenix King his reply was immediate and undiplomatic.
He sent a message saying that the Phoenix King did not answer demands but granted pleas.
Dwarfs are a touchy, proud race and to suggest to a Dwarf King that he should beg for anything was almost as bad as suggesting he shave off his beard.
King Gotrek sent a blunt reply to Caledor saying he made pleas to neither Elf nor god and demanded twice the recompense originally asked because of the implied insult.
Caledor sent his ambassador back with his beard shaved off and said if Gotrek wanted compensation he should come to Ulthuan and collect it.
While all this was going on agents of Naggaroth were abroad throughout the Old World stirring up trouble.
Now it was a matter of honour.
There could now be only one outcome: war.
Dwarf armies marched down on the trading city of Tor Alessi (present day L'Anguille in Bretonnia) and laid siege to it.
Gotrek swore an oath that he would have his money or its weregeld price in Elf blood or he would shave his head.
It was a mighty oath.
His ambassador had already become a Trollslayer from the shame of having his beard shaved.
The Dwarfs were determined that their king should not endure a similar fate.
Upon hearing of the Dwarf attack Caledor was outraged.
He instantly dispatched an expedition to relieve Tor Alessi.
It was a mighty fleet and a great army.
As they watched the towering ships sail forth his advisors were dismayed because they feared that the despatch of such a force would leave Ulthuan almost defenceless.
Caledor flew into a towering rage and dismissed their fears as groundless.
In the Old World the war dragged on.
Neither side was strong enough to overcome the other.
The fortress cities of the Dwarfs were virtually impregnable.
The dour, stalwart Dwarf troops were quite unlike any the Elves had faced before.
They simply refused to give up or admit defeat, even when hopelessly outnumbered.
This was not the berserker bravery of the Chaos Hordes; this incredible tenacity was allied to tactical cunning and consummate military skill.
For their part, the Dwarfs were astonished by the power of the Elf forces.
They had judged the strength of Ulthuan by that of the least of its provinces.
The huge armies of mailed knights and disciplined infantry was not what they had expected.
Still, in true Dwarf fashion, they were not about to admit to a mistake.
The war engendered a legacy of hatred and bitterness that was to last for thousands of years.
In response to the beard-shaving incident the Dwarfs chopped down entire virgin forests to spite the Elves.
Both sides fought till nearly their entire military strength was spent.
Tired of their lack of success Caledor II dismissed his generals and took command personally.
It was his last great mistake.
At the fourteenth siege of Tor Alessi he charged right into the heart of the Dwarf infantry and was cut down by King Gotrek who snatched the Phoenix crown from his corpse and took it in payment for the Elves' insolence.
The Dwarfs retreated from the field claiming that honour was satisfied and refused to answer any Elf petitions for the return of the crown.
Gotrek claimed that if they wished they could come to Karaz-a-Karak with an army and plead for its return.
The first Phoenix crown remains in the great vault of the Everpeak to the present day, a source of festering hatred and recrimination between the two peoples.
The Dwarfs refer to the Elves as oathbreakers and beardclippers, while the Elves call the Dwarfs thieves.
It was a petty, spiteful and pointless war and worse was yet to come.
Even as the Elves mustered a suicidal expedition to besiege Karaz-a-Karak, the world's most unassailable fortress, word came that the Dark Elves had invaded Ulthuan once more.
The Witch King's long plan had come to fruition.
V) The Peacemaker Caradryel 1–603 (Imperial calendar -1599 to -997)
Once again, the Elves found themselves in the middle of a war without a Phoenix King.
The fleets of the Witch King seized the Blighted Isle and retook most of the Shadowlands.
Several Black Arks were beached to form the core of a new fortress city at the harbour of Anlec.
From there the Dark Elves drove south to besiege the Griffon Gate.
The High Elves were caught in the jaws of a trap, fighting a war on two fronts against two powerful foes.
The Fourth Council met at the Shrine of Asuryan and chose Caradryel of Yvresse, who was as different from Caledor II as night from day.
He was quiet and unassuming, an indifferent soldier but an able ruler.
He made the hard decision to abandon the Old World.
Faced with the implacable hostility of the Dwarfs it seemed to him foolish to maintain huge armies overseas, particularly with a more pressing threat to the Elf heartland.
He abandoned pride, ordered the forging of a new Phoenix crown and called the armies home.
Among the haughtiest Elves there was a huge outcry.
It seemed an gross insult to Elf pride that the Phoenix crown should remain in Dwarf hands.
Caradryel replied that he would rather lose the crown than the realm and continued with his policy.
Additionally there were protests from the Elf colonies in the Old World who saw the departure of the armies as a betrayal.
Those with kin in Ulthuan raised a great protest.
Caradryel told them that if the Elves in the Old World required the protection of the armies of Ulthuan then they should return to the island continent.
Many Elves did return but others, such as those in Athel Loren, refused to abandon their adopted homeland and stayed on in the Old World.
There they took a different path from the High Elves and wandered far from the mainstream of Elf culture, declaring themselves independent of the Phoenix Throne.
Caradryel shrugged.
He had more important things to do than start another civil war.
Recognising his own inadequacy as a general, he appointed a succession of brilliant field commanders to lead the High Elf armies.
They scored many victories in the field.
Tethlis of Caledor in particular established a brilliant reputation, lifting the siege of Griffon Gate and harrying the Dark Elves to within sight of Anlec.
Caradryel continued to oversee the long retreat from the Old World.
He strengthened the forces holding the gateway fortresses and initiated the system of rotating units to the forts in succession so that the forces holding these valuable citadels would always be fresh and near to full strength.
For the rest of Caradryel's reign sporadic war blazed through northern Ulthuan.
More and more Dark Elves flowed in from Naggaroth.
These were met by the disciplined, well-trained armies of the Phoenix King, many of whom were veterans of the wars with the Dwarfs.
The northern seas were the scene of many great naval battles and despite an increased program of shipbuilding the High Elves were never entirely able to sweep the seas clear of their foes.
Caradryel achieved another distinction — he was the first Phoenix King to die peacefully in bed.
VI) The Slayer Tethlis 1–304 (Imperial calendar -996 to -692)
The Fifth Council chose Tethlis of Caledor, the hero of Griffon Gate, to be the new Phoenix King.
Tethlis was another warlike ruler.
He had learned well the value of preparation and organisation from Caradryel and he came to the throne with one aim: to force the Dark Elves out of Ulthuan and reclaim the Blighted Isle from the spawn of Naggaroth.
He followed through this plan with single-minded ruthlessness and determination.
Tethlis's heart was filled with a terrible cold hatred for the children of Naggaroth, for they had slain his family in one of their many raids.
The Dark Elves never had a more implacable enemy.
He fought not for honour or glory but to put an end to the threat of Naggaroth for all time.
If the Witch King had started this long war, Tethlis was determined to finish it, and he might have succeeded had it not been for the decline in power of the dragons.
During the latter part of Caradryel's reign, the dragons had become increasingly rare.
Many started to drift into longer and longer sleeps, waking perhaps once per century.
The Elves needed to increase their strength in other areas to compensate for the raw power and savage strength of the great beasts.
The first years of Tethlis's reign saw the assembling of new armies.
Every Elf city was required to have a martial field where its soldiers could train and fight mock battles.
Painstakingly, with meticulous attention to detail, Tethlis rebuilt the Elf forces to a strength not seen since the time of Aenarion.
He never committed an army to the field without being sure that he could bring overwhelming force to bear and never fought a battle without being sure he could win it.
By relentless attrition he wore the Dark Elves down.
Over the long centuries a series of massive offensives rolled them back through the Shadowlands and eventually culminated in the storming of Anlec.
Tethlis was cold and ruthless, even by the standards of Elves.
He ordered the entire city rased.
No prisoners were taken.
Salt was strewn in the fields.
Shocked though his subjects were they obeyed.
No Dark Elf was left alive on Ulthuan.
Having scoured Ulthuan Tethlis turned his attention to the Blighted Isle, which was still in the hands of the Witch King's legions.
The largest Elf armada of all time was assembled to reclaim it.
Thousands of ships bore tens of thousands of troops out to sea.
Elf mages bound the weather and kept the skies clear of storms.
The seas were swept clear of Naggarothi ships.
On the shores of the Blighted Isle the Dark Elf host assembled, determined to deny the High Elves a foothold on the shore.
The Elves landed and thus began the battle of the waves.
Thousands of High Elves were cut down by crossbow fire as they waded ashore.
Ship-mounted bolt throwers returned fire and sent clouds of arrows arcing into the assembled Naggarothi.
The seas turned red with blood.
Overcome with hatred, the Dark Elves charged into the water and a great melee broke out.
Both sides fought with abandon, crimson water swirling round their knees.
There was no place for skill.
Warriors simply hacked at each other.
The wounded were trampled and drowned in the shallow waves.
Inch by bloody inch the High Elves fought their way onto the beach.
From the cliffs above the Dark Elves rained down a hail of fire.
With his customary ruthlessness Tethlis had planned for this.
While the Dark Elves fought on the beaches another force of High Elves had landed miles away.
Silver Helm cavalry swiftly raced along the coast and came upon the Dark Elves on the cliffs.
In the terrible battle that followed many Dark Elves were driven howling with hatred and fear off the cliff tops.
Their bodies were broken on the rocks below.
The Elves now had a secure foothold to bring the rest of their army ashore.
Swiftly they overran the island, driving their dark kinsfolk into the sea.
The carnage was ghastly.
Tens of thousands of Dark Elves were butchered until even the hardiest Elf captains' stomachs were sickened.
They feared that their troops might acquire a taste for such butchery and become no better than those they fought against.
Many of the captains spoke against continuing on to Naggaroth, saying that they had achieved their goal, and that the loss of life was too great to continue.
Tethlis insisted that they push on but first, drawn by some  irresistible influence, he must make a pilgrimage to the Altar of Khaine.
On the Plain of Bones, the great skeleton-covered wasteland around the Altar of Khaine, Tethlis saw something glitter.
Strangely drawn to the light he unearthed the dragon armour of Aenarion.
Of the skeleton of Aenarion or Indraugnir there was nothing to be found.
The armour he gifted to Auaralion, the great grandson of Morelion, Aenarion's son by Astarielle.
This was virtually his last act as Phoenix King.
There are two versions of what happened next.
Some records say that he dismissed the White Lions and the rest of his retinue, claiming that he wanted a moment alone to contemplate the blade that had done his people so much harm.
It is said that a Dark Elf assassin emerged from his hiding place beneath the piles of bones and struck Tethlis down with a poisoned blade.
Others say that Tethlis grasped the Sword of Khaine and that it writhed in his grip and started to come free, and that the king was cut down by his own bodyguard who feared the consequences of Aenarion's fatal weapon being unleashed once more upon the world.
No-one knows for sure exactly what happened.
Scholars are divided.
All that is known is that Tethlis died that day, and lacking his driving presence the armada turned back from Naggaroth.
VII) The Scholar-King Bel-Korhadris 1–1189 (Imperial calendar -690 to +498)
With their people weary of war, the Elves of the Sixth Council selected Bel-Korhadris of Saphery to be the next Phoenix King.
Bel-Korhadris had the second longest reign of any Phoenix King.
He was a wizard prince and a famed scholar.
While he did not neglect the defence of the realm he was not given to fighting, believing that magic could shield Ulthuan.
Thus began the great age of Elf scholarship.
During his long reign the White Tower of Hoeth was constructed on a spot deemed auspicious by geomancers.
For a thousand years the Elves raised this vast sky-reaching structure.
Only the power of magic enabled the Elves to construct such a high tower.
Craftsmen laboured for nearly a millennia on intricate carvings.
Scholars gathered wisdom and knowledge from the four corners of the world.
Mages inscribed grimoires of the most potent spells to be enshrined in its libraries.
The tower was woven round with spells of illusion and warding to protect this treasured knowledge.
The Scholar-King founded the order of Loremasters at Hoeth.
Every discipline from warfare to sorcery to alchemy and astromancy was studied here.
It was during this time that the Sword Masters of Hoeth gathered to study the art of swordsmanship and protect the tower.
From these studious soldiers emerged the continent-wandering order of master warriors who gather information and perform the errands of the Chief Loremaster.
Many famed scholars and sorcerers gathered at Hoeth and such an exchange of knowledge occurred as has not been seen before or since.
In the shadow of the needle-pointed spire thousands of the wisest philosophers debated about knowledge.
Within the library a cadre of Loremasters began to inscribe the Book of Days, the great history of the Elf people on which all future histories would be based.
This period was notable also for being a time of near unbroken peace.
The Dark Elves of Naggaroth had been so weakened by Tethlis's onslaught that they were afraid to harry the realm.
Bel-Korhadris ruled wisely and well and was loved by all.
The Elves remember this as the start of a second golden age.
Bel-Korhadris died just after the completion of the White Tower and was buried amid its foundations.
It is said that his ghost still haunts the crypts below the tower and occasionally assists searching scholars.
VIII) The Poet Aethis 1– 622 (Imperial calendar 498 to 1120)
B el-Korhadris was succeeded by Aethis of Saphery.
He was the first Phoenix King who did not inherit an unstable kingdom or take the throne in the aftermath of a war.
In his reign the long peace continued.
The Dark Elves lay quiescent in Naggaroth.
Their raids ceased.
Many suspected that they were a dying race, slowly passing into extinction.
Rumours abounded that the Witch King had finally died.
The Dwarfs were content to be left alone.
During the early centuries of Aethis's rule news of the founding of a new human empire reached Ulthuan but seemed no cause for concern.
Nothing threatened the High Elves.
Aethis was a noted poet and singer.
He gathered all the great artists of Ulthuan to his court in Saphery.
Poets, dramatists, painters, sculptors, writers of histories and masques all found a place in his vast palace of carved jade.
This was the high water mark of Elf culture when most of their greatest works of art were created.
This was the period that saw the creation plays of Tazelle and Torion Fireheart's animated court portraits.
An army of sculptors and artisans beautified the mountains of Chrace.
Above the Griffon Gate a towering griffon five hundred feet high seemed to leap from the mountain.
So cunning was the sculptors' work that the story was told that it would come alive to guard the pass against any invader.
Prodigious amounts of wealth were spent on grandiose projects such as these.
The city of Lothern grew from a small fishing village to a great city to accommodate the increase in trade from the colonies and other realms.
Contact was made with the old human empire in Cathay.
Representatives of the Phoenix King arrived at the court of the Emperor of Cathay.
Silk, jade and spices became valued commodities.
Secure in their strength the Elves began to run down their armies and fleets.
After nearly fifteen hundred years of relative peace under Bel-Korhadris and Aethis memories of old wars and old enmities began to fade.
Approaches were made to the Dwarfs about the return of the Phoenix crown.
These were rebuffed, but the Elves took no insult.
A certain complacency set in.
Factions sprang up at court and intrigue, always a dangerous pastime among the Elves, became a way of life for many.
Strangely enough this was also the period when the Elves came to realise they were a dying race.
Even during the long golden days of peace the population had fallen.
The number of births had simply decreased and the great cities began to empty.
Once more the Cult of Luxury began to spread, this time cloaked in a secrecy that made it even more attractive to jaded Elf aristocrats.
After a while the Sword Masters of Hoeth began to investigate the cult and report their findings back to the White Tower.
Their findings disturbed the High Loremaster sufficiently for him to take them to the Phoenix King.
The Chancellor of the Court was revealed as a secret spy for Naggaroth.
As he was unmasked he drove a poisoned dagger through Aethis's heart, and so the eighth Phoenix King was slain by a trusted friend.
IX) The Impetuous Morvael 1–381 (Imperial calendar 1121 to 1502)
The Eighth Council chose Morvael of Yvresse to succeed the assassinated Phoenix King.
He was the High Loremaster of the White Tower under Aethis.
Although learned he had little real experience of statecraft of warfare.
His first act after his coronation was to order a punitive attack on Naggaroth.
An Elf fleet was despatched to the cold north and was massacred by the Dark Elves.
As the few survivors brought word of the defeat back to Ulthuan, panic back to spread among the High Elves.
The last thing they had expected was defeat.
They had supposed the threat of Naggaroth all but extinguished, but now it seemed that the Dark Elves had merely been rebuilding their strength.
By allowing their fleets and armies to be run down under Bel-Korhadris and Aethis, the Elves of Ulthuan had allowed their dark kindred to catch up and almost overhaul them in military might.
During the quiet years the servants of the Witch King had scoured the world in search of hardy and warlike slaves.
Now they could draw on great levies of drug-enthralled human warriors and other even more sinister creatures.
A mighty Dark Elf armada seized the Blighted Isle and sailed on to Ulthuan.
They retook the cursed city of Anlec and cast up a great fortress in the rubble.
Swiftly they drove south and were stopped only after desperate fighting round the Griffon Gate.
A new period of warfare erupted.
Morvael, having learned some lessons from earlier defeats, appointed Mentheus of Caledor as field commander.
Desperate for soldiers he organised the system of troop levies that still exists in Ulthuan today.
This required every Elf to spend at least part of the year as part of a military force, and to provide wargear for himself.
It was a system of recruitment that was to enable the depleted population of Ulthuan to field mighty armies of citizen-soldiers well beyond what the declining population would suggest was possible.
Morvael was a sensitive highly-strung soul, often troubled by terrible nightmares and dreams.
He did not care for sending his friends and subjects to their deaths but in order to preserve the realm there was little else he could do.
He emptied the coffers of the Phoenix Throne to build a new and mighty fleet capable of carrying the war to the northern seas and stopping the flow of reinforcements from Naggaroth.
He was forced to use the Sword Masters of Hoeth and other agents to seek out the devotees of the Cult of Pleasure and it was his unpleasant task to sign many death warrants.
Many long nights he would brood in his tower, and soon he was turned stoop-shouldered and prematurely old by his duties.
For over a century intermittent warfare blazed.
The fleets of Ulthuan ranged the seas destroying Dark Elf slaving ships.
Two new fortresses were built far from Ulthuan to enable these long range missions to be accomplished.
At the tip of the Dark Continent the Fortress of the Dawn was built to refit the fleets and protect the trade routes to Cathay.
At the tip of Lustria the Citadel of the Sunset was completed as a base from which the Elf fleets could guard the coasts of Southern Lustria.
Eventually the war reached its climax.
Mentheus of Caledor besieged Anlec with a great army of Elves.
Morvael remained in the Shrine of Asuryan awaiting the outcome of the battle.
Every night he was  assailed by ever more dreadful dreams.
Some say these were sent by the Witch King to plague him.
With every day that passed he became ever more despairing and hopeless as messengers brought him reports of the army's casualties.
On the final day when Anlec fell Mentheus was killed as he led the assault.
His great dragon Nightfang went berserk and slaughtered many Dark Elves and their slave troops.
Weary unto death, listless and depressed, Morvael abdicated by walking into the sacred flame of Asuryan.
No mortal frame could endure this twice.
Morvael died the very morning after his armies achieved victory.
X) The Sage Bel Hathor 1–660 (Imperial calendar 1503 to 2162)
After the victory at Anlec the Elves were forced to choose a new King.
Mentheus of Caledor, the obvious choice, was dead.
At court, many factions manoeuvred to have their candidate chosen.
Some wanted to press on with the war and argued for Mentheus's son, Altheus.
Others felt that too many lives had already been lost and wanted a Phoenix King who was more peacefully inclined.
They sought the selection of Kregan of Yvresse.
The Ninth Council ended in deadlock so a compromise had to be reached.
Eventually Bel-Hathor, a wizard prince of Saphery, was chosen and crowned.
Bel-Hathor seemed an inauspicious choice; like most Sapherian princes he was something of an eccentric.
Many of the other princes saw him as easily manipulable towards their faction's ends.
They were wrong.
Bel-Hathor turned out to be surprisingly strong-willed and wise.
He refused all attempts to force him to order an invasion of Naggaroth.
He knew that although Ulthuan could probably win a war in the bleak northern lands, the cost would be so high that the Elf realms would never recover.
The numbers of Elves had so declined in later years that many of the cities were half empty and many of the lands abandoned.
He was not prepared to gamble with the future of the Elf race.
Soon his attention was focused elsewhere.
In the old world the race of Man had risen from savagery to being the dominant civilisation in two short millennia.
Two mighty realms dominated the northern portion of the Old World.
The Empire, a loose alliance of city-states and provinces owing allegiance to its Emperor, and the kingdom of Bretonnia.
Beyond the Old World was the northern realm of Norsca, home of the ferocious Norse raiders.
Norse longships had long troubled the coast of Ulthuan, slipping through the net of Elf warships.
Bel-Hathor called a convocation of all the realm's greatest mages and instructed them to guard Ulthuan's eastern approaches.
After three decades of preparation the magicians enshrouded the island's approaches in a maze of spells, illusions and treacherous shifting shoals and mists.
It became virtually impossible for Norse raiders to reach Ulthuan except by pure chance.
Legends of these terrible sea routes reached the Old World and caused men to talk of the Elf-realm with dread.
The Norse were not the only men to dare the sea-routes to Ulthuan.
Increasingly, the great naval powers of the Old World, the Empire and Bretonnia also sent ships west over the ocean, seeking Ulthuan and the legendary golden cities of Lustria.
The men of the Old World were determined mariners and eventually some of their ships found a route to Ulthuan.
The Phoenix King issued an edict forbidding them to set foot on Ulthuan.
He did however agree to let Finubar, Prince of Eataine return to the Old World with them to study the new rulers of the Old World.
Finubar sailed to L'Anguille in Bretonnia and from there spent fifty years wandering over the continent.
Because of the ancient feud with the Dwarfs, it had been a long time since any High Elf had set foot on the Old World.
He was at once impressed and appalled with what he saw.
The human realms were vast, teeming and populous.
Men showed vast ingenuity in works of engineering and scholarship.
Finubar had expected mud huts and primitive savages.
Instead he found mighty walled cities and disciplined armies, capable of subjugating the Orcs and keeping the peace over huge stretches of territory.
He saw that the humans were numerous and becoming more so, and that it was only a matter of time before they would eclipse the elder races.
In addition he was fascinated by their crude vitality and exuberant culture, their energy and greed.
He swiftly decided that it would be better for the Elves to have these people as allies rather than enemies.
In his travels he also came upon the lost Elf realm of Athel-Loren.
He was at once shocked and amazed by what he found there.
The Elves of the old frontier province had taken a far different path from the High Elves.
They seemed rustic and backward and yet they were friendlier and easier for him to understand than the humans.
When Finubar returned to Ulthuan he was hailed as a great hero.
He swiftly took his news to King Bel-Hathor.
The Phoenix King listened to Finubar's conclusions and reversed his earlier edict.
At Finubar's request the city of Lothern was opened to human merchants and Elf pilots were provided to guide the trading fleets through the approaches to Ulthuan.
Thus began a second period of explosive growth in Lothern.
Prince Finubar watched his home city become the largest trading port in the world and was happy.
The humans were astounded by the grace and majesty of Elf civilisation and well-pleased with the commerce that went on there.
The Elves were content to have powerful allies in the Old World.
Bel-Hathor died peacefully.
Finubar was his chosen successor.
XI) The Seafarer Finubar (Imperial calendar 2163 to?)
Finubar of Lothern seemed the prince best suited to understanding this new age.
By temperament and experience he was equipped to deal with the race of Men, and as a native of Lothern he had grown up with an understanding of the worth of trade and a tolerant cosmopolitan outlook on the world.
He inaugurated a new policy of trade and exploration.
Elf clippers sailed as far as Nippon and Cathay in search of goods.
Untold riches flowed through Lothern.
Finubar's reign was marred only by the great Chaos Incursion when it looked as if the Dark Powers had returned once more to claim the world.
A massive Dark Elf invasion swept out of Naggaroth and the Witch King himself returned to Ulthuan.
For a time it seemed as if the Everqueen of Avelorn was lost and the realm with her.
Then two mighty heroes, the twin brothers Tyrion and Teclis, arose to succour the realm and repel the invasion.
Since then the world has grown darker.
Norse raids have become ever more numerous.
A horde of Goblins under Grom the Paunch pillaged eastern Ulthuan.
Dark Elf raiders have committed innumerable acts of piracy.
The promise of a new golden age of peace has faded, and the Elves and their new allies have looked once more to their weapons.
For the Elves the present is a time that holds both the promise of renewal and the threat of destruction.
Their old enemies have become stronger and they have become weaker.
Although few humans would guess it, Ulthuan is a power in decline.
It can still muster the mightiest fleet in the Known World and its armies are rightly feared by its foes and yet the realm is but a shadow of its former self.
Many on Ulthuan feel the great days of the Elves are passed.
Yet every year bring new opportunities to win glory and fight against evil.
There are still mighty Elf heroes.
The dragons, though few, are turning restless in their long sleep.
In the north the Witch King stirs once more and the Sword of Khaine haunts the dreams of warriors.
The Elves still have a great part to play before the final act of their long drama is played out.
The Book Of Days (Abridged version)
The Golden Time
These years are not dealt with in the chronicle of the Phoenix Kings.
During this time the Everqueen ruled Ulthuan from Avelorn and many realms were founded by adventurers departing from that primeval land.
The time ends with the coming of Chaos and the time of violence that then ensued.
I. Aenarion the Defender (Imperial Calendar -4500 to -4920)
1
Aenarion passes through the sacred flame and then defends the Shrine of Asuryan against the Chaos Horde of Morkar.
2
Aenarion arrives in Caledor and is recognised as the chosen of Asuryan by Caledor Dragontamer.
The great dragon Indraugnir becomes Aenarion's steed.
They fly to Vaul's Anvil where the dragon armour of Aenarion is forged along with many weapons that will eventually become heirlooms of the great Elf noble families.
Technically, the rank of Prince in present day Ulthuan belongs to anyone who can show possession of one of these ancient weapons.
3
The war against Chaos begins in earnest as the Elf Dragonriders descend from Caledor and take the fight to the enemy.
21
The forces of Chaos are driven back for a time and a fragile peace descends on Ulthuan.
Aenarion marries the Everqueen Astarielle and two children, Yvraine and Morelion, are born to them.
30
The forces of Chaos attack Avelorn.
The Everqueen is slain and her children believed lost.
In fact they are in the care of the Treeman Oakheart.
Wracked with grief, Aenarion flies to the Blighted Isle and draws the Sword of Khaine.
Armed with this terrible weapon he is all but invincible for a time.
39
Aenarion rescues the witch Morathi from a Slaaneshi warband.
They make court in Nagarythe.
40
Caledor Dragontamer concludes that the only way to stop Chaos is to drain the winds of magic from the world.
He starts repairing and expanding the ancient network of standing stones which has stood upon Ulthuan since the dawn of time.
42
Morathi bears Aenarion a child, Malekith, the future Witch King of Naggaroth.
79
The Battle of the Isle of the Dead.
At this epic battle Caledor Dragontamer creates the magical Vortex.
Aenarion suffers a mortal wound and as his last act flies to the Blighted Isle and drives the Sword of Khaine back into the altar.
Aenarion's body is never found.
II.
Bel Shanaar the Navigator (Imperial Calendar -4419 to -2750)
1
The coronation of Bel Shanaar marks the end of the war with Chaos and the start of the great period of rebuilding that sees the rise of Tiranoc to pre-eminence among the Elf realms.
255
The foundation of the first colonies in the New World, on the east coast.
Malekith defeats the Orc warlord Gritok Redfang and saves the city of Athel Toralien.
300
The Elves land in the Old World.
Malekith befriends the Dwarf King Snorri Whitebeard and together the armies of Dwarfs and Elves begin to drive the remnants of Chaos from the lands.
As the colonies prosper wealth begins to flow back to Ulthuan.
1000
The Cult of Pleasure begins its slow spread through Nagarythe and across all Ulthuan.
1580
Bel Shanaar himself visits the newly founded Dwarf city of Karaz-a-Karak and signs the pledge of eternal friendship between Dwarfs and the Elves.
Malekith stays on as ambassador and remains on friendly terms with the Dwarf kings.
1630
Malekith begins his great period of wandering around the world in search of magical artefacts of elder times.
1644
In the northern wasteland Malekith finds the Circlet of Iron in the ancient ruined city of Vorshgar.
1645
Malekith returns to Ulthuan and denounces his own mother as a Slaanesh worshipper.
The Cult of Pleasure is revealed as being secretly given over to the worship of Slaanesh.
1668
The massacre at the Shrine of Asuryan.
Bel Shanaar assassinated.
Malekith is burned by the sacred flame and horribly mutilated.
Later that year his assassins try to kill the future Phoenix King Caledor I who is rescued by a band of Chracian hunters, the ancestors of the White Lions.
III.
Caledor the Conqueror (Imperial Calendar -2749 to -2199)
1
Coronation of Caledor.
Malekith flees to Nagarythe.
Civil war erupts across all Ulthuan.
Brother turns against brother as the devotees of the Cult of Pleasure stir up trouble in every city and town.
10
The renegade wizard princes flee Saphery and join Malekith.
Hotek, a heretic priest of Vaul, steals the sacred hammer from Vaul's Anvil and makes his way to Nagarythe.
13
Malekith is sealed within his great black armour and is hailed as the Witch King.
The intensity of the war increases.
25
Caledor defeats the Witch King at the Battle of Maledor.
The Witch King flees and decides to implement his master plan.
26
The Sundering.
As a result of the Witch King's interference with the Vortex much of northern Ulthuan is sunk.
The renegade wizards raise the Black Arks and depart to the cold north to found the Dark Elf kingdom of Naggaroth.
There is little the High Elves can do to stop them at this point.
Tiranoc is lost beneath the waves and the cataclysmic unleashing of energies devastates the land.
The Elves begin to rebuild their shattered land.
Contact is lost with the Old World colonies.
119
A Dark Elf expedition return to Ulthuan and hostilities resume.
Caledor reorganises the High Elf army for defence and begins the building of the Gateway fortresses in the northern passes.
150
Griffon Gate, the Unconquered Fortress, is finally completed.
It is the first of a series of massive strongholds that will eventually guard the approaches to the Inner Lands.
The war rages on unabated as the Dark Elves seek to gain access to the Inner Lands and conquer the Holy Shrines.
The High Elves resist them.
324
The dragon ship Indraugnir, armed with the magically forged Starblade ram, sinks the Palace of Joyous Oblivion near the Blighted Isle.
This is the first time a Black Ark has ever been sunk and marks the beginning of the High Elves' naval ascendancy over their dark kindred.
530
The Elves finally succeed in driving the last Dark Elves from northern Ulthuan and begin to sweep the northern seas clear of their ships.
532
Caledor orders the first of the ill-starred expeditions to the Blighted Isle.
549
The High Elves take the Blighted Isle.
Caledor does not draw the Sword of Khaine even though it would give him the power to defeat the Witch King.
On his way home a great tempest separates his flagship Indraugnir from the rest of the fleet.
Sails torn, driven to the very coast of Naggaroth, the ship is overwhelmed by Dark Elf reavers.
Caledor throws himself into the sea rather than be captured.
IV.
Caledor II (Imperial Calendar -2198 to -1600)
1
An uneasy peace settles over Ulthuan.
The survivors from Tiranoc and what was once Nagarythe start rebuilding their lands.
The remaining Elves of Nagarythe, which has become known as the Shadowlands, take up a wandering, nomadic life shunning the trappings of civilisation.
10
Contact is re-established with Dwarfs.
Trade begins again.
193
Dark Elf raids begin against Dwarf trading caravans.
198
Dwarf protests are ignored by Caledor II.
Increasing acrimony enters relations between the two races.
201
The War of the Beard begins.
This will eventually exhaust the strength of both empires and lead to ages of bitter feuding.
There are many periods of peace where both sides claimed victory.
224
Caledor II personally kills Snorri Halfhand, King Gotrek's son, before returning to Ulthuan in time for the hunting season.
230
Morgrim, Snorri's cousin, kills Caledor's brother Imladrik.
250
The Dwarfs destroy the Elf colony of Athel Maraya.
596
Caledor II comes to the Old World to supervise the defeat of the Dwarf kings.
597
Caledor II killed by Gotrek Starbreaker.
The Phoenix Crown is lost.
Announcing their victory the Dwarfs retreat to the mountains and refuse to fight any more.
As the Elf host is assembled for a suicidal attack on Karaz-a-Karak news reaches them that the Witch King has once again invaded Ulthuan.
V. Caradryel The Peacemaker (Imperial Calendar -1599 to -997)
1
The Black Arks Citadel of Ecstatic Damnation and Jade Palace of Pain are beached to become the core of the fortress of Anlec in the Shadowlands.
This will provide the Dark Elves with a base from which to launch many massive attacks.
10
Caradryel orders the recall of the Elf armies from the Old World to combat this new threat.
Demoralised by the long war against the Dwarfs, the Elves are in no position to deal with the resurgent Naggarothi.
98
The last Elf army departs from the Old World, leaving behind a few hardy colonists who refused to go.
What will become the Wood Elf realm of Athel Loren is founded.
102
Caradryel introduces the system of rotating units to the Gateway fortresses so that the garrisons are always at full strength.
Intermittent war rages across Ulthuan once more as the Dark Elves consolidate their hold on the northern lands.
602
Caradryel dies peacefully.
VI.
Tethlis The Slayer (Imperial Calendar -996 to -692)
3
The first dragons begin their long sleep.
5
Formal military training for Elf regiments begins.
10
Tethlis launches the Scouring, a great drive north that will culminate in the slaying of every Dark Elf in Ulthuan.
50
Naggarothi counter-offensive reaches Griffon Gate and is caught in a carefully prepared trap.
74
The Battle of Grey Canyon.
A massive army of Dark Elves is caught by surprise and destroyed while camped in a hidden valley in the Shadowlands.
264
In a last ditch attempt to win the war the Witch King launches a desperate winter offensive across the Shadowlands.
Protected by spells against the cold his army advances.
They take several Elf fortresses and precipitate the most bitter fighting ever seen between the Elves including the infamous Siege of Tor Lehan.
After this battle there were no survivors on either side.
300
Anlec is destroyed.
No stone is unscoured.
The Altar of Khaine is toppled into the sea.
303
A great armada sails for the Blighted Isle and Naggaroth.
The Battle of the Waves is fought on the Blighted Isle.
Tethlis dies afterwards under mysterious circumstances.
The armada turns back.
VII.
Bel-Korhadris The Scholar King (Imperial Calendar -690 to +498)
11
The foundations of the White Tower of Hoeth are laid down and the longest period of continual peace in Elf history begins.
400
The first Loremasters assemble round the half-complete tower.
An entire town of mages and scholars springs up within its walls.
1187
The White Tower is complete.
The Order of Sword Masters is incepted.
VIII.
Aethis the Poet
(Imperial Calendar +498 to 1120)
107
The great statue at Griffon Gate is completed.
Its fearsome appearance strikes terror into the hearts of the Elves' enemies, but it is also a memorial to the countless Elf warriors who have died defending it.
200
Representatives of the Phoenix King arrive in Cathay.
They return laden with silk, jade and spices.
Trade between east and west begins to flourish
203
Explosive growth of the seaport of Lothern begins.
The Cult of Pleasure makes a secretive reappearance.
The Sword Masters of Hoeth begin their long secret war against the Cult.
255
Dark Elf slave-ships begin roaming the globe and bring entire tribes to Naggaroth in chains.
621
Aethis is assassinated by his own chancellor, a secret follower of Slaanesh.
IX.
Morvael The  Impetuous (Imperial Calendar +1121 to 1502)
2
The High Elf punitive expedition to Naggaroth is massacred by the Dark Elves, aided by a screaming horde of drugged slave warriors.
10
The Dark Elves rebuild the citadel of Anlec in the Shadowlands.
12
The Griffon Gate is besieged.
Morvael appoints Mentheus of Caledor as his general and introduces the levy system of mandatory universal military service that will eventually produce the great citizen-soldier armies of Ulthuan.
20
The siege of Griffon Gate drags on.
The great keep is completely encircled by triple rings of ditches and war machines.
25
Siege of Griffon Gate finally lifted by Mentheus leading an army mainly composed of spearmen and archers from Cothique and Chrace.
82
The Fortress of the Dawn is built at the southern tip of the Dark continent.
97
The Citadel of Sunset is built at the southern tip of Lustria.
380
Mentheus is slain assaulting Anlec.
His dragon, Nightfang, goes berserk and routs the Dark Elves.
Wracked with grief Morvael re-enters the sacred flame, committing ritual suicide.
X. Bel-Hathor The sage (Imperial Calendar +1503 to 2162)
200
Norse raids begin.
Magnus the Mad arrives to besiege Lothern with 200 men.
Confronted by the 10,000 strong Sea Guard of Lothern he orders his men to charge…
400
Facing ever increasing numbers of Norse raids the Mages of Saphery draw a shroud of mists over the eastern sea approaches to Ulthuan.
Bel-Hathor issues his interdict forbidding humans to set foot on Ulthuan.
498
Finubar departs for the Old World, landing at the Bretonnian port of L'Anguille.
He travels extensively over the Old World, opening relations with the Empire, Bretonnia and even the Dwarfs.
530
Finubar reaches Athel Loren and rediscovers the Wood Elves.
548
Finubar returns to Lothern and persuades Bel-Hathor to raise the Interdict.
Trade starts to flow into Ulthuan as never before.
XI.
Finubar The Seafarer (Imperial Calendar +2163 to present)
138
The Great Chaos Incursion.
Dark Elves invade Ulthuan with many Chaos allies.
The Everqueen is saved by Tyrion.
Teclis forges his sword and departs the White Tower.
The Witch King is defeated at the Battle of Finuval Plain.
Teclis leaves with Finreir and Yrtle to join Magnus the Pious in the fight against Chaos in the Old World
140
The Dark Elves are driven out of Ulthuan after two years of relentless warfare.
141
Teclis founds the Colleges of Magic in Altdorf.
163
Teclis returns to Ulthuan and takes up the position of High Loremaster in the Tower of Hoeth.
260
Eltharion, son of Moranion, leads a highly successful raid against Naggarond itself.
It is the first time High Elves have entered Naggarond and returned alive.
262
Grom the Paunch, a notorious Goblin king, sails from the Old World at the head of a mighty Goblin war host.
Landing in Yvresse, the horde ravage eastern Ulthuan before being defeated by an Elf army led by Eltharion at Tor Yvresse.
Eltharion becomes the Warden of Tor Yvresse.
339
Erik Redaxe raids Cothique at the head of a great fleet of Norse reavers.
An Elf war fleet led by Tyrion defeats the Norse in a huge sea battle and drives them away from the coast of Ulthuan.
HIGH ELF TACTICS
There is a paradox involved in fighting with a High Elf army.
On one hand you have arguably the best defensive troops in the game — High Elf archers armed with long bows protected by the extremely formidable High Elf infantry.
On the other hand you have some of the fastest moving and hardest-hitting warriors ever to grace the battlefields of the Known World: Silver Helms, Dragon Princes of Caledor and the Tiranoc Charioteers.
These troops tend to pull High Elf strategy in two different directions.
Balancing the two is the key to success on the Warhammer battlefield for any High Elf commander.
Before looking at this in detail it's worth briefly outlining what all High Elf forces and troop types have in common.
The most important thing is that they are superb warriors.
Even their most common troop types have better leadership scores than virtually any other race.
Their movement rate is greater and their weapon and bow skills are a full point better than most humans.
They are invariably well equipped.
They are reliable, fast-moving and hard-hitting — a classic elite force.
Unfortunately they suffer from the main drawback of such elite forces: such exceptional warriors are rare.
The high point cost of an Elf army means that they will invariably be outnumbered by their enemies.
All this means that you can usually rely on a High Elf force to do what you want, when you want.
In the Warhammer world there is no 100% guarantee of this but the tendency will be there.
This is a good determinant for overall strategy.
Knowing that you will invariably be outnumbered means that you should take pains to ensure that you do the best you can to cut down the number of your attackers.
For me this means making the incredibly potent High Elf archers the backbone of the army.
You can rely on these keen-eyed bowmen to whittle down the enemy's numbers as they advance.
There is another reason for taking archers in large numbers — the Elves don't have the same profusion of potent long range war engines that, for example, an Empire army or an Orc and Goblin army has.
The bolt thrower, while an excellent weapon for picking on large tough monsters, lacks the massive numerical killpower of the Helblaster volley gun or even a decent shot from a cannon or stonethrower.
This means the High Elves must rely on their bowmen and their magicians for long range mass slaughter.
Fortunately for them they have the troops for the job.
The problem with archers is that they are extremely vulnerable when it comes to close combat.
Man for man a unit of Elf longbowmen is more than a match for most opposing troop types.
The problem is one of formation.
The optimum formation for missile troops is a long thin line from which as many archers as possible can draw a bead on the foe.
Indeed, absolutely the best place for missile troops is on a hill with two levels.
From here they can be drawn up in two ranks, both of which can fire, and they can draw line of sight to almost any place on the field.
Unfortunately, in close combat, the rule is straightforward and brutal: the more ranks you have the better.
Infantry tend to march in deep blocks with as many ranks as possible.
This usually means that they can slaughter archers who almost never have more than one extra rank.
It's a lucky force of archers indeed that can stand up to a determined push by even indifferent infantry in a long melee.
Against fast moving shock troops such as armoured cavalry this is also true.
While most cavalry lack the rank bonus, their ability to charge in and kill large numbers of enemies before that enemy even gets to strike back means that they are just as capable of inflicting catastrophic defeat.
However the answer is simple.
Protect your archers with deep blocks of infantry of your own.
You can intersperse them between units of archers.
From here they can move forward to interpose themselves when the enemy is too close.
Spearmen are particularly good in this role since they can bring an extra rank of spears to bear on any foes who charge them and this means that casualties suffered by the front ranks are less of a disaster.
They are also comparatively cheap (for High Elves) so you can afford a fair number of them.
As mentioned above this would seem to determine a strategy of standing and waiting while your enemy advances towards you.
This is good because it allows you to whittle down those superior numbers.
However that other consideration now needs to be taken into account.
You will almost certainly have a large number of powerful shock troops such as Silver Helms, Dragon Princes and Tiranoc charioteers.
These are incredibly hard-hitting and fast-moving.
The problem is that they represent such a concentration of points that they are bound to attract fire, either from enemy archers or from those deadly war engines.
If you intend to fight a missile duel, the chances are that most of your highly mobile force will attract a disproportionate amount of your enemy's firepower and will die the death.
Since there will be a lot of points tied up in them, this could be a real disaster.
There are two answers here.
The first is to concentrate your own fire on the enemy war engines and archers.
This rather defeats the purpose of having lots of archers since you intended to use them to cut down the enemy as they advance.
The second is really easy: use your cavalry and attack.
This will get your cavalry into close combat and hopefully out of the hail of missiles fairly quickly.
Elf cavalry are so fast that they can cross most battlefields and be in combat in two turns.
This brings us to the horns of the Elf dilemma.
Half your army wants to hang back and shoot, the other half wants to get stuck in as quickly as possible.
My answer is reasonably straightforward.
I try to concentrate all my hard-hitting, fast moving units on one flank.
This has two advantages.
The first is that it preserves a clear field of fire for my missile troops.
The second is that it allows you to make a fast flank attack on the end of the enemy's line with the possibility of rolling along it and taking lots of his troops in the flanks.
If you're very lucky you might get a chance to attack advancing units in the flank as they move forward.
At the very least such a concentrated and potent force as High Elf cavalry should be able to punch a hole in any enemy line then turn around and attack from the rear.
If  this happens the relatively fast marching High Elf infantry can be moved forward to attack from the front.
While all this is going on the archers can pour a rain of arrows on the foe.
Caught between the hammer and the anvil the enemy will hopefully be destroyed.
The High Elves also have some not-very-secret weapons.
Their mighty heroes such as Tyrion and Eltharion are awesome warriors capable of slaughtering almost anything within their reach.
Tyrion is even capable of slaying a greater daemon given a modicum of luck.
Mounted on Malhandir, he also has a charge distance of 20″.
It's perfectly possible, if somewhat unwise, for him to charge clean across the battlefield and engage the enemy on turn one.
I don't recommend this as a tactic unless the rest of your cavalry is already engaged, or he could be surrounded and overwhelmed by a mass of lesser troops.
I think the best place for Tyrion is attached to a cavalry unit such as the Silver Helms or Dragon Princes.
That way he cannot be targeted by missile fire or some spells and will be potentially protected from war engines.
In the midst of hand to hand combat his high leadership can bolster the warriors' morale.
Eltharion is slightly more problematical — being mounted on a large terror-inspiring griffon makes him somewhat conspicuous.
The best place for him is usually aloft, flying high, as soon as possible.
Just be sure that your opponent does not trap him there with the Orb of Thunder, so keep that Dispel scroll handy.
Once he's airborne bring him down into hand to hand combat once your cavalry have made contact.
With any luck, if you choose an enemy that is already engaged, you will take them in the flank and cause an immediate panic test.
Magic is another area in which the High Elves excel.
Teclis is a truly formidable mage; arguably the best in the world.
If you have the points to spare choose him.
High Mages are wonderful in defence and against daemons.
If you suspect you will be facing a greater daemon spare no effort to acquire the Banishment spell.
If you decide to take advantage of the the High Mage's ability to choose spells from any of the Colleges of Magic try and limit your choice to spells of one or two colleges.
It's far more likely that you will get the spells you are looking for if you select them from say the Amethyst or the Jade college rather than choosing one from Jade, one from Bright, one from Amethyst etc.
The same rule applies to the High Elves when choosing magic items as to anyone else; try to pick the tools for the job, maximise your strengths and minimise your weaknesses.
If you're likely to face daemons a daemon-slaying sword is essential (conveniently, Tyrion comes already equipped with such a mighty weapon.)
If facing dragons then choose a dragon-slaying sword.
It's usually worth protecting those high-cost cavalry units with a banner of Arcane Warding or Protection.
Finally, remember you have what is arguably the finest army in the Known World under your command.
It is well equipped, and warrior for warrior better than almost any other.
Use them well and your troops will not let you down.
Victory will be determined by your skill as a general.
The fate of Ulthuan and the entire Elf race rests in your hands.
Don't let them down.
REPEATER BOLT THROWER
The High Elves of Ulthuan have never developed gunpowder technology as have the men of the Old World and Dwarfs — indeed they have never needed to do so as their marksmanship with the bow is superior to that of lesser races.
Centuries ago they created torsion powered and counter-weighted devices which are their equivalent of cannons, perfecting them to such a degree that they are in many ways superior to crude gunpowder weapons.
THE REPEATER BOLT THROWER
The High Elf repeater bolt thrower is a machine that shoots long, steel-tipped bolts or darts.
The machine can shoot either a single dart or a whole volley.
However, when a volley is fired, the energy of the weapon is divided and the bolts are less effective.
The repeater bolt thrower is therefore ideally adapted to engage large, tough targets by means of a single shot, or multiple weaker targets with a volley of darts.
When it is your turn to shoot, declare whether you are firing a single shot or a volley.
Single shots are worked out exactly as described in the Warhammer rulebook (see p79), but the rules are repeated below for your convenience.
A bolt thrower is a powerful weapon which can hurl its bolt through several ranks of troops, piercing each warrior in turn.
If you hit then resolve damage against the target using the bolt thrower's full strength of 5.
If the model is slain then the bolt hits the trooper in the second rank directly behind: resolve damage on the second model with a strength of 4.
If the second rank trooper is slain then a model in the third rank is hit: resolve damage with a strength of 3.
Continue to work out damage as the bolt pierces and slays a model in each rank, deducting -1 from the strength for each rank pierced.
A model damaged by a bolt thrower sustains not 1 but D4 wounds, which means that even large monsters can be hurt or even slain by a hit from a bolt thrower.
Armour saves are not allowed for hits from a bolt thrower, because the missiles are so fast and deadly that any armour is pierced along with its wearer.
Because saves are not taken a target with only 1 wound will be slain if it takes damage, there is therefore no need to roll the D4 to decide the number of wounds.
VOLLEYS
A volley is worked out slightly differently to a normal bolt thrower shot.
A volley consists of 4 separate bolts, but these are always fired towards the same target in the same way as a unit of archers or crossbowmen.
Roll to hit for each bolt using the Ballistic Skill of the crewmen and the Missile Fire Chart as normal.
As High Elves have a BS value of 4 this means a hit is scored on a 3 where no other modifiers apply.
Because the Bolt Thrower's energy is divided between four individual bolts the strength of any hit is 4 as opposed to 5 for a single shot.
Resolve damage as normal using the ‘To Wound’ chart.
If successful 1 wound is inflicted.
Note that this is less than the D4 wounds inflicted by a single shot due to the reduced effectiveness of a multiple shot.
If the target is slain then the bolt penetrates to the second rank and hits again in exactly the same way as a normal bolt thrower.
Several ranks can be penetrated in this way, but the strength hit is reduced by -1 for each rank pierced.
So, the first hit is resolved at strength 4, the second at strength 3, the third at strength 2 and the fourth at strength 1.
As with single shots, no armour saving throws are allowed for hits from a bolt thrower.
Example.
Shooting at a unit of men at long range with a multiple shot.
Roll 4 dice to hit.
You will require a 4+ with each shot as the target is at long range.
The dice score 2, 3, 5 and 6 = 2 hits (an average score at this range).
Men have toughness 3 and so you require 3+ to wound.
Roll two dice scoring 3 and 5 = 2 wounds and two men slain (no saves allowed).
Roll for the second rank at strength 3 so you require 4+ to wound.
Roll two dice scoring 4 and 6 = a further 2 men slain.
The next rank is at strength 2 so you require 5+ to wound.
Re-roll the two dice again scoring 3 and 6 = 1 man slain.
The next rank is at strength 1 so you require a 6 to wound.
Re-roll the dice scoring 2 = no further damage.
Total = 5 men slain.
The repeater bolt thrower is a solid device which has a toughness value and an equivalent to 3 wounds as shown below.
The repeater bolt thrower can be moved by its crew.
It cannot move and shoot in the same turn, except that it can be turned to face its intended target.
If one of the crew members is killed, then its movement is reduced by half.
The repeater bolt thrower has a crew of two models and if one crewman is slain then the remaining crewman can continue to operate the machine without any reduction in performance.
If both crew are slain the bolt thrower cannot shoot.
SUMMARY
1
1.
Align bolt thrower on target and declare single or multiple shot.
Roll to hit for each shot.
2
2.
Resolve damage at strength 5 for single shots, 4 for multiple shots.
No save is permitted.
3
3.
If the target is slain roll damage against the second rank at strength 4 for single shots, 3 for multiple shots.
4
4.
Continue rolling for damage until you fail to slay the target or run out of ranks, deducting -1 from the strength for each rank already pierced.
THE HIGH ELF ARMY
A High Elf army is normally a compact and hard hitting force, a select body of Elves brought together to defend some realm or oust an invader.
Thousands of years of experience have honed the tactics and organisation of the army of Ulthuan to a keen edge, and there are few who would dispute the Elves' ability to muster an army and get it to the point of conflict by land or sea with what seems to be supernatural speed.
Over the last three centuries the High Elves have re-established contact with the Old World and have, on occasion, despatched armies to support their human allies.
An army will normally comprise elite foot companies of White Lions, Phoenix Guard, Sword Masters and the like forming the core supported by squadrons of Elven cavalry and larger regiments of spearmen and archers drawn from the Elven citizens of Ulthuan.
High elf spearmen and archers
Regiments of Elf spearmen and archers are made up of the citizen-soldiers of Ulthuan.
Though they may be artists, craftsmen or poets in times of peace, every Elf is a trained and deadly fighter in times of war.
Over a thousand years ago the Phoenix King Morvael introduced a system of training large bodies of troops to be called up from the populace.
He had accurately predicted the necessity of a better organised army to defend Ulthuan against the increasing strength of the Dark Elves.
Each city and settlement trains and equips a body of spearmen and archers in proportion to their population, the retinues of the High Elf nobles also contribute to the levy.
These many disparate units are then formed into larger regiments as needed.
Many are sent north to guard the passes and the isles, while others remain in the cities and settlements as a standing force ready to meet any threat.
Both spearmen and archers are garbed in robes of pure white, often with a border design which proclaims the wearer's home city or land.
The colour white signifies purity and death amongst High Elves, so the robes are a symbol of their unity and determination to fight to the death if necessary.
The spearmen are well equipped with hauberks of fine scale armour, tall helms, shields and seven-foot Elf war-spears.
The archers have a lighter corselets of scale mail and powerful bows constructed of alternating layers of wood to give them great power and range.
Protected by regiments of spearmen, High Elf archers are amongst of the most decisive troops in the army, unleashing deadly volleys of steel-fanged death upon their foes.
The Lothern Sea Guard are part of the citizen soldiery of Eataine, and are responsible for manning the defences of Lothern and guarding against sea-borne invaders.
When the great ships of Ulthuan sail to war companies of the Sea Guard are carried with them as they are well-trained in boarding actions and fighting at sea.
The High Elves of the more remote parts of Ulthuan do not train together like the spearmen and archers of the cities.
Instead, they hone their personal fighting skills and come in times of need to fight in small warrior bands.
Unlike the more regimented units of spearmen and archers these warrior bands can be very diversely armed, often favouring more traditional weapon combinations such as sword and shield or two swords.
THE DRAGON PRINCES OF CALEDOR
Caledor is a mountainous realm of volcanoes and rich valleys and beneath its fire-crowned peaks dwell nests of dragons.
Once the Dragon Princes could command enough dragons to turn the skies black with wings, destroying entire armies with their flames and mighty claws.
Now the dragons are few and those that are left slumber deeply.
Occasionally in times of dire need they may rouse a dragon from its centuries of slumber, but only their greatest heroes can aspire to ride such ferocious steeds.
The Dragon Princes have lost none of their own skills with sword and lance so they gallop into battle upon mighty Elven steeds caparisoned in burnished armour forged in the form of a dragon, an echo of a bygone age but no less terrible for it.
SILVER HELM KNIGHTS
Silver Helm Knights are drawn from all the realms of Ulthuan and include many of its finest and most noble sons.
Long ago, when men were still fighting with clubs and wicker shields, the High Elves had mastered the proud, powerful horses of Ulthuan and learned how to employ them as steeds.
The Silver Helm Knights are the culmination of thousands of years of experience in mounted combat.
Swift and deadly, they are armoured in shining silver and armed with white lances with diamond-hard tips which glitter like stars.
Though less heavily armoured than the human knights they use their greater speed well and are every bit as deadly in combat, catching their foes off guard with quick flanking moves and pursuits.
Their thunderous charges have broken the back of many an invading army.
REAVER KNIGHTS
The Reaver Knights are a common sight throughout Ulthuan as they tirelessly patrol its most dangerous areas.
They were formed over fifty centuries ago by the Phoenix King Caledor the first at the start of the schism between  the High Elves and the Dark Elves.
At that time Ulthuan was rent asunder with confusion and treachery, and any messenger or scout was liable to be set upon and slain by the many factions roaming the land.
Caledor called for brave young horsemen to bear his messages and ride the troubled land.
Those who answered his call became known as the Reaver Knights because they were forced to live off the land as they galloped back and forth across Ulthuan.
They served Caledor well and when the Dark Elves were driven from Ulthuan he foresaw the need for constant patrols to keep the island safe.
Caledor gave this great honour to the Reaver Knights for their loyalty and to this day, over five thousand years later, the Reaver Knights still rigorously patrol Ulthuan and a place in their ranks is much sought after.
The Reaver Knights are commonly made up of the wildest and most headstrong sons of the noble houses.
Many come from Ellyrion where Elves are trained in fighting on horseback from an early age.
TIRANOC CHARIOTEERS
The peoples of the sundered realm of Tiranoc still keep alive the art of fighting from a fast-moving chariot.
Each chariot is drawn by two fine Elven steeds and carries a single Tiranoc noble who controls the chariot with nothing more than a spoken word.
Charioteers traditionally carry the deadly Singing Blade, a glaive-like weapon cunningly carved and pierced so that it shrieks as it is swung.
A single blow from a Singing Blade can cleave a fully armoured man in two if it is struck from a thundering chariot.
The nobles are also experts in the use of bow and sword and often carry these weapons with them to war.
Charging in, striking at the foe and wheeling away, driving back their enemies with their skill and power, the Charioteers of Tiranoc are a breathtaking sight that none in the outer lands can match for speed and grace.
PHOENIX GUARDS
The Phoenix Guards protect the Shrine of Asuryan, a great pyramid on an isle in the Sea of Dreams.
Inside the shrine it is said there lies the Chamber of Days, a place where the histories of the Phoenix Kings past, present and future are written in words of fire upon stone.
Because they have seen the future they cannot or will not speak of what they know so the Phoenix Guard are a silent order, pledged not to allow a single word to pass their lips in all the time they spend as guardians of the shrine.
This makes them terrible foes in battle as an uncanny silence reigns as they fight, no war cries or screams rend the air as they wield their halberds with deadly intensity.
In certain rites and ceremonies the Phoenix Guard attend the Phoenix King, most notably when he is chosen and enters the flame eternal in the shrine to mark his rebirth as the new king.
They also carry away his body to the white ship at the time of his passing.
Stories abound of the Phoenix Guard arriving at the very instant that the council decides upon a new king or at the moment that life leaves the old king, lending weight to the legends about the Chamber of Days.
However the Phoenix Guard never divulge their secrets and no one has ever seen the Chamber of Days and lived.
WHITE LIONS OF CHRACE
The White Lions take their names from the fierce predators which stalk the mountains of Chrace.
They hold the passes in the broken northlands against the constant incursions of the Dark Elves.
They are sworn to protect the lands about the Inner Sea to their dying breath and are renowned for their ferocity and prowess.
Traditionally, a company of White Lions acts as the personal bodyguard of the Phoenix King in honour of the time they saved Caledor the first from Dark Elf assassins.
The White Lions are powerfully built and stronger than most Elves, and in battle they wield fearsome double-handed war axes.
Sword-Masters of Hoeth
The Sword Masters are guardians of the Tower of Hoeth in the mysterious land of Saphery, warrior-ascetics who dedicate their lives to the pursuit of wisdom and learning carefully controlled violence.
They study meditation and martial arts until they are capable of super-human feats of arms.
They favour the Elven greatsword above all other blades; a wicked weapon a full five or six feet in length, double-edged and razor sharp.
The Sword Masters are so superlatively trained that they can wield their mighty swords as fast as an ordinary warrior can use a normal sword.
the shadow warriors
The Shadow Warriors are survivors of the ravages of the Dark Elves in the north of Ulthuan.
When the Dark Elves first split from the rest of Ulthuan many from their own lands did not join them but were still caught in the terrible war that followed, culminating in the destruction of their land by the magics unleashed by the Dark Elf sorcerers.
To this day they live on as a nomadic people wandering in the wildernesses of northern Ulthuan and ranging across Cothique, Tiranoc and Chrace in small, fierce bands.
Sometimes they are joined by Elves who have lost their homes and families to the Dark Elves and now lust for vengeance with the cold fury that only Elves can feel.
Shadow Warriors are used to fighting in small units hunting and ambushing Dark Elf infiltrators.
Often they will arrive unbidden at a mustering of High Elf forces and offer their expert services as scouts and skirmishers to the general of the army.
HIGH ELF ARMY LIST
The High Elf Army list has been designed so that you can choose an army to a previously fixed points value.
There is no upper limit to the size of an army, but one thousand points is about the smallest size that will allow you to field a battle-worthy force.
Two thousand points is the usual size for battles that will last an entire evening, and three thousand points will give you enough troops for a battle that will take most of a day to fight.
Most people prefer to collect their armies in blocks of a thousand or five hundred points, starting with say a thousand point ‘core’ force and adding five hundred points at a time.
This allows you to conveniently plan your purchases and gives you time to paint the models and try them out on the tabletop before deciding what to add next.
It is usual for each side to begin with an equal points value of troops — say two thousand points a side.
This means both players pick an army worth up to the agreed points value.
The High Elf player uses the High Elf army list, whilst his opponent uses his own list.
The total value of a player's army may be less than the agreed value, and will often be a few points short simply because there is nothing left to spend the few remaining points on.
The list that follows tells you what proportion of your points you may spend on character models, regiments, war machines and allies.
This ensures that your army and that of your opponent are reasonably balanced, and don't consist entirely of cannons or Lord characters for example!
CHARACTERS
The points value of characters includes the value of their armour and weapons, any magic items they have, and a steed if they are mounted.
If a character rides a monster its points value counts towards the army's character point allowance and not the monster point allowance.
The proportion of points permitted to your army for monsters is for monsters without riders.
If a character rides in a chariot then its points value including any additional crew is also included in the character points value.
The points value of characters includes the points paid for champions of regiments.
But you should remember that a regiment's champion is part of his unit and cannot leave it.
A character may be equipped with any of the weapons or armour available to the ordinary troops in the list.
The points cost of weaponry and armour is the standard value and the complete list is repeated at the end of this section.
Note that this doesn't mean that a character can carry a special weapon such as a bolt thrower.
A character can carry appropriate magic items chosen from the magic items cards in Warhammer or Warhammer Battle Magic.
It is also our intention to add more magic items at a future date, possibly as part of scenario supplements and also in White Dwarf magazine.
The points value of magic items is included on the cards themselves.
Characters are permitted no more than the number of magic items shown on the chart below.
Note that some magic items are restricted to certain races or types of characters.
Scrolls can only be used by wizards, for example and only Heroes can wear magic armour.
REGIMENTS
Models are organised into units which we call regiments.
Regiments must be at least five models strong unless indicated otherwise in the army list.
There is no upper limit to the size of a regiment.
The minimum of five models includes its leader (which it must have), plus an optional regimental standard bearer, musician and champion if it has them.
All regiments are assumed to include a leader equipped in the same way as his men and with identical characteristics.
He costs the same points as an ordinary trooper.
All regiments may include a standard bearer and/or musician, and these cost double the points value of an ordinary trooper.
Standard bearers and musicians are assumed to be equipped with the same weapons as the rest of the unit and fight just like ordinary troopers (see the rulebook for a full description).
Some regiments are permitted magic standards.
These are covered by the Warhammer Battle Magic supplement and are included as magic item cards.
Obviously, the regiment must include a standard bearer before it can be given a magic standard.
If you include a magic standard then its points value is included with the points value of the regiment.
Units are permitted champions.
Champions are always equipped in exactly the same way as the rest of the unit, except that they are permitted one magic item in addition.
A champion may be the unit's leader, but does not have to be — you can have a separate leader and champion model if you wish.
Champions always fight with their regiment and cannot leave it.
The points value of a champion, and of any magic item he carries, comes from the proportion of points allocated to the army's characters and NOT the regiments.
WAR MACHINES
The High Elves place little faith in war machines in open battle, thought they do use repeater bolt throwers in reasonable numbers.
Up to one quarter of the army's points may be spent on repeater bolt throwers.
MONSTERS
Monsters are beasts brought along to fight beside the army.
They include trained creatures hand-reared from birth and monsters which have been magically bound by spells of obedience.
Monsters chosen as mounts for characters are NOT included in the points allocation for monsters; they are included in the points for characters instead.
ALLIES
The High Elf army may include a proportion of allies, up to a quarter of its total points value.
Allies are chosen from the Warhammer Armies book or books indicated.
So, for example, your High Elf army could include up to a quarter of its points value as Wood Elves chosen from the Wood Elf list, or Dwarfs chosen from the Dwarfs list.
There is nothing to prevent you choosing allies from several different lists if you wish.
Including allies is a good way of expanding your collection, it also allows you to paint something different and still include it in your army.
PRESENTATION OF PROFILES
Profiles are given in the standard format and include all the characteristic values.
They do not take into account movement reductions due to armour, as this may vary depending on how you choose to equip your troops.
Saving throws are not included on the profiles for the same reason, as they may vary depending on what armour you choose to buy.
Cavalry have two profiles, one for the rider and one for the mount.
M = Movement W = Wounds
WS = Weapon Skill I = Initiative
BS = Ballistic Skill A = Attacks
S = Strength Ld = Leadership
T = Toughness
LIMITATIONS ON CERTAIN CHARACTERS/UNITS
The army lists presents the player with lists of troop types which can be included in the High Elf Army.
In most cases there is no limit on the number of individual models, or the number of units, other than that imposed by the points values.
However, some particular types of unit or character are limited.
In some cases you can only include one character of a certain type in your army, or one of a specific unit.
Any such limitations are clearly indicated in the lists.
For example, you may only ever include one general model.
SPECIAL CHARACTERS
The High Elves are an exceptional race and there are many exceptional Elven heroes and wizards.
The army list has provision for a number of characters without specifying who they are or where they come from within Ulthuan — it is assumed that players will like to create their own names and background histories for their characters.
A separate section describing some of the famous warriors of Ulthuan has been included at the end of the army list.
These are ready-made characters with their own characteristics, history, magical artefacts and points values.
You can include these characters in your army if you wish.
The points cost of special characters comes out of your character points allowance in the normal way.
ARMOUR
The saving throws for troops is not given on their profile because this is variable depending on the armour they wear.
Saving throws are summarised below.
For example, a Silver Helm Knight is a cavalryman wearing light armour, carrying a shield and riding a barded horse, his save is therefore 3+ (4+ with a further +1 on account of the barding).
EQUIPMENT LIST
The following is a list of all the usual weapons in the Warhammer game.
It has been included so that you can refer to it for comparative purposes, and so that you can choose equipment for character models without having to refer to the army list entries or the Warhammer rulebook.
A character model may be armed with any weapons available to the troops themselves, subject to the usual restriction regarding weapon use — eg a halberd requires two arms to use and so prevents its wielder using a shield as well.
Remember that champions must be equipped in the same manner as the regiment they are part of.
In all cases the models must actually carry the weapons ascribed to them.
Items marked with an asterix (*) are not used by High Elf troops and are not therefore available to High Elf characters.
They have been included out of a sense of completeness.
CHARACTERS
Your High Elf army may include up to 50% of its points value as characters chosen from the list below.
You must always include a General, but apart from this you are free to choose as many or as few characters as you wish.
1 HIGH ELF GENERAL 160 points
The army must include a General to lead it.
The General could be a High Elf Prince or perhaps even the Phoenix King himself.
EQUIPMENT: Sword.
WEAPONS/ARMOUR: The General may be armed with any combination of weapons/armour allowed to any of the troop types in this list (see Equipment List for points values).
MAY RIDE: The General may ride an Elven Steed (+3 points), a Monster (see the separate Monster List for points), or he may ride in a two-horse chariot at a cost of +56 points.
MAGIC ITEMS: The General is a Lord character and is entitled to up to three magic items chosen from the appropriate cards.
0–1 BATTLE STANDARD 98 points
The army may include a Battle Standard together with its bearer if you wish.
EQUIPMENT: Sword and Battle Standard.
WEAPONS/ARMOUR: The Battle Standard Bearer may be armed with any combination of weapons/armour allowed to any of the troop types in this list (see Equipment List for points values).
MAY RIDE: The Battle Standard Bearer may ride an Elven Steed (+3 points), a Monster (see the separate Monster List for points), or he may ride in a two-horse chariot at a cost of +56 points.
MAGIC ITEMS: The Battle Standard Bearer is a Champion character and is entitled to up to one magic item chosen from the appropriate cards.
This may be a magic standard, effectively turning the army's banner into a magic standard.
HEROES 104 points
The army may include as many Heroes as you wish within the normal limitations of the points available.
Heroes represent individuals of exceptional prowess and courage.
Many individuals of this sort are to be found amongst the nobility of Ulthuan.
Not all Heroes are nobles by any means — some are ordinary folk whose outstanding abilities and deeds makes them the equal of any other hero on the battlefield.
EQUIPMENT: Sword.
WEAPONS/ARMOUR: A Hero may be armed with any combination of weapons/armour allowed to any of the troop types in this list (see Equipment List for points values).
MAY RIDE: A Hero may ride an Elven Steed (+3 points), a Monster (see the separate Monster List for points), or he may ride in a two-horse chariot at a cost of +56 points.
MAGIC ITEMS: A Hero character is entitled to up to two magic items chosen from the appropriate cards.
CHAMPIONS 48 points
Any regiment may include a Champion armed and equipped in the same way as the rest of the unit (see Equipment List for points values).
Champions represent especially powerful or adept warriors.
EQUIPMENT: A Champion is always armed and equipped in the same way as the rank and file members of his regiment (see Equipment List for points values).
MAY RIDE: A Champion may ride an Elven Steed (+3 points).
If the rest of his regiment is also mounted, he may ride in a two-horse chariot at a cost of +56 points if he is part of a unit of Tiranoc Charioteers.
MAGIC ITEMS: A Champion character is entitled to a single magic item chosen from the appropriate cards.
WIZARDS
The army may include as many High Elf Mages as you wish within the usual limitations of points cost.
High Elf Mages are the greatest practitioners of magic in the world, born of a race who have studied the power of magic throughout their long lives.
Their mighty spells and fiery blasts have won them many battles when sword and spear might not have prevailed.
High Elf Mages may be selected from any of the four levels of power at the appropriate points cost as shown below.
Mage 59 points
Champion Mage 121 points
Master Mage 219 points
Mage Lord 328 points
EQUIPMENT: Sword.
WEAPONS/ARMOUR: A High Elf Mage may be armed with any combination of weapons/armour allowed to any of the troop types in this list (see Equipment List for points values).
However, wearing armour prevents a Mage casting spells, so they do not normally do so.
Note that a Mage may ride a horse wearing barding, and this does not interfere with his ability to cast spells.
MAY RIDE: A High Elf Mage may ride an Elven Steed (+3 points), a Monster (see the separate Monster List for points), or he may ride in a two-horse chariot at a cost of +56 points.
MAGIC ITEMS: A High Elf Mage is entitled to magic items chosen from the appropriate cards.
A Mage may have one magic item, a Champion Mage may have two magic items, a Master Mage may have three magic items, and a Mage Lord may have four magic items.
REGIMENTS
REAVER KNIGHTS 23 points per model
The Reaver Knights are a common sight throughout Ulthuan as they tirelessly patrol its most dangerous areas.
The Reaver Knights are made up of the wildest and most headstrong sons of the noble houses.
Many come from Ellyrion where Elves are born to the saddle and trained to fight from horseback from an early age.
EQUIPMENT: The Reaver Knights wear light armour and are armed with a sword.
SAVE: 5+.
OPTIONS: Any regiment may be equipped with bows at a cost of +4 points per model.
Any regiment may be equipped with spears at a cost of +2 points per model.
Any regiment may be equipped with shields at a cost of +2 points per model.
SILVER HELM KNIGHTS 31 points per model
Silver Helm Knights are drawn from all the realms of Ulthuan and include many of its finest and most noble sons.
They are armoured in shining silver and armed with white lances with diamond-hard tips which glitter like stars.
Their thunderous charges have broken the back of many an invading army 
EQUIPMENT: The Silver Helms wear light armour.
They are armed with a sword and lance.
SAVE: 5+.
OPTIONS: The Silver Helms may carry a magic standard.
This may be chosen from the appropriate magic item cards and its cost is indicated on the card itself (see Warhammer Battle Magic).
Any regiment may be equipped with shields at cost of +2 points per model.
Any unit may be equipped with barding for their steeds at a cost of +8 points per model.
Hence a fully armoured Silver Helm Knight will cost 41 points (31+2+8) and have an armour saving throw of 3+.
0–1 unit of DRAGON PRINCES OF CALEDOR 43 points per model
Though once the Dragon Princes could arouse enough Dragons to turn the skies black with wings now these creatures are few and those that are left slumber deeply.
Now the Dragon Princes gallop into battle upon mighty Elven steeds caparisoned in burnished armour forged in the form of a Dragon, an echo of a bygone age but no less terrible for all that.
EQUIPMENT: The Dragon Princes wear heavy armour and carry a shield, and ride a barded Steed.
They are armed with a sword and lance.
SAVE: 2+.
OPTIONS: The Dragon Princes may carry a magic standard.
This may be chosen from the appropriate magic item cards and its cost is indicated on the card itself (see Warhammer Battle Magic).
TIRANOC CHARIOTEERS 72 points per model
The scattered peoples of the sundered realm of Tiranoc still keep alive the art of fighting from a fast-moving chariot.
Charging in, striking at the foe and wheeling away, driving back their enemies with their deadly skill, the Charioteers of Tiranoc are a breathtaking sight that none in the outer lands can match for speed and grace.
Each chariot is drawn by two fine Elven Steeds and carries a single crewman.
EQUIPMENT: The Charioteers wear light armour and are armed with a sword, bow and halberd.
SAVE: 6+.
OPTIONS: Any chariot may be equipped with scythed wheels at a cost of +20 point.
Any Charioteer may be equipped with a shield at a cost of +1 point, javelins at a cost of +1 point, a spear at a cost of +1 point.
Any Charioteer may swap his bow for a long bow at a cost of +1 point.
0–1 UNIT OF SWORD MASTERS OF HOETH 16 points per model
The Sword Masters are guardians of the Tower of Hoeth in the mysterious land of Saphery.
The Sword Masters are warrior-ascetics who dedicate their lives to the pursuit of wisdom and learning carefully controlled violence.
They study meditation and martial arts until they are capable of super-human feats of arms.
They favour the Elven greatsword above all other blades: a wicked weapon a full five or six feet in length, double-edged and razor sharp.
The Sword Masters are so superlatively trained that they can wield these mighty swords as fast as an ordinary warrior can use a normal sword.
EQUIPMENT: The Sword Masters wear light armour and are armed with a double-handed sword.
SAVE: 6+.
OPTIONS: The Sword Masters of Hoeth may carry a magic standard.
This may be chosen from the appropriate magic item cards and its cost is indicated on the card (see Warhammer Battle Magic).
SPECIAL RULE: The Sword Masters of Hoeth fight with a fluid grace and poise impossible to equal.
Hence they do not always strike last in hand-to-hand combat — the normal penalty for using two-handed weapons.
0–1 UNIT OF PHOENIX GUARDS 14 points per model
Your army may include one unit of Phoenix Guards.
The Phoenix Guards protect the Shrine of Asuryan.
They are a silent order, pledged not to allow a single word to pass their lips in the time they spend as guardians of the shrine.
They are terrible foes in battle as an uncanny silence reigns as they fight, no war cries or screams rend the air as they wield their halberds with deadly intensity.
EQUIPMENT: The Phoenix Guards wear light armour and are armed with halberds.
SAVE: 6+.
OPTIONS: The Phoenix Guard may carry a magic standard.
This may be chosen from the appropriate magic item cards and its cost is indicated on the card itself (see Warhammer Battle Magic).
The Phoenix Guard may increase their armour to heavy armour at a cost of +1 point per model.
0–1 UNIT OF WHITE LIONS OF CHRACE 14 points per model
The White Lions hold the passes in the broken Northlands of Chrace against the constant incursions of the Dark Elves.
They are sworn to protect the lands about the Inner Sea to their dying breath and are renowned for their ferocity and prowess.
Traditionally, a company of White Lions acts as the personal bodyguard of the Phoenix King.
EQUIPMENT: The White Lions wear light armour and are armed with a double-handed axe.
SAVE: 6+.
OPTIONS: The White Lions may carry a magic standard.
This may be chosen from the appropriate magic item cards and its cost is indicated on the card itself (see Warhammer Battle Magic).
HIGH ELF SPEARMEN 12 points per model
Your army may include any number of regiments of Elven Spearmen.
Regiments of Elven Spearmen are made up of the citizen-soldiers of Ulthuan.
Though they may be artists or craftsmen or poets in times of peace, every Elf is a deadly fighter in times of war.
EQUIPMENT: Elven Spearmen carry a spear, a sword and a shield, they wear light armour.
SAVE: 5+.
LOTHERN SEA GUARD 12 points per model
The Lothern Sea Guard are responsible for manning the defences of Lothern and guarding against invaders from the sea.
When the great ships of Ulthuan sail to war companies of the Sea Guard are carried with them as ship-borne troops as they are well-trained in fighting at sea.
EQUIPMENT: The Sea Guards wear light armour and are armed with spears and shields.
SAVE: 5+.
OPTIONS: Any regiments of Sea Guard may be equipped with bows at an additional cost of +2 points per model.
Any regiments may swap their spears for halberds at an additional cost of +1 point per model.
ELF WARRIORS 9 points per model
The High Elves of the more remote parts of Ulthuan do not train together like the spearmen and archers of the cities.
Instead they hone their personal fighting skills and come in times of need to fight in small warrior bands.
EQUIPMENT: Elven warriors carry a hand weapon (a sword, axe or mace) and a shield.
SAVE: 6+.
OPTIONS: Any regiment of Elf warriors may be equipped with light armour at an additional cost of +2 points per model.
They may be armed with spears at an additional cost of +1 point per model.
A regiment may swap their shields for additional hand weapons for no additional points cost.
HIGH ELF ARCHERS 10 points per model
Your army may include any number of regiments of archers.
Protected by regiments of spearmen High Elf Archers are amongst of the most decisive troops in the army, unleashing deadly volleys of steel-fanged death upon their foes.
EQUIPMENT: Bow and hand weapon.
SAVE: None.
OPTIONS: Any regiment of archers may be equipped with light armour at an additional cost of +2 points per model.
Any regiment may swap its bows for long bows at an additional cost of +1 point per model.
0–1 UNIT OF SHADOW warriors 11 points per model
The Shadow Warriors are survivors of the ravages of the Dark Elves in the north of Ulthuan.
When the Dark Elves first split from the rest of Ulthuan many from their own lands did not join them but were still caught in the terrible war that followed, culminating in the destruction of their land by the magic unleashed by Dark Elf sorcerers.
To this day they live on as a nomadic people wandering in the wildernesses of northern Ulthuan and ranging across Cothique, Tiranoc and Chrace in small, fierce bands.
EQUIPMENT: Bow, sword and shield.
SAVE: 6+.
OPTIONS: A regiment of Shadow Warriors may be equipped with light armour at an additional cost of +2 points per model.
A regiment may swap their bows for long bows at an additional cost of +1 point per model.
SPECIAL RULES: The Shadow Warriors are used to fighting in small units hunting and ambushing Dark Elf infiltrators.
This means they can they can be deployed as skirmishers and use the rules for skirmishers on page 90 of the Warhammer rulebook.
Because of their bitter, unrelenting struggle against the Dark Elves, the Shadow Warriors are subject to the rules for hatred when fighting Dark Elves
WAR MACHINES
REPEATER BOLT THROWERS 50 points per model
Your army may include any number of repeater bolt throwers.
Each bolt thrower has a crew of two to operate the weapon.
EQUIPMENT: The crew are armed with hand weapons and wear light armour.
SAVE: 6+.
MONSTERS LIST
The Dragons of Caledor
Caledor is renowned throughout the Known World for its dragons.
Long ago, these great creatures made their lairs under the smouldering peaks of the Dragon Spine mountains.
In ages past Caledor Dragontamer bound the fearsome dragons to his will and his descendants still name their kingdom Caledor in his honour.
Once few dared the wrath of Caledor, for their Dragonriders could ravage a foe's armies and lands in hours, the great leathery wings of their mounts blotting out the sky with their numbers.
But now most of the dragons slumber, dreaming the centuries away until the end of the world.
Those that remain awake are sometimes sluggish and temperamental, so their riders are reluctant to use their mounts save in times of direst need.
But the greatest Princes of Caledor still ride dragons into battle, and no foe of Ulthuan can deny their potency.
Special Rules
Dragonrage.
The dragons of Caledor are fiercely loyal to their riders.
They have developed a bond with the Dragon Princes down the centuries which is now bred into their very spirit.
Hence if a High Elf dragon has its rider killed add +1 to the D6 roll on the Monster Reaction Table to see what it does next.
This means that the dragon will remain with its fallen master or attack, and will not flee the battlefield as wilder dragons might.
SPECIAL CHARACTERS
Tyrion — High Elf Prince, and his brother Teclis — High Elf Mage Lord, can be included in any Warhammer High Elf army by paying the appropriate points cost.
This is deducted from the character allocation in the army list.
Both characters are equipped with a number of special magic items.
Cards for these are supplied elsewhere in this book.
Several of these items are specific to Tyrion and Teclis but others can be bought for other High Elf characters by paying the appropriate points cost.
Only one character at a time may wield these magic items.
So if Teclis himself is on the battlefield, no other character may be equipped with the Sword of Teclis.
TECLIS HIGH ELF MAGE LORD 575 points
Teclis has three magic items included in his points value.
He can be given one more magic item from Warhammer or Warhammer Magic at the standard points cost.
Magic Items: The Sword of Teclis, the Moonstaff of Lileath and the War Crown of Saphery.
(The cost of these magic items is included in Teclis's total points value.)
TYRION HIGH ELF PRINCE 425 points
Magic Items: Sunfang — the Runesword of Tyrion, the Dragon Armour of Aenarion and the Heart of Avelorn.
(The cost of these magic items is included in Tyrion's total points value.)
ELTHARION THE GRIM, WARDEN OF TOR YVRESSE 165 points
Stormwing +150 points
Fangsword +50 points
Talisman of Hoeth +85 points
Eltharion the Grim can be included in any Warhammer High Elf army by paying the appropriate points cost.
This is deducted from the character allocation in the army list.
Eltharion can be equipped with up to three magic items.
Cards for two special magic items normally carried by Eltharion, the Fangsword of Eltharion and the Talisman of Hoeth, are supplied in the colour section of this book.
The Fangsword is specific to Eltharion and only he may carry it but the Talisman of Hoeth can be bought for other High Elf characters by paying the appropriate points cost.
Special Rules
Eltharion lost nearly all of his family and saw his ancestral lands ravaged and burned in the cataclysmic Goblin invasion of Yvresse led by Grom the Paunch.
To this day he holds a bitter hatred in his heart for all Goblins, so he is subject to the psychology rules for hatred when fighting Goblins.
If he is in combat with Grom the fury of Eltharion's blows is such that he gains +1 on his rolls to hit and +1 on the strength of his hits.
TYRION AND TECLIS
Among the High Elves the names of Tyrion and Teclis are spoken with hushed respect.
The fame of these twin brothers extends throughout Ulthuan and into the lands beyond.
Prince Tyrion is the Elf general who turned back the great Incursion of Chaos two hundred years ago.
Teclis is the greatest sorcerer of this age of the world, a mage so powerful that spells and magical artefacts are named after him.
Born into one of the oldest families of Ulthuan, the brothers can trace their line back to the doomed King Aenarion, first and mightiest of the Phoenix Kings of Ulthuan.
It is their destiny to perform mighty deeds and shape the fate of kingdoms.
The brothers are as different as day and night.
Tyrion is tall, proud and fair, a master of weapons, a match for the Dragon Princes of old in battle-prowess and skill.
The chosen champion of the Everqueen of Avelorn, he is a warrior without peer and a foe without mercy.
Among the Dark Elves of Naggaroth he is known as the Reaper, to the Goblins of Red-Axe Pass he is Orcbane, and to the north the Norse know him as Mankiller.
For two centuries he has stood between the Elves of Ulthuan and their many foes.
He is a mighty champion, an unbreakable shield against the darkness.
In him it is said Aenarion the Defender has come again.
The age-old curse on the line of Aenarion affected Tyrion's twin brother Teclis more strongly.
Where his brother was mighty, he was weak.
Where Tyrion was golden-skinned and yellow-maned, Teclis was pale, dark and gaunt.
Where Tyrion was fair-spoken and noble-minded, Teclis was caustic-tongued and bitter.
From birth he was sickly and consumptive.
As a child, he was driven by an insatiable curiosity and showed an awesome gift for sorcery.
He was schooled by the shadowy Loremasters of the Tower of Hoeth, who recognised in him great power.
Within the precincts of the White Tower, guarded by magical illusions of great cunning, he learned the intricacies of sorcery, and rose to become a true master of High Magic.
THE DARK ELF WARS
When the great incursion of Chaos came, destiny touched the twins.
From the north the Dark Elves swept through Ulthuan looting, burning and pillaging.
Allied with the servants of the four powers of Chaos they seemed unstoppable.
The gigantic Black Arks of Naggaroth vomited forth a wave of corruption on the shores of the Elf lands.
Ships of rune-woven red iron brought frenzied Chaos warriors to Ulthuan.
The Witch King of Naggaroth once more set foot on the land from where he'd so long ago been driven.
Everywhere the unprepared Elves suffered defeat after defeat at the hands of their Chaos-worshipping kin.
In the lands of Men things went no better.
The shattered Empire, long a cauldron of factional strife, could not stand against the tide of Chaos.
It was a time of blood and darkness.
The world was ending in death and despair.
Tyrion was in Avelorn at the court of Alarielle, the newly crowned Everqueen, when the Dark Elves came.
The thunderous voices of their beasts filled the ancient woods.
The shrill blast of their brazen trumpets echoed triumphantly through the heart of the land.
Hurriedly the Maiden Guard of the Queen moved to meet the threat to their lady.
A hastily assembled force of warriors was thrown into battle but to no avail.
The Dark Elves were too strong and it looked as if the Everqueen, the spiritual leader of Ulthuan, would fall into their clutches.
In desperation, Tyrion pulled her from her silk pavilion and cut a bloody path clear of the massacre, slaying any Dark Elf that got in his way.
As they fled, Tyrion was stabbed by the blade of a Witch Elf, but disregarded his wound, the two escaped into the heart of the ancient forests and disappeared.
Word of the Everqueen's loss spread through the land and the hearts of the Elves were filled with despair.
When the news of his brother's disappearance reached the White Tower, Teclis refused to believe his brother was dead.
From birth, he and Tyrion had shared a special link and he was convinced that if Tyrion were dead he would know.
He decided to leave the tower and seek him out.
Using all his cunning arts he forged himself a blade and wove it round with deadly enchantments.
Seeing that Teclis could not be dissuaded, the High Loremaster gifted him with the War Crown of Saphery and let him go.
He sensed destiny in the youth and knew that the fate of the Elf Kingdoms rested on his shoulders.
Teclis was stronger now, the potions of the Loremasters had gone a long way towards giving him mortal strength.
The High Loremaster hoped it would be enough.
Tyrion and the Everqueen fled through a land laid waste by war.
The old forests burned as the Dark Elves took vengeance for their long exile.
An army of Ellyrian horsemen was destroyed in the field by the Witch King's sorcery.
The Princes of Caledor strove unsuccessfully to wake the last dragons.
The great navies of Lothern were driven from the seas by the Chaos fleets.
A Dark Elf army re-took the Blighted Isle and the Altar of Khaine fell once more into Dark Elf hands.
Triumph followed triumph for the spawn of Naggaroth.
Bitter defeat piled upon bitter defeat for the High Elves.
The Dark Elves were filled with glee at the news of the loss of Alarielle, but the Witch King refused to believe the rumour of her death.
He insisted that her body be found so he could display it crucified upon his standard.
Four assassins stood before him and pledged to know no rest till they brought him Alarielle's corpse.
The Dark Elves  sought the pair everywhere.
Tyrion and the Everqueen often hid, blindly writhing through the loam to avoid the eyes of Dark Elf patrols.
As the Witch Elf poison gripped him, Tyrion grew ever weaker and more feverish, but with her land disrupted the young Everqueen could not find the power to save him.
The High Elves were reduced to fighting a guerilla war in their own land while the servants of Darkness reigned everywhere.
But now a new rumour filled all ears.
A sorcerer was abroad and no-one could stand against him.
He was a pale youth who wore the War Crown of Saphery.
Where he walked the Dark Elves trembled, for he commanded the powers of magic as if born to them.
His words summoned lightning.
He cast down monsters and destroyed Chaos warriors with a word.
The Slaaneshi Champion Alberecht Numan challenged him to battle, but he and all his followers were in an instant reduced to dust.
He intervened at the battle of Hathar Ford and slew Ferik Kasterman's Coven of Ten — the most feared Tzeentchian sorcerers of the day.
These were small victories, but in those days of darkness they gave the High Elves some hope.
Hope was what the folk of Ulthuan's many kingdoms desperately needed.
The claw of Chaos held the island-continent firmly in its grip.
From Chrace in the north to Eataine in the south, the Elf lands were overrun.
Not even the waters of the Inner Sea were free of Dark Elf incursion.
Ships were carved from the blighted forests with supernatural speed, and raiders moved as far as the Isle of the Dead before being turned back by the warding spells.
Only in Saphery, around the White Tower, and by the walls of the mighty fortress city of Lothern were the Dark Elves halted, and even there things looked grim.
Three Black Arks laid siege to the great lighthouse of Lothern, the Glittering Tower.
By day and night spell blasts and siege engine shots battered the walls.
The Phoenix King himself was trapped within the city, and it seemed only a matter of time before the entire land was devoured.
With the Everqueen lost, the Elves had little heart to fight on.
THE DARKEST HOUR
In the forests of Avelorn the hunt was closing in.
The four assassins finally caught up with Tyrion and his charge, coming upon their camp by night.
The wounded Elf Lord fought like a blood-mad wolf.
Under the furious onslaught of his blade the Dark Elves died, but not before one unleashed a messenger familiar to carry word of their discovery to the Witch King.
Howling with triumph the Lord of Naggaroth then unleashed his pride and joy, the Keeper of Secrets, N'Kari.
With a roar, the Greater Daemon sped through the night to find its prey.
The Greater Daemon found Tyrion and the Everqueen in the dark hour before the dawn, descending upon them like a falling star from the firmament.
Once, the Everqueen could easily have banished the daemon, but her power was much reduced even as her land was ravaged.
Tyrion reeled to his feet, determined to sell his life dearly.
With a sweep of one mighty fist, the daemon dashed the wounded warrior aside.
Looming over the Everqueen it reached out to caress her cheek with its claw.
Lightning split the night and the daemon was knocked back.
A frail-looking figure emerged from the forest.
On his head was the horned-moon helm of Saphery and he swiftly took up position between the queen and the Keeper of Secrets.
With an angry bellow, the daemon rose to confront him.
Teclis spoke words of thunder and a sphere of coruscating energy leapt forth, its touch instantly casting the daemon back into the Realm of Chaos.
Swiftly Teclis went to his brother's aid.
Using all the healing lore he had learned in the White Tower he managed to summon Tyrion's spirit back from the brink of the abyss.
When the daemon's defeat was revealed in his black orb of seeing the Witch-King was enraged.
He ordered one thousand enslaved Elf prisoners sacrificed to Slaanesh immediately.
The war blazed on with renewed ferocity.
Teclis guided the Everqueen and his twin to the shores of the Inner Sea.
There they were picked up by a white ship crewed by the remnants of the Queen's Guard.
This carried them to the Plain of Finuval where the shattered remnants of the Elf armies were assembling for a desperate last stand.
Charioteers from Tiranoc raced into position between Silver Helm cavalry and spearmen from Cothique and Yvresse.
Ellyrian cavalrymen mustered beside the elite White Lions of Chrace.
Griffon-mounted Elf Lords soared over the army.
Sword Masters of the White Tower formed up alongside the Everqueen's Maiden Guard.
When word of the Everqueen's presence was known, a great cheer went up from the army, and all the warriors gained new heart.
But then a cloud of dust on the horizon announced the arrival of their enemies.
THE BATTLE OF FINUVAL PLAIN
That night the two armies camped almost within bowshot of each other.
The watchfires of one force could be seen by the pickets of the other.
In the Elf camp Tyrion and Teclis were greeted by their father Arathion.
The old Elf lord gifted Tyrion with the dragon armour of Aenarion.
This armour had been worn by the first Phoenix King during the ancient wars with Chaos.
It had been forged in Vaul's Anvil and could resist the fiery breath of dragons.
Out of gratitude for his rescue of the Everqueen, the Elves of Ellyrion presented him with their finest steed, Malhandir, last of the bloodline of Korhandir, father of horses.
The Everqueen herself gifted him with a heart-shaped broach which she had woven with enchantments for his safe return.
In his mighty fist Tyrion grasped the runesword Sunfang, forged in elder days to be the bane of daemons.
So Tyrion was made ready for battle.
To Teclis, Alarielle gave the sacred staff of Lilaeth.
It granted him strength and power so great that he wouldn't need his enabling potions.
He refused the offer of any sword, preferring to use the blade he had forged with his own hands.
He was now ready to stand beside his brother in the heat of battle.
The coming of day revealed the full extent of the Chaos forces.
Endless ranks of Dark Elf crossbowmen chanted the praises of Slaanesh.
A horde of Cold Ones croaked and bellowed in the chill morning light.
Mail-armoured warriors brandished their spears.
Witch Elves cackled and gibbered maniacally.
Beast masters herded monsters into position.
One entire flank of the Witch King's army was held by Chaos Knights and their bestial retinues.
The Elves were greatly outnumbered and the situation looked desperate.
From a blasted hill in the centre of that evil army, the gigantic black-armoured figure of the Witch King surveyed the battlefield, confident that victory was within his iron-clawed grip.
Urian Poisonblade, the Witch King's personal champion, called out a challenge to single combat.
Was there anyone in the Elf army brave enough to face him?
Urian's reputation preceded him.
He had been bred for battle by the Witch King himself.
He was the greatest of assassins, the most relentless of slayers.
He had the heart of a daemon and the eyes of a hawk.
He could kill a bull with one blow of his bare hands, and deflect an arrow in flight with a sweep of his blade.
On his brow was the mark of Khaine.
He was Death incarnate.
Arhalien of Yvresse was the first to respond.
He was a mighty soldier, a veteran of countless battles.
Urian cut him down as if he were a child.
The Elf army moaned in despair and dismay.
Next was Korhian Ironglaive, captain of the White Lions, the most renowned warrior of Chrace.
Blows were exchanged faster than the eye could follow but to no avail — within minutes the proud High Elf lay headless on the plain.
Then Tyrion strode forth.
It was a battle the like of which those present had never before witnessed.
It was as if gods themselves made war.
Sparks flew as blade clashed on blade.
Both warriors fought in deadly silence.
Again and again Urian's glowing black blade was turned by Tyrion's armour.
Again and again the master assassin ducked the sweep of Sunfang.
They fought for an hour and it seemed that neither would have the mastery.
Spells blistered the air round them as the Witch King sought to aid his champion.
Sweat glistening on his brow, Teclis dispelled them.
Every witness held their breath.
It seemed impossible that anyone could survive in the middle of that storm of blades.
Then Tyrion slipped and Urian loomed over him blade held high.
It was the opening that the High Elf had waited for.
A quick thrust of his weapon found the assassin's heart.
The host of darkness let out a howl of anguish and charged forward to overwhelm the lone Elf warrior and the Elf army raced to meet them.
Malhandir reached his master first and Tyrion vaulted into the saddle then turned to face his foes.
The two forces clashed at the heart of Finuval Plain.
The Dark Elves had the greater number and their allies were fell.
The High Elves were fighting for their homeland and the Everqueen.
They had the desperate courage that flowed from knowing that this might be their last chance to turn the tide.
All that long day the armies fought with savage fury.
Both sides were driven by the consuming hatred that their ancient civil war had bred.
Flights of crossbow bolts, so numerous they darkened the sky, were met by clouds of white fletched arrows.
Great lumbering Cold Ones were hamstrung by nimble Elf warriors.
The horsemen of Ellyrion were pulled down by the foul beasts of Chaos.
Spells crackled back and forth through the air.
Blood mingled with the dust thrown up by the battle.
Thousands died but neither side gave any ground.
So great was the carnage that warriors fought over bodies of the dead and ravens feasted on the wounded trapped inside the mounds of corpses.
Right at the centre, Tyrion fought with the fury of an enraged beast.
His great burning blade cut down foes with every stroke, and his shining mail turned the swords of his desperate foes.
By himself he was worth an army.
Where he rode the Elves took heart.
Malhandir trampled Dark Elves beneath his silver-shod hooves.
But Tyrion could not be everywhere at once and slowly the weight of numbers turned the battle against the High Elves.
THE DEFEAT OF THE WITCH KING
At the heart of the battle, Teclis wrestled with the dark sorcery of the Witch King.
Naggaroth's dark master had perfected his evil arts over long millennia and for the first time Teclis met a foe that was his match.
Awesome magical energies were focussed and brought to bear.
Lightning streaked the darkening sky.
Terrible clouds, capable of stripping men to the bone, were turned aside by magical winds.
Daemons howled and gibbered as they surged through the carnage.
Teclis strode into the sky to better observe the battle.
From the blasted hilltop the Witch King matched him spell for spell.
Teclis saw that the battle had turned.
The size of the Dark Elf warhost was too great.
It looked as if the Elves would be slain to a man.
Now there was nothing else for it.
It was time for a last desperate gamble.
He invoked the power of Lilaeth.
His staff glowed and pulsed as the goddess fed him energy.
Teclis sculpted the power into one bolt of titanic power and unleashed it upon the Witch King.
Frantically the evil one tried to turn it aside but could not.
The blast descended on him, burning into his very soul.
At the final moment he was forced to cast himself into the Realm of Chaos to avoid final and utter death.
Freed now from the burden of dealing with the Witch King, Teclis turned his energies on the horde of evil.
Spell after spell crashed down on the Dark Elves, the carnage was too awful to contemplate.
Malhandir brought Tyrion face to face with the Witch King's standard bearer.
The High Elf cut down his foe with ease.
Malhandir trampled the Witch King's banner into the mud.
Seeing their Lord defeated and their standard smashed the Dark Elves fell into despair.
Overhead a seemingly unstoppable magician rained magical doom down on them, before them an unstoppable warrior clove through their ranks like a ship through the waves.
Almost to a man that vast army turned and fled.
Almost to a man they were cut down.
The High Elves had won their first major victory.
The tide had turned.
Tyrion led the army south to relieve Lothern.
Word of his coming gave heart to the High Elves.
The tall warrior wearing the Everqueen's favour and his sorcerer twin became feared by their foes.
The High Elf army fell on the besiegers of Lothern, putting them to the sword.
The Phoenix King led his guard from Lothern to meet them.
Caught between the hammer and the anvil the besieging army was crushed.
Outside the walls of Lothern, Tyrion and Teclis were greeted by the Phoenix King himself.
Within two days a great plan was conceived to drive the Dark Elves from the land.
Tyrion would lead one High Elf army to Saphery to relieve the Tower of Hoeth.
The Phoenix King would drive north and engage the enemy directly.
Word arrived from Caledor that the dragons had been roused.
Victory was within the High Elves' grasp.
THE GIFT OF MAGIC
Just as the armies readied to set out, a battered ship limped into harbour.
It was commanded by Pieter Lazlo, personal ambassador of Magnus the Pious.
He bore a tale of woe from the Old World.
The armies of Chaos had overrun Kislev and looked set to sweep over the lands of men.
Magnus had led the human defence of the Empire and, desperate for help, had sent to the Elves for aid.
The Elves knew that they could barely spare a single warrior from their forces and yet they knew that if mankind failed then the forces of Chaos in the Old World would be free to aid the Dark Elves.
Hearing once more the call of destiny, Teclis volunteered to go to the aid of mankind.
Yrtle and Finreir, two of his old comrades from the Tower of Hoeth agreed to go with him.
It was all that could be done.
The two brothers parted at the docks in Lothern.
It was a bleak farewell.
Neither knew if they would ever see each other again.
Teclis took to his ship.
Tyrion rode away with his army.
It would be many long years before they saw each other again.
Now leading the Elf army, Tyrion proved to be every bit as skillful a general as he was a warrior.
His surprise attack routed the Chaos forces in the woods around the White Tower.
Joined by a contingent of Sword Masters, his army marched on into southern Avelorn to reclaim the Everqueen's land.
There the Dark Elves had been demoralised by the Witch King's defeat and hounded relentlessly by guerilla forces.
Tyrion drove them out of the woods and into the hills of southern Chrace.
In this mountainous land a savage war of ambush and counter-ambush was fought.
But the Phoenix King had lent Tyrion the services of a unit of White Lions and these bold warriors' knowledge of their homeland was to prove invaluable.
In the year 2303, exactly two years after the invasion began, the Phoenix King and Tyrion met at Tor Achare, the capital of Chrace.
The Dark Elves had been driven from the mainland of Ulthuan.
The war was all but over, although bitter fighting was to rumble on in the islands for many decades.
In the Old World, Teclis and his companions arrived at the court of Magnus the Pious, where Teclis's wise advice and mighty sorcery soon made him an invaluable councillor.
The influence of the three High Elf Mages changed the course of the war.
They taught some simple battle-spells to the human hedge-wizards and these combined with their own command of awesome forces aided in many human victories.
In many battles they proved their willingness to spill their own blood in defence of the human lands and Teclis and Finreir both took many wounds.
Yrtle himself fell in battle and was buried with great honour.
But it was after the war, when Magnus had driven the enemy from the land and he'd been hailed as the new Emperor, that he performed what was to be his most significant act.
Magnus requested that Finreir and Teclis teach the full secrets of magic to humans.
The new Emperor had seen how instrumental it had been in holding back the tide of Chaos and wanted to add yet another weapon to mankind's arsenal.
At first Finreir resisted.
Elves and Men had come to blows in the past and might do so again.
Teclis took the long view.
He argued that by helping Men protect themselves against Chaos they would create an invaluable bulwark against the forces of darkness.
Eventually Teclis's view prevailed and the Colleges of Magic were established.
Teclis himself taught the first human students and more than twenty years passed before he returned home.
Through his work as a teacher, he became fond of the race of Men and saw in it the possibility and the threat that in time it might far exceed the declining race of Elves.
The two brothers met again at their ancestral home in the year 2326 when Teclis returned for their father's funeral.
It was a sad moment but the two embraced joyously.
Tyrion was now the chosen Champion of the Everqueen, second only to the Phoenix King among the defenders of Ulthuan.
Teclis planned to return to the Empire to continue his work, but word came that the High Loremaster of the White Tower had died and the council offered Teclis his position.
Teclis could not refuse such an honour and so he returned to the Tower of Hoeth.
Since the days of the Great War against Chaos the two brothers have been active in the defence of Ulthuan.
Tyrion led the army that defeated Erik Redaxe's army of Norse raiders and twice led expeditions to the Blighted Isle to reclaim the Altar of Khaine from the Dark Elves.
Both times he drove the spawn of Naggaroth off but always they return.
When not leading the armies to war he dwells at the court of the Everqueen and keeps the peace in Avelorn, slaying marauding monsters and hunting down bands of Beastmen and Goblins.
Teclis probes the ancient mysteries of sorcery at the White Tower.
Often his researches demand that he visit the far corners of the world.
He has ventured as far afield as Cathay and Lustria and has aided armies both human and High Elf against the forces of evil.