

INTRODUCTION
This is a book about Orcs and Goblins and their armies in the Warhammer game.
Within its pages you will find background information explaining much about Orcs and their smaller cousins: where they come from, how they live and fight, and how their wars have helped to shape the Warhammer World.
In addition you'll find all the rules you need to use an Orc or Goblin army in the Warhammer game, including rules for new creatures and troop types not covered in the Warhammer Bestiary itself.
Unfortunately we didn't have room to include the complete rules for war machines and chariots as they appear in the Warhammer rulebook, but you will find a summary for them at the end of the War Machines section.
The heart of this book is the Army List section which provides a full list and points values for the Orc and Goblin army.
By means of the Army List you can choose your own Orc and Goblin force, equip your own warlord and his entourage of shamans and bosses, and descend upon your quaking foes with the awesome power of the Waaagh behind you!
Orcs and Goblins are one of the most popular and most effective armies in the Warhammer game.
One of the reasons for this popularity is the tremendous degree of choice.
For example, although we generally refer to ‘Orcs and Goblins’ you can perfectly well field a force that is all Orcs or all Goblins.
You could go further and have an army made up entirely of Night Goblins, Savage Orcs or Forest Goblins if you wanted.
We know of at least one person whose army consists entirely of Goblin wolf riders!
However, such extreme examples are exceptional, and most players use the wide variety available to create an effective mix of different troops.
This variety is another reason why Orcs and Goblins appeal to so many players, as the number of different troops types enables you to tailor an army to your own style of play or to a particular opponent.
For example, a player whose regular opponent fields High Elves might wisely decide to abandon any attempt to out-shoot his enemies in favour of a fast, hard-hitting attack force combined with long range artillery.
Both these options are available in abundance with boar riders, trolls, and chariots for attack and rock lobbers or doom divers for long range destruction.
On the other hand, a player faced with an Empire army would probably adopt a different strategy altogether.
With its knights and cannons the Empire army would soon sweep aside an army based around boar boyz, while Orc artillery and large creatures such as trolls would present excellent targets for cannons and Helblaster volley guns.
In this case the Orc general might choose Night Goblin units with fanatics, backed up by units of Orcs to provide some backbone and either doom divers or flying monsters to take out cannons from the air.
Woe betide those Empire knights when they tangle with the Night Goblin fanatics!
The options are many and varied, and part of the challenge of the Orc army is to discover the combination of troops and equipment that works best for you.
In writing this book we have assumed that the reader either owns or has access to copies of both Warhammer and Warhammer Battle Magic.
As far as possible we've attempted to provide references within the Warhammer rulebook, the Bestiary, or the Battle Magic rulebook so that you can find relevant sections more easily.
Where practical we've chosen to repeat information or at least summarise pertinent details within this volume so that you shouldn't need to keep swapping from one book to another.
THE DOMINION OF THE ORC
Orcs exist more or less everywhere in the Old World, in the lands to the east, and in the far north western realm of Naggaroth beyond the Sea of Chaos.
Naturally there are places where Orcs are relatively concentrated and others where they are rare.
In the realms of Men, for example, Orcs live only in the wildernesses, deep in the forests or high in the mountains.
From their secluded hideouts they raid and rampage over the surrounding territory.
There is nowhere in the Old World where the threat of marauding greenskins is completely unknown.
Beyond the realms of Men, Orcs and their small Goblin kin are far more numerous, and in some places they are the dominant intelligent creature.
Orcs don't have kingdoms or countries in the same way as Men do, but there are nevertheless areas where Orcs or Goblins are very definitely in control.
The Troll Country north of Kislev is a barren wilderness inhabited by brigands and monsters including, as its name suggests, many wild and savage Trolls.
Trolls are not the only monsters to be found there, but they are one of the few creatures able to thrive in this grim and hostile land.
In the Troll Country Chaos warbands fight each other for supremacy and Orc armies gather their strength to invade south.
On numerous occasions massive Orc armies have swept down from the north, destroying the towns and cities of Kislev and invading the northern provinces of the Empire.
Orcs and Goblins live in vast numbers between the Black Mountains and the Worlds Edge Mountains.
This part of the Old World is known as the Badlands on account of it being dominated by interwarring Orc and Goblin tribes.
It is from this battleground that many of the most successful Orc leaders have emerged.
From the Badlands Orcs move northwards into the Border Princes, a violent and battle-torn land shared by Men and Orcs, and further north still through the Black Fire Pass and into the Empire.
The Worlds Edge Mountains themselves are riddled with old Dwarf mines and the cruder tunnels of Night Goblins.
The ancient Dwarf hold of Karak Ungor has become so infested with Night Goblins that it is now known as Red Eye Mountain.
Further south, the ancient hold of Karak Varn has become Crag Mere, infamous haunt of monsters and evil creatures of all kinds: its slopes home to Orcs and its deep tunnels the preserve of Night Goblins.
Further south still the mountains between Mad Dog Pass and the quiescent volcano of Fire Mountain are riddled with the lairs of Goblins and Orcs.
Mad Dog Pass is overlooked by the crude forts of Goblins, while Black Crag is a vast Orc stronghold which guards the western entrance to Death Pass.
To the east of the Worlds Edge Mountains, over Mad Dog Pass and Death Pass, is the Dark Land, a region of desolation inhabited by all kinds of evil creatures including Chaos Dwarfs, Orcs, Goblins and especially Black Orcs.
According to Orc lore, Black Orcs originate from the eastern side of the Dark Lands adjoining the distant Mountains of Mourn.
Black Orcs are certainly more common in the eastern part of their territory, in the Dark Lands themselves, and in the Worlds Edge Mountains adjoining the Bad Lands.
In the far west, beyond the Old World and the Elven Kingdoms of Ulthuan, the Orcs and Goblins of Naggaroth are the descendants of captives taken by the Dark Elves many thousands of years ago.
Orcs were forced to fight for the Dark Elves in their wars against the High Elves, although in truth the Orcs took little persuading.
Since that time many independent Orc and Goblin tribes have taken root in the forests and mountains of that cold land.
Sometimes the Orcs ally with the Dark Elves, but they are creatures of shifting loyalties, and are equally likely to attack their erstwhile allies and rampage through the Dark Elf lands.
ORC TRIBES
All Orcs and Goblins live in tribes.
A tribe usually contains Orcs or Goblins of the same type, for example it might be a Night Goblin tribe, a Black Orc tribe, a Forest Goblin tribe, etc.
However, most Orc tribes also include inferior Goblins of lower status.
Tribes vary in size from a few hundred individuals to many thousands of warriors.
A tribe is led by a chieftain called a Warboss or, if he is very powerful, a Warlord.
If a chieftain is very successful other Orc and Goblins will flock to join his tribe and other tribes will place themselves under his command.
Green-skinned warriors will travel halfway across the Old World just to fight alongside a particularly powerful Warlord.
The tribe of a successful Warlord will tend to grow in size and power, enabling it to fight other tribes or invade the realms of Men.
Orc and Goblin tribes are dependent for their fortunes on the abilities of their chieftain.
Tribes grow and become powerful under brave and successful leaders, and then shrink or break apart when their chieftain is eventually defeated or slain.
When a tribe breaks apart the main portion will probably continue under the old leader or under his successor if the original boss has been slain.
The contenders for a tribe's leadership come from the group of especially large Orcs known as Big'uns — the closest that Orcs get to a ruling class.
Every tribe has its own core of Big'uns waiting their chance to take over and becomes the tribe's chieftain.
Of course there can only be one chieftain, so defeated rivals must either accept his supremacy or leave the tribe altogether and set up a new one of their own.
ORC HISTORY
The history of Orcs and Goblins, as recorded by Men, Dwarfs and Elves, is an account of the rise and fall of huge tribes which have fought against them.
Only the really big and powerful tribes impinge upon human or Dwarf history.
As such it is a fragmented account but a spectacularly bloody one, punctuated by occasions when the whole of the Old World stood on the brink of destruction.
THE BATTLE OF BLACK FIRE PASS
Before the time of Sigmar the lands west of the Worlds Edge Mountains were as much a realm of Orcs as they were of Men.
The tribes of Men were divided amongst themselves, with embittered rivalries and long feuds leading to constant warfare and raiding.
The Orc and Goblin tribes were engaged in their own wars against each other and against the tribes of Men, so the whole land was dangerous and strife torn.
In the Worlds Edge Mountains the Night Goblins were multiplying deep within their tunnels, and most of the ancient subterranean realm of the Dwarfs was in the possession of Orcs and Goblins.
From out of this turmoil emerged Sigmar, a great leader of Men and the founder of the Empire.
Sigmar united the human tribes and forged a mighty army to rid the land of Orcs and claim it for his own.
After many battles the Orcs were driven north into the Forest of Shadows and deep into the Great Forest itself.
In the east, many old Dwarf holds were cleared out, and the power of the Orcs was broken for many years.
It was a terrible time for the Orcs, who suffered defeat after defeat and never found a leader of their own to equal Sigmar.
Eventually the Orcs sent to the east for reinforcements, and a huge Orc army headed up towards the Black Fire Pass from the Badlands, which in those days encompassed the whole of the area which would come to be known as the Border Princes.
The Orc army destroyed a small scouting force of Dwarfs who were unlucky enough to be caught at the eastern end of the pass.
Wild with their easy victory, the Orc army advanced quickly into the pass itself, taking little care to scout ahead or leave a rearguard to protect its line of march.
The ensuing conflict is the most famous battle in all of the history of Men, the Battle of Black Fire Pass.
The Orc army was destroyed and Sigmar was ultimately victorious.
It was not the end of the Orcs of course, and in the following years Sigmar took the battle deep into the forests and mountains, rooting out Goblin strongholds and driving his enemies ever deeper into the wilds.
GORBAD IRONCLAW
Gorbad Ironclaw was one of the most successful Orc leaders of all time: his campaign of destruction raged across the Empire and left the region of Solland so devastated that it has never fully recovered.
He rose to power deep in the Badlands where his tribe, the Ironclaws, held the fortress known as the Iron Rock.
The Iron Rock is a core of molten iron vomited from the bowels of the earth during some incalculably ancient upheaval.
It lies in the western shadows of Thunder Mountain, and was discovered by the Dwarfs who mined into it creating a labyrinth of tunnels, caverns and partially complete workings.
The Orcs found the Iron Rock when they overran the Worlds Edge Mountains, establishing their own domain over all the peaks between Mad Dog Pass and Fire Mountain.
The Ironclaw Orcs lived around the Iron Rock for many years, and their fortunes rose and fell with the accustomed regularity of Orc tribes.
The Ironclaw's chief rival was the Broken Tooth tribe, whose leader was the notoriously huge and brutal Crusher Zogoth.
The Broken Tooths were currently in possession of Black Crag, the old Dwarf hold to the south.
In a lightning raid Gorbad moved his army through the ancient Dwarf tunnels and smashed the Broken Tooth tribe before they realised what was happening.
Crusher Zogoth escaped into the old Dwarf tunnels threatening revenge and Gorbad sent wild Cave Squigs after him.
The squealing of the Cave Squigs echoed through the passages of Black Crag for several days, and Night Goblin Squig Hunters were sent in to retrieve them.
Neither Squigs nor Goblins ever returned.
The Broken Tooths readily accepted Gorbad as their leader, as is the fashion of Orcs who know when they are beaten and who would much sooner be on the winning side.
With the Broken Tooths under his thumb Gorbad soon conquered the surrounding Goblin and Night Goblin tribes.
Waaagh Gorbad had begun!
From all over the Badland tribes of Orcs and Goblins rushed to join the huge army as it gradually moved north.
As the growing Waaagh moved past Mad Dog Pass it was joined by the Goblin tribes that lived along its tunnel-strewn length.
As the army swung westwards by the forest below the Dwarf Hold of Everpeak it was joined by Forest Goblin tribes riding giant spiders and whooping their savage war cries.
The Waaagh crossed Black Fire Pass by night as the skies thundered and lightning crashed about the peaks of the Black Mountains.
A small holding force of Empire troops was swept aside and the Orc army descended into the plains of Averland.
Gorbad Ironclaw took the old Dwarf road through Averland, looting and destroying the farms and small towns along its path.
The Orc army made camp at the Three Towers, the ancient Elf ruins on the borders of the Moot.
Here the Orcs feasted and fought amongst themselves while their loot lasted, and, after three days of drunken brawling, readied to invade the Moot.
Forewarned of the Orc advance, the Halflings gathered to defend themselves, and the Count of Averland sent troops to support them.
It was a futile gesture.
Gorbad struck north through the Tower Hills and caught the Halflings  and their allies on the Aver Down, the range of low hills in the southern Moot.
The Halflings were cut down to a man, and only a few Knights Panther escaped to warn the Emperor Sigismund of the impending approach of the Orc horde.
The Orcs spent two more days looting the Moot and drinking the contents of its many inns.
Halfling refugees poured down the river Aver in a convoy of boats, barges, and improvised rafts, and eventually took refuge in Nuln.
Meanwhile, the Orcs advanced upon Averheim.
Orc war machines battered the city's gates and broke its walls, and soon the Waaagh was inside the city itself, burning and destroying while the helpless citizens fled to the hills.
By this time Gorbad Ironclaw's reputation had spread amongst all the Orc and Goblin tribes of the Great Forest, and many more green-skinned warriors flocked southwards to join him.
The Orcs began to loot and pillage in their usual fashion, but Gorbad had other plans.
On his orders, the Ironclaw Big'uns prowled the burning streets gathering up the half drunken Orcs and dragging the Goblins back into the battlelines.
This caused much grumbling and many heads were knocked together just to remind everybody who was boss.
Nuln was next to feel the power of the Waaagh.
Gorbad advanced towards the city from the east, roughly following the line of the river Aver.
Nuln was already crammed with Halfling refugees and people from eastern Averland who had taken shelter from the Orc horde.
The Orcs barely slowed their pace at the town walls, but poured over the city gates destroying and killing in a repetition of the slaughter at Averheim.
Brutus Leitdorf, the Count of Averland, ordered the retreat over the great bridge and rallied his troops in the western half of the city.
The Count ordered the centre section of the bridge to be raised as the Orcs approached, cutting off the Orc advance.
However it was to no avail: the Orcs swarmed across the river floating on broken timber beams and other debris.
At first the Orcs were beaten back and many drowned in the blood-filled river, but in the end sheer numbers prevailed and the Orcs gained a firm foot-hold on the western bank.
By nightfall the whole city was burning and the few survivors were fleeing southwards towards Altdorf.
Brutus Leitdorf was among them, leading the remnants of his army away from the disaster and towards Altdorf.
The destruction of Nuln was a great blow to the Emperor Sigismund and a mighty victory for Gorbad Ironclaw.
The Empire's army was so weakened by the loss of its forces that Sigismund could do nothing but watch and wait while the Orc hordes devastated the surrounding lands.
The whole of Solland and Wissenland were plundered and burned after the defeat of another army led by Count Eldred of Solland in what came to be known in the Empire as the Battle of Solland's Crown.
Count Eldred was slain in personal combat by Gorbad and the Solland sword, the Runefang of Solland given to Sigmar's heirs by the Dwarfs, was taken by the Orcs.
According to legend, Gorbad tore the crown of Solland from the Count's head and placed it upon his own, and wore it thereafter as a token of his victory.
The Orcs rampaged through Solland for weeks, burned and looting, until turning north once more towards Altdorf.
An army was dispatched under the Count of Wissenland to intercept the advancing Orcs before they reached the capital.
The Count of Wissenland, Erich Adolphus, was counted the best general in the Empire, the victor of several fierce battles against the pretender to the Imperial throne, Count Gerhardt Meister of Middenland.
Adolphus's army was small but composed of the cream of the Empire's soldiery — the Reiksguard, Knights of the White Wolf, Knights Panther and Knights of the Blazing Sun.
Soon, Wolf Riders began to report news of the Empire army's advance to Gorbad, who sent a large force of Orc Boar Boys, Wolf Riders, Forest Goblin Spider Riders, and chariots to meet it.
The resulting conflict, the Battle of Grunberg, was unusual in that it consisted almost entirely of mounted troops on both sides, the best of the Empire's knights versus the most mobile part of the Orc horde.
Gorbad led his troops in person, wearing the crown of Solland upon his head and swinging his huge battle axe Morgor the Mangler.
At first the Empire knights looked unstoppable as they drove the Goblin wolf riders from the field, but soon both sides became embroiled in hand-to-hand combat where the Knights' lances were hindered by the close press of warriors.
With their troops locked in combat both leaders rushed forward to add their weight to the battle.
The Empire's greatest general and the mightiest Orc Warlord of the age fell upon each other with the fury of ancient enemies.
Gorbad drove his wolf chariot straight at the Count, its three slavering wolves leaping as one for their enemy's throat.
Adolphus swung his sword, one of the twelve mighty Runefangs, and brother to the Solland blade taken by Gorbad at the Battle of Solland's Crown.
The three wolves fell dead, all three heads severed with one blow as the Runefang described a bloody arc through the air.
Gorbad's chariot came to a crashing halt, throwing the Orc Warlord at Adolphus's feet.
The Count thrust his blade through Gorbad's massive chest and steaming green blood gushed over his armour.
Gorbad bellowed in agony and swung Morgor wildly, catching Adolphus a glancing blow across the temple.
Both mighty leaders staggered with pain as the battle swirled around them.
As they prepared to strike again knights and boar boys rushed in from both sides and the two leaders were swept apart and caught in the maelstrom of carnage.
It was a hard-fought battle on both sides, but eventually the Orcs began to gain the upper hand, and the knights fell back before them.
As night fell the Empire army was in full retreat with wolf riders snapping at their heels.
Gorbad was too badly hurt to mount a vigorous pursuit, and many gallant knights were able to escape including the badly wounded Count of Wissenland.
In Altdorf the Emperor Sigismund prepared for the Orc invasion by fortifying the city's walls and gathering in the harvests.
After every man, woman and beast within fifty miles was safely enclosed within the capital he ordered the lands about to be devastated.
When the Orcs arrived they found fields already burned, wells poisoned, and inns empty.
The Orc army therefore lost no time in its usual pillaging, but launched straight into its attack.
The first assault was thrown back from Altdorf's tall walls with the loss of many Orc and Goblin warriors.
The marshes around Altdorf made it difficult for the Orcs to group for the assault, and several mobs of Orcs disappeared forever when they strayed into the marshes.
Gorbad halted the attack and prepared for a long siege.
At first his huge rock lobbers pounded the walls and dropped stones within the city, causing considerable damage.
In response the city's cannons were trained against the Orcs and soon the rock lobbers were silenced.
Gorbad, still weak from the wound suffered at Grunberg, was unprepared for a frontal assault.
He began to collect together an aerial force to attack the city.
Four wyverns from the Worlds Edge Mountains took to the air, swooping and marauding within the city while Goblin doom divers rained down causing panic and consternation.
During the height of the fighting Sigismund was slain as he led a regiment of archers out to defend the palace against wyvern attack.
Two wyverns fell on the same night and after the Emperor's death the aerial attacks gradually subsided and the siege settled down into a protracted stalemate.
As time ebbed away the wound inflicted by the Count of Wissenland did not heal but began to trouble the mighty Orc Warlord more and more.
For days he would rage in fevered pain, screaming at his minions and cursing his underlings for failing to deliver Altdorf into his hands.
Gradually his horde dissipated, the power of the Waaagh lost its impetus, and the tribes returned to the forests and mountains.
Eventually even Gorbad had to give up, Altdorf had defeated him and the Waaagh was over.
The Ironclaws and the Broken Tooths were all that was left of the countless Orc tribes that had flocked to Gorbad's banner.
There were more Goblin tribes still loyal or too afraid to desert, but even they were few compared to the great days of conquest.
Gorbad Ironclaw withdrew to the east, following the river Reik back to the Worlds Edge Mountains.
As his depleted army made its way home it was harried by Dwarfs and Men, and even attacked by Orc tribes that had once fought as part of the Waaagh.
There was to be only one more pitched battle, the Battle of Blood Peak, fought in the shadow of the notorious red-coloured mountain south of Black Fire Pass.
It was here that the Orc horde was confronted by a large Dwarf army led by the Lord of Karaz-a-Karak.
During his first march into the west Gorbad broke into many Dwarf tombs and stole the magic weapons they contained, an act of desecration that enraged the Dwarfs but which they were powerless to prevent at the time.
As Gorbad headed back east, the Dwarfs saw their chance to revenge themselves and prepared a trap for the retreating Orc army.
Although encircled by the Dwarfs, half starved and weary from the march, the Orcs gave a good account of themselves by fighting their way out of the trap and out-distancing the Dwarfs.
Gorbad survived but his army was scattered.
Divided into many small bands, the Orcs made their way east out of the Old World and recorded history.
As Orcs keep few records of any kind it is uncertain what happened to Gorbad.
Perhaps he regained his old power in the Badlands and rebuilt his domain, or maybe he fell to the sword stroke of an ambitious young Orc Warboss before ever reaching the Iron Rock.
It's impossible to be sure what fate befell the mightiest Orc Warlord of all time, but whatever became of him his reputation and memory lives on.
To Orcs he has become a great hero whose spirit stands beside the gods Gork and Mork in battle.
To Men he is a reminder of the terrifying destructive power of the Waaagh!
AZHAG THE SLAUGHTERER
After the particularly bitter winter that began the Imperial year 2512, a massive horde of Orcs and Goblins descended from the World's Edge Mountains and ravaged the eastern provinces of the Empire.
The Orc Warlord that led them was Azhag the Slaughterer, and under his command were tribes of Orcs and Goblins from the highlands around Red Eye Mountain.
In ancient times Red Eye Mountain was a mighty Dwarf realm called Karak Ungor, the Delving Hold.
Since the fall of the old Dwarf Empire it has become the most powerful Night Goblin stronghold north of Mad Dog Pass.
Azhag's career of carnage began when he was chieftain of a small Orc tribe from the Troll country.
His feet were firmly placed upon the road to power when he uncovered a magic artefact, the Crown of Sorcery, in the subterranean ruins of the daemon-haunted city of Todtheim on the edge of the Northern Wastes.
When attacked by marauding Chaos warbands Azhag and his Orcs were forced underground into the labyrinthine ruins of Todtheim.
The Orcs spent weeks in the darkness, fighting off the monstrosities that lived in the cursed city.
After fighting many monsters and uncovering countless ancient horrors, Azhag was confronted by a huge Chaos Troll.
Azhag fought the Troll, and eventually chased it back to its lair where he slew it after a bloody struggle.
Searching through the Troll's hoard of treasure he chanced upon the Crown of Sorcery.
Unsuspecting of its true power, Azhag placed the metal band upon his head, and instantly its magic began to work.
Strange and terrifying thoughts flooded his mind, and darkness overwhelmed him.
Azhag and his tribe fought its way out of Todtheim easily, indeed, Azhag seemed almost to know the way out.
Azhag was changed.
Sometimes the tribe's Big'uns recognised their old leader as he stomped up and down the battle lines bawling at his lads.
At other times, and especially at  night, he seemed disturbingly different.
His eyes appeared dark and fixed, as if possessed of some terrifying secret.
At first he wore the crown he had found only occasionally, but later it was always on his scarred green skull and he became increasingly silent and brooding.
Unknown to the Orcs, the crown was working its power upon Azhag, for it was an ancient and evil device that once belonged to the Liche Lord Nagash himself, and his power and his spirit still clung to it.
Azhag was not entirely Azhag any more, the immeasurably strong personality of Nagash was gradually eating him away.
But Azhag and Nagash had one thing in common, a lust for conquest and power that the Orc warlord was now in a position to fulfil.
Azhag's tribe struck eastwards, into the Worlds Edge Mountains and against the Orc and Goblin tribes that lived there.
At first his challenges were met by rival warbosses, and there were several bloody battles, but after rumours of Azhag's victories became well known the tribes gave up any ideas of fighting and flocked to join the growing Waaagh.
Moving southwards along the Worlds Edge Mountain chain he conquered tribe after tribe, and eventually all the Night Goblins of Red Eye Mountain joined the Waaagh.
This greatly increased the size of Azhag's army, for there are more Night Goblin tribes living in and around Red Eye Mountain than anywhere else in the Old World.
After holing up for the winter of 2512 the horde descended into the eastern provinces of the Empire.
At first the Orcs looted and pillaged through Ostermark, feasting upon the few beasts that the people had carefully nurtured through the winter and driving the impoverished population westwards through the snow.
The towns of Kohlizt and the Temple of Sigmar at Nachtdorf were razed to the ground.
The Count of Ostermark led a small army of local troops and Knights Panther to try and stem the Orcs' advance, but his troops were hopelessly outnumbered and soon driven from the field in rout.
The Count rallied his forces in Bechafen where the constant stream of refugees meant lean rations and poor quarters for all.
The snows persisted until the second month of the new year, and many died of cold and hunger before the spring.
The cold did little to hinder the Orcs, for Orcs and Goblins are hardy creatures, and, if needs must, will eat any flesh no matter how foul or what manner of creature it comes from.
The Orcs were also provided with food and reinforcements by Forest Goblins who flocked to join them from the Great Forest.
Bypassing Bechafen the horde headed west, towards the Middle Mountains and Ostland, crossing the river Talabec by the old bridge at Rinn.
The Imperial troops posted to defend the river gates from Kislev fled when they saw the green horde stretched out across the horizon and advancing at full speed towards them.
In Ostland the horde began to loot and destroy with customary Orc efficiency, crushing the spring crops underfoot and gorging themselves on the hard won stores of the local people.
Tough frontier folk that they were, the Ostlanders fought as hard as they could, and the Count of Ostland gathered an army to fight the green tide.
At the Battle of Grim Moor the Count Valmir von Raukov won a temporary respite, putting to rout many of Azhag's Goblins before being forced to withdraw.
Azhag flew over the battlefield on his wyvern, swooping upon regiment after regiment and harrying the retreating army as it made its way to the refuge of Wolfenburg.
After the battle Orc tribes came from the Forest of Shadows, swelling Azhag's horde still further, but the Count of Ostland built his defences well and Wolfenburg held out.
Frustrated at this set-back Azhag headed south, where the horde wreaked havoc, destroying the town of Forstich before turning back east through the Great Forest and into Ostermark once more.
By now the Emperor's army was approaching from the south, led by one of his most able generals, Marshal Otto Blucher.
The two armies met near the village of Osterwald, where, after a long and close fought battle the Orcs were driven from the field.
Early in the battle Azhag was struck from the back of his wyvern while fighting against the Knights Panther, leaving the Orc army leaderless and demoralised in the face of a fierce Empire attack.
It was the end of Azhag and of the Waaagh — with a single blow the Orc horde had been defeated, and after the battle it would disperse into the forests and hills.
As for the Crown of Sorcery, it was recovered and taken back to Altdorf by the Grand Theogonist of Sigmar who placed it in the deepest vault of the Temple to be guarded for eternity by powerful spells and iron locks.
GROM THE PAUNCH OF MISTY MOUNTAIN
Most of the warlords whose campaigns of destruction have shaken the world and threatened the destruction of the realms of Men have been Orcs rather than Goblins.
Orcs are bigger than Goblins, more dangerous, and more brutally ambitious.
Grom was to prove the exception, a Goblin who was not only as dangerous and ambitious as the best Orc, but vastly bigger as well!
It was not that Grom was especially tall, certainly not as tall as an Orc, but he was enormously and infamously fat.
In fact he was so huge that he became known as the Paunch of Misty Mountain, or simply as Grom the Fat.
If tales are to be believed his improbable bulk was due to his eating raw Troll for a wager.
Apart from being enormously tough, Troll flesh has the unusual property of being able to regenerate itself quite quickly.
If a Troll suffers harm his flesh will almost instantly re-grow.
It is this as much as their stubborn stupidity and iron-hard muscle which makes Trolls very hard to fight.
It also makes Troll flesh virtually impossible to eat unless it is very thoroughly cooked.
Determined to out-eat his challenger, Grom consumed a plate of raw Troll steaks only to discover the meat regenerating inside his stomach.
As the churning mass swelled within him his resilient Goblin digestive system got to work on the over-abundance of raw material.
For days Grom lay moaning and groaning as at first the Troll's regenerative abilities outpaced his own ability to digest it and then his stomach gradually gained ground.
Eventually an equilibrium was reached, and although the Troll flesh was still there Grom was digesting it as fast as it was regrowing.
After several weeks of fevered indigestion and almost terminal flatulence Grom emerged triumphant.
He was also quite a bit fatter.
Although he ate nothing afterwards he continued to gain weight thanks to the presence of the Troll flesh.
He was to suffer from bouts of explosive flatulence for the rest of his life.
Grom's tribe was the Broken Axe, a tribe of Goblins that lived at the eastern end of Mad Dog Pass.
The tribe occupied one of the countless tumble-down fortresses that line the craggy and tunnel strewn pass.
Some time around the Imperial year 2400 Grom engaged in the infamous eating contest described above.
The effect was to be startling and highly visible.
To Orcs and Goblins size is power and by any reckoning Grom was looking to be very powerful indeed.
Within ten years he had conquered the other tribes along the Mad Dog Pass and subjugated the Night Goblin tribes that lived around and under Thunder Mountain.
It was the beginning of Waaagh Grom and the birth of a legend amongst Orc kind.
For a number of years the Broken Axe tribe wandered west and north, conquering the Orc and Goblin tribes of the southern Worlds Edge Mountains and the Badlands.
Some time around the year 2410 Grom led his horde over the Black Fire Pass and then northwards along the Dwarf-held highlands.
Destroying several small Dwarf holds and looting the tombs of Dwarf ancestors, his forces roamed unopposed whilst the Dwarfs gathered their forces.
At the Battle of Iron Gate, the site of one of the old Dwarf gateways into Karak Varn, the King of the Dwarfs and his army met a part of Grom's Horde led by Grom himself.
After a long and hard fought battle the two sides retreated leaving many dead on the field but no clear victor.
None-the-less the battle ultimately favoured Grom who could afford to lose vast numbers of troops without affecting his horde's strength.
For the Dwarfs it was a disaster.
Many of the King's best warriors lay dead and all hope of driving the horde away were gone.
In desperation the Dwarfs sent to the Empire for help.
Unfortunately for the Dwarfs and for the Empire the reigning Emperor was Dieter IV, the Elector Count of Stirland, perhaps the most ineffective and self serving individual ever to sit upon the Imperial throne.
For years Dieter had diverted resources away from the army and into his own pocket.
Nothing had been spared to turn the city of Nuln into a spectacular metropolis with marble fountains, golden statues, and dazzling gardens.
Dieter had razed nearly half the city to build his awesome Palace of Gold with its surrounding temples and public gardens.
When the Dwarf King's messenger reached Dieter the Emperor reacted immediately, not by sending help (for the army was so starved of funds there was no help to send) but by removing his entire court westwards to Altdorf in order to be as far as possible from the threat of Grom's horde.
Disgusted, the Dwarf messenger returned to Karaz a Karak where the King received the news of the Emperor's decision with typical Dwarf stoicism.
Unable to contain the Goblin Warlord's ambitions, the Dwarfs resolved to shut their stout doors and defend their fortresses from within.
For the next few years the horde ravaged at will through the mountains, desecrating shrines, despoiling tombs, and waylaying travellers, but Grom was unable to take any of the Dwarf holds or bring them to battle.
As the Waaagh roamed freely over the Worlds Edge Mountains it was joined by multitudes of Goblins including the Night Goblin tribes of Red Eye Mountain and many Forest Goblin tribes from the Great Forest.
As his armies grew in number and strength Grom ventured further and further west, devastating much of Stirland, Talabecland and even going as far as Hochland in the shadow of the Middle Mountains.
Empire armies were met and defeated.
The human population retreated to the towns and much of the countryside was abandoned.
The Great Forest became a virtual Goblin realm where not even an Imperial army was safe.
Nuln, whose city defences had long been neglected in favour of marbled magnificence was attacked and burned.
Dieter's marvellous Palace of Gold and all his great buildings and fountains were destroyed.
The horde moved westward until the whole Empire became a land under siege.
Communities driven from the countryside huddled behind heavily defended walls while outside the horde roamed and plundered at will.
Seeing the humans abandoning their lands, the tribes of the deep forests and high mountains flocked to join the Waaagh.
The end of the Empire seemed inevitable, for no land was being tilled or crops sown, beasts were slaughtered and seed grain ground into flour to feed the hungry.
The Emperor seemed unable or unwilling to even raise an army, but skulked behind the walls of Altdorf and dreamed of better days.
While the Emperor did nothing, his cousin, Wilhelm Prince of Altdorf, was to prove the saviour of the Empire.
He organised the defence of Altdorf and raised a new army from amongst the beleaguered citizens.
Although Wilhelm's army was no match for the total power of the Waaagh, Grom's forces were split up all over the Empire into many small armies.
By avoiding the largest concentrations of Orcs and Goblins Wilhelm was able to fight several successful holding actions and prevent Grom from completely devastating the Reikland.
Meanwhile Grom's attentions had turned to the west and to the coastal regions of the Empire.
After wreaking havoc throughout the Middenland and defeating an army led by the Count of Middenheim, Grom reached the shores of the ocean.
According to Imperial records the horde gathered at the coast and began to construct a huge fleet.
Acres of forest were felled to provide the timber, and whole tribes of Goblins were sent to forage for materials amongst the ruins of the Empire.
For weeks the forges bellowed and Goblins sweated as Grom's fleet took shape.
It was a fleet whose like had never been seen before, vast hulks of crudely fashioned wood propelled by massive tread wheels and gigantic sails.
The world watched as the fleet took shape.
Riders from the Empire sent word to Bretonnia, Kislev, and the southern kingdoms warning them of the inevitable approach of the armada.
Rulers throughout the Old World trembled and waited, hoping that the path of the Waaagh would pass them by.
When the fleet put sail outriders from the Empire followed its progress along the coast.
At Marienburg the Orcs fought a massive and bloody sea battle against the Empire fleet, sending half the Imperial ships to the bottom of the sea and scattering the rest to the four winds.
Marienburg lay open to the plundering Orc and Goblin horde and the sturdy Marienburgers prepared to defend their city.
As fortune would have it the weather turned for the worse, and Grom's fleet was blown westward before a devastating storm.
The Goblins, unused to the sea and ignorant of navigation, could do nothing but ride out the storm.
At least one ship was broken up and its wreckage cast upon the coasts of Bretonnia, but of Grom and the rest of the Waaagh nothing was ever seen again in the realms of Men.
Only years later did the full story of Grom's voyage to the Elven land of Ulthuan emerge, and did Men learn of the final defeat and destruction of the Waaagh before Tor Yvresse
WAAAGH SKARSNIK
After the collapse of the Dwarf empire almost three and a half thousand years ago the Dwarf stronghold of Karak Eight Peaks lay in ruins.
Its deep caverns and tunnels were taken over by Night Goblins and Skaven.
Deeper still nameless horrors crawled into the old Dwarf mines and settled in the long-abandoned depths.
Within a few years of Karak Eight Peaks' fall the Night Goblins had settled permanently in the ruins and split into many tribes based around the adjoining mountains and the tunnels that ran beneath them.
Although the Dwarfs often tried to recapture Karak Eight Peaks they did not succeed until about the Imperial year 2470, when Belegar established a fortified bridgehead in the old citadel.
Though the Dwarfs were forced to live in a virtual state of siege, they gradually managed to clear the Night Goblins and other evil creatures out of the upper levels.
Today Belegar and his kinsfolk still live amongst the ruins of Karak Eight Peaks, and hope one day to reconquer the whole realm of their ancestors.
Belegar's Dwarfs face constant raiding by the Night Goblin tribes that live in the surrounding eight peaks of the old Dwarf kingdom.
The most powerful of these tribes is the Crooked Moon tribe under its leader Skarsnik.
Skarsnik is a cunning and observant leader who has grown to understand the Dwarf mind.
When Belegar arrived he watched the Dwarfs rebuild their citadel but did not attack at first.
Instead he waited until stragglers ventured outside the walls and then picked them off one by one, capturing the Dwarfs alive if possible and tormenting them for days within earshot of the citadel walls.
Over the years Skarsnik has amassed a large collection of Dwarf beard scalps which he displays on long wooden stakes driven into the mountain side.
The Dwarfs are forced to watch the number of beard scalps grow day by day, while by night the pounding war drums of the Night Goblins and the screaming of captives haunts their sleep.
Skarsnik's fame has grown amongst the other tribes, and today all the Night Goblins of Karak Eight Peaks, and many others besides, hail him as their undisputed master.
About forty years before the present day, Belegar attempted to break the deadlock with aid from the north.
The Dwarfs sent word to the Dwarf capital of Karaz a Karak high in the Worlds Edge Mountains, explaining that the Night Goblins were virtually holding them prisoners within their own citadel and that without reinforcements it could only be a matter of time before the Dwarfs were defeated.
Duregar, a kinsman of Belegar from Karaz a Karak, immediately gathered an army and marched southwards along the western flanks of the mountains.
By this time Skarsnik's horde had grown into a huge Waaagh.
The Night Goblin warlord's forces were fighting every Dwarf and Orc between Thunder Mountain to the north and Fire Mountain to the south.
In the Badlands several Orc tribes joined the Waaagh.
Even Barak Varr, the Sea Fortress of the Dwarfs by the Black Gulf, was under attack.
As the Dwarfs from Karaz a Karak marched south they saw the rising plumes of smoke in front of them.
Messengers from Barak Varr brought news that the western approaches to Karaz Eight Peaks were held in strength by the Red Fang Orcs led by Gorfang Rotgut.
It was at this point that Duregar made an important decision.
Rather than enter Karak Eight Peaks from the west, he would cross the Worlds Edge Mountains and move south along the eastern edge, entering Karak Eight-Peaks from what he hoped would be the more lightly held eastern gate.
With the sun ebbing in the sky and the smoke of Thunder Mountain drifting across the horizon, the Dwarf army camped at the entrance to Mad Dog Pass.
The following day the Dwarfs advanced into the pass.
Mad Dog Pass is notoriously dangerous.
Its steep sides are thronged with Goblin strongholds and its rocky slopes overlay caves and tunnels that are riddled with evil creatures.
Duregar pinned his hopes on Dwarven determination to keep the army safe.
As the Dwarfs advanced into the mouth of the pass they were attacked by a large army of Orcs and Goblins that had apparently been waiting to attack them from behind once they had moved south.
The Dwarfs were hard pressed at first, but eventually saw the Orcs off with the help of their formidable cannons.
This battle became known later as the Battle of the Jaws, an apt name considering the manner in which the Orc attack closed in on the Dwarfs, like the jaws of the Mad Dog itself.
During the battle five Troll Slayers distinguished themselves by attacking and destroying three Trolls which were perilously close to crushing Duregar himself.
Only two of the Troll Slayers survived.
One was heard to complain that there were insufficient Trolls to go round.
Although the Orcs and Goblins were beaten they accounted for only a small part of Skarsnik's horde.
When he heard of his army's defeat he proclaimed a huge mushroom feast and ordered his shamans to brew up a  fresh batch of Mad Cap fungus liquor for the Fanatics.
Squig Hunters were dispatched into the deep tunnels to fetch more Cave Squigs, while Netters were sent off to hunt down Stone Trolls amongst the mountains.
As the Dwarfs moved south Goblins watched them from the hills, reporting their movements by means of oily smoke signals and throbbing war drums.
Skarsnik sat upon his iron throne and waited.
In the meantime he amused himself by feeding Dwarf captives to Gobbla, the enormous, malodorous and psychopathically vicious Cave Squig which he kept firmly chained to his left leg.
Why the demented creature never bit Skarsnik was a matter of some mystery.
It certainly bit everything else.
Duregar's army moved steadily southwards until it reached the eastern entrance to Death Pass.
The East Gate of Karak Eight Peaks lay several miles inside the pass through a broad side valley paved with ancient stones and studded with the ruined tombs of Dwarf ancestors.
The Dwarfs advanced in battle formation fully expecting an attack from the steep mountain slopes which towered ominously above the old Dwarf road.
The East Gate had been built thousands of years before at a place where a long ridge ran down into the valley causing it to narrow to a hundred yards or less.
Here the Dwarfs of antiquity had built their gate, once a vast and impregnable fortress but now little more than a pile of stone through which the road still led.
In front of the gate and connected to it by a high causeway was a tall grey watchtower whose summit commanded the approach down the valley.
Although partially ruined, the watchtower had been rebuilt and fortified by Skarsnik's Goblins.
Now it was crammed with Night Goblin archers, and on top there was a huge rock lobber crewed by fierce Orcs.
As the Dwarfs marched forwards Orcs and Goblins closed in from their hiding places in the slopes to left and right.
Behind them a huge force of Orcs moved to block their escape.
The Dwarfs were surrounded by foes on all sides.
Stones from the rock lobber began to fall amongst their densely packed ranks.
Duregar pushed forward, pinning his hopes on breaking through the East Gate.
As the Dwarfs approached the first ranks of Night Goblins a massive whoop went up amongst the greenskins, and from out of their formation charged Night Goblin Fanatics whirling balls and chains.
Like spinning tops they lurched crazily towards the Dwarfs.
Many were shot down with crossbow bolts, some whirled away and missed the Dwarfs altogether, but some hit the Dwarfs killing many before collapsing with exhaustion.
The Dwarfs advanced.
The Night Goblins in front were easily driven away, but just as soon as a gap appeared and the Dwarfs caught sight of the gate more Night Goblins charged in to hold them.
Night Goblin archers rained arrows down from the watchtower.
Black-fletched arrows hit Dwarf and Night Goblin alike, but the archers carried on shooting regardless, ignoring the hurt done to their fellows.
Things looked bleak for the Dwarfs.
Over half of their army had been destroyed during the initial rush towards the gate.
The Goblin horde seemed hardly diminished.
With typical Dwarf stubbornness Duregar led his troops up onto a small mound, the remains of an ancient Dwarf tomb, to make his last stand.
As the Dwarfs steeled themselves for the inevitable assault, there was a loud explosion and the gateway burst apart in a cloud of dust.
As the dust cleared Duregar saw Dwarfs pouring through the gateway towards them.
The confused Night Goblins scattered leaving piles of dead in their wake.
It was Belegar and the Dwarfs of Karak Eight Peaks.
They had advanced eastwards from the other side of the gate and destroyed the unsuspecting Night Goblin rearguard before blowing the gates with gunpowder.
The Night Goblins and Orcs were thrown into disorder.
Skarsnik, watching from his vantage point on the mountain slopes, saw his army waver.
For the Dwarfs it was a much needed respite.
The Dwarf forces met across a sea of blood and green bodies.
Forming into a huge and solidly packed square the combined army began to move steadily back towards the gate.
Before they were half way there the Orcs and Goblins regrouped.
When they saw how few Dwarfs there were their confidence returned.
Stones from the rock lobber smashed into the Dwarf column and arrows fell amongst their ranks.
Many Dwarfs stumbled to the ground dead with Goblin arrows embedded in them, but more still made the gate.
Cave Squigs were unleashed upon the Dwarfs, but several were killed by Troll Slayers while others ran wild snapping at the Night Goblins, biting off limbs and heads before vanishing into the mountains.
Smashing through the few Night Goblins that remained to oppose them, Duregar and Belegar headed west.
The Night Goblins continued to harass the Dwarf column all the way to the Citadel, but thanks to their heavy armour and natural toughness there were few more casualties.
As night fell Skarsnik was master of the battlefield, but Duregar and Belegar had escaped his net.
Although not as catastrophic as it might have been, the Battle of East Gate was a resounding defeat for the Dwarfs.
Over half of the Dwarf force had been slain and although Skarsnik had lost many good warriors they were losses he could easily afford.
The Dwarf army was bottled up inside the Citadel and, although not destroyed, the Dwarfs were not going anywhere.
Skarsnik had other enemies to crush, and would launch huge attacks against Karak Azul, Barak Varr and throughout the Badlands over the course of the next three summers.
Gobbla, his hugely bloated and eternally hungry Cave Squig would feed well.
Although repulsed time and time again, Skarsnik's power continues to grow even today, and his grip over the mountains around Karak Eight Peaks is just as tight.
IMPORTANT EVENTS IN ORC HISTORY
Imperial Year  NOTABLE EVENTS IN ORC HISTORY
–c1500
At about this time the Elves abandon the Old World and the declining Dwarf empire is destroyed by earthquakes and volcanic eruptions.
Orcs and Goblins pour over the lands, looting the remaining Elf cities and destroying Dwarf holds.
Karak Ungor is the first Dwarf hold to fall to the Goblins, it becomes the Night Goblin stronghold of Red Eye Mountain.
The Dwarfs refer to the following five hundred years as the time of the Goblin Wars, as Dwarfs and Goblins fight for possession of the old Dwarf empire.
Karak Varn is flooded and then occupied by Skaven and Goblins.
The isolated Dwarf mines at Ekrund in the Dragonback Mountains fall to Orcs who rename the place Mount Bloodfang.
Goblins take over the Dwarf watch towers and forts throughout the Mad Dog Pass.
The Dwarf gold mines at Gunbad fall to the Night Goblins.
Gunbad was the richest and largest mine in the Worlds Edge mountains as well as a source of precious gems and the brilliant blue crystal rock Brynduraz or ‘Bright Stone’.
It is taken over by Goblins and fortified.
–1387
The Silver Road Wars begin between Dwarfs and Goblins.
After twenty years the Dwarfs abandon the mines at Mount Silverspear to the Orcs.
The mines are occupied by Warlord Urk Grimfang and known ever after as Mount Grimfang.
With the loss of Gunbad and Silverspear, the Dwarfs lose their most important mines in the east and within five years they abandon the eastern fringes of the Worlds Edge Mountains altogether.
–c1250
The Troll Wars.
Trolls are driven north by fresh eruptions of Thunder Mountain, attacking Dwarf miners and prospectors and overrunning several small Dwarf settlements south of Karaz a Karak.
–1245
From this time the Dwarfs launch a series of attacks against Goblin-held territories.
They drive the Orcs from the mountains and gain control of the whole area between Karak Kadrin and Mad Dog Pass.
Mount Gunbad is temporarily recaptured by the Dwarfs but then lost again.
Mount Grimfang is attacked but the Dwarfs are beaten off by Orc Chieftain Nurk Ard'ed.
For the next 250 years the Dwarfs consolidate their hold over the mountains, gradually reopening many of their old mines and rebuilding countless tombs of their ancestors.
–c1200
Nagash the Black excavates the Cursed Pit.
Goblins and Orcs flee west to escape the necromantic evil that grips the south.
–1185
Kadrin Redmane the Dwarf Runesmith leads an expedition into the ruins of Karak Varn where he discovers a rich vein of Gromril.
The Dwarfs continue to mine the vein for several years and even talk of resettling the old hold.
–1136
Kadrin Redmane killed by Orcs above Black Water leading a muletrain of Gromril ore.
The Dwarf miners pull out from Karak Varn under renewed pressure from Skaven in the depths.
–975
Battle of a Thousand Woes.
A Dwarf attempt to recapture Red Eye Mountain fails when the Dwarf army is ambushed somewhere north of Karak Kadrin.
Many Dwarfs are slain and the Dwarfs give up their attempted reconquests.
The Dwarfs concentrate on fortification and consolidation, so few records are made of Orc activity for the next few hundred years.
–750
The Red Cloud Goblin tribe attacks Karak Azgul and are repulsed.
They then go on to attack and partially occupy the hold of Karak Azul.
Ten years of hard fighting follow before the Goblins are eventually expelled.
–513
After hundreds of years of embattled resistance the Dwarf city of Karak Eight Peaks falls to attack by Orcs, Goblins and Skaven.
Its ruins and the surrounding mountains become infested with Goblins and Skaven who fight each other for possession of what remains.
–469
Orc Warlord Dork leads a huge army of Orcs and Goblins to take the Dwarf hold of Karak Azgal which he destroys and abandons, leaving the secrets of its depths unexplored.
Three years later he attacks and captures the Dwarf hold of Karak Drazh which is occupied and renamed Black Crag.
Within fifty years of the fall of Karak Eight Peaks the Dwarfs have lost all of their major holds south of Karaz a Karak with the exception of Karak Azul, which is under constant siege.
All the mountains between Mad Dog Pass and Karak Eight Peaks are Orc or Goblin controlled.
–370
According to Dwarf tradition the rampages of Urgok the Beard Burner occur about this time.
Orcs and Goblins almost overwhelm the remaining Dwarf holds but are finally beaten back at the Battle of Black Water.
–15 to 50
The time of Sigmar sees the Orcs and Goblins driven out of the lands west of the Worlds Edge Mountains.
Orcs take refuge in the deep forests or travel north into the Troll Country.
Goblins flee to the mountains.
A massive Orc army is defeated at the Battle of Black Fire Pass (in the year -1), a resounding defeat which paved the way for the accession of Sigmar as the first Emperor.
977
Gilles le Breton conquers all the lands west of the Grey Mountains and creates the land of Bretonnia.
Orcs and Goblins retreat to the Grey Mountains and northern forests under pressure from the new Bretonnian armies.
1142
Guillaume, the third Bretonnian King, defeats a large Orc army at the Battle of Armandur and drives out the last of the Orcs from northern Bretonnia.
c1705
Around this time Gorbad Ironclaw defeats Crusher Zogoth and unites the Ironclaw and Broken Tooth tribes at the fortress of Iron Rock.
1707–1712
The greatest Warlord of all time, Gorbad Ironclaw, leads a huge Waaagh into the Empire.
Averland and the Moot are devastated.
Averheim and Nuln are taken and burned.
At the battle of Solland's Crown Eldred Count of Solland is slain and his magic sword the Runefang of Solland taken by the Orcs.
Solland is devastated.
Gorbad is badly wounded at the Battle of Grunberg, but the battle is won and the Empire army flees back to Altdorf.
Altdorf is besieged.
The Emperor Sigismund is killed in the fighting.
Gorbad's wound causes him to become weaker and weaker, until the Waaagh gradually loses impetus.
The Orc army breaks up leaving the eastern half of the Empire in ruins.
2201
The beginning of the Errantry Wars when Louen Orc Slayer, the King of Bretonnia, declares his intention to rid Bretonnia of Orcs.
Over the next century Bretonnian territory is gradually cleared of Orcs who take to the mountains and forests to escape the king's knights.
2302
The Great War Against Chaos in the north forces many Orc tribes southwards into the Empire and Worlds Edge Mountains.
Some join Chaos but others attack the Chaos armies as they pass.
2420
Bretonnian King Charlen announces his intention to carry the Errantry Wars east into the Border Princes and beyond.
Bretonnian knights win a huge victory against Orcs at Blood River, and more settlers move east into the Border Princes.
2420–2424
The Goblin Warlord Grom leads a coalition of Orc and Goblin tribes into the Worlds Edge Mountains.
After defeating the Dwarfs at the battle of Iron Gate the Waaagh moves into the Empire.
Much of the north and east is devastated and Nuln is burned to the ground.
Grom leads his armies to the sea where he builds a huge fleet and sails into the west, never to be seen again in the Old World.
Years later it is discovered that Grom reached the Elven Kingdoms of Ulthuan, causing great destruction until finally defeated by the High Elves.
2488
The Battle of Death Pass.
A Bretonnian army is defeated by Morglum Necksnapper.
The Bretonnian king declares the Errantry Wars at an end.
2498
The Battle of the Jaws.
An Orc army is defeated at the western end of Mad Dog Pass by Dwarfs led by Duregar.
Dwarfs subsequently beaten at the Battle of East Gate by the Night Goblin Warlord Skarsnik.
The partially resettled Dwarf hold of Karak Eight Peaks is under constant pressure from surrounding Goblin tribes.
2500–2510
Orc Warlord Gnashrak unites the Orcs and Goblins of the eastern Worlds Edge Mountains and leads a huge army along the Silver Road towards Karaz a Karak.
The Orcs rampage through the mountains for years, causing considerable destruction and even threatening to capture the capital.
Eventually Gnashrak is defeated and captured at the Battle of Broken Leg Gulley by a Dwarf army led by Lord Ungrim Ironfist of Karak Kadrin.
2503–7
An Orc army under Gorfang Rotgut besieges Barak Varr and later joins up with Orc and Goblin tribes led by Morglum Necksnapper to attack Karak Azul.
The Orcs briefly take possession of parts of the Hold and Gorfang captures many kinsfolk of Lord Kazador.
2512–2515
Orc Warlord Azhag the Slaughterer leads a huge army of Orcs and Night Goblins into the northern Empire.
He is finally met and defeated at the Battle of Osterwald.
ANIMOSITY
Because they argue and fight amongst themselves even in the thick of battle, Orcs and Goblins are affected by a special Animosity rule.
The Animosity rule is explained below in complete detail.
Although basically the same as that given in the Warhammer rulebook, we have made a few additions and included more explanation, so we suggest you read through these new rules even if you are already familiar with the original ones.
In particular, note that Mobs already fighting in hand-to-hand combat are not affected by Animosity — they are too busy bashing the enemy to worry about bashing each other .
Orcs and Goblins argue and fight amongst themselves continually.
Even at the best of times fighting in the ranks can cause disarray and confusion in the army.
The behaviour of Orc and Goblin units (Mobs) can be rather unpredictable.
One moment a Mob is striding purposefully towards the enemy, and the next it is suddenly brought to a halt while two warriors settle their differences.
This wayward tendency is a great drawback to an Orc warlord.
Inevitably you will hear the cries of squabbling amongst your forces and realise that, once again, your best laid plans have been laid low by some dispute in the ranks.
A good Orc warlord takes such things into account when he draws up his battlelines, but even the best commander will be lucky to avoid the effects of Animosity altogether.
WHO TO TEST
At the start of his turn the Orc player must test amongst his troops to determine if Animosity has taken effect.
You must test separately for each of the following:
1.
Each Orc or Savage Orc Mob
This means you must make a test for every Orc infantry or cavalry unit.
Black Orcs are not affected by Animosity so no test is necessary for Black Orc units.
Big'uns do have to test as they are an Orc Mob.
2.
Each Goblin, Night Goblin, or Forest Goblin Mob
This means you must test for every Goblin infantry and cavalry unit.
This includes Night Goblin Netters and Squig Hunters.
A Mob which is already engaged in hand-to-hand combat at the start of the turn is not affected by Animosity and no test is necessary.
Characters are not affected by Animosity unless they join a Mob, in which case they are affected along with the unit itself.
A shaman will be unable to use his magic if the unit he is with fails its Animosity test.
War machines and chariots are not affected by Animosity.
Night Goblin Fanatics are not affected by Animosity at all.
Obviously the unit they are hiding in can be affected, but the Fanatics are too crazed to realise what is going on.
Squig Hoppers are not affected by Animosity.
Trolls, Snotlings and other creatures in your army are not affected by the Animosity rules.
WHEN TO TEST
At the start of your turn you must test for each Orc and Goblin Mob as described above.
Starting on one side of the table and working through your army, roll a D6 for each unit.
If the dice roll is 2 or more the unit passes the test and may fight normally this turn.
If the dice roll is a 1 then the unit has been affected by Animosity.
THE EFFECT OF ANIMOSITY
To determine what the affected unit does roll a D6 and consult the Animosity Table.
LIVING WITH ANIMOSITY
Animosity is just one of those things.
If you command a horde of Orcs and Goblins you will suffer from its effects now and again, and sometimes it will be a real pain in the neck.
There are a few things you can do to make sure that when Animosity strikes the effect is minimal.
When you choose your army remember that the more Mobs you have the more likely they are to fail an Animosity test.
If you have six Mobs, for example, then on average one unit will  fail its test each turn; if you have twelve Mobs then two units will fail, and so on .
To minimise the chances of failure, make sure you have a few big Mobs rather than lots of small ones.
Goblins need to be in big units to fight well anyway.
When you deploy, bear in mind your Mobs' tendency to fight amongst themselves.
If you place two Mobs beside each other, then there's a chance they might attack each other .
This is an acceptable risk up to a point, but remember that Mobs don't attack chariots, characters on their own, war machines, or units of Trolls, Snotlings, Black Orcs, etc.
This means you can reduce the risk by positioning, say, some Black Orcs between two Orc Boyz Mobs.
Of course, this doesn't stop a Mob squabbling amongst itself, but at least this only halts one unit for a turn rather than bringing two units to a standstill and inflicting casualties.
The classic mistake to make when deploying Orcs is to put one Mob directly behind another.
This is a recipe for disaster, because you have placed both Mobs where they are in an ideal position to charge each other.
Furthermore, if the Mob in front starts to squabble the unit behind is stuck, and won't be able to take advantage of a We'll get 'em result to get an extra move.
If you must place one unit directly behind another, make sure it is a unit that doesn't suffer from Animosity.
The other thing to remember is that Mobs already engaged in hand-to-hand combat are not affected by Animosity and can't be attacked by another Mob that fails its Animosity test.
So don't hang around…get stuck in!
If you just stand around waiting for the enemy to come to you then of course your ladz will get bored, and naturally they'll start to get a bit fractious, then inevitably they'll end up failing an Animosity test probably just when you don't want them to.
You can get stuck in faster with a We'll get ‘em result on the Animosity Table of course, and sometimes this can really work in your favour, much to the dismay of your enemy.
ORC & GOBLIN ANIMOSITY TABLE
1
Get ‘em
Them other greenskins is asking for trouble!
Pulling faces, shouting rude insults, hurling dung.
They deserve a good bashing!
If your Mob is armed with bows, crossbows, or other missile weapons, then this turn it will halt and shoot at the nearest other Orc or Goblin Mob.
Note that the target must be an infantry or cavalry Mob of the kind that has to take an Animosity test itself — not a chariot, war engine, etc and not a Mob that is already engaged with the enemy.
Although the Mob doesn't move, individual models may be turned in the ranks in order to shoot at their target.
Work out the effects of shooting immediately — this means that shooting due to Animosity is worked out before normal shooting.
The Mob cannot do anything else that turn, it will not move and it cannot shoot.
If there are no other Orcs or Goblins to fire at, the affected Mob squabbles instead (see below).
If your Mob is not armed with missile weapons then it will charge the nearest other Orc or Goblin Mob if able to do so.
Note that the target must be an infantry or cavalry Mob of the kind that has to take an Animosity test itself, not a chariot, war engine etc, and not a Mob which is already engaged against the enemy.
If unable to charge (for example if it is too far away) then the Mob squabbles instead (see below).
Assuming it is able to charge, the Mob is immediately moved against its target and a huge brawl breaks out.
Immediately work out hand-to-hand combat with all models in base contact fighting.
Once both sides have fought, casualties are removed and the two rival units spend the rest of the turn unable to do anything while they dust themselves down.
There is no further effect — the two Mobs do not continue to fight in following turns.
2–5
Squabble
Ratgut is a filthy lyin' git and he spat on my favourite boots.
He needs teaching a lesson!
An internal squabble amongst the ranks soon grows into a minor riot with fists and curses flying.
This throws the Mob into disorder and prevents all moving and shooting this turn.
The unit does nothing this turn while the Bosses crack heads together to restore order.
6
We'll Show ‘em
The rest of the army is just softies compared to us.
We'll show 'em how it's done.
Charge!
Determined to show that they are best, the Mob dashes forward towards the enemy, cheering, waving weapons, and jeering at their foes.
The Mob immediately moves forward a full normal move towards the nearest visible enemy unit, deducting the usual penalties for terrain.
You must move the full distance possible.
You cannot move less unless there is another unit or an uncrossable obstacle in the way.
If you move into an enemy unit you count as having charged it.
This extra move is an exception to the normal movement sequence.
Once the Mob has moved it may still move in the movement phase, shoot and fight just as normal.
If the extra move brings you to within charge range of an enemy unit then you may declare a charge and attack it in your movement phase if you wish.
SHAMANS
Orc and Goblin wizards are called shamans.
The power of a shaman comes from the the raw Waaagh energy radiated by all the Orcs and Goblins near him.
The more greenskins there are crowded around a shaman the more easily he can cast spells.
However, a shaman can handle only so much Waaagh energy.
If there are too many Orcs and Goblins jostling around him, all excitedly generating raw unconscious power, then the shaman can suffer dizzying sickness, horrendous injuries or even death.
For this reason Orc and Goblin shamans must take a special Waaagh Test during the magic phase as described in Warhammer Battle Magic.
As an Orc shaman gains in power and experience he learns how to handle the Waaagh energy better, hence Orc shamans are allowed to add their magic level to their Waaagh Test dice roll (D6 + magic level, as explained under Waaagh Magic in Warhammer Battle Magic).
Goblin shamans, however, are more delicate: their minds are keener and more receptive than those of Orcs, they are more intelligent and definitely more imaginative.
This makes them more susceptible to the effects of Waaagh energy.
Night Goblin and Forest Goblin shamans have special rules which make them different from other Goblin shamans.
Night Goblin shamans are allowed to gobble pieces of mushroom to give them extra power, while Forest Goblin shamans are immune to ‘Eadbangin’ thanks to the spider venom flowing through their veins.
NIGHT GOBLIN SHAMANS
Night Goblins eat vast quantities of the multi-coloured fungi that grow in the dank caves where they live.
Some of these fungi contain toxins that are either hallucinogenic or downright poisonous — but Goblins have tough digestive systems and can cope with this sort of thing.
Night Goblin shamans are especially well-versed in fungus lore — they know which mushrooms can be eaten safely, which to avoid, and which to use for their potions and brews.
It is the Night Goblin shamans who brew up the Mad Cap mushroom brew which sends the Goblin Fanatics drink into a whirling frenzy.
Because he is constantly handling, tasting and eating fungi the spores tend to work their way into the shaman's skin, penetrating his bloodstream and saturating his body.
These spores take root in the Night Goblin's flesh and gradually start to change him.
If the shaman is exposed to the  insidious effects of the fungus for too long he may eventually turn into a giant shaman mushroom.
A magic-saturated shaman mushroom is very potent indeed, containing the essence of the shaman's magical power.
If another living shaman eats a portion of shaman mushroom then it dissolves inside him and releases vast amounts of magic energy.
SPECIAL RULES
All Night Goblin shamans begin the game with one piece of shaman mushroom per magic level.
A Shaman has one piece of mushroom, a Shaman Champion two, a Master Shaman three and a Shaman Lord four.
Each piece of mushroom can be used once during the game.
The Night Goblin shaman may consume a single piece of mushroom at the start of any magic phase, before the Winds of Magic are determined.
The shaman automatically receives D6 extra magic cards to use during that magic phase.
These extra cards can only be used by that shaman — they cannot be used by other shamans.
Normally a Goblin shaman must be within 12″ of at least one Orc or Goblin Mob to use his magic.
However, if a Night Goblin shaman eats a piece of mushroom he can use magic even if there are no other Orcs or Goblins near.
As there is no other source of Waaagh power within 12″ the Shaman receives no magic cards from the Winds of Magic, he only gets the D6 cards from consuming the mushroom.
There is, however, a price to be paid for such power.
As the energy of the mushroom surges through the Night Goblin shaman there is an enormous risk of his brain overloading and dribbling out of his ears.
Make the Waaagh Test as normal (see Warhammer Battle Magic) but if you fail deduct -1 from the D6 roll on the ‘Eadbangerz Chart.
This penalty only applies when the mushroom has been eaten; at other times the shaman rolls normally.
FOREST GOBLINS
The Forest Goblin tribes share their domain with a great variety of spiders.
Some of these creatures are eaten, others are kept as pets or ridden to war, while the very biggest are worshipped as gods.
Forest Goblin shamans encourage small poisonous spiders to nest in their robes and live upon their bodies.
These gaily coloured little creatures run all over the shaman's body, and often live in convenient crannies such as in his ears and in between his toes.
When a shaman opens his mouth dozens of tiny spiders skitter between his teeth and run up his nose.
As a result of the spiders’ poisonous bites the shaman becomes immune to their toxin and his flesh becomes almost completely numb.
Orcs and Goblins feel little pain anyway, but Forest Goblin shamans feel none at all.
Because of the build up of venom in their system the Forest Goblin shamans inhabit a dream-like world haunted by strange spider gods and shadowy eight-legged daemons.
Their oddly twisted vision of reality is reflected in their wide-eyed stare and slavering tongue stained purple with spider venom.
Although plainly crazy, the shamans are possessed of great power, for the spider venom that addles their mind also stimulates the part of their brain that controls magic.
SPECIAL RULES
Thanks to the intoxicating venom that floods his brain the Forest Goblin Shaman has great powers of mental control.
He must take a Waaagh Test just like any other Goblin shaman, but he automatically adds +1 to his dice roll on the ‘Eadbangerz Chart.
If he rolls a 6 then he is completely unaffected just as if he had passed his Waaagh Test.
This means that the worst score a Forest Goblin can get on the ‘Eadbangerz Chart is 2 (‘I fink I'm gonna…’) and it is impossible for him to ‘Eadbang.
Unfortunately, while his powers of mental control are impressive, this cannot be said of his ability to control his physical body.
Forest Goblin shamans are prone to run off dizzily, or just blunder about, unable to distinguish fact from venom-induced fiction.
Therefore, every time a Forest Goblin shaman fails a Waaagh Test he automatically staggers D6″ in a random direction.
Use a scatter dice to determine which direction he moves in.
This happens even if he subsequently rolls a 6 for his ‘Eadbangerz Test.
Move the shaman before applying the ‘Eadbangerz results.
If he walks into something he will stop.
If he moves into an enemy then he is engaged in hand-to-hand combat and must fight in the following hand-to-hand combat round (he counts as charging in the first round as is also the case with magically induced movement).
If already in hand-to-hand combat then he won't move away, but counts as charging again in the next round (the shaman dashes around with insane vigour much to the astonishment of his foes).
SAVAGE ORC SHAMANS
Savage Orc shamans are renowned for their extraordinary powers and their ability to make magic potions.
When the Savage Orcs go to war their shaman marks them with tribal tattoos using a strong magical concoction.
These tattoos protect the Savage Orc Boyz like armour.
If a Savage Orc shaman is with a Mob of Savage Orcs then the power of their tattoos is enhanced still further, while the wild energy of the Mob increases the Savage Orc shaman's own power.
SPECIAL RULES
If a Savage Orc shaman joins a Mob of Savage Orcs (Boyz or Boar Boyz) then he gets +1 extra magic card when the magic cards are dealt at the start of the magic phase.
This extra card can only be used by that shaman — the card cannot be used by other shamans.
In addition, his protective tattoos now confer a saving throw of 5 or 6 rather than a 6.
If a Savage Orc shaman joins a Mob of Savage Orcs (Boyz or Boar Boyz) then the Boyz’ protective tattoos give them a saving throw of a 5 or 6 rather than 6.
This means a Mob of Savage Orcs with shields will have a save of 4, 5 or 6, for example.
Remember that the protective value of a tattoo is not affected by weapon modifiers.
However, if a weapon allows no save (eg, a cannon) then a protective tattoo does not save either.
SUMMARY
Night Goblin Shamans
1.
A Night Goblin shaman may consume a piece of mushroom at the start of the magic phase.
This gives him +D6 magic cards.
2.
Even if they are more than 12″ away from Orcs/Goblins, Night Goblin shamans may use magic by consuming mushroom.
If they do this, they receive no other magic cards.
3.
When they consume mushrooms Night Goblin shamans deduct -1 from their dice score when they roll on the ‘Eadbangerz Chart.
Forest Goblin Shamans
1.
Forest Goblin shamans add +1 to their dice score when rolling on the ‘Eadbangerz Chart.
2.
Whenever they fail a Waaagh Test they move D6″ in a random direction.
Savage Orc Shamans
1.
A Savage Orc shaman receives an additional magic card if he is with a Mob of Savage Orcs.
2.
Both shaman and the Savage Orc Boyz have a save of 5 or 6 from their protective tattoos when a shaman is with the unit.
WAR MACHINES
GOBLIN DOOM DIVER CATAPULT
By far the majority of Goblin tribes are partly nomadic.
They journey from plain to forest, or along the river valleys and mountain passes, where they buy, sell, or steal things that they can re-sell to other Orcs and Goblins later on.
Goblins make a living bartering and trading with Forest Goblins, Night Goblins, as well as Orcs, Ogres and other creatures.
They particularly enjoy dealing with Orcs as it gives them a chance to outwit their larger and more brutal cousins.
This they accomplish fairly easily as Orcs are rather dim.
Goblin tribes often include huge caravans of scrap metal, captured monsters in crude wooden cages, as well as captive men, Elves and Dwarfs.
The lumbering carts and chariots are protected by outriders mounted on giant wolves who patrol the area in front of the advancing tribe, probing for enemies and scouting for small settlements to loot.
As the outriders can only move so fast, their ability to reconnoitre ahead is limited.
To overcome this shortcoming the Goblins have developed a unique machine known as the Doom Diver Catapult, more often referred to as the bat-winged loony lobber.
This machine, a small but powerful catapult, lobs Goblins high into the air, from where they can spy out the land ahead.
Of course, the information they glean is of little value if the Goblin is pulverised as he impacts with the ground.
To help keep the Goblin alive, if not exactly intact, a whole variety of life preserving techniques were originally developed.
These included tying lots of cushions to the Goblin, making parachutes, and kitting him out with wings.
Although none of these methods have ever proved completely successful, the idea of having wings appealed to the Goblins best of all and the other methods rapidly fell out of favour.
In any case, Goblins have a marked tendency to bounce so casualties are probably fewer than one might reasonably expect.
It didn't take long for some bright spark to try out the Doom Diver Catapult in a battle.
It was probably whilst flying high over an approaching enemy that one Goblin got a bit carried away, and steering himself as best as he could with his crude wings, crashed right down onto the enemy army.
So impressive was the damage, and the mess, that willing Goblins soon began to take this form of warfare quite seriously.
It does not seem to bother them that their chances of survival are low, but then only the most crazed Goblins would want to be propelled high into the air anyway.
These Goblin are known as Doom Divers, although it is usual for other (saner) Goblins to call them bat-winged loonies.
The Doom Divers themselves care not a jot about such criticism, they know that the ultimate excitement of diving through the air at high speed is well worth the considerable risks.
In the dirty, brutal and often painfully short life of a Goblin the chance of swooping through the air and smashing right through their enemies is just too good to miss.
Doom Divers take their opportunity very seriously, practising for weeks by jumping off increasingly taller rocks, strengthening their arms by flapping their wings as they run about in circles, and getting trolls to throw them into the air.
When the big day comes the Doom Diver prepares by strapping on his wings which he makes himself (no Doom Diver trusts any other Goblin to make his wings and gets very angry if anyone else should even so much as touch them).
Next he straps on his spiked helmet.
The spiked helmet is intended to spear his chosen target, but in reality the huge splat the Goblin makes as he hits the ground is what tends to cause the damage.
Finally he hooks his belt onto the Doom Diver Catapult and braces himself for sudden acceleration.
The catapult is powered by a huge piece of stretchy sinew and the height the Goblin reaches is largely dependent on how far back the Doom Diver can force the catapult.
It has been known for Goblins to get so ambitious that the entire catapult springs from its mounts and hits the Goblin splat in the face, putting paid to the whole device.
When he just can't stretch the catapult any further, the Goblin emits a frantic whoop and lets go.
With a loud twang the Doom Diver is propelled high into the air, his exulted cries and excited squeaks gradually dimming as he becomes a tiny speck above the Goblin army.
The Doom Diver rips through the clouds like a bullet until he reaches the pinnacle of his ascent.
The lands below are a patchwork quilt across which armies of ants march and countermarch.
Using his wings he begins to glide downwards, and by dropping one wing tip and then the  other he guides himself towards the enemy army and his chosen target.
It can take several minutes for the Goblin to pick his target, at which point he folds his wings back and starts to plummet, yelling wildly as the speed of his descent drives his small Goblin brain wild.
Down on the ground the first thing to be heard is a distant squeal, and a sharp-sighted man might just discern a black dot like a bird high in the sky.
With worrying rapidity the dot expands into the silhouette of the Doom Diver, and the squeal expands into a terrifying roar of ecstatic destruction.
The screaming exultation of the descending Doom Diver is enough to scatter troops who are not particularly steadfast.
When the Goblin finally impacts his spike drives straight through whatever he lands upon.
If this is an enemy he will almost certainly be slain.
If he lands on a tree or on the ground he sticks in like a dart, and even if he survives the impact he won't be able to free himself easily.
It is more likely the Goblin will be smashed apart — which although sad is considered a good way to go for a Goblin and infinitely better than being eaten by a peckish troll.
Alternatively the Goblin might survive the impact and bounce around two or three times, possibly breaking a few bones but definitely causing considerable damage to the enemy he lands on.
DOOM DIVER RULES
The catapult and Doom Diver model constitutes the Doom Diver Catapult war machine.
Although there is only a single Doom Diver model it is assumed that there is an infinite supply of would-be Doom Divers ready and waiting to be thrown into the air.
The catapult works very much like a stone thrower as described in the Warhammer rules except that the Goblin is able to steer himself to his target and is therefore more accurate than a stone.
The catapult may be fired in the shooting phase.
You will need the smaller 2″ diameter template supplied with Warhammer — the catapult is much smaller than a regular stone thrower so the template is smaller too.
Firstly pivot the catapult on the spot so that it is pointing in the direction you wish to shoot.
Now declare how far you wish to throw the Doom Diver.
As with stone throwers you must do this without measuring the distance to your target, so you must guess the range as accurately as you can.
There is no limit to the distance you can guess other than the confines of the tabletop.
Once you have made your guess place the template directly over the spot where you have guessed.
To decide if the Goblin lands where you have aimed it roll both the scatter dice and the artillery dice.
The scatter dice is marked with arrows on four sides and the word HIT on two sides.
If you roll a HIT then you have hit, and the Goblin lands bang on target.
If you roll an arrow the Goblin Doom Diver has missed and veered off in the direction indicated by the arrow.
The artillery dice is marked 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 and MISFIRE.
If you roll a misfire then something has gone wrong — roll a D6 and consult the Doom Diver Misfire Chart.
A misfire result automatically cancels out the shot even if you also roll a HIT.
If you roll a number on the artillery dice and an arrow on the scatter dice then this is the distance the Goblin veers off target: reposition the template the distance indicated.
If you roll a HIT on the scatter dice and numbers on the artillery dice then the numbers are ignored — they have no effect — the Doom Diver has landed smack on target.
Because the Doom Diver can steer himself as he dives downwards, he can attempt to correct his flight path should he veer away from his target.
If the template veers off target, you may attempt to bring it back towards the original target.
Roll a D6 and move the template back the number of inches indicated.
If the D6 roll is more than the distance you have veered away then the Doom Diver has over compensated and the template is moved over and beyond the target the full distance roll.
DAMAGE
Once you have worked out where the Goblin lands you can work out damage.
The model that lies directly under the centre point of the template is automatically hit and suffers a strength 10 hit.
Note that this direct hit can only ever affect one model.
If your roll to wound is successful the individual receives not one wound as normal, but D6 wounds.
If the creature has only one wound this further dice roll is, of course, unnecessary, as it will be slain whatever the result.
However, it does mean that you can take out big monsters with a direct hit from a Doom Diver, which makes them very useful indeed.
No saving throw is ever allowed for armour.
The spike on the Goblin's head can pierce even the thickest dragon-hide and armour.
Models whose bases lie under the rest of the template are hit on the D6 roll of 4+.
As with stone throwers you will have to use your judgement to decide how many models are caught.
The rule of thumb is that a model is a potential target if at least half of its base area if covered by the template.
Any models hit are not struck by the Goblin's spike, but caught by pieces of flying debris, smashed weapons, and broken armour.
This is nowhere near as dangerous as the spike itself, but still causes a strength 5 attack on any targets hit.
This further damage inflicts only 1 wound and saving throws apply as normal.
The catapult itself is fairly solid and difficult to destroy.
There is no crew as such because the Doom Diver effectively launches himself, although it is assumed that there are a number of Doom Divers ready and willing to step forward and be catapulted into the air.
The Doom Diver has the same profile as an ordinary Goblin.
Should the Doom Diver be slain then the catapult cannot shoot in its following turn while another Doom Diver steps forward to replace him — the model can therefore be removed and replaced in its following turn.
The catapult may be moved by the Doom Diver up to 4″ which is the Goblin's normal move.
If the catapult is moved other than to pivot to face the target, then it may not shoot that turn.
The catapult itself has a profile as follows.
LOSS OF DOOM DIVERS
As discussed above there are assumed to be a number of willing Doom Divers ready and waiting to step forward and be catapulted into the air.
The Doom Diver model is not removed when he is shot, but remains in place to indicate that the catapult has a crew of Doom Divers standing ready.
If the model is slain by enemy missile fire or similar then the catapult may not shoot next turn, but the model may be returned to indicate that another Doom Diver has stepped forward.
If the catapult is destroyed, or if the catapult and crew are broken either in hand-to-hand combat or as a result of a psychology test, then the catapult is removed from the game.
SNOTLING PUMP WAGON
The Snotling Pump Wagon is very much like a chariot in that it consists of a wooden fighting platform, rather like a ramshackle wooden hut on wheels, and it moves under its own power.
In the case of the Pump Wagon this power is provided not by horses, wolves or some other beast, but by the frantic pumping of Snotlings which drives a simple mechanism and keeps the Pump Wagon moving.
The Pump Wagon is also equipped with a spiked roller at the front, which crushes and pierces any foes (and Snotling crew) unfortunate enough to fall beneath it.
The rules described for chariots apply to the Pump Wagon as well with a few exceptions which take into account its unusual construction and crew.
As the Pump Wagon has no horses pulling it any hits must be distributed amongst the crew or machine only, as shown on the chart below.
The Pump Wagon is heavily constructed and has the same basic profile as a chariot.
This is shown here again for convenience.
Like a chariot, the Pump Wagon causes a great deal of damage as it charges but the effect is even more extreme due to the destructive power of the crunching roller at the front.
The pump wagon is crewed by stand of Snotlings.
The speed of a Pump Wagon tends to be somewhat unpredictable as its crew are continually squabbling over which of them is going to operate the pump.
An enthusiastic Snotling will fight his way forward and pump like crazy for a while until he is completely exhausted when another will shove him aside and take over.
This means the machine tends to go forward in fits and starts, sometimes quite quickly but at other times embarrassingly slowly.
Because the machine's speed is reliant upon the whim of its rather dim-witted crew, the player has little control over its speed at all.
To represent this the Pump Wagon has no fixed move rate.
It automatically moves 2D6″ and is moved along with compulsory movement before other troops can move.
The player can control the direction which the machine moves in, representing the efforts of its crew to steer the thing by leaning precariously to one side or the other, but he has no say over the speed.
If the machine's speed is sufficient to bring it into contact with a target then it is considered to have charged.
No formal declaration of charge is necessary.
The target may make the usual response just as if it had been charged in the normal manner.
It sometimes happens that the Pump Wagon's move means it has to traverse terrain which it cannot cross.
For example it might be forced into a river, bog or straight through a wall.
In these situations the Pump Wagon sustains D6 strength 6 hits due to damage sustained as it crunches and smashes its way through.
It can also happen that a Pump Wagon is obliged to move into friendly troops, although this is rare as you can move the machine as you wish.
A foolish general might surround his Pump Wagon with friendly units only to see the machine crunch through his own lines in the first turn!
When this happens work out the effect just as if it were an enemy unit.
Even the Snotlings will fight as they are far too excited to care what they are doing.
The Pump Wagon does not abandon the fight until the combat is complete and one side broken or destroyed.
A Pump Wagon is dependent on its crew for mobility, so once its crew are all slain it cannot move.
It does not rampage around like a chariot for example.
The model may be removed once the crew are slain, as it is of no further value.
DOOM DIVER CATAPULT SUMMARY
1.
1.
Declare target and guess range
2.
2.
Position template and roll the Scatter and Artillery dice.
3.
3.
If the Artillery dice is MISFIRE refer to Misfire Chart.
Otherwise see below.
4.
4.
If the Scatter dice is a HIT the Doom Diver has struck home.
5.
5.
If the Scatter dice is an arrow the Goblin has landed in the direction shown 2, 4, 6, 8 or 10″ from his aiming point as shown by the Artillery dice.
However, the Goblin may attempt to correct his flight path by D6″.
6.
6.
The single model in the exact centre of the template is hit.
Remaining models beneath the template are hit on a D6 score of 4+.
7.
7.
Work out hits as normal.
The single model which suffers a direct hit has no saving throw.
ROCK LOBBER, BOLT THROWER & CHARIOT RULES SUMMARY
ROCK LOBBER SUMMARY
Orcs call stone throwers rock lobbers, but in all other respects they are exactly the same.
The rules for rock lobbers are summarised below, but see pages 75–76 of the Warhammer rulebook for the complete rules.
1.
1.
Declare target and guess range.
2.
2.
Position template and roll Scatter and Artillery dice.
3.
3.
If the Artillery dice is MISFIRE refer to Misfire Chart, otherwise…
4.
4.
If the Scatter dice is a HIT the stone has struck home.
5.
5.
If the Scatter dice is an arrow the stone has landed in the direction shown 2, 4, 6, 8 or 10″ away from the aiming point as shown on the Artillery dice.
6.
6.
The single model in the exact centre is hit.
Remaining models under the template are hit on the D6 score of a 4+.
7.
7.
Work out hits as normal.
Models are allowed no saving throw from a rock lobber.
BOLT THROWER SUMMARY
For the complete bolt thrower rules, please refer to page 79 of the Warhammer rulebook.
1
1.
Align bolt thrower on target and roll to hit.
2.
2.
Resolve damage at strength 5.
No save is allowed for a bolt thrower.
3.
3.
If the target is slain roll damage against the second rank at strength 4.
4.
4.
Continue rolling for damage until you fail to slay the target or run out of ranks.
Deduct -1 from the strength for each rank already pierced.
CHARIOT SUMMARY
The complete chariot rules can be found on pages 72–73 of the Warhammer rulebook.
1.
1.
Chariots move individually in the same way as large monsters or characters.
If grouped together (within 5″ of another chariot) they may be treated as a unit for leadership tests testing on the value of the highest.
2.
2.
A chariot moves at the speed of the creatures pulling it.
Casualties reduce this speed in proportion, eg a chariot pulled by three Giant Wolves moves 9″.
If one Giant Wolf is slain the chariot moves 6″, if two are slain it moves 3″, if all three are slain it is immobilised.
If all of a chariot's crew are slain it will move 2D6″ up to its maximum speed in a random direction, collapsing on a double.
3
3.
Chariots cannot move over obstacles or difficult terrain except to cross a river at a bridge or ford.
If obliged to do so it suffers D6 S6 hits.
4.
4.
In hand-to-hand combat the enemy fights against the highest WS of the chariot crew.
All hits against the chariot in hand-to-hand or shooting are randomly allocated as shown below.
Remember that chariots are large targets and so +1 to hit.
If a chariot has crew with differing profiles hits may be randomised between them.
5
5.
Chariots have their own profiles as shown below.
Once a chariot has taken its full quota of wounds it is destroyed.
Surviving crew may continue to fight on foot if the player has models to represent them.
6
6.
Crew may fight all round.
Creatures pulling the chariot may fight to their front.
The chariot itself may attack only as it charges causing D6 hits plus +1 per scythe if scythes are fitted on the model.
7.
7.
Chariots flee and pursue exactly like other troops.
If forced to flee and subsequently caught by their pursuers they are destroyed.
8.
8.
In the case of stone throwers and other war machines with a template, treat each individual part of the chariot as a separate target.
TACTICS
The Orc and Goblin army is a real gambler's army, an army with many, many different choices, but ultimately an army that favours aggressive play.
Your troops are not completely predictable — when they're good they're brilliant, but when they're bad they're the worst!
Even the best generals sometimes lose with this army just because that's the way it is.
On the other hand, if the dice roll in your favour you'll thrash your opponent no matter how good he might be.
That's not to say it's just a question of luck whether you win — nothing could be further from the truth.
Like any good gambler you have to understand how the odds work and how to stack things in your favour.
When you start to put your army together you'll be confronted with a bewildering amount of choice because there are so many kinds of troops.
At first the very quantity and variety of troops can be confusing.
It is important to realise that you can't hope to include every type of warrior and machine in your army…there are just too many!
Instead, build your army around a core of reliable troops such as Black Orcs, Big'uns, or Boar Boyz.
This core doesn't have to be very large, it could be a single Mob, but it is necessary to give some solidity to the army.
Once you have decided on your core force you can elaborate upon it by adding more troops, war machines, and monsters.
When choosing your army bear in mind that some types of character model, war engines, or special troops are only available if your army includes Mobs of corresponding Orc or Goblin types.
For example, you need at least one Goblin Mob to include Doom Divers.
If you want to include specific special troops or machines you'll have to tailor your army appropriately.
If you play against a particular army a lot then you'll naturally try to assemble your own force so that it stands the best possible chance against that foe.
Your own preferences will also make a difference to how aggressively you play, and what tactics you use.
Ultimately it's up to you to decide for yourself what works best for you.
There are some things that hold true whatever you do.
These are the first principles of Orc generalship…the things that everybody learns pretty quickly.
The following notes embody these principles and guide you through the pros and cons of the different troops.
BASIC PRINCIPLES
It is a good idea to make your units fairly big.
A bigger unit can take more casualties before its combat worthiness is eroded.
Remember that a unit which takes 25% casualties from shooting must take a panic test, and the bigger your unit the more casualties it will be able to sustain before having to test.
War machines can crumple up small units easily.
You must be able to take casualties so make sure your units are big enough to take a serious hit without depleting their effectiveness.
Arrange your units as deeply as possible.
The more ranks a unit has the better its combat result bonus.
If your units are four ranks deep you receive a +3 bonus (the maximum).
If your units are five ranks deep you receive the maximum bonus and you can afford to take some casualties before you start to deplete the all important fourth rank.
Remember, if you have relatively few models in your frontage compared to your depth the advantage of the rank bonus is accentuated because neither you nor your enemy can inflict many casualties.
It is therefore to the advantage of poor troops (Goblins) to have as much depth and as little frontage as possible.
Give all your units bosses and standards wherever you can afford it.
If you cannot afford it consider dropping the unit altogether.
Goblin units must be led by Big Bosses, or else you need to find some other way to improve their leadership or combat resilience with magic items or standards.
The reason for this is that Goblins, with their leadership of only 5, are very fragile, which means they are virtually certain to fail any break or psychology test they have to take.
Remember that an Orc Big Boss can be placed with a Goblin unit to lead it.
By including bosses you will be improving your chances of inflicting casualties and reducing the number of casualties sustained.
By including a standard you add +1 to your combat result score.
All these are important to any unit and vital to Goblins.
Attack!
Your army contains troops which are very good in hand-to-hand combat — use them to spearhead your advance.
Your army also contains troops which are good at pinning or delaying the enemy, for example large Goblin units, Fanatics, pump wagons, Snotlings, etc.
If you can bog down one of your enemy's top units with Snotlings, or keep him pinned down by landing Fanatics in front of him, then you are free to win the game with your core units.
THE CORE UNITS
The very first decision to make is what core units to include in your army.
Think of these as the troops who will do most of the real fighting.
The rest of your army is there purely to support these guys and tie down the enemy while your core units get to work.
Your choices are between Black Orcs, Big'uns, Boar Boyz and Boyz.
Black Orcs are the most reliable because they are not affected by animosity and they have an extra point of leadership over both Big'uns and ordinary Orcs.
If you go for a Black Orc Mob you'll be able to include Black Orc characters too and this is well worthwhile if you're worried by animosity or by your army's generally low leadership levels.
On the down side Black Orcs are expensive.
Big'uns are cheaper than Black Orcs but lack the benefit of the extra point of leadership.
They do have an extra point of initiative instead, which puts them on a par with Men and gives them an advantage over Dwarfs.
Big'uns are good fighters for the points and with a strength of 4 and toughness 4 superior to ordinary Orcs.
They are very good value for the points.
Orc Boar Boyz are the best troops you can get.
The war boar is a dangerous beast whose charge puts him in the same category as a fully armoured, lance-armed knight.
Orc Boar Boyz are the most expensive choice for a core unit.
Savage Orc Boar Boyz are marginally cheaper with a lower WS and no armour but have the advantage of their protective tattoos.
The Orc Boar Boyz option really does commit you to the attack, and things can go wrong if animosity strikes or if the supporting troops don't perform up to par.
In other words it's a relatively high risk gamble, but if your army holds together you will probably win.
This is even more true of Savage Orc Boar Boyz because they are subject to frenzy, which means they have to charge enemy within reach whether you want them to or not.
Orc Boyz are powerful enough to be considered core units but it is doubly important to beef them up by including a powerful character.
They are obviously not as powerful as Black Orcs, Big'uns or Boar Boyz, but they are much cheaper and still better than most opposition.
The number of core units you can afford will depend on the total points value of the army.
You will need two core units as a minimum and of these at least one should be Black Orcs, Big'uns or Boar Boyz.
A third unit would be useful but this would start to eat into the army's points value in a big way.
Orc Boyz units work out cheapest per model, so it makes sense to include extra Boyz units if you are going to increase the size of your core.
To be of any real value core units have to be fairly big for the reasons discussed.
Generally speaking, ten is an absolute minimum for a core mob of Boar Boyz, and infantry units need to be at least sixteen, preferably twenty, and bigger if you can manage it.
All the earlier comments about characters and standards apply, and it is well worth mentally putting aside some points for magic standards and magic weapons for your characters (more on magic later).
Decide on what core units you're going to have before even thinking about the rest of your army.
You have to imagine how your supporting troops are going to help the core units do their job.
You have plenty of choices, some are more reliable but potentially less effective, while others are completely unreliable but devastating.
This is where the gambler's instinct comes to the fore!
INFANTRY
Once you have chosen your core it is time to consider the rest of your army.
One immediately obvious solution is just to expand your core until you have an entire army, ignoring all the least reliable and more chancy troops altogether.
This is certainly an option, but one has to ask why choose an Orc and Goblin army if you don't like taking chances?
You'll be affected by animosity regardless and without supporting troops of some kind you'll be out-shot by bows and crossbows, crushed by war machines, and given the run around by skirmishers.
Putting aside the option of expanding your army with more core troops, the choices are basically between Goblin Boyz of different types, mounted Goblins, and various special troops such as chariots, trolls, giants, and ogres.
Other troops which have a supporting role, and which can be considered in this category are Orc and Savage Orc Boyz armed with bows or crossbows.
Orcs and Savage Orcs are good fighting troops and can therefore be thought of as core units, but they can also be used as quality supporting troops if armed with missile weapons.
With bows or crossbows you can shoot up the enemy before your core units get to grips with them, or you can attempt to draw enemy missile troops into an exchange to divert fire from the core units as they advance.
Once the core units are engaged you can pile in alongside them or form them up beside the core units to block enemy attacks from the sides.
In this supporting role your Orc units don't need to be so large and there is less need to provide standards or characters.
Goblins are a different story altogether.
Some players find Goblins hard to use because they imagine they are fighters and commit them to combat as if they were Orcs.
This is very rarely successful.
Goblins are primarily support troops — their role is to ensure that your core troops get into combat against their chosen target.
The different sorts of Goblins can do this in different ways but the objective is the same: either attack an enemy unit and bog it down in a protracted combat, or stand in the way of an enemy unit to prevent it attacking your core units.
In either case you will need to gear the unit up to fight.
The basic principles of large units, deep ranks, and good characters doubly apply to Goblins.
Goblins are so weak and vulnerable that small units are all but useless, while the principle of deep ranks and narrow frontage is essential for combat survival.
If you include a  Boss and Big Boss in your front rank this will reduce the number of vulnerable Goblins fighting and cut down on the number of casualties you suffer.
At the same time you might score a few wounds on the enemy, and with a huge rank bonus and bonus from your standard you stand as good a chance as you're going to get.
Consider upping the effect with magic weapons if you can afford it.
Remember, an Orc or Black Orc Big Boss can be placed with a Goblin unit to lead it, raising your deplorable leadership value as well as stiffening your front rank.
A Black Orc will give you invulnerability to animosity too.
A Goblin Big Boss has the advantage of being cheap and he will do almost as good a job, especially if you give him the Crown of Command to raise his leadership to 10.
When it comes to fighting it is best to think of Goblin Mobs as characters with a +4 combat resolution bonus (+3 from the ranks behind and +1 from the standard).
Don't assume the Goblins will hit anything — if they do it's an unexpected bonus!
Assuming the Boss and Big Boss can score a few wounds you are in with a good chance of winning the combat.
If your Big Boss ends up against an enemy character then the two will tend to cancel out.
This is good because it prevents the enemy character wiping the floor with your Goblins.
It also accentuates the value of your rank bonus by reducing the overall number of casualties caused.
Give the Big Boss a magic weapon if you can.
Remember — anything that reduces the casualty count will work in your favour because of your fixed rank bonus.
Night Goblins are the most effective type of Goblin infantry because you can include Fanatics within their ranks.
Fanatics are potentially battle winning troops as your opponent will quickly learn.
You will find he will go to immense trouble to avoid Night Goblin units if he even thinks they might contain Fanatics.
Regard the Night Goblin Mobs as a vehicle for carrying Fanatics.
The Fanatics are the real weapon, the Mob is just a means of deploying them close to the enemy lines.
The threat of Fanatics can often be a more powerful weapon than the Fanatics themselves, because although their potential for causing carnage is great the actual effect can sometimes be disappointing.
There are two good ways to use Fanatics.
If you place the Night Goblin unit close to your best core unit the enemy won't dare to charge the core unit with knights or other precious troops — if he does the Fanatics will come out and whap him as he moves.
If he freezes that's fine, your core unit can attack where it wants while the enemy units are dithering.
Your other option is to press ahead with your Night Goblins and release your Fanatics in front of his best unit.
If a Fanatic ends up in front of the unit (and it probably will) this effectively pins the unit in place and stops it moving.
If your Night Goblins have bows they can add further insult by taking pot shots at the enemy while he squirms.
On the subject of Fanatics you should always buy the full allowance.
You need to do this because they are inherently random.
As the ultimate gambler, you will therefore play the odds by having the maximum number.
While one may whizz straight through the enemy, and another might stall in front of your Mob, the other one is bound to end up somewhere where you want him.
After the first turn it's down to luck, the Fanatic could go anywhere, but the chances are you'll either block the enemy or hit him hard for at least one more turn.
Some enemy will try to draw your Fanatics from their Mobs by sending out a small unit of fast cavalry to gallop past, forcing you to release your Fanatics before you are ready.
There isn't much you can do about this other than vengefully shoot up the sacrificial unit in your following turn.
When considering the armament of your Goblins remember arming them up with light armour and fancy weapons makes them expensive for what they are.
Spears are probably a good buy, the extra fighting rank helps to stiffen the Goblins a little bit, and shields are well worthwhile too.
Bows are an option which can work well in the right circumstances, but with a range of only 16″ don't expect anything too dramatic.
Even archer units have to be fairly big, and they need the Bosses, standards and all the trimmings just like other units.
If you arrange your archers on the slopes of a hill the rear ranks can shoot over the heads of the ranks in front, enabling you to take advantage of large numbers.
Although your Goblin archers are feeble compared to Men or Elves, bear in mind the comparable points cost.
If you can occupy a unit of Elf archers for a few turns then the exchange can sometimes be worth it.
Watch out for the 25% casualty level panic test though.
If your Mob is taking high casualties you could be forced to take a panic test, resulting in your archers fleeing and panicking other Goblins.
Squig Hunter and Netter units are an entertaining variation with some specific advantages over ordinary Night Goblins.
You can get away with slightly smaller units of these than of other Goblins.
With Netters you can get away with about twenty, but you'll still need a Boss, standard, drummer/horn blower, and a Big Boss if possible.
With Squig Hunters nine Squigs and three Hunter teams is about right.
Squigs are unpredictable and in many way the best thing that can happen is for them to go wild once they are near the enemy.
You can't put standards or Bosses with Squig units because the Squigs tend to eat them, or you have to put the Bosses at the back where they can't do anything.
CAVALRY
When it comes to choosing cavalry you have fewer options than with infantry but you are still spoiled for choice compared to most armies.
In addition to the core-type Boar Boyz you have Wolf Riders and Spider Riders.
Although described as core troops, you might consider including smaller units of Boar Boyz in a supporting role.
You can deploy such a unit beside a core unit to prevent an enemy attacking its flanks and, to a degree, to draw fire away from the main unit.
A Mob of even five Boar Boyz is potentially very strong and can get stuck in once your core units are committed.
The disadvantage of using these troops in this way is that they are very expensive, and it's easy to lose such a small unit to a hit from a war machine or good archery.
Although this might seem a ‘safe’ option compared to buying Goblins, this isn't really the case.
Remember that if your Orc units panic and flee they will spread panic amongst your other Orcs and Goblins, whereas Orcs will ignore fleeing Goblins altogether.
Wolf Riders are not as powerful as Orc Boar Boyz but then again they are nothing like as expensive either at 9 points against 27.
The Wolf has WS4 and can put up a pretty good show against most enemy.
It is tempting to buy a small unit of Wolf Riders and use them to race ahead of your army, move around the enemy's flanks, and maybe to attack his war machines before he has a chance to use them on your main force.
This plan usually falls down because the Wolf Riders are vulnerable to shooting and because small units of Goblins are very fragile.
For example, two casualties on a unit of five models causes a panic test and the chances of passing that with a basic leadership value of 5 are remote to say the least.
A far better option is to treat the Wolf Riders in the same way as Goblin infantry Mobs — go for a fairly large unit, deploy in deep ranks, and include at least one worthy character.
Used in this way the Wolf Riders can move in fast to pin your chosen enemy unit, taking the heat off your Boar Boyz and other core units.
How long the Wolf Riders last once they are fighting depends to an extent on the characters and magic you put with them.
Don't expect much from the Goblin riders themselves!
Spider Riders are similar in principal to Wolf Riders and the same comments apply.
Spiders have a better strength than wolves (4 as opposed to 3) and although their WS is lower it is still better than the Goblin rider's.
Their big advantage is that they ignore difficult ground and obstacles.
This means they can move straight through woods and debris and such like.
They can also go straight over obstacles, which is very useful if your enemy is defending a wall or hedgerow.
CHARIOTS AND OTHER SUPPORTING TROOPS
Chariots are relatively expensive models and the added protection they offer is useful for your Warlord and maybe your best Shaman.
A group of several chariots is certainly powerful but suffers all the disadvantages of large monsters.
They become instant targets for enemy war machines!
If you can get them into combat they stand a good chance of winning, but you can guarantee the enemy will do his best to shoot them up first.
If your battle plan is to charge headlong at the enemy and engage him as soon as possible chariots are ideal.
If your enemy has a preponderance of missile weapons or lots of war machines then chariots are vulnerable.
Snotlings are an oddball troop type with more to recommend them than their profiles might suggest.
True, they have feeble strength and toughness, but with three wounds they are more resilient than the same frontage of Goblins or Orcs.
Because they are unaffected by psychology and don't take break tests they can be used to pin down a much more powerful enemy, diverting attention away from the core units.
The only problem with Snotties is that they take casualties fairly quickly.
This means that if they fight alongside other troops their vulnerability will drag down your overall combat result score.
To counter this make sure you keep a narrow frontage and rack them up deep, and make your attack slightly away from other units.
You need a four base width formation to get your rank bonuses, but it is better to sacrifice the bonus in favour of avoiding being dragged into a broader combat.
By keeping the Snotties slightly apart they won't get involved in a larger combat and the casualties they suffer will be of no account.
Because they don't need leaders Snotties are a good way to spend a few extra points to round off your army — at 15 points a base they're cheap too.
Trolls are extremely powerful and because they regenerate damage they are very hard to kill.
As they are stupid they are unreliable, and with a leadership of only 4 they will almost always fail their test.
The only answer is to buy an Orc Big Boss to look after them.
Apart from that get them into combat as soon as possible.
At least they stand a fifty-fifty chance of fighting if they go stupid.
Ogres are good solid troops with plenty of of muscle, high wounds value, two attacks, and a basic leadership as good as Orcs.
They also cause fear.
Double-handed weapons are a good option because Ogres have such a low initiative they usually end up striking last anyway.
Their toughness and wounds are high enough to enable them to get away without a shield.
If you can afford it a unit of Ogres will provide you with another tough unit to rank alongside your Black Orcs or Boar Boyz as part of the army's core.
Because they are so tough, and have three wounds, you can have a relatively small unit, say five.
This will still cost you two hundred points even without standard and musician.
Two hundred points buys an awful lot of Goblins!
If your idea of an ideal army is compact and tough then Ogres are a good choice.
As with all small units you have to be wary of war machines and magic.
A Giant is good fun but frighteningly unreliable.
It also makes an ideal target for every enemy war machine in sight.
A Giant will have the same effect on your enemy as a big monster.
Your opponent will tend to fixate on the Giant and divert a lot of his resources against it while the Boyz get on with winning the battle (hopefully!).
The best reason for including a Giant in your army is that they are very entertaining!
It's worth having one just to see the expression on your enemy's face as the Giant jumps up and down on his cherished troops.
WAR MACHINES
You have two good options for long range artillery in the form of Orc Rock Lobbers and Goblin Doom Divers.
In both cases you need to include an appropriate Mob before you can have these war machines in your army.
Both are comparably effective — the Rock Lobbers being more destructive while the Doom Divers are more accurate.
Either or both will do a fine job of picking off enemy war machines or lobbing missiles into the middle of key enemy units.
Neither are completely reliable, and the only way to be sure of landing an effective shot is to play the odds — buy several machines!
A group of, say, four machines gives you a pretty good chance of hitting where you want at least once every turn.
Try to make every shot count and concentrate on hitting important targets.
If you can take out enemy war machines early on with Doom Divers then you will protect your core units and you can lob a few shots at the enemy's best troops before the Boyz get stuck in.
Bolt Throwers are more like super-archers than the other two machines.
They need a clear line of sight to shoot and will tear through several ranks of an enemy unit.
Bolt throwers work well if they are positioned on a hill or facing an open line of advance, preferably behind a hedge or a wall.
If your tactics are basically to run straight towards the enemy and hit him hard then a bolt thrower isn't really going to do you any good.
For one thing your own troops will probably end up blocking the line of sight.
If you're fighting Dwarfs, who you know will stand around a lot waiting for you to come and get them, then a few rounds of bolt fire from two or three machines can soften them up nicely.
Always concentrate your fire if you have several machines — ten casualties on one unit is better than two casualties on five units.
Snotling Pump Wagons are fun, difficult to control and occasionally deadly.
Like big monsters and chariots they will become the target of every bowman and war machine that can fire at them, so it's no use sending a Pump Wagon out on its own as it will just get shot up.
Because its potential to cause damage is huge the Pump Wagon will unnerve your enemy and force him to divert resources towards destroying it.
At least while the enemy is shooting up your Pump Wagon he's ignoring the rest of your army as it storms forward, and at 40 points each that's a small price to pay for keeping your core units intact.
You can use several Pump Wagons together, or advance them with chariots or big monsters, but their random move means you can't rely on them to hit the enemy at the same time.
Bear in mind that if you deploy a Pump Wagon right in front of one of your Orc or Goblin units there is a good chance it will get in the way of their advance — the average Pump Wagon move is 7″ while a march move for Orcs or Goblins is 8″.
CHARACTERS
The amount of points you can spend on characters is restricted and you need to spend a lot of points on Bosses and Big Bosses to accompany your Mobs.
That won't leave a lot to spend on your Warlord or Shamans.
In practice, the number of Bosses and Big Bosses you can afford will determine how many infantry and cavalry units you have.
There is no point at all in buying Mobs of Goblins without putting a half way decent leader with them, and a Goblin Boss isn't enough on his own (leadership 5).
You really need to raise the leadership to at least 7 for your Goblins and that means either an Orc Big Boss or a Goblin Big Boss with a magic item to increase his leadership such as the Crown of Command (Ld 10).
If you can afford a magic standard then you can use this to increase the leadership or add to your combat result which amounts to the same thing for the all important break test.
In any case, you have to make sure all your Mobs have sufficient characters to ensure they can fight properly.
The bottom line here is a Boss for every unit, and a Big Boss of some sort for every Goblin unit (preferably an Orc).
Black Orc Big Bosses are best, as a unit led by a Black Orc is not affected by animosity, but at 91 points each you won't be able to afford many.
A Goblin Big Boss may have a leadership of only 6, but he still has 2 wounds and 3 attacks, can carry two magic items and costs only 33 points.
If you feel tempted to field Mobs without proper leaders think again!
Better to drop the unit and spend the points on increasing the size of your other Mobs.
A Mob without a proper leader is just a liability.
When it comes to choosing a Warlord as your army's leader you have plenty of choice and all of it pretty good.
A Goblin Warlord is cheap, but with a leadership of only 7 this is a risky option even with an accompanying Battle Standard Bearer.
You could buy him the Crown of Command as one of his magic items, which at 50 points still makes him marginally cheaper than an Orc or Black Orc Warlord.
A good option for the Goblin Warlord is to ride a chariot.
If you buy Grom you get the army's Battle Standard in the same chariot.
If you do decide to have Grom take his full allowance of magic items to protect the chariot as much as you can.
An Orc Warlord riding a war boar accompanied by the Battle Standard Bearer also riding a war boar can both accompany your Boar Boyz  core unit, assuming you have one.
If you have taken the sensible option of a Boar Boyz Boss this gives you a formidable front line with eight Orc and three Boar attacks concentrated into three models, not to mention the effect of magic weapons or the war boars' charge.
This is a good option for those who like to get stuck in.
Of course, if the enemy lands a magic attack or a war machine hit on top of this lot you're in trouble, but you can avoid this with careful protective magic and a bit of luck.
The other option for a Warlord is to put him on a wyvern or other big monster, but this isn't recommended.
You need your Warlord near his troops to pass on the benefits of his leadership and to get stuck in alongside the Boyz.
If you put him on a wyvern there is a temptation to spend half the game flitting about behind the enemy lines or stuck up in the air.
By the time you've bought a Warlord, a Battle Standard Bearer, Bosses for your units, and Big Bosses for vulnerable Goblin units, plus magic weapons and armour for the most important characters, the chances are you won't have many points left.
In fact, the chances are you'll have to go back and pare down your heroes to give you enough points for Shamans.
This is where you find yourself trading in those Black Orcs for something more realistic!
You need at least one Shaman, and if you can only afford one he should be an Orc or Forest Goblin (assuming you have Forest Goblins in your army to allow you to choose him).
Forest Goblins don't ‘ead bang while other Goblins are prone to fail their Waaagh test.
Other Goblin Shamans need to be kept towards the flanks or placed so that there are not too many Orcs and Goblins about, otherwise they will ‘eadbang.
Low level Goblin Shamans are cheap and, to a degree, disposable, so don't worry too much when they fail their Waaagh test.
Orc Shamans are better and it's worth going for a Shaman Lord if you can afford it.
Remember, Shamans have to be within 12″ of Orcs or Goblins to cast spells.
If you put your Orc Shaman on a wyvern and fly him to the other end of the battlefield he won't be able to use his Waaagh magic.
See comments on monsters below.
MONSTERS
If you mount up your Warlord or Shamans on big monsters you will substantially increase their fighting potential but they become easy targets for the enemy.
If you can keep your characters partially obscured, or fly them behind the enemy lines and out of his fire arcs then so much the better.
However, you really need your Warlord to be with the troops, and your Shaman has to be within 12″ of at least one sizeable Orc or Goblin unit to use his magic.
This certainly makes a big monster a less favourable option as a mount for these characters.
You could buy a spare Big Boss, load him up with magic items, mount him on a wyvern and use him to pick off the enemy's general or other vital pieces early in the game.
This tactic does sometimes work, but it's quite risky for Orcs because it ties up a lot of character points which you could well use elsewhere.
A wyvern without a rider can be employed either to launch an early attack on your enemy's artillery or on a powerful character.
Alternatively, let him fly high to act as a aerial patrol to intercept an enemy trying the same thing.
Some sort of flying creature is definitely a good idea, as otherwise you are vulnerable to attack from the air.
You can use the magic item Orb of Thunder to darken the skies and spoil high level flight altogether, but you can't count on this working.
You can also use magic to fend off attacks from the air, taking advantage of the magic phase during your enemy's turn.
MAGIC ITEMS
It is well worth putting aside a portion of your points to buy magic standards, for those units that are permitted them, and magic items for your leaders.
When choosing your magic try to anticipate your troops’ shortcomings and compensate for them.
To a degree this depends upon your enemy — some enemies require a slightly different approach than others.
In the case of Undead and Elves you will have to take into account that they cause fear, especially the Undead, and with generally low leadership values this is bad news.
To compensate, choose as many magic items as possible that either boost leadership or negate fear.
A good choice here is the Dread Banner which actually causes fear and makes the unit carrying it immune to fear too — this is very useful against any opponent.
The most obvious choice is the Crown of Command, which gives you a unmodifiable leadership value of 10 which is very useful for a Goblin leader.
You can boost your hand-to-hand fighting effectiveness with banners (Battle Banner, War Banner, Banner of Courage, Banner of Might) or by equipping characters with appropriate magic weapons.
Another useful device here is the Potion of Strength, a cheap item at only 10 points, and well worth giving to a character with lots of attacks already.
If you're planning a risky aerial attack with a high-ranking character the Healing Potion might be a good idea.
At 50 points it's quite expensive, but if it saves your Warlord's life it's obviously worth it.
Magic can protect your army as well as enhance it.
Always take at least one Dispel Magic Scroll for every Shaman, and use them carefully.
Remember you can only use a Dispel Scroll once, so it's important not to waste any.
The Amulet of Fire is a good investment at 25 points.
It will protect the wearer and unit he is with from a single magic  attack per turn, but only works on a 4, 5 or 6 (ie, as a standard Dispel card).
Another useful item is the Orb of Thunder which you can use to darken the skies and prevent the enemy flying high into the air.
This is a good way of stopping early aerial attacks against your Warlord or artillery.
The Black Amulet is good for reducing your own wounds and shifting them onto the enemy, pushing up your all important combat result.
Magic swords are a good investment because anything that improves your hand-to-hand fighting abilities is a good idea.
If you have a Goblin character he often works best as a ‘spoiler’ to cancel out the enemy's characters by absorbing attacks.
In this case, weapons which work defensively are best.
Anything that lowers the overall casualty count will work in the favour of your deep Mobs.
A sword which improves your toughness (Swords of Resilience, Defiance, and Unyielding) are therefore good although expensive.
A Warrior Bane or Parrying Blade are useful too as they reduce your enemy's attacks.
Swords which affect psychology are extremely useful and a Sword of Fortitude is a must for any Orc or Goblin army, as it makes the bearer and the unit he is with immune to fear, terror and panic.
ANIMOSITY
As an Orc and Goblin player animosity is something you will have to learn to live with.
You can do things to limit its effects, but ultimately you can't stop it so you might as well not worry about it too much.
You have to assume that Mobs will occasionally fall prey to animosity come what may.
If you like, go back to playing the odds to ensure success — if you need to rely on a unit to do something then send two units!
While it is important not to fixate on animosity it is wise to take it into account.
Black Orcs don't suffer from animosity and units led by Black Orcs don't suffer from animosity either.
So if you can afford them Black Orc Big Bosses can be very useful.
Also, a Get 'em result will only result in fighting between Mobs if there is a suitable target nearby to attack.
As an Orc or Goblin Mob will only attack another Mob that is also liable to animosity, it makes sense to avoid putting these units next to each other.
Certainly don't put them one in front of the other, as this is asking for trouble.
If you deploy with a unit of Orcs you could put a unit of Black Orcs next to them, then Goblins, then Trolls, then more Orcs, and there will be no two animosity-suffering units next to each other.
That way the worst that can happen is you will miss a turn.
That is bad enough of course, but infinitely better than two Mobs scrapping.
Note also that the fewer units you have the less likely you are to suffer from animosity.
This is another reason to avoid small units — far better to have a single big unit than two small ones.
TACTICS
Remember that your prime objective has to be to advance quickly with your core units and hit your enemy hard.
At the same time use your supporting troops to tie up the enemy units you want to keep out of the way.
Don't get drawn into committing your supporting troops into combat if they can just as easily pin down the enemy from a distance.
Night Goblin units with Fanatics are good for this.
Even if the Fanatics don't hit the enemy they will block his line of advance while you get stuck in elsewhere with your best troops.
As a general point, you should try to tie down the enemy's best unit while you use your core troops to see off his second best troops.
In practice, you will have to judge the enemy for yourself.
If you're very confident of beating his best units with your core troops go ahead and attack.
Enemy artillery will probably be better than your own, so try to counter it early on.
You could take it out with a flying monster.
Alternatively, use Doom Divers to zap the enemy's artillery before it can damage your core units.
Use your own artillery to soften up the enemy units that you wish to attack.
Always use the principles of size, depth, and narrow frontage to maximise your combat value.
Don't deploy onto a larger frontage than you have to with Goblins.
Anything you can do to gain the advantage in combat is worthwhile.
With Goblins watch out for panic.
Buy magic items to keep panic in check if you can.
A good leader is essential.
Your magic is well suited to aggressive play so don't hold back.
Heads will explode but don't worry about Goblin Shamans as they are cheap.
Put Night Goblin and Goblin Shamans where they are least likely to ‘eadbang.
Savage Orc Shamans and Forest Goblin Shamans are the most reliable and effective.
Savage Orc Shamans are best placed with units of Savage Orcs where their protective tattoos will be enhanced.
Against specific opponents you might have to vary your approach — but this is something that players learn as they go.
Dwarfs are a bit slow so you might prefer a more steady advance with more war machines to pound the stunties before you go in.
Against a mobile enemy such as Bretonnian knights you must be careful of their charge — a unit of Goblins will be swept away in one turn if caught like this.
Against Elves you have to be careful of the fear rule, as Goblins fear units of Elves they don't outnumber two to one.
Increase the size of your Goblin units if you have to, even drop the number of units to a bare minimum to counteract the effect.
Fighting the Empire you have to look out for the Helblaster volley gun.
Try to take it out before you get close to it otherwise it'll blow a big hole in your advancing army.
Cannons can cause considerable damage on your deep ranks too, but this is less worrying.
Expect to take casualties as you advance, especially Goblins.
Don't let this dishearten you, the little greenies are there to soak up the enemy's attention after all.
Remove Goblin casualties with a deliberately contemptuous gesture or casual lack of concern if it makes you feel better.
Remember, while your Goblins are soaking up casualties your real troops are getting closer to the enemy.
If your enemy is good he will realise where your real strength lies, and he'll probably leave your Goblins alone.
This isn't necessarily a good thing, but at least it gives you the opportunity to advance those big blocks of troops close to his army.
ORC BESTIARY
ORCS
Orcs vary in height and their physical appearance more than humans — some are no taller than a man but most are substantially larger and the biggest Orcs stand well over seven feet tall.
They are also much broader than humans, with big deep chests, massive shoulders and long, powerfully muscled arms.
Orcs have large heads with huge jaws but tiny foreheads behind which lurk a thick skull and not very much brain.
Despite their apparent lack of intelligence Orcs are not stupid, although they are rather limited in the way they think and act.
They are not the deepest thinkers in the world, but neither are they doubtful or divided.
When an Orc wants to do something he simply does it, where a human might spend untold time weighing the alternatives.
The Orcs’ single-mindedness is one of their greatest strengths, especially as they enjoy fighting more than anything else.
When they're not actually at war, Orcs spend all their time fighting each other to establish rights of leadership.
Orc leaders are known as Boss Orcs, but even Boss Orcs fight amongst themselves to decide which of them is the overall leader.
This means there are innumerable layers in the Orc pecking order, from Boss to Big Boss, Warboss and Warlord.
A Warlord is an Orc who has established total supremacy over his rivals (having either killed them or driven them away) and now leads all the tribes in glorious conquest over other puny races such as Men, Elves and Dwarfs (Orcs call Elves skinnies and Dwarfs stunties).
An Orc's life is therefore spent in constant battle either with his fellow Orcs or against some worthy opponent.
This is regarded as a Good Thing by Orcs who are universally content with their lot, being ultimately happy to meet their end in battle so long as they get a chance of a good fight.
The more battles and the more kills an Orc has under his belt the more respect he earns from other Orcs, the more his enemies fear him, and the happier he will be.
Special Rule
Panic
Orcs expect Goblins to run away and it doesn't really surprise them when this happens.
The sight of Goblins running in flight does not upset the Orcs, it simply reminds them why they are better!
When a Goblin unit breaks or flees past during the turn, there is no need for the Orcs to test for panic.
There is no way that big, tough Orcs are going to panic just because some weedy Goblins run off!
SAVAGE ORCS
There are so many tribes of Orcs that it is impossible to count them, especially as they are constantly breaking up and reforming under the leadership of new ambitious Orc Warlords.
Most of these tribes are the common sort of Orc, but there are other kinds as well, including Savage Orcs.
Savage Orcs are not physically different to the great mass of Orcs, except that they like to wear tattoos and warpaint, but they are none-the-less quite distinct.
They live in their own tribes and have their own ways of fighting which make them easily distinguishable.
Many hundreds of years ago all Orcs were savages with no means of manufacturing metal weapons, armour and war machines.
These primitive Orcs used stone weapons, wooden clubs, and what other weaponry they could steal from more advanced races.
When other Orcs began to learn about metal working from the Chaos Dwarfs, a few tribes either missed out or deliberately turned their back on these new ways.
These Savage Orcs were happy to continue in their old ways, using metal weapons and armour on occasions when they could steal or trade it, but on the whole sticking to their ancient traditions.
Over the years the Savage Orc tribes became increasingly distinct as their brother Orcs continued to develop, until eventually the two kinds were quite different.
Savage Orcs persist in their savage ways to this day.
They continue to sing the praises of the boisterous Orc gods Gork and Mork in their barbarous fashion, holding midnight feasts to consume gallons of Brew and to fight each other under the watchful eyes of their crude idols.
In battle they believe so strongly in the power of the Orc gods Gork and Mork to protect them that enemy arrows and swords blows really can be deflected by the Orcs' aura of self-generated arcane power.
It is also possible that the tribal tattoos which Savage Orc Shamans paint onto the Orcs' bodies protect them in some way.
This is a very mysterious and wondrous thing, and confirms the Savage Orcs' strong belief in their old and trusty ways.
Other Orcs are completely puzzled by this, but the Savage Orcs maintain it is their undivided attention to the tried and tested Orc way of life and the veneration of their ancient gods.
Perhaps this is why Savage Orcs are famous for the number and power of their skin-clad bone waving Shamans.
Special Rules
Protective Tattoos
Savage Orcs do not usually wear armour although they sometimes obtain it as war booty or trade it from wandering Goblin tribes.
They do use shields and these are often made from animal hide.
A Savage Orc without body armour will be protected by his unshakeable faith.
This is comparable to wearing a mail shirt or breastplate, conferring a D6 saving throw of 6.
If the Savage Orc has a shield as well then he has a saving throw of 5 or 6 just as if he had a mail shirt and shield.
Note that this saving throw is not strictly speaking because of armour, and the Orc always has a saving throw of 6 even if he is struck by a weapon that would normally have a saving throw modifier.
For example, a two-handed axe deducts -2 from your armour save but a Savage Orc protected by his tattoos still gets a save of 6.
This special protection is lost if the Orc wears body armour.
Frenzy
Savage Orcs are wild fighters, whooping and screaming as they attack, calling upon Gork and Mork to help them as they crash into the enemy ranks.
Savage Orcs are therefore affected by the rules for frenzy described in the main rules.
This means that they will charge enemy within reach, and fight with double attacks (two rather than one).
See the Warhammer rulebook for details.
Panic
Just like other Orcs, Savage Orcs expect Goblins to run away and it doesn't really surprise them when this happens.
The sight of Goblins running in flight does not upset the Orcs, it simply reminds them why they are better!
When a Goblin unit breaks or flees past during the turn, there is no need for the Savage Orcs to test for panic.
There is no way that big, tough Orcs are going to panic just because some weedy Goblins run off!
BLACK ORCS
Black Orcs are the biggest and strongest of all Orcs.
They first appeared in the Old World during Sigmar's time, when a whole band crossed the Worlds Edge Mountains and conquered the other Orcs that lived in the hills to the northwest of Stirland.
The great hero Sigmar first united the men of the middle Old World into the Empire, and to do so he had to drive out the Orcs and Goblins that lived there.
The Black Orcs were the most difficult to defeat, because they were so warlike and determined.
Orcs have an unusual metabolism, and they can continue to grow throughout their lives.
How large they grow has little to do with what or how much they eat, but more to do with their status among other Orcs.
The more important the Orc the bigger he grows, and the bigger he grows the stronger and tougher he gets.
As it is inevitably the biggest, toughest Orcs that become more important it goes without saying that it is the big Orcs who get bigger!
If a tough, pushy Orc grows fast he will soon come into conflict with an established equally big Orc.
When this happens the two rival Orcs settle matters by fighting it out to decide which of them is best.
In this way the number of huge and powerful Orcs is naturally regulated and every Orc knows his place amongst his fellows.
The biggest Orcs of all are the Warbosses and Warlords, but there are some almost equally big Orcs who consider themselves just one step down from the great leader himself.
These are very important Orcs and they are known as the Big'uns.
When the Warboss is killed or badly wounded, the Big'uns who fancy their chances fight each other for the leadership.
The winner becomes the new Warboss.
The other Big'uns continue to support the new Warboss because they know their chance will come one day.
The number of Big'uns in an Orc tribe is never very great, the natural process of growth and conflict ensures that there are always many more ordinary Orcs.
In battle the Big'uns fight together in a single mass.
They are very strong and mean, and by far the best Mob of Orcs in the whole army.
Special Rules
Panic
Big'uns are not affected by Goblins that break or flee past them, in the same way as other Orcs.
GOBLINS
Like their big relatives the Orcs, Goblins vary in size although they are typically smaller than Orcs and usually smaller than a man.
Goblins have quick, nimble fingers and small darting eyes, their teeth are tiny and very pointy.
Compared to the large, powerful bodies of the Orcs, Goblins look rather thin and skrawny with gangly arms.
Their voices are much higher pitched than those of Orcs, and they are extremely noisy and garrulous where Orcs are inclined to speak slowly and infrequently (considering the determined glare and comparison of fangs to be sufficient communication in most situations).
Goblins are more intelligent than Orcs and love nothing better that trading and bartering with their slow-witted relatives, because they always come out best.
Goblin tribes are partly nomadic.
They move about from plain to forest, or along the river valleys and in between the mountain passes where they buy, sell or steal things that they can re-sell to other Orcs or Goblins later on.
Goblin tribes are often accompanied by huge caravans of scrap metal, captured monsters in crude wooden cages, or even Men, Dwarfs or Elves that they have trapped and enslaved.
Outriders mounted on huge slavering wolves patrol the area to the tribe's front, probing for enemies and scouting out small settlements that can be raided and pillaged.
Some Goblins become very wealthy by trading in this way and the tribe's King becomes exceedingly rich.
Goblins like to show off their wealth.
A really successful Goblin trader wears countless rings, ornamental daggers, swords, and the biggest helmet he can comfortably balance on his head.
Others spend their ill-gotten gains on fast chariots which they race against each other, trying to outdo their rivals by having the fastest or flashiest machine.
Goblins can acquire a great variety of weaponry as they travel about, either looted or traded with other Orcs and Goblins.
Special Rule
Fear
Goblins strongly dislike fighting Elves, partly because of the dire reputation of these formidable troops, but also because the natural aura of Elves incites unreasoning fear in Goblins.
A unit of Goblins fears any unit of Elves which it does not outnumber by at least two to one.
The unit is affected by fear as described in the Psychology section of the Warhammer rules.
NIGHT GOBLINS
Many years ago some Goblins took to living in the caves beneath the Worlds Edge mountains.
Over the centuries these became distinct in type and are now known as Night Goblins.
Night Goblins have become so accustomed to the dark that when they come out into the open they prefer to move around at night and hide away during the day.
Many of them wear long ragged cloaks, hooded coats, and dangling caps which cover their bodies and protect them from the sunlight.
Night Goblins raise special subterranean fungi deep beneath the mountains in their cool damp caves.
They cultivate many types of fungus and are always searching for new ones to experiment with.
Some fungus is used as food for the Night Goblins and their strange animals, but many are grown for their hallucinogenic or intoxicating properties or because they affect the Goblin metabolism in some other way.
These fungi are traded with other Goblins for weapons and many of the other items the Night Goblins need.
Night Goblin Shamans are expert at identifying, growing and using fungi, and they grow many special strains to use as poisons or even weapons.
When the Night Goblins prepare for battle they brew huge quantities of fungus beer to bolster their courage.
As they get steadily more drunk they sing loudly so that their voices fill the tunnels of the Worlds Edge Mountains and echo through the Dwarf strongholds.
When the time is right Shamans pick the special fungus and make the vile brew which sends the Fanatics crazy and turns them into uncontrolled whirling maniacs.
Night Goblins often take over abandoned Dwarf strongholds to live in, and much of the ancient Dwarf Empire is now infested with these creatures.
Occasionally the Dwarfs will try to drive the Goblins out, or the Goblins will find some tunnel which leads them into the Dwarf tunnels, and the two races battle it out beneath the mountains.
Due to this ancient enmity Dwarfs and Goblins are implacable foes and will often fight to the death rather than give an inch of ground to their enemies.
Special Rules
Hate Dwarfs
Night Goblins hate their old rivals the Dwarfs so intensely that they will often fight to the death rather than run away.
When fighting Dwarfs Night Goblins are affected by the rules for hatred as described in the Warhammer rulebook.
Fear
Like other Goblins, Night Goblins strongly dislike fighting Elves.
A unit of Night Goblins fears any unit of Elves which it does not outnumber by at least two to one.
The unit is affected by fear as described in the Warhammer rulebook.
NIGHT GOBLIN FANATICS
Night Goblins cultivate many kinds of toxic fungi in their dark caves and they are constantly on the look-out for new and exotic varieties.
The least noxious ones are eaten with great enthusiasm.
Others are used by Shamans to make their foul potions and poisons.
One particular variety, known as the Mad Cap, is used as the basis for an intoxicating brew whose effects are legendary amongst the Night Goblins.
This is the brew which turns a Goblin into an ecstatic gibbering lunatic who is impervious to pain, almost completely unaware of his environment, hugely strong, and completely fearless into the bargain.
It is the secret behind the powers of the Goblin Fanatics, probably the most dangerous Goblins of all.
Fanatics carry a huge ball and chain, a weapon so large that it would be impossible for a Goblin to pick up in normal circumstances, but the Fanatic's strength is boosted by fungus beer enabling him to swing the heavy ball round and round.
The Goblin is almost completely unaware of what is happening around him, and he has to be carried into battle by his mates.
His urge to leap about and start to swing his weapon is difficult to suppress, but his fellows manage this by grabbing him very tightly and sitting on him if necessary.
Should the Fanatic start to whirl about anywhere near them they know they are in trouble!
The Goblins wait until the enemy are close by, and then push the Fanatic out towards the foe, giving him a good shove to start him off in the right direction.
Free at last, the deranged Goblin starts to spin round crazily, swinging his ball and chain in a dizzy circle of death.
Anything that gets in his way is smashed to pieces.
Eventually the Goblin runs out of energy and collapses in an exhausted pile with a silly grin on his face, or he crashes straight into a tree or other obstacle and ends up throttling himself with his chain.
If the Goblin Fanatic manages to keep going then he quickly becomes disoriented, and will start to spin about the battlefield first one way and then another — which can be very disconcerting for all combatants!
Despite the eager shouting of his Goblin mates, the Fanatic really has little idea of where he is going, and will happily plough through troops from his own side if they get in the way.
Special Rules
Hide
Goblin Fanatics are not placed on the table at the start of the game like other troops.
Instead you must note down where they are hidden.
Up to three Fanatics can hide in each Night Goblin infantry unit — note down which units conceal Fanatics and how many.
These Fanatics remain hidden, carried along by their fellows, until they are ready to be pushed out towards the enemy.
If the Night Goblin unit is routed then the Fanatics are carried along with their companions.
If the Night Goblin unit is destroyed then the Fanatics are destroyed as well.
Attack
Goblin Fanatics are released as soon as enemy come within 8″ of their unit.
There is no choice here, all the Fanatics in a unit must be released as soon as enemy are within this distance.
This often forms an exception to the normal turn sequence, because the enemy may move to within 8″ during his turn.
He may even be charging the Night Goblin unit, for example.
Whatever the situation, whether it is your turn or your opponent's, as soon as enemy approach to within 8″ you declare that your Fanatics are coming out!
All movement is halted immediately.
If a moving enemy has triggered the Fanatics then the enemy unit is halted at 8″ away.
The Fanatics' attacks are worked out completely before the game proceeds any further.
Move
The Fanatics are shoved out of their unit towards the enemy.
Take each Fanatic model and declare which direction it will be moving in.
Now roll 2D6 for each Fanatic and move the model that number of inches.
Obviously some models will move further than others, and the average roll is 7, so you have to do slightly better than average to hit your target.
Fanatics move straight through any troops in the way.
They do not stop but keep whirling forwards oblivious to their surroundings.
It is possible for a Fanatic to whirl through several enemy units if he is especially lucky!
Fighting
Fanatics don't fight hand-to-hand combat at all.
Instead they cause immense damage as they whirl through their target.
They cannot be attacked in hand-to-hand combat either — the only way to destroy a Fanatic is to shoot him or to wait and let him collapse from exhaustion.
If a Fanatic touches a unit as he moves, it automatically sustains D6 strength 5 hits from the spinning ball of death.
It does not matter how many models the Fanatic spins through.
If he hits one then he bounds about inside the unit, bouncing from foe to foe, until he spins out of the other side, leaving the enemy completely devastated.
No saving throws are permitted for armour from Fanatic attacks.
Heavily armoured targets are therefore just as vulnerable to others — their armour is easily crushed by the huge ball while nimbler, more lightly armour individuals may actually be able to dodge and duck more easily.
Work out all the damage from Fanatics as they emerge from their concealing units.
If they cause very high casualties the enemy units may have to take a panic test in the same way as for missile casualties.
In this case work out the result before continuing.
This can be useful, as it allows Goblins to drive off charging enemy units with their Fanatics, and even enemy who are not panicked into fleeing away will be severely mauled.
Further Movement
Once Fanatics are in place they move during their own turn at the beginning of the movement phase once charges have been declared.
It is best to move Fanatics before doing other compulsory movement (such as fleeing units).
For each Fanatic in turn roll a scatter dice to determine which direction it moves in — the Goblin is now so utterly disorientated that he moves in a random direction.
Move the Fanatic 2D6 inches in the direction indicated by the arrow on the scatter dice.
If you roll a double on the 2D6 roll then the Fanatic has met with an accident, wrapping the chain around his neck, or perhaps his heart just gives out and he collapses to the ground.
In any case, a double indicates the Fanatic has met his end and the model is immediately removed from the table.
Note this only happens when moving randomly, not when the Fanatic emerges from his unit.
Work out damage on units the Fanatic touches as he moves.
Of course, as he is moving in a random direction at a random speed, he is quite likely to whirl out of control and hit either side.
Hopefully the initial push towards the enemy will ensure that the Fanatic hits the enemy more often than he hits his mates…but you can never be sure.
Charging through Fanatics
Fanatics are spinning circles of death, so it is not a good idea to move troops into them deliberately.
If a charging unit is suddenly confronted by emerging Fanatics, leaving Fanatics in front of the chargers and between them and their target unit, then the chargers can either remain halted or complete their charge.
This is up to the player.
If chargers move through Fanatics they have not already encountered then they sustain more damage as they hit the deranged Goblins.
This may cause a panic test on the charging unit, but if they have already taken and passed a panic test due to Fanatic casualties that turn then they do not have to test again.
Moving through Fanatics
Apart from chargers who are moving through emerging Fanatics, troops are not allowed to move through Fanatics.
Sometimes troops are forced to move into Fanatics, because they move randomly, or they are forced to flee through them for example.
Such troops sustain damage as if hit by the Fanatics
Obstacles
If a Fanatic moves into an obstacle, wood, building, or into another Fanatic then he is slain.
In the case of two Fanatics colliding both are slain.
Splat!
PSYCHOLOGY
Fanatics are immune to all Psychology and cannot be beaten (or even fought) in hand-to-hand combat.
They therefore have no leadership value — they are far too crazed to care!
NIGHT GOBLIN SQUIG HUNTERS
Night Goblins cultivate different kinds of fungus and moulds in their meandering caves and tunnels.
They also descend into the deeper caverns to search for the wild and exotic funguses which they use to make powerful magic potions.
Night Goblins are not the only creatures that like to eat fungus, so they have to be constantly on the look out for dangerous subterranean denizens.
One of the most deadly of all these creatures is the elusive Cave Squig.
These are hybrid creatures, part fungus and part flesh, with tough ball-shaped bodies and clumsy taloned feet.
Cave Squigs have huge gaping mouths thronged with slashing teeth, and an enraged Cave Squig can bite a large creature clean in two and can easily swallow a Night Goblin whole.
Over the many hundreds of years that Night Goblins have lived in the tunnels they have become quite used to dealing with these fearsome creatures.
Roasted Cave Squig is considered a great delicacy and captive Cave Squigs are kept as pets by Night Goblin Chieftains.
Night Goblins hunt Cave Squigs using long, sturdy forks called ‘prodders’ to goad the Squigs from their hiding places and to keep the enraged beasts at bay.
Once a Squig has been provoked from its lair the Night Goblins throw nets over it then bash it senseless with large clubs so it can be safely dragged away.
Some Night Goblins become very proficient Squig hunters and come to be quite nonchalant about the dangers involved.
Famous Squig hunters are happy to exhibit their skills with daring spectacles such as Squig wrestling, tunnel racing, Squig pit leaping, and bare-back Squig riding.
Squigs are often herded into battle by Night Goblins armed with prodders.
The Squigs don't like daylight at all, and quickly become maddened by the sun.
The Goblins herd the enraged Squigs towards the enemy where they gnash, bite and chew their way through the enemy's ranks.
SPECIAL RULES
MOVEMENT
A unit of Squig Hunters includes a number of Night Goblins armed with prodder forks plus a number of Cave Squigs.
At the start of the battle there must be at least two Goblins in the unit to carry a prodder fork, and there must be at least five models in total.
Although Goblins and Squigs have different movement rates, the whole unit keeps together moving at the speed of the Goblins.
FORMATION
A unit of Squig Hunters is always deployed in two ranks with all the Cave Squigs in the front rank and all the Night Goblins behind them.
HAND-TO-HAND FIGHTING
The Cave Squigs will attack any models in base contact except for the prodder-armed Night Goblins behind them.
Night Goblins armed with prodders can also attack enemy models they are touching.
They are mounted two models to a base, and both models get their own attack.
Both Goblins can fight if any part of their base is touching an enemy model.
Prodder-armed Night Goblins can also use their long prodder to attack from behind their Squigs in a similar way to troops armed with spears.
If the Cave Squig in front of the Goblins is fighting then both the Goblins carrying the prodder can fight too.
Goblins using a prodder receive a +1 strength bonus because the prodder is so big and heavy.
Note that prodder-armed Goblins can fight from a rear rank even if they have moved — unlike spears which can only do so when stationary (see the Warhammer rulebook).
SHOOTING
When the enemy shoots at the Squig Hunter unit any hits are randomised between the Squigs and Goblins.
For example if there are three Squigs and two Goblins roll a D6: 1–3 = a Squig hit, 4–5 = a Goblin hit, 6 = roll again.
Remember that a pair of Goblins carrying a prodder is two Goblins not one.
LEADERSHIP AND CHARACTERISTICS
The whole unit uses the leadership value of the Goblins unless the Squigs go wild as explained below.
The unit can be joined and led by an Orc or Goblin character, in which case you test leadership on the character's value.
However, note that Squigs will attack any model that isn't a prodder-armed Night Goblin…so any character with the unit will have to be placed at the back to be safe!
GOBLIN CASUALTIES
The prodder-armed Goblins are mounted two to a base, so you will have to either remember or make a note if one of them is killed.
Alternatively you can substitute an ordinary Goblin model if you have one.
A single Goblin can continue to use the huge prodder to keep back the Squigs and fight, but he loses the +1 strength bonus as the prodder is exceptionally unwieldy.
When Goblin casualties are taken any odd Goblins are always removed first, leaving as many complete pairs as possible.
FEAR
Goblins dislike fighting Elves and the usual rule for fear applies.
The unit fears any unit of Elves it does not outnumber by at least two to one.
The size of the unit is the number of Goblins plus the number of Squigs.
WILD SQUIGS
So long as the Squigs are successfully herded by the prodder-armed Night Goblins they are moved and fight just like any other unit.
However, if the Goblins should be slain some or all the Squigs may break away and go wild.
Each prodder can control up to three Squigs.
If there are not enough prodders to control all the Squigs then any excess Squigs will go wild.
Of course, if all the Goblins are slain then all the remaining Squigs will go wild!
Wild Squigs are moved individually along with other compulsory movement at the start of the movement phase.
Each Squig moves 2D6″ in a random direction.
Use the scatter dice to determine the direction moved in the same way as for Goblin Fanatics.
As the Squig escapes from the control of its Night Goblin herders it may burst through its own unit, but it does not cause any damage as it does so.
However, if its movement carries it into any other target it charges into hand-to-hand combat and stops.
The wild Squig fights whatever it hits, regardless of which side its opponent is on.
Once in hand-to-hand combat the Squig doesn't move, but it will pursue a broken enemy and then continue to move randomly.
A wild Squig is far too angry to take any psychology or other leadership tests.
It cannot be broken in hand-to-hand combat and is immune to the effects of psychology.
NIGHT GOBLIN SQUIG HOPPERS
Night Goblin Squig Hunters have a carefree attitude to the dangers posed by huge and hungry Cave Squigs.
Most have impressive scars which they cheerfully exhibit to anyone foolhardy enough to express an interest.
Drunken Squig Hunters often compete with each other to show off their most horrific injuries and tell (grossly exaggerated) tales of how they were earned.
The most reckless Squig Hunters even ride Squigs into battle, grabbing hold of the Squig's tiny horns or ears, and bouncing along as the Squig leaps about.
These bravados are called Squig Hoppers.
Squig Hoppers don't fight in Mobs because individual Squigs move in an unpredictable manner while their riders hang on as best they can.
A skilled Goblin can direct his Squig vaguely towards the enemy, but some Squigs prove almost impossible to control and end up bouncing around on top of everybody.
SPECIAL RULES
MOVEMENT
Each Squig Hopper is moved randomly along with other compulsory movement at the start of the movement phase.
Like Goblin Fanatics, Squig Hoppers are moved as individual models and do not fight in units.
Begin by nominating the direction you wish the Squig Hopper to move in and then bounce it 2D6″ in that direction.
On the roll of a double the Squig moves the distance indicated but in an entirely random direction.
Use the Scatter dice to establish the direction moved in the same way as for Goblin Fanatics.
Squigs bounce over intervening troops and scenery and land where indicated.
They can therefore land directly on top of models, in the middle of a unit, etc.
If a Squig lands on top of any other model it will attack as described below and then bounce off again!
Nominate a direction once more and move the Squig Hopper again in the same way.
Continue to bounce the Squig Hopper and continue to attack until it fails to land on a model.
If Squig Hoppers land in a river or lake the squig sinks like a stone, drowning both squig and rider!
If a Squig Hopper bounces off the table it does not return.
PSYCHOLOGY
The Squig is literally hopping mad and certainly far too angry to take any psychology or other leadership tests.
It cannot be broken in hand-to-hand combat and is immune to the effects of psychology.
The Night Goblin just hangs on and has no effect upon the Squig's determination.
FIGHTING
When a Squig Hopper lands on any model the Squig will bite it.
The Goblin may also strike a blow if you want, but does not have to (if you land on one of your own units, for example).
The Squig and Goblin hit automatically — no roll to hit is necessary.
Work out damage as normal.
The enemy models may not fight back as they are too surprised to react in time to return blows.
CHARGING A SQUIG HOPPER
An enemy unit may charge a Squig Hopper and fight it in hand-to-hand combat exactly as if it were a normal cavalry model.
Once engaged in hand-to-hand combat in this way the Squig Hopper is pinioned to the ground and does not move away.
This means it fights exactly like any other model in hand-to-hand combat except that it is immune to psychology and does not take a break test.
Should its enemies be destroyed or forced to flee the Squig is free to start bouncing again.
SHOOTING
Squig Hoppers are treated like any other cavalry when hit by missile fire.
Work out the shot against the rider and remove the entire model if the rider is slain.
A saving throw of 6 is permitted to take account of the Squig.
NIGHT GOBLIN NETTERS
The subterranean tunnels where the Night Goblins live are riddled with other, even older, passages and caverns.
The deeper down a tunnel goes the more dangerous it is and the more likely it is to be inhabited by some terrible monster.
Night Goblins find it necessary to occasionally descend into the chill depths in search of exotic funguses, so they know all too well what dangers await them.
Night Goblin Netters and Clubbers fight together in order to immobilise and either destroy or capture dangerous creatures.
On the battlefield they use their skills against the enemy, throwing their nets to entangle the foe while Clubbers bash the enemy senseless.
SPECIAL RULES
FORMATION
Night Goblin Netters fight in units of five or more models.
Each Night Goblin is armed with either a net or a huge club.
The unit can include as many net-armed and as many club-armed Night Goblins as you wish, and they can be mixed up in the ranks as you please.
For example, you could have all your Night Goblins armed with nets, or all armed with clubs, or you can have some armed with clubs and some with nets.
Net-armed and club-armed Goblins fight in slightly different ways, so it is up to you to decide upon your ideal mix.
The Netter unit moves and fights just like any other Goblin unit.
If the unit is arranged in several ranks then only models in base contact can fight (usually the front rank).
This means the number of net-armed and club-armed models you have in your front rank is crucial.
As casualties occur you can remove any of the models fighting and replace them with any models from a rearward rank — so you can change the ratio of nets to clubs by, say removing a club and replacing it with a net.
NETS
Goblins with nets receive a +1 initiative bonus and so always attack before club-armed Goblins.
Work out the attack as normal.
Hits do not cause any damage at all, instead make a note of the number of net hits caused.
Each enemy hit by a net cannot attack back that turn assuming he has not already done so.
In addition, any enemy hit by a net is a prime target for a club attack as explained below.
CLUBS
Club-armed Goblins receive a +1 strength bonus and so count as having a strength of 4.
Work out the attacks as normal.
Once you have established how many hits your clubs have caused add the number of enemy already netted that turn.
In effect the club-armed Goblins get an extra free hit for every netted enemy.
For example, if four enemy are already netted and the club-armed Goblins hit two enemy then 2+4 = 6 hits inflicted.
All these hits are resolved with the +1 strength bonus.
It doesn't matter how few clubbers are fighting so long as there is at least one.
If there are no clubbers at all then any netted enemy are jumped on by the netters themselves, and damage is resolved with a strength of 3 as normal.
Any netted model which are not slain free themselves automatically — they do not continue to count as netted.
SHOOTING
When the enemy shoots at a unit of Night Goblin Netters randomise any hits amongst the potential targets.
For example, if there are four net-armed and two club-armed Night Goblins roll a dice: 1, 2, 3, 4 = a net; 5, 6 = a club.
FOREST GOBLINS
The dark forests of the Old World are home to many strange and dangerous creatures including marauding bands of Chaos Warriors, elusive Beastmen, Minotaurs and countless others even more ancient and hideous.
In these gloomy forests also live the Forest Goblins.
Forest Goblins are not physically different from other Goblins.
They are the same size, have the same green skin, and overall it would be hard to tell one from another were it not for their distinctive styles of dress and skin painting.
Forest Goblins decorate themselves with colourful feathers, often sticking the quills directly into their skin as Goblins feel little pain.
Different tribes often use different colours and combinations of feathers to identify themselves.
Metal ores are quite rare in the forests, so the Forest Goblins trade with other Goblin tribes, swapping captives and fungus for ores from the mountains.
Because they don't have much metal at their disposal, Forest Goblins also like to use bones and teeth to make armour as well as for decoration.
Forest Goblins wear warpaint in broad bands of colour over their bodies.
Bright red and blue are the most popular colours, and these are commonly applied to make V shaped chevrons over their face and arms.
The forests are full of all kinds of spiders, and the Forest Goblins are experts when it comes to capturing and finding uses for these creatures.
Forest Goblins even eat certain species of spiders which they regard as especially succulent and superior to any other kind of flesh.
The really gigantic spiders are sometimes captured and used as barter, but mostly these enormous creatures are avoided because they are too dangerous.
Smaller spiders, about the size of a horse, are ridden by the Goblins, and smaller ones are kept as pets.
Forest Goblin Shamans keep small poisonous spiders in their mouths.
These bite the Goblin on the tongue so that his body is always saturated with strange intoxicating poisons.
This drives the Shaman a bit mad and makes his tongue swell up and turn a bright colour such as purple or blue, but it also stimulates the part of his brain that controls magic.
Forest Shamans are the chief figures in the Spider Cult which worships the forest spiders as the gods of the forest.
Forest Goblin tribes have totem poles depicting Gork, Mork and the Spider, and this is where they meet before marching to raid a human farmstead or burn some woodcutter's house.
Shields and banners often have spiders on them, and spider decorations are common designs for buckles, banner pole tops, and weapons 
Special Rule
Fear
Like other Goblins Forest Goblins strongly dislike fighting Elves.
A unit of Goblins fears any unit of Elves that it does not outnumber by at least two to one.
The unit is affected by fear as described in the Warhammer rulebook.
SNOTLINGS
Snotlings are the smallest of the green-skinned races.
They are not very intelligent and behave very much like extremely enthusiastic and uncontrollable puppies.
They can fetch and carry for other Goblin or Orc races, and do other rather limited tasks, but they are little use for any real work.
Snotlings live around Orcs and Goblins, infesting their caves and huts, scavenging amongst their rubbish piles, and stealing anything they can get their hands on.
Their larger relatives regard Snotlings with a certain amount of affection and treat them as wayward and rather mischievous pets.
Sometimes an Orc or Goblin will capture a few Snotlings and train them to perform entertaining tricks, or to perform simple tasks.
Snotlings are great mimics and are fascinated by the activities of their larger relatives, which, although their actions are completely inexplicable to Snotlings, they will often cheerfully imitate.
It is quite common to see an important Orc Boss strutting through the Orc camp followed closely by a tiny Snotling impersonating his walk and copying the Boss' every movement in an exaggerated comic fashion.
This aping behaviour can be infuriating for Orc Bosses who like take themselves seriously, especially the Black Orcs, who are renowned for their lack of humour.
When Orcs or Goblins march off to battle they invariably find themselves accompanied by a horde of Snotlings armed with bits of wood, broken spears, and weapons they have stolen or scrounged.
On the battlefield the Snotlings latch on to a unit of Orcs or Goblins, following them about and copying their actions.
When their big friends get stuck into close combat the Snotlings throw themselves on the enemy, screaming and yelling crazily, waving their wooden clubs and biting the foes with their sharp teeth.
The sheer mass of Snotlings can overwhelm or tie down an enemy unit even if the tiny creatures don't cause many casualties!
Special Rules
Snotling Bases
Snotlings are so small that they are modelled in multiples on a single large base.
The base contains about nine Snotlings but is treated as if it were a single large monster with several wounds and attacks.
The Snotling base fights at full effect until it has taken 3 wounds when it is removed.
Mimic
Snotlings don't really think for themselves, they merely mimic the actions of Orcs and Goblins around them.
A Snotling unit must always be within 12″ of an Orc or Goblin unit and will move to within this distance during the movement phase if it finds itself further away.
The Snotlings always do what the nearest unit of Orcs or Goblins does — cheerfully imitating their neighbours' actions.
If the nearest unit of Orcs or Goblins is engaged in hand-to-hand combat or declares a charge this turn then the Snotlings must charge the nearest enemy if they can.
If they are too far away to charge the Snotlings move towards the nearest enemy as fast as they are able.
If the nearest unit of Orcs or Goblins is fleeing, or if it fails a break or panic test and so starts to flee, then the Snotlings pretend to flee as well!
The Snotling unit is immediately broken and treated just like a unit broken in combat or fleeing following a failed panic test.
If the nearest unit is Savage Orcs fighting in a frenzy then the Snotlings also go frenzied if they are fighting hand-to-hand.
Otherwise the Snotlings will keep pace with their nearest neighbours, ensuring that they remain within 12″.
So long as they have neighbours within 12″ the Snotlings are not affected by the psychology rules and they do not need to take break tests when they are beaten in hand-to-hand combat.
Because they copy their neighbours they will be affected by the results of these units' psychology tests, break tests, and so on.
This means that Snotlings can be very frustrating to fight, because no matter how many are slain they keep fighting so long as their neighbours hold steady.
A large powerful unit of enemy troops can be bogged down by Snotlings and overwhelmed, even though the Snotlings are unlikely to cause many casualties.
If Snotlings find themselves themselves further than 12″ away from a unit of Orcs or Goblins, and if they cannot move to within 12″ of a unit during that movement phase, then they mill around in a confused mass.
The Snotlings will not move until they are able to move within 12″ of a friendly Orc or Goblin unit, and if charged by enemy troops they are automatically broken as if they had failed a panic or fear test.
If the Snotlings are not within 12″ of a friendly Orc or Goblin unit they are affected by psychology as normal.
Leaders
Snotlings cannot be joined by heroes or led by them — they fight as a big mass of their own kind and are far too excited to respond to even the simplest commands.
Note that the animosity rules do not affect Snotlings — animosity only applies to Orcs and Goblins.
GIANT WOLVES
The Giant or Great Wolf of the Warhammer World is a fearsome monster with slavering fangs and huge claws.
They are a great menace to humans and have been hunted to such an extent that the huge wolf packs that terrorised whole provinces are now a thing of the past.
Only in the vast wastes of Kislev is it still common for entire villages to be raided and destroyed by marauding wolf packs, and for children to be stolen away or herds of domestic animals to be destroyed in a single night.
Attacked and driven out by men, Giant Wolves have allied with Goblin tribes.
This partnership of Goblin and wolf has proved very successful.
The Goblins protect and feed the wolves.
In turn, Goblins are small enough to ride Giant Wolves, and also hitch them to chariots and carts in place of horses, who detest the smell of Goblin, and won't have anything to do with them.
Wolves and Goblins seem to get along very well, and the two races have thrived together.
Goblin wolf riders raid and pillage far afield, while outriders scour the surrounding countryside for any sign of enemy armies.
GIANT SPIDERS
The forests of the Old World are infested with all kinds of horrible creatures of which spiders are probably the most numerous.
Most are no larger than the palm of a man's hand, but even spiders this small can have a deadly poisonous bite.
Others are as big as dragons, great bloated monsters which can hardly move from their lairs and which are revered by the Forest Goblins as gods of the forest.
There are all sorts and shapes of spider between these two extremes, including the creatures about the size of small ponies which Forest Goblins capture and ride.
These are captured when still small and raised on tasty tit-bits until they are big enough to ride.
As they are hand reared these spiders become accustomed to Goblins and quickly learn to accept a rider.
Spiders are good fighters, with gaping mandibles like steel pincers.
Although they are not as fast as wolves or horses, spiders can move swiftly over obstacles or rough territory thanks to their eight legs.
Special Rule
Move
Spiders have eight hairy legs which enable them to move easily over obstacles and rough territory.
In woodlands they can swing from tree to tree or scramble over the treetops to drop to the forest floor below.
To represent this spiders are not slowed down by crossing difficult ground or obstacles.
WAR BOARS
The war boar is a ferocious animal, as big as a horse, extremely strong, vicious, bad tempered, loudly flatulent, and its behaviour is in all respects dangerous and unpredictable.
These are just the sort of qualities that Orcs really admire!
Orc war boar riders are rough, tough and very determined.
Breaking in a war boar can be a long and dangerous business, but fortunately Orcs have thick skulls and don't feel pain much.
In fact you never really train a war boar, you just learn to hang on better while the creature goes crazy, goring and stamping, twisting and biting, and generally causing as much damage as it can.
Thanks to their size, toughness, and extreme ferocity war boars make excellent mounts for Orc warriors.
They can also be harnessed to pull chariots.
Thanks to these admirable qualities war boars have earned themselves a place alongside Orcs, and most Orc settlements have one or more secure pens where the war boars are kept.
War boars are evil minded creatures that will take every opportunity to maim, bite, and kick their Orc masters but this doesn't really bother the Orcs who are on the whole sensible enough to keep out of the way.
Special Rules
Leadership
War boars are really hard to control so when the boar decides to run off or charge madly out of control it is very difficult for the rider to do much about it.
To represent this wildness a war boar rider always reduces his leadership value by -1 when taking any tests.
So an Orc with a leadership of 7 will test with a leadership of 6, for example.
Save
War boars are obstinate, thick-skinned and very difficult to kill.
A hit is likely to make the creature even more determined to fight on.
A war boar rider therefore receives an extra bonus onto his save roll, +2 rather than +1 for other cavalry mounts such as horses and wolves.
So, for example, an Orc rider wearing a chainmail shirt and carrying a shield has an armour save of 3+ compared to 4+ for a man wearing the same armour and riding a horse, and 5+ for the same Orc fighting on foot.
This makes war boar riders very difficult to kill!
Combat Bonus
A charging war boar is a bad-tempered mound of bloody-minded muscle and bone with pointy tusks and sharp teeth.
The impact of this slavering beast on an enemy formation is just as effective as that of a Knight with a lance.
A charging war boar therefore receives a strength bonus of +2.
This extra bonus applies only to the war boar and not to the Orc rider.
TROLLS
Trolls are large and hideous creatures, bestial and foul with long gangling limbs and cold damp hides.
Their warty, slimy and sometimes scaly skins can be almost any colour.
There are many different kinds of Trolls — spines are not uncommon, while two headed Trolls have sometimes been sighted travelling with Chaos warbands.
Trolls are not very intelligent, but they are extremely strong, and can easily rip a man apart with their bare hands.
Trolls are greatly feared because of their unthinking ferocity and indiscriminate appetite.
They can and will eat anything — flesh and bone, wood, rocks, bits of metal.
The stomach of a Troll contains some of the most powerful acids known in the Old World, and its digestive juices are highly valued by alchemists and wizards.
The other unusual and perhaps best known characteristic of Trolls is that their flesh is able to regrow almost as quickly as it is damaged.
If a Troll's clawed hand is severed a fresh one will grow from the stump.
You have to cause a great deal of damage to a Troll to stop it regenerating.
The only thing that Trolls cannot survive is fire.
If they are burned they cannot regenerate, so fire is the greatest ally of the Troll fighter.
Trolls can sometimes be persuaded to join Orcs or Goblins as they march to battle, although it is doubtful if they really understand what is going on.
Left to their own devices, the chances are the Trolls will go wild or become soporific, but if led by a more intelligent creature they can often prove to be dangerous foes.
Special Rules
Fear
Trolls are large and extremely repulsive monsters which cause fear as described in the Psychology rules.
Stupidity
Trolls are extremely stupid creatures that get confused very easily.
Trolls are affected by the rules described for stupidity .
Regenerate
Trolls can regenerate damage if they are not too badly hurt.
Work this out as follows.
When Trolls are attacked calculate the number of wounds the unit suffers as normal.
Once both sides involved in the combat have made all their attacks the Trolls may try to regenerate.
Roll a D6 for each wound suffered during the combat.
If you roll a 4 or more that wound has regenerated.
Any regenerated wounds are reinstated, and models removed as casualties are replaced if enough wounds are regenerated.
The results of combat are worked out after the Trolls have regenerated, and the number of wounds inflicted on them does not include any that are regenerated.
For example, three Trolls are fighting five Empire knights.
The knights strike first and inflict 5 wounds, enough to kill one Troll and cause 2 further wounds.
The remaining 2 Trolls inflict 3 wounds on the knights.
The Trolls now test to regenerate and successfully regenerate 3 wounds.
The 3 wounds are reinstated, the slain Troll is replaced, and the 2 wounds suffered are noted down.
In this example the knights have scored only 2 wounds in the end while the Trolls have inflicted 3.
Assuming no other combat bonuses apply the Trolls have won.
Fire
Troll flesh cannot regenerate when it is burned.
If a Troll sustains one or more wounds from flames then it cannot regenerate any wounds, not even those inflicted by ordinary weapons.
Vomit
A Troll has a particularly unpleasant alternative method of attack which is to vomit the contents of its stomach over its enemy.
Should a Troll elect to vomit it may make no other attacks in hand-to-hand combat that turn.
The heaving Troll automatically inflicts 1 strength 5 hit on his enemy.
The Troll's vomit is sticky and semi-liquid, so it penetrates through armour easily and even dissolves part of it away.
No armour saving throw is therefore allowed against a vomit attack.
STONE TROLLS
Stone Trolls live in the rocky regions of the Old World, amongst the mountains and craggy hills.
Like all Trolls they will eat anything and through force of circumstance they tend to eat a lot of rocks.
Trolls tend to acquire physical attributes as a result of what they eat, and Stone Trolls are craggy with cracked flesh like weathered stone.
Rocks and stones absorb sluggish Light magic, and because the Troll eats a lot of rocks his body naturally absorbs a large quantity of magical power.
This makes Stone Trolls extraordinarily resistant to attack by magic.
If a spell is directed upon a unit of Stone Trolls it will be automatically dispelled on the D6 roll of a 4, 5 or 6.
However, this applies to all spells for both sides, not just enemy spells.
Ordinary dispels, rebounds and other magic cards may be used as normal to stop spells directed at the Trolls should their natural dispel fail to work.
Their magical resistance does not affect magic weapons or other items, except for those which cast spells in the usual way.
RIVER TROLLS
River Trolls live in marshlands or bogs, and beside untamed rivers where the banks are broad and muddy.
They are both slimy and scaly, with vile green-coloured skin and lank hair-like growths.
The slime they  exude is obnoxious and slippery, and has the stench of rotting fish.
The malodorous slime has the dual effects of choking anyone too near the Troll and also making it extremely hard for an attacker to land a blow.
All enemy must subtract -1 from any rolls to hit River Trolls in hand-to-hand combat, down to a minimum of 6 to hit.
If the Troll would normally require 6 to be hit, if it is behind a low wall for example, then the slime makes no difference — it is hard enough to hit already.
The Troll's slime has no effect on hits from shooting.
THE ARMY LIST
The Orc and Goblin Army list has been designed so that you can choose an army to a points value agreed by you and your opponent.
There is no upper limit to the size of an army, but one thousand points is about the smallest size that will allow you to field a battleworthy force.
Two thousand points is the usual size for battles that will last an entire evening, and three thousand points will give you enough troops for a battle that will take the best part of a day to fight.
Most people prefer to collect their armies in blocks of a thousand or five hundred points, starting with say a one thousand point core force and adding five hundred points at a time.
This allows you to conveniently plan your purchases and gives you time to paint the models and try them out on the tabletop before deciding what to add next.
It is usual for each side to begin with an equal points value of troops — say two thousand points a side.
This means both players pick an army worth up to the agreed points value.
The Orc and Goblin player uses the Orc and Goblin army list, while his opponent uses the list from the Warhammer Armies book for his army.
The total value of a player's army may be slightly less than the agreed value, and will often be a few points short simply because there is nothing left to spend the odd point on.
THE ARMY
When you choose your army you can spend your points on five different types of troops: Characters, Mobs, War Machines, Monsters, and Allies.
You are permitted to spend only a certain maximum proportion of your points on each each of these categories.
For example, you can spend up to 25% of your army's points value on war machines.
These limitations ensure that the army is reasonably representative and doesn't consist entirely of heroes, big monsters, or war machines.
The list which defines the limitations for each category is given immediately before the army list itself.
Of the five different categories of troops all except for allies are covered by the list in this book.
Allies are covered by the Warhammer Armies book for that race.
CHARACTERS
The portion of the army's points value which you are permitted to spend on characters includes the value of characters' armour and weapons, any magic items they have, a steed if they are mounted, a monster if they ride a monster, and a chariot and its crew if they ride a chariot.
Note especially that if a character rides a monster its points value is included in the Character point allowance and not the Monster point allowance.
You still select the monster from the Monsters part of the list, but the points value is added to that of the character.
The proportion of your army's points permitted for monsters is for monsters without riders, and this is quite separate.
Similarly, if a character rides in a chariot then its points value including that of its crew is included in the Characters' point allowance.
One of the types of characters available to you is Bosses.
Bosses are Orc or Goblin unit champions.
Although they are characters they cannot move or fight on their own, because they are part of their Mob.
You cannot include a Boss unless you also include his own Mob for him to fight with.
Although the Boss always fights with his Mob he still counts as a Character and his points cost must be reckoned with the Character points allowance.
The characters in the lists do not have specific weapons.
They can be equipped with any of the weapons or armour indicted by the Equipment List printed below.
In principal, a character may be armed with any weapon or piece of equipment normally available to the Mobs, but this does not include special weapons such as a Fanatic's ball and chain, or a Squig Hunter's prodder for example.
Bosses always have the same equipment as their Mob.
A character can carry appropriate magic items chosen from the magic item cards in Warhammer or Warhammer Battle Magic.
It is also our intention to add more magic items at a future date, possibly as part of scenario supplements and also in White Dwarf magazine.
The points value of magic items is indicated on the cards themselves.
Characters are permitted no more than the number of magic items shown on the chart below.
Note that some magic items are restricted to certain races or types of characters.
Scrolls can only be used by wizards (ie, shamans), for example.
MOBS
The great mass of Orc and Goblin troops are covered by the Mobs section of the army list.
Troops are organised into units which, in the case of Orcs and Goblins, are called Mobs.
These units must be at least five models strong unless indicated otherwise.
There is no upper limit to the size of a unit.
The minimum of five models includes its leader, standard bearer, musician and champion if it has them.
All units are assumed to include a leader equipped in the same way as his troops and with identical characteristics.
He costs the same points as an ordinary trooper.
All units may include a standard bearer and/or musician, and these cost double the points value of an ordinary trooper.
Standard bearers and musicians are assumed to be equipped with the same weapons as the rest of the unit and fight just like ordinary troopers (see the Warhammer rulebook for a full description).
Some units are permitted magic standards.
These are covered by the Warhammer Battle Magic supplement and are included as magic item cards.
If you include a magic standard then its points value is included with the points value of the unit.
Units are permitted champions which in the case of Orcs and Goblins are called Bosses.
Bosses are always equipped exactly as the rest of the unit, except that they are permitted one magic item in addition.
A Boss may be the unit's leader, but does not have to be — you can have a separate leader and champion model if you wish.
As we have already seen, the points value of a Boss, and any magic item he carries, comes from your Character points allocation.
WAR MACHINES
War machines includes all the artillery and other machines of war available to the Orc and Goblin army including Rock Lobbers, Doom Divers, and Snotling Pump Wagons.
The War Machines section also includes chariots — note that this is different from some other armies where chariots may be included as part of their ordinary units.
MONSTERS
Monsters are beasts brought along to fight beside the army.
They include captive monsters goaded into fighting and monsters which have been magically bound by spells of obedience.
Monsters chosen as mounts for characters are NOT included in the points allocation for Monsters: they are included in the points for Characters instead.
ALLIES
The Orc and Goblin army may include a proportion of allies worth up to a quarter of its total points value.
Allies are chosen from the Warhammer Armies book or books indicated.
So, for example, your Orc and Goblin army could include up to a quarter of its points value as Dark Elves chosen from the Dark Elf list, or Chaos chosen from the Chaos list.
There is nothing to prevent you choosing allies from several different lists if you wish.
Including allies is a good way of expanding your miniature collection, and it also allows you to paint something different and still include it in your army.
When you choose allies you can spend your points freely on characters, regiments, and war machines (also Daemons in the case of Chaos allies).
The normal army selection proportions do not apply, although other normal restrictions do (eg, you need an Orc unit to buy an Orc war machine).
You cannot include monsters from your allies except for monsters ridden by characters.
You do not have to include a general model for your allies but you can do so if you wish.
The allied general counts as a character in the normal way but he does not benefit from any of the special rules for generals.
In effect the allied general becomes a subordinate character in the same way as other heroes.
PRESENTATION OF PROFILES
Profiles are given in the standard format and include all the characteristic values.
They do not take into account movement reductions due to armour, as this may vary depending on how you choose to equip your troops.
Saving throws are not included on the profiles for the same reason, as they may vary depending on what armour you choose to buy.
Cavalry have two profiles, one for the rider and one for the mount.
As the mount will be either a war boar, giant spider or giant wolf their profiles have been included in full.
M = Movement W = Wounds
WS = Weapon Skill I = Initiative
BS = Ballistic Skill A = Attacks
S = Strength Ld = Leadership
T = Toughness
LIMITATIONS ON CERTAIN CHARACTERS/UNITS
The army lists presents the player with lists of troop types which can be included in the Orc and Goblin Army.
In most cases there is no limit on the number of individual models, or the number of units, other than that imposed by the points values.
However, some particular types of unit or character are limited.
In some cases you can only include one character of a certain type in your army, or one of a specific unit.
Any such limitations are clearly indicated in the lists.
For example, you may only ever include one Warlord model.
SPECIAL CHARACTERS
The army list itself is intended to broadly represent an Orc and Goblin army.
Provision has been made to include a general, but we do not specify that the general should be a particular Orc or Goblin warlord, the chieftain of a powerful tribe, or any given individual.
We leave it up to you to invent a name and background as you feel appropriate for your own general and for any heroes you include in your army.
A separate section describing famous Orc and Goblin warlords has been included after the army list.
These are, in effect, ready-made heroes and shamans, with their own unique characteristics, magic artefacts, and points values.
You may include these characters in your army if you wish.
The points cost of these special characters comes out of your Character points allowance in the normal way.
So, for , you can have Grom as your army's warlord if you wish.
ARMOUR
The saving throws for troops is not given on their profile because it can vary depending on the armour they wear.
Saving throws are summarised below.
For example, an Orc Boar Boy is cavalry wearing light armour and shield and riding a war boar, his save is therefore 3+ (4+ with a further +1 on account of the boar).
EQUIPMENT LIST
The following is a list of all the usual weapons in the Warhammer game.
It has been included so that you can refer to it for comparative purposes, and so that you can choose equipment for character models without having to refer to the army list entries or the Warhammer rulebook.
A character model may be armed with any weapons available to the troops themselves, subject to the usual restriction regarding weapon use — for example, it is impossible to wield a double-handed axe and a halberd as both require two hands to use.
In the case of characters the models must actually carry the weapons ascribed to them.
Note that regimental champions (Bosses) are always assumed to be armed and equipped exactly as the rank and file members of their regiment.
Items marked with an  asterisk (*) are not used by Orc or Goblin troops and are not therefore available to your army's characters.
They have been included out of a sense of completeness.
Army Selection
Characters 0–50% Up to half the points value of the army may be spent on characters.
This includes the cost of a monster or chariot ridden by a character.
Mobs 25%+ At least a quarter of the total points value of the army must be spent on troops.
This does not include the cost of champions or of chariots ridden by characters (both of these are paid for out of the Characters allowance).
War Machines 0–25% Up to a quarter of the points value of the army may be spent on war machines.
Monsters 0–25% Up to a quarter of the points value of the army may be spent on monsters.
Note that this does not include monsters ridden by characters, which must be paid for from the Characters allowance.
Allies 0–25% Up to a quarter of the points value of the army may be spent on allied troops chosen from any of the following list or lists: Chaos, Chaos Dwarf, Dark Elves, and Skaven.
CHARACTERS
Your army may include up to 50% of its points value as characters chosen from the list below.
You must always include one Warlord, but apart from this you are free to choose as many or a few characters as you wish.
WARLORD Black Orc  140 points  Orc 110 points  Savage Orc 150 points  Goblin 50 points  Forest Goblin 50 points  Night Goblin 50 points 
Your army must be led by a general and Orc and Goblin generals are called Warlords.
The Warlord represents a great chieftain and leader of the Waaagh.
He can be a Black Orc, an Orc, Savage Orc, Goblin, Forest Goblin or Night Goblin.
Whichever race you choose, your army must always include at least one Mob of the same race.
For example, if you have a Black Orc Warlord you must have at least one Mob of Black Orcs in your army.
EQUIPMENT : Sword.
WEAPONS/ARMOUR : The Warlord may be armed with any of the weapons or armour indicated on the Equipment List.
See the separate Equipment List for summary and points values.
MAY RIDE : Orc and Goblin Warlords may ride either giant wolves, giant spiders, or war boars as shown on the chart below.
Any Warlord may ride a monster (see separate Monster List for points values).
A Warlord may ride in a chariot pulled by either war boars or giant wolves as described in the War Machines section of the list.
MAGIC ITEMS : The Warlord is a Warboss character and is entitled to up to three magic items chosen from the appropriate Warhammer Battle Magic cards.
0–1 BATTLE STANDARD  Black Orc 92 points  Orc 83 points  Savage Orc 95 points  Goblin 65 points  Forest Goblin 65 points  Night Goblin 65 points 
The army may include a Battle Standard together with its bearer if you wish.
The Battle Standard Bearer may be of any of the Orc or Goblin races indicated.
Whichever race you choose, your army must always include at least one Mob of the same race.
For example, if you have a Forest Goblin as your Battle Standard Bearer you must have at least one Mob of Forest Goblins in your army.
EQUIPMENT : Sword and Battle Standard.
WEAPONS/ARMOUR : The Battle Standard Bearer may be armed with any of the weapons or armour indicated on the Equipment List.
See the separate Equipment List for summary and points values.
MAY RIDE : Orc and Goblin Battle Standard Bearers may ride either giant wolves, giant spiders, or war boars as shown on the chart below.
Any Battle Standard Bearer may ride a monster (see separate Monster List for more details).
Any Battle Standard Bearer may ride in a chariot pulled by either war boars or giant wolves as described in the War Machines section of the list.
MAGIC ITEMS : The Battle Standard Bearer is a Boss character and is entitled to up to one magic item chosen from the appropriate Warhammer Battle Magic cards.
This may be a magic standard, effectively turning the army's banner into a magic standard.
BIG BOSSES  Black Orc 91 points  Orc 72 points  Savage Orc 98 points  Goblin 33 points  Forest Goblin 33 points  Night Goblin 33 points 
The army may include as many Orc or Goblin Big Bosses as you wish within the normal limitations of the points available.
You may choose from any of the Orc or Goblin races which are represented by Mobs in your army.
For example, you can choose a Black Orc Big Boss only if your army includes at least one Mob of Black Orcs.
Similarly you can only choose a Savage Orc Big Boss if your army includes at least one Mob of Savage Orcs.
EQUIPMENT : Sword.
WEAPONS/ARMOUR : A Big Boss may be armed with any of the weapons or armour indicated on the Equipment List.
See the separate Equipment List for summary and points values.
MAY RIDE : Orc and Goblin Big Bosses may ride either giant wolves, giant spiders, or war boars as shown on the chart below.
Any Big Boss may ride a Monster (see separate Monster List for points values and selection).
Any Big Boss may ride in a chariot pulled by either war boars or giant wolves as described in the War Machines section of the list.
MAGIC ITEMS : A Big Boss character is entitled to up to two magic items chosen from the appropriate Warhammer Battle Magic cards.
BOSSES  Black Orc 42 points  Orc 33 points  Savage Orc 45 points  Goblin 15 points  Forest Goblin 15 points  Night Goblin 15 points 
Any regiment may include a Boss armed and equipped as the rest of the unit (see Equipment List for points values).
A Boss is always the same race as the Mob to which he belongs.
EQUIPMENT: A Boss is always armed and equipped in the same way as the rank and file members of his regiment (see Equipment List for points values).
MAGIC ITEMS: A Boss character is entitled to a single magic item chosen from the appropriate Warhammer Battle Magic cards.
SHAMANS
The army may include as many Shamans as you wish within the usual limitations of points cost.
You may choose from any of the Orc or Goblin races which are represented by Mobs in your army.
For example, you can choose a Night Goblin Shaman if your army includes at least one Mob of Night Goblins.
Similarly, you can only choose a Savage Orc Shaman if your army includes at least one Mob of Savage Orcs.
Note that there are no such things as Black Orc Shamans.
EQUIPMENT : Sword.
WEAPONS/ARMOUR : A Shaman may be armed with any of the weapons or armour allowed to any of the troop types in this list.
See the Equipment List for separate summary and points values.
MAY RIDE : Orc and Goblin Shamans may ride either giant wolves, giant spiders, or war boars as shown on the chart below.
Any Shaman may ride a Monster (see separate Monster List for points values and selection).
Any Shaman may ride in a chariot pulled by either war boars or giant wolves as described in the War Machines section of the list.
Note that the points value of a Shaman's chariot is included as part of his total points value.
MAGIC ITEMS : A Shaman is entitled to magic items chosen from the appropriate cards.
A Shaman may have one magic item, a Shaman Champion may have two magic items, a Master Shaman may have three magic items, and a Shaman Lord may have four magic items.
MOBS
Your army must include at least 25% of its points value as units chosen from the following list; it may include more if you wish.
Orc and Goblin units are called Mobs, but in other respects they are exactly like the regiments of Men and Elves.
In some cases you may only choose a maximum of one unit of a specific type, for example you can only have one Mob of Big'uns.
There is no limitation on the size of a unit, other than units must consist of at least five models unless otherwise stated.
SAVAGE ORC BOAR BOYZ  25 points per model 
Your army may include any number of Mobs of Savage Orc Boar Boyz — Savage Orcs riding war boars.
EQUIPMENT : Savage Orc Boar Boyz carry shields.
They ride fierce war boars and are armed with a hand weapon.
SAVE : 3+ (A Savage Orc's protective tattoos give him a save equivalent to light armour.)
OPTIONS : Any Mobs of Savage Orc Boar Boyz may be equipped with spears at an additional cost of +2 points per model.
Any Mobs of Savage Orc Boar Boyz may be equipped with bows at an additional cost of +4 points per model.
One Mob of Savage Orc Boar Boyz Mob may carry a Magic Standard.
This may be chosen from the appropriate magic item cards and its cost is indicated on the card itself (see Warhammer Battle Magic).
SPECIAL RULE: Savage Orcs are affected by the rules for frenzy , as described in the Warhammer rulebook.
ORC BOAR BOYZ  27 points per model 
Your army may include any number of Mobs of Orc Boar Boyz — fierce Orcs riding equally fierce war boars.
These are powerful troops, better fighters than normal Orcs, and potentially the equal to the best heavily armoured knights of the Empire or High Elves.
EQUIPMENT : Boar Boyz wear light armour and carry shields.
They ride fierce war boars and are armed with a hand weapon.
SAVE : 3+
OPTIONS : Any Mobs of Boar Boyz may be equipped with spears at an additional cost of +2 points per model.
Any Boar Boyz Mob may carry a Magic Standard.
This may be chosen from the appropriate magic item cards and its cost is indicated on the card itself (see Warhammer Battle Magic).
GOBLIN WOLF RIDERS
9 points per model
Your army may include any number of Mobs of Goblin wolf riders.
Goblin wolf riders are among the fastest and most mobile of all troops.
They are capable of moving rapidly across the battlefield in a very short time, either to intercept enemy or to harass static war machines.
Swarms of wolf riders are often deployed ahead of the army's line of march to scout and block any route of escape.
EQUIPMENT : Wolf riders carry a hand weapon and ride a giant wolf.
SAVE : 6+
OPTIONS : Any Mobs of wolf riders may be armed with spears at an additional cost of +1 points per model.
Any Mobs of wolf riders may be armed with short bows at an additional cost of +1 points per model.
Any Mobs of wolf riders may be equipped with light armour at an additional cost of +2 points per model.
Any Mobs of wolf riders may be equipped with shields at an additional cost of +1 point per model.
FOREST GOBLIN SPIDER RIDERS  9 points per model 
Your army may include any number of Mobs of Forest Goblin spider riders.
Spider riders can move easily through woods and forests, scuttling over the treetops and through the dense foliage.
EQUIPMENT : Spider riders carry a hand weapon and ride a giant spider.
SAVE : 6+
OPTIONS : Any Mobs of spider riders may carry shields at an additional cost of +1 points per model.
Any Mobs of spider riders may be armed with spears at an additional cost of +1 points per model.
Any Mobs of spider riders may be armed with short bows at an additional cost of +1 points per model.
0–1 MOB OF ORC BIG'UNS  6½ points per model 
Your army may include one Mob of Big'uns.
These are especially large and fierce Orcs, the most powerful of all after the tribe's chieftain.
They are often well armoured and likely to carry the pick of any wargear the tribe has.
EQUIPMENT : Hand weapon.
SAVE : None.
OPTIONS : The Big'uns may be equipped with shields at an additional cost of +1 point per model.
The Big'uns may be equipped with light armour at an additional cost of +2 points per model.
Big'uns may carry one of the following weapons: either spears (+1 point per model), or double-handed weapons (+2 points per model) or bows (+2 points per model).
The Big'uns may carry a Magic Standard.
This may be chosen from the appropriate Magic Item cards and its cost is indicated on the card itself (see Warhammer Battle Magic).
ORC BOYZ  5½ points per model 
Your army may include any number of Mobs of Orc Boyz.
These are the mainstay of many an army — tough, reliable fighters able to hold a battleline against almost any enemy.
EQUIPMENT : Orc Boyz carry a hand weapon.
SAVE : None.
OPTIONS : Any Mobs of Orc Boyz may be equipped with light armour at an additional cost of +2 points per model.
Any Mobs may be equipped with shields at a cost of +1 points per model.
Any Mobs may be armed with one of the following weapons: either a double-handed weapon (+2 points per model), a halberd (+2 points per model), a spear (+1 point per model), or an additional hand weapon (+1 point per model).
One Orc Boyz Mob may carry a Magic Standard.
This may be chosen from the appropriate magic item cards and its cost is indicated on the card itself (see Warhammer Battle Magic).
ORC ARRER BOYZ  7½ points per model 
Your army may include any number of Mobs of Orc Arrer Boyz.
These are Orc Boyz armed with bows or crossbows.
Despite their armament they are equally good hand-to-hand fighters as other Boyz.
EQUIPMENT : Orc Arrer Boyz carry a hand weapon and bow.
SAVE : None.
OPTIONS : Any Mobs of Orc Arrer Boyz may be equipped with light armour at an additional cost of +2 points per model.
Any Mobs may be equipped with shields at a cost of +1 points per model.
Any Mobs may be armed with crossbows instead of bows at an additional cost of +1 point per model.
0–1 MOB OF BLACK ORCS  9 points per model 
Your army may include one Mob of Black Orcs.
Black Orcs come from the eastern side of the Worlds Edge Mountains and are bigger, stronger and tougher than ordinary Orcs.
They are also more reliable, and don't fight amongst themselves like other Orcs and Goblins.
EQUIPMENT : Black Orcs wear light armour and carry a hand weapon.
SAVE : 6+
OPTIONS : A Mob of Black Orcs may be armed with one of the following: double-handed weapons (+2 points per model), halberds (+2 points per model), spears (+1 point per model) or an additional hand weapon (+1 point).
A Mob of Black Orcs may carry a shield (+1 point).
The Mob of Black Orcs may carry a Magic Standard.
This may be chosen from the appropriate magic item cards and its cost is indicated on the card itself (see Warhammer Battle Magic).
SAVAGE ORCS  7½points per model 
Your army may include any number of Mobs of Savage Orcs.
Savage Orcs are barbaric and fierce, they wear no armour and fight with simply made weapons such as maces and clubs.
EQUIPMENT : Savage Orcs carry a crude hand weapon, usually a club, mace or stone axe.
SAVE : 6+ due to protective tattoos.
OPTIONS : Any Mobs of Savage Orcs may carry a shield at an additional cost of +1 point per model.
Any Mobs of Savage Orcs may be armed with one of the following weapons: either a double-handed weapon (+2 points per model) or an additional hand weapon (+1 point per model) or a bow (+2 points per model).
One Mob of Savage Orcs may carry a Magic Standard.
This may be chosen from the appropriate magic item cards and its cost is indicated on the card itself (see Warhammer Battle Magic).
SPECIAL RULES : Savage Orcs can skirmish as described in the Warhammer rulebook.
Savage Orcs are affected by the rules for frenzy .
NB:The points value of 7 ½ is correct, and takes into account their frenzy and natural armour.
The points value of 5 ½ given in the Warhammer rulebook does not take these into account and is (as astute players have pointed out!) a mistake .
GOBLINS  2½ points per model 
Your army may include any number of Mobs of Goblins.
Goblins are numerous and fight most effectively in big Mobs with many ranks — this enables the Goblins to bowl over their enemy by sheer weight of numbers.
EQUIPMENT : Goblins carry a hand weapon.
SAVE : None.
OPTIONS : Any Mobs of Goblins may carry shields at an additional cost of +½ point per model.
Any Mobs of Goblins may wear light armour at an additional cost of +1 point per model.
Any Mobs may be armed with one of the following weapons: either double-handed weapons (+1 point per model), halberds (+1 point per model), spears (+½ point per model), or short bows (+½ point per model).
One Mob of Goblins may carry a Magic Standard.
This may be chosen from the appropriate magic item cards and its cost is indicated on the card itself (see Warhammer Battle Magic).
FOREST GOBLINS  2½points per model 
Your army may include any number of Mobs of Forest Goblins.
Forest Goblins wear exotic war paint, carry war axes and are often decorated with colourful feathers.
EQUIPMENT : Forest Goblins are armed with a hand weapon — often a war axe or club.
SAVE : None.
OPTIONS : Any Mobs of Forest Goblins may carry shields at an additional cost of +½ point per model.
Any Mobs may be armed with one of the following weapons: either double-handed weapons (+1 point per model), spears (+½ point per model), or short bows (+½ point per model).
One Mob of Forest Goblins may carry a Magic Standard.
This may be chosen from the appropriate magic item cards and its cost is indicated on the card itself.
NIGHT GOBLINS  2½ points per model 
Your army may include any number of Mobs of Night Goblins.
Night Goblins live in the tunnels and caverns beneath the mountains, and dress in black or dark cloaks and hoods.
EQUIPMENT : Night Goblins are armed with a hand weapon.
SAVE : None.
OPTIONS : Any Mobs of Night Goblins may carry shields at an additional cost of +½ point per model.
Any Mobs may be armed with one of the following weapons: either double-handed weapons (+1 point per model), halberds (+1 point per model), spears (+½ point per model), or short bows (+½ point per model).
One Mob of Night Goblins may carry a Magic Standard.
This may be chosen from the appropriate magic item cards and its cost is indicated on the card itself (see Warhammer Battle Magic).
SPECIAL RULES : Each Night Goblin Mob may include up to three hidden Night Goblin Fanatics.
0–1 MOB OF SQUIG HUNTERS  8 points per hunter team  20 points per cave squig 
If your army contains at least one Mob of ordinary Night Goblins then it may include a single Squig Hunter Mob too.
A Squig Hunter Mob must contain at least five models (a Squig Hunter team counts as two) and may include Cave Squigs as well as Hunters armed with long prodders.
A Mob must have at least one Hunter team for every three Cave Squigs in order to control the Squigs properly.
EQUIPMENT : Night Goblin Squig Hunters are armed with long handled squig prodders.
SAVE : None.
SPECIAL RULES : See the Orc Bestiary rules section of this book for a full description of how Squig Hunters work.
BOSS .
As Squig Hunter teams normally carry one prodder between two models a Boss can be armed with a sword, axe or any other kind of hand weapon rather than with a prodder.
This is an exception to the normal rules — normally a champion/boss is armed in the same way as his unit.
0–1 MOB OF NETTERS  3½points per model 
If your army contains at least one Mob of ordinary Night Goblins then it may include a single Netter Mob too.
A Netter Mob contains five or more models like any other Mob, but unlike other units it can contain both net- and club-armed Night Goblins.
The ratio of net-to club-armed Netters is entirely up to you: you could have all clubs, all nets or a mixture of the two.
If a Netter Mob has a Boss he may be armed with a club at a cost of +1 point.
EQUIPMENT : Night Goblin Netters are armed with either nets or clubs.
SAVE : None.
SPECIAL RULES : See the Bestiary section in this volume for a full description of how Netters work.
BOSS .
A Mob of Netters may have a Boss armed with a club, they may not have a Boss armed with a net.
(What's the point of being the Boss if you don't get to bash things?)
NIGHT GOBLIN FANATICS  30 points per model 
Each unit of Night Goblins in your army may include up to three hidden Night Goblin Fanatics.
Only Night Goblin Mobs may include Night Goblin Fanatics.
Night Goblin Netter and Night Goblin Squig Hunter units may not include Fanatics.
EQUIPMENT : Ball and chain.
SAVE : None.
SPECIAL RULES : See the Orc Bestiary rules section.
SQUIG HOPPERS  25 points per model 
Your army may include up to five Squig Hoppers for each Night Goblin Mob it contains (including Squig Hunter and Netter Mobs).
They are not part of the Mobs (as are Fanatics) but quite independent.
Squig Hoppers are not organised into formal units.
Each Squig Hopper moves and fights as an individual model and as such they never have champions, standards, musicians, etc.
Equipment : Each Night Goblin rider carries a hand weapon such as a club or axe.
Save : 6+
Special Rules : See the Squig Hopper rules in the Bestiary section of this volume for a full description of how Squig Hoppers work.
GIANTS  200 points per model 
Giants are big and not very bright creatures.
Although they do not need it to fight they are usually armed with a big club made from a tree trunk.
OGRES  40 points per model 
Ogre bands are attracted to Orc armies by the prospects of loot.
Orcs respect them partly because of their great strength but mostly because Ogres are bigger than them.
EQUIPMENT : Hand weapon.
SAVE : None.
OPTIONS : Any units of Ogres may be equipped with one of the following: an additional hand weapon at a further +1 point per model, a double-handed weapon at +2 points per model, or a halberd at +2 points per model.
Any unit may be equipped with light armour at an additional cost of +2 points per model.
TROLLS  65 points per model 
Your army may include any number of Trolls, of which there are three types: Trolls, Stone Trolls and River Trolls.
Trolls must be organised into units of the same type, but the number of Trolls in a unit can be less than the normal minimum of five models.
If your army includes up to five Trolls these form a single unit.
For example you could have just one Troll in your army and it will count as a unit on its own.
If your army includes six to ten Trolls these may be organised into either one unit or into two as near as possible equally sized units.
For example, if you have seven Trolls these could be organised into one unit of four and one unit of three.
If your army includes eleven to fifteen Trolls these may be organised into either a single unit, two as near as possible equally-sized units, or three as near a possible equally-sized units.
If your army includes sixteen or more Trolls then the possible number of units goes up by 1 for every extra 5 models, eg 16–20 Trolls = up to 4 units, 21–25 Trolls = up to 5 units, 26–30 Trolls = up to 6 units and so on.
EQUIPMENT : Trolls do not require weapons to fight but often carry a big club.
SAVE : None.
SPECIAL RULES : See the Bestiary section for details.
SNOTLINGS  15 points per base 
Your army may include any number of Snotling bases.
If your army includes up to five Snotling bases these form a single unit.
For example, if you have just one Snotling base in your army it will count as a unit on its own.
If your army includes six to ten Snotling bases these may be organised into either one unit or into two as near as possible equally sized units.
If your army includes eleven to fifteen bases these may be organised into either a single unit, two as near as possible equally-sized units, or three as near as possible equally-sized units.
If your army includes sixteen or more Snotling bases then the possible number of units goes up by one for every extra five bases.
WAR MACHINES
Neither Orcs nor Goblins are particularly technically minded, but they build fast and strong so their devices usually work even though they may appear crude in comparison to human constructions.
Your army may include up to 25% of its points value as war machines chosen from the following list.
ROCK LOBBERS  Small Rock Lobbers 66½points each  Big Rock Lobbers 96½points each 
If your army contains at least one Mob of Orcs (including Big'uns) it may also include any number of stone throwers, which Orcs call Rock Lobbers.
Each machine has three Orc crew to operate and defend it.
EQUIPMENT : The crew are armed with hand weapons.
SAVE : None.
OPTIONS : Rock Lobber crew may wear light armour at an additional cost of +2 points per model.
BOLT THROWERS  46½ points each 
If your army contains at least one Mob of Orcs (including Big'uns) it may also include any number of Bolt Throwers.
Each machine has a crew of three Orcs to operate and defend it.
EQUIPMENT : The crew are armed with hand weapons.
SAVE : None.
OPTIONS : Rock Lobber crew may wear light armour at an additional cost of +2 points per model.
SNOTLING PUMP WAGON  40 points each 
If your army includes at least one Goblin Mob then it may include any number of Snotling Pump Wagons.
Each machine is crewed by a stand of Snotlings.
DOOM DIVER CATAPULT  100 points each 
If your army contains at least one Goblin Mob then it may include any number of Doom Diver Catapults.
Note that this must be an ordinary Goblin Mob — not a Night Goblin or a Forest Goblin Mob.
Each Doom Diver Catapult is assumed to have an infinite supply of Doom Divers ready and waiting to be catapulted into the air.
Special Rules : See elsewhere in this volume for special rules for the Doom Diver Catapult.
ORC BOAR CHARIOTS  81 points per model 
If your army includes at least one Mob of Orcs (including Big'uns) it may also include any number of Orc boar chariots.
Chariots fight as individual models as described in the Warhammer rulebook.
Each chariot has a crew of two Orcs and is pulled by two war boars.
EQUIPMENT : The Orcs carry swords and wear light armour.
OPTIONS : Any chariots may have up to two additional crewmen each at a cost of 7 ½ points each.
Any chariot crew may be equipped with shields at an additional cost of +1 point per crewman.
Any chariot crew may be given short bows at an additional cost of +1 point per crewman.
Any chariots may have scythed wheels at an additional cost of 20 points per chariot.
One Orc boar chariot may carry a Magic Standard.
This may be chosen from the appropriate magic item cards and its cost is indicated on the card itself (see Warhammer Battle Magic).
GOBLIN WOLF CHARIOTS  65 points per model 
If your army contains at least one Goblin Mob then it may include any number of Goblin wolf chariots.
Chariots fight as individual models as described in the Warhammer rulebook.
Each chariot has a crew of two Goblins and is pulled by two giant wolves.
EQUIPMENT : The Goblins carry swords and wear light armour.
OPTIONS : Any chariots may have up to two additional crewmen each at a cost of 3 ½ points each.
Any chariot may have an additional giant wolf to pull it at a cost of +4 points.
Any chariot crew may be equipped with shields at an additional cost of +½ point per crewman.
Any chariot crew many be given short bows at an additional cost of +½ point per crewman.
Any chariots may have scythed wheels at an additional cost of 20 points per chariot.
One Goblin wolf chariot may carry a Magic Standard.
This may be chosen from the appropriate magic item cards and its cost is indicated on the card itself (see Warhammer Battle Magic).
MONSTERS
SPECIAL CHARACTERS
AZHAG THE SLAUGHTERER  130 points  Wyvern: +180 points 
Your army may be led by Azhag the Slaughterer.
If you decide to do this, Azhag is the Warlord of your army and therefore replaces the Warlord described in the main army list.
If your army is led by Azhag the Slaughterer it must include at least one unit of Orcs.
Azhag was one of the most dangerous Orc Warlords of recent history, and his campaigns of destruction throughout the Empire almost brought the eastern provinces to their knees.
After defeating countless Orc and Goblin tribes from the Worlds Edge Mountains he led his horde into Ostermark and looted several towns destroying the Temple of Sigmar at Nachtdorf in the process.
Azhag possessed a strange iron crown which appeared to give him sorcerous powers.
After his final defeat by a large Empire army this crown was taken by the Grand Theogonist of Sigmar and locked away forever.
Azhag rode to battle on the back of a large wyvern, often harrying his retreating enemies from the air after a battle.
WEAPONS/ARMOUR : Azhag wears a suit of light armour and carries a shield.
MAY RIDE : Azhag rides a wyvern.
MAGIC ITEMS : Azhag may carry up to three magic items in total but the first magic item he has must always be the Crown of Sorcery.
Azhag does not have to have the Crown of Sorcery, but if he has any magic items the Crown of Sorcery must be among them.
Other items may be chosen freely from the Warhammer Battle Magic cards.
SPECIAL RULES
ANIMOSITY
No Orc or Goblin units within 12″ of Azhag the Slaughterer are affected by animosity.
They just don't dare.
Units within 12″ of Azhag therefore don't test.
Units more than 12″ away from Azhag at the start of your turn are affected exactly as normal.
GORFANG ROTGUT  90 points 
You may include Gorfang Rotgut in your army as an Orc Big Boss or as a Warlord if you wish, but if you take him your army must include at least one unit of Orcs.
Gorfang Rotgut is the chieftain of the Orcs of Black Crag, the ancient Dwarf hold taken over by Orcs many years ago.
Over the centuries many tribes have fought over and occupied Black Crag, and the most powerful tribe has always taken the crag as its homeland.
Gorfang's tribe, the Red Fangs, is currently the most powerful Orc tribe in the whole of the area around the western end of Death Pass.
Gorfang has subjugated most of the local Orc tribes but his neighbours are the Night Goblins of Karak Eight Peaks whose leader is the old and infamously cunning Skarsnik.
The two leaders enjoy an uneasy alliance, with Skarsnik controlling the mountains around Karak Eight Peaks and the eastern end of Death Pass, while Gorfang controls the western end of Death Pass and the adjoining area.
Gorfang is an immensely strong Orc.
He lost an eye at the Battle of the Jaws, and wears an iron patch to cover the wound.
Many of his battles have been fought against Dwarfs, including the siege of Barak Varr and the attack on Karak Azul.
As a result of his long struggles Gorfang has acquired an unreasoning hatred of the Dwarf race.
When Gorfang attacked Karak Azul he broke into Lord Kazador's throne room and captured many of the Dwarf Lord's kinsfolk.
Some were taken back to the dungeons of Black Crag where they remain to this day, to the anger of Kazador.
The Dwarf Lord's son, Kazrik, was not taken captive but was shaved, and his head tattooed with a crude Orc glyph representing Gorfang, and then firmly nailed to Kazador's own throne.
Although Kazrik survived, the experienced has unhinged him somewhat.
Lord Kazador has sworn vengeance and awaits the day when he can crush the Orc chieftain.
WEAPONS/ARMOUR : Gorfang Rotgut wears light armour and carries a shield.
He is armed with a huge sword.
MAY RIDE : Gorfang Rotgut may ride a war boar (+8 points), or a monster (see separate Monster List), or he can ride a chariot pulled by either war boars or giant wolves as described in the War Machines section.
MAGIC ITEMS : Gorfang Rotgut may carry up to two magic items chosen from the appropriate Warhammer Battle Magic cards.
SPECIAL RULES
HATES DWARFS
Gorfang Rotgut really hates Dwarfs — he just can't stand stunties.
He is therefore affected by the rules for hatred as described in the Warhammer rulebook.
GROM THE PAUNCH OF MISTY MOUNTAIN  80 points  Niblit: +65 points with Battle Standard  Chariot: +62 points  Axe of Grom: +50 points 
Your army may be led by Grom the Paunch of Misty Mountain.
If you decide to do this, Grom is the Warlord of your army and therefore replaces the Warlord described in the main army list.
Grom is accompanied by his Goblin assistant Niblit who also carries the army's battle banner.
Niblit replaces the normal battle standard bearer option in the army list.
Your army must include at least one unit of Goblins if it is led by Grom.
Grom is a hugely obese and extremely fierce Goblin Warlord.
According to legend he once ate a plate of raw Troll meat which is regenerating within him all the time.
As a result he is very fat and suffers from constant agony due to chronic indigestion, which may explain why he is so fierce.
He rides a massive chariot pulled by three wolves, and swings his mighty axe Elf-Biter.
He is accompanied by his assistant Niblit the Goblin who carries the army's battle standard.
As a result of eating the troll flesh he has developed several troll-like traits and has an almost trollish resistance to injury.
WEAPONS/ARMOUR : Grom wears a suit of light armour, and is armed with the huge Axe of Grom.
Grom rides a chariot pulled by three giant wolves and is accompanied by his Goblin attendant Niblit who carries the army's battle standard.
MAGIC ITEMS : Grom may carry up to three magic items including the mighty Axe of Grom.
The magic item card for Grom's axe is included in the Warhammer game itself.
Other magic items may be chosen from the cards in Warhammer Battle Magic as usual.
Niblit may carry a single magic item chosen from Warhammer Battle Magic.
SPECIAL RULES
REGENERATE
Grom can regenerate wounds in the same way as a Troll.
This works as follows.
If Grom suffers one or more wounds from shooting, combat, or whatever, he can try to recover these wounds at the end of the phase in which they are inflicted.
Roll a dice for each wound.
If you roll a 4 or more that wound has regenerated.
Any regenerated wounds are reinstated.
If Grom is slain he may still try to regenerate wounds suffered, and if successful he is not killed after all.
Like Trolls, Grom cannot regenerate wounds suffered from flames or burning.
If he sustains one or more wounds from flames then he loses his ability to regenerate, and he won't even be able to regenerate wounds inflicted by ordinary weapons.