

Looking Forward to Retirement
Just as there are some people who become engaged within three hours of meeting and live happily ever after, there are others who without any apparent planning enjoy a totally fulfilled retirement, clearly relishing everything it has to offer.
But for most of us life does not work like that.
Important events require some preparation if we are to make the most of them and arguably this is more true of retirement than of any other stage.
Glancing through a book I wrote for the Daily Telegraph in 1970, I was struck by the gloom with which many men and women — but especially men — viewed the prospect of what could be their happiest and most satisfying years.
Far from welcoming the new challenges and opportunities, many saw retirement as a kind of bogeyman who trailed in his wake the threats of a lower standard of living, boredom and impending old age.
Small wonder perhaps that many buried their heads in the sand and refused even to think about the event until the last possible moment.
Happily over the last decade attitudes have been radically changing.
Not only are a majority of those retiring today fitter, more skilled and better off financially than any previous generation, but with early retirement increasingly becoming the norm, a great many of us can realistically look forward to 25 years or more of active life ahead.
As a result, planning the future has become even more critically important.
The Good Retirement Guide is not designed to offer you a ready-made philosophy or a few rose-tinted blueprints on the theme ‘Life Begins in Middle Age’.
Its sole aim is to set you thinking along constructive lines, to indicate what is possible, to advise on the best sources of information and to help you avoid the pitfalls that can trap the unwary.
Key concerns are likely to be the question of money and how you will occupy your time.
Others may well include: where you live, how best to keep fit, the effect of your retirement on close personal relationships and perhaps new responsibilities such as the care of elderly parents.
You do not need to be an accountant to know that once you stop earning your income will drop.
However, if you complete the Budget Planner (see pages 120–25), you may be pleasantly surprised to find that the difference is far less than you had feared.
On the plus side, you will be saving on travel and other work-related expenses as well as enjoying a welcome reduction in tax.
As with all questions affecting retirement, it is sensible if possible to plan ahead.
Assess your likely savings including the lump sum from your pension and any insurance policies you may have.
Then draw up a plan as to how you can maximise their value.
Should you invest your money in a building society, PEP scheme, TESSA, unit trust, stocks and shares or government securities?
Does it make sense to buy an annuity?
What are the tax angles for someone in your position?
Should you consider consulting a good accountant, stockbroker or other professional adviser?
If you are unsure of the answers, then Investment, Chapter 5, may help to clarify your thinking.
Your retirement income may well depend on whether you start a new career.
We are not pretending this is easy, but a great many men and women do in fact find rewarding work when they are well into their sixties.
While some individuals turn their talents to something entirely new, others go freelance or become consultants in their existing area of expertise.
An increasing number of people are taking the heady step of starting their own business.
This is not a decision to be entered into lightly.
The risks are legion and most budding entrepreneurs find that they have never worked as hard in their lives.
In the early days at least, being your own boss means sacrificing your social life, forgoing a salary and traipsing out in the rain to post your own letters.
Moreover, if you are married, then unless your partner is solidly behind you there are liable to be domestic tensions — especially if you run the business from home.
Against this, many who take the plunge derive enormous satisfaction from building up a family enterprise.
If you are seriously flirting with the idea Chapter 10, Starting Your Own Business, provides a lot of the detail you will need to know.
A worthwhile alternative to becoming a business tycoon is to devote your energies to voluntary work.
There are literally scores of opportunities for retired people to make a valuable contribution within their own community.
You might visit the elderly in their own homes, drive patients to hospital, run a holiday playscheme, help out in your Citizens' Advice Bureau or become a Samaritan.
Other ideas which might appeal are conservation work or playing a more active role in politics by joining your local party association.
Whether you can only spare the occasional day or are prepared to help on a regular basis, Chapter 12, Voluntary Work, lists a fund of suggestions you might like to consider.
A prime requirement, whether you are thinking of paid or unpaid work, or for that matter simply planning to devote more time to your hobbies, is to remain fit and healthy.
Good health is the most valuable possession we have.
Without it, energy is lacking, activities are restricted and the fun goes out of life.
No amount of money can compensate for being bedridden or a semi-invalid.
While anyone can be unfortunate enough to be struck down by an unexpected illness, your future good health is largely in your own hands.
The reason why the seventies are so often dogged by aches and pains is that sufficient care has not been taken during the fifties and sixties.
As well as all the obvious advice about not smoking, becoming too fat or drinking to excess, there is the important question of exercise.
While you could of course do press-ups and go for walks, you will probably have a much better time if you join the new keep-fit brigade.
Thanks to the Sports Council there are opportunities around the country for almost every kind of sport, with 50-plus beginners especially welcome.
Additionally dancing, yoga, keep-fit-to-music and relaxation classes are readily available through most local  authorities as well as being offered by the many specialist bodies listed in both the Health and Leisure Activities chapters.
The only problem is likely to be fitting everything in.
The choice of organised leisure pursuits is little short of staggering.
If you have ever wanted to learn about computers, take a degree, join a choir, become proficient in a craft, play competitive Scrabble, start coin collecting or become a beekeeper, you will find an organisation that caters for your enthusiasm.
The type of activities you enjoy could be an important consideration in choosing where you will live.
Because we are conditioned to thinking of retirement as a time for settling into a new home, many people up sticks without perhaps giving enough thought to such essentials as proximity to family and friends and whether a different area would provide the same scope for pursuing their interests.
A fairly common mistake is for people to retire to a place where they once spent an idyllic holiday, perhaps 15 or 20 years previously, with only a minimum of further investigation.
Resorts that are glorious in mid-summer can be bleak and damp in winter as well as pretty dull when the tourist season is over.
Equally, many people sell their house and move somewhere smaller without taking account of the fact that when they are spending more time at home they may actually want more space, rather than less.
This is particularly true of anyone planning to work from home or who has a hobby such as carpentry which requires a separate workroom.
While moving may be the right solution, especially if you want to realise some capital to boost your retirement income, there are plenty of ways of adapting a house to make it more convenient and labour-saving.
Likewise, you may be able to cut the running costs, for example with insulation.
These and other possibilities, including taking in a lodger and creating a granny flat are explored in Chapter 8, Your Home.
On the subject of granny flats, if you are caring for elderly parents there may come a time when a little bit of outside help could make all the difference.
The range of organisations that can provide you with back-up is far more extensive than is generally realised.
For single women especially, who may feel that they have to give up a career, knowing what facilities are available could prove a veritable godsend.
While there may be pressure if a parent, however much loved, requires an undue amount of attention, a more commonplace problem is the effect of retirement on a couple's relationship.
Many husbands are puzzled, and sometimes hurt, by their wife's attitude to the event.
For years she has been complaining ‘I never see anything of you, darling’ and ‘Why can't you spend a little more time with the family?’— so naturally he expects her to be delighted to have him at home.
But according to some husbands, the enthusiasm may seem less than wholehearted.
As one recently retired 62-year-old put it: ‘I had hardly had a chance to enjoy a couple of days pottering in the garden for the first time in years, when my wife was nagging me to go out and find something to do.
She was the one who wanted me to take early retirement.
Now she is wishing that I was back at work.’
The reverse situation can also apply, especially if the wife had a high-powered career.
Although in general the evidence suggests that it is usually the man's retirement  that provokes most friction, this may change as more of today's working wives turn sixty and find themselves facing the same need to make difficult adjustments.
Either way, the point is that after years of seeing relatively little of each other, retirement suddenly creates the possibility of much more togetherness.
Put in blunt terms, many wives grumble that having a husband at home during the day means an extra meal to cook and inevitable disruption to their normal routine.
And while this may not apply in an ‘equal opportunity’ marriage, where the domestic jobs are shared equally between husband and wife, in a majority of households women still do the lion's share of the cooking and cleaning.
So, if he stays in bed longer in the morning, the chores will be finished later which can be an irritation.
But an even greater cause for resentment is that she may feel guilty about meeting her friends or pursuing her usual weekday activities unless her partner is also busy.
If she is still at work, the situation can be even more fraught as, apart from the extra housework, she may find her loyalties uncomfortably divided.
Furthermore, quite irrationally, some retired husbands begin to harbour dire suspicions about their wives' working colleagues, imagining romantic entanglements that had never crossed their minds before.
Sometimes too, retired people subconsciously label themselves as ‘old’ and start denying themselves and their partner the pleasures of a happily fulfilled sex life.
It is difficult to know whether this is more ludicrous or tragic.
As studies in many parts of the world show, the sexual satisfaction of both partners continues in a high proportion of cases long after the age of seventy and often well into the eighties.
A welcome book which discusses the subject frankly is published by Age Concern.
Called Living, Loving and Ageing , it costs £4.95 and is available from most bookshops or directly from Age Concern.
Usually, problems that coincide with retirement can be fairly simply overcome by willingness to discuss them frankly and to work out a solution that suits both partners.
The situation is very much easier today than even ten years ago when male/female roles were far more stereotyped and many couples felt that they had to conform to a set pattern for the sake of convention.
Despite the impression given by some articles, marriage is not the only relationship and many non-marrieds equally find that adjusting to retirement is not always that easy.
Relatives may impose new pressures once you are no longer at work.
Likewise, close friendships sometimes alter when one friend retires — and not the other.
Additionally, many single people admit that they had not realised before how much they relied on their job for companionship and sometimes, even for part of their week-end social life.
Pre-retirement courses
Talking to other people to find out how they plan to tackle the challenges as well as the opportunities of retirement can be immensely helpful.
Many companies recognise this need by providing pre-retirement courses.
If you are unlucky enough to be in a firm where this is not yet done, or if you are self-employed, there are a number of organisations to which you can turn for advice and help.
Before deciding on a particular course, it is worthwhile giving a little thought to the best time to go and the subjects which the counselling should cover.
The traditional view is that the ideal time is somewhere between one and two years before you are due to retire.
While this is probably true for most people, it is also important to remember that preparing for retirement really has to be a staged process.
Some financial decisions, such as those affecting company or personal pension planning, need to be taken as early as possible.
Others, such as whether to move house, can probably only be made much later.
The basic subjects that the best courses address are: finance, health, activity, leisure, housing and the adjustments which will need to be made by both you and your family when you retire.
The crucial test however is not the amount of factual information that is contained but the extent to which the course helps to focus and stimulate your own thoughts on the various issues and to lead to discussion with your partner and others in the same situation.
The following is a list of the best known courses available to individuals enrolling independently of company sponsorship.
The Pre-Retirement Association of Great Britain & Northern Ireland , Nodus Centre, University Campus, Guildford, Surrey GU2 5RX.
T:0483 39323.
The PRA, the national body for retirement counselling, runs the Retirement Preparation Service which includes both company courses and those for individuals who are not sponsored by their employer.
These courses are independent, free from commercial bias and partners are encouraged to attend.
For example a day's course at Sion College, in Central London, costs £95 plus £70 for the participant's partner.
A weekend course at Stanford Hall in Leicestershire is offered four times a year for about £188 (including VAT).
Week-long retirement planning holiday courses are run at Barton Hall Chalet Hotel, near Torquay, in the spring and autumn.
Price is about £255 which includes full board, accommodation and evening entertainment.
Details from Bill Tadd, PRA Holiday Courses, 78 Capel Road, East Barnet, Herts EN4 8JF.
T:081–449 4506.
Throughout the UK some of the 40 affiliated local organisations of the PRA arrange their own pre-retirement courses, often in collaboration with other educational authorities.
For further details, contact the PRA at the Guildford address above.
Scottish Retirement Council , Alexandra House, 204 Bath Street, Glasgow G2 4HL.
T:041–332 9427.
Runs courses in various regions of Scotland.
These are normally held over six days and prices range from about £18 to £40.
Courses in the Strathclyde area are free of charge.
Greater London Association for Pre-Retirement , Seacoal House, 9 Seacoal Lane, London EC4M 7HY.
T:071–236 5536.
Runs two-day non-residential courses in Central London during February, April, June and October.
Subjects covered are  leisure, health, money matters and state benefits.
Cost for two days, including lunch and book pack, is £95 (£80 for GLAP members).
Jewish Care , Training Department, 221 Golders Green Road, London NW11 9DQ.
T:081–458 3282.
Offers a course of six workshops (day or evening) in Hendon, North London, focusing on: attitudes to retirement, financial planning, health, voluntary activity, further education and family relationships.
Partners are encouraged to attend and price is approximately £25.
For further information, contact Sue Gordon at the above address.
Adult Education Centres
See local telephone directory under your local council listing.
As interest in this area increases a growing number of Adult Education Centres are running both day and evening courses.
Standards vary but you should be able to get a good idea of the approach from the syllabus.
Retirement Education Centre , 6 Rothsay Gardens, Bedford MK40 3QB.
T:0234 360304.
Offers a variety of courses, at management and other levels, ranging from one day to ten half-days.
Depending on the length of course you choose, content may be essentially to do with financial planning or may also include health and leisure plus the social and emotional adjustments to retirement.
Prices are: £45 for the one-day course; £90 (partners £45) for the two-day course; and £125 (partners £15) for the 10 half-days.
New courses on mid-life planning are also available.
Workers' Educational Association , Temple House, 17 Victoria Park Square, Bethnal Green, London E2 9PB.
T:081–983 1515.
Many of the 900 branches of the WEA run local courses.
Check your telephone directory for the nearest branch or contact the London HQ for further information.
Open University , Learning Materials Service Office, The Open University, PO Box 100, Milton Keynes MK7 6DH.
T:0908 652185 or 0908 653338 (after office hours).
The OU produces a study pack called ‘Planning Retirement’(P941) which covers all the important areas and provides a useful starting point for thought and discussion.
The price, which includes an audio cassette, is £28.
This can be supplemented by written exercises which will be computer assessed at an extra cost of £15.
Financial organisations
Pensions and pensioners are a big market as is reflected in the wide range of financial institutions offering pre-retirement courses.
The very largest like the Prudential and Standard Life are able to offer these as a genuinely independent extension of their huge pension businesses but many of the smaller firms obviously see them as commercial marketing opportunities.
It is, therefore, important to be aware of this if you do go on such a course.
Abbey National Financial Services Ltd .,
Prestwood House, Corporation Street, High Wycombe, Bucks.
HP13 6T0, T:0494 472211.
Offer one and two-day retirement planning seminars in a number of locations around the country.
1993 prices, which are inclusive of a buffet lunch, are: £96 (£167 for couples) for the one-day seminar and £190 (£310 for couples) for the two-day event; in both cases, VAT should be added.
Accommodation, if required, can be arranged.
For further information, contact Ken Melbourne at the above address.
Godwins Ltd .,
Briarcliff House, Kingsmead, Farnborough, Hampshire GUI4 7TE.
T:0252 544484.
Godwins, who started running courses over 12 years ago, are among the best known independent financial advisers concerned with pre-retirement.
They offer two-day, non-residential courses at their Farnborough headquarters and at other locations countrywide.
Cost, including lunch, is £110 per person; £165 per couple plus VAT.
Contact: Mrs Tina Gilchrist, Retirement Counselling Co-ordinator at the above address.
Noble Lowndes , Norfolk House, Wellesley Road, Croydon CR9 3EB.
T:081–686 2466.
Noble Lowndes runs one-day courses for individuals whose employers do not make in-house arrangements.
The main topics covered are finance, health and leisure, together with the social aspects of adjusting to retirement.
Price is £125 plus VAT per participant; £150 plus VAT per couple.
Prudential Retirement Counselling Service , 1 Stephen Street, Tottenham Court Road, London W1P 2AP.
T:071–548 31 84.
Pre-retirement seminars are offered on an open basis to individuals every month at a variety of locations around the country.
Topics include state and company pension benefits, financial planning, health, the home in retirement and opportunities for further work and leisure pursuits.
The price for a two day non-residential programme inclusive of literature and luncheon is £170 a head, plus VAT.
Senior Management residential seminars are also held at regular intervals at Weybridge in Surrey; price is £350 plus VAT per person.
For further information, contact Roy Elms, Retirement Counselling Manager at the above address.
Standard Life Assurance Company , PO Box 186, 125 George Street, Edinburgh EH2 2LJ.
T:031–245 0312.
Standard Life run about 30 one-day courses each year, which are held in hotels throughout the UK.
In addition, they stage three weekend courses annually: two in Cumbria and one on Tayside.
The courses do not involve high-powered financial topics but include talks on pensions, health, leisure activities, basic finance and personal relationships.
The one-day courses cost £80 per person (or £135 per couple) plus VAT, inclusive of literature and lunch.
The weekend courses cost approximately £160 per person plus VAT, inclusive of literature and full board.
Contact Dougal Calder at the above address.
Willis Consulting , Willis Wrightson House, Wood Street, Kingston-upon-Thames, Surrey KT1 1UG.
T:081–787 6282.
Runs two-day residential courses every month at  a hotel near Reigate, Surrey.
Content is largely geared towards financial planning and budgeting, although other topics covered include health and leisure activities.
The inclusive cost, excluding VAT, is £270; partners, £240.
For further information, contact Gordon Bane.
Other commercial organisations
Aylesbury Industrial Group Training Centre Ltd .,
Gatehouse Close, Aylesbury, Bucks HP19 3DE.
T:0296 81818.
Non-residential pre-retirement courses are run five times a year at their Aylesbury headquarters.
Courses last 2½ days and include talks on pensions, legal rights, health and fitness, home security and the psychological aspects of retirement.
The cost is £200 plus VAT, inclusive of lunches.
Spouses are welcomed free of charge.
For further information, contact Mr. W.J.S. McCunn, Chief Executive, at the above address.
Future Perfect , 6 Langley Street, London WC2H 9JT.
T:071–497 2242.
Future Perfect aims to help people approaching or over the age of 50 deal with the transition from their main career by pointing them in the direction of new opportunities.
As well as running workshops and training events in different parts of the country to help individuals and couples plan constructively for the future, it also offers one-to-one counselling advice to those thinking of embarking on a new career.
The price for a residential two-day workshop is approximately £400 plus VAT per person.
For further information, contact John McLean Fox at the above address.
New Life Retirement Services Ltd .,
5 Parklands Close, Chandler's Ford, Eastleigh, Hants S05 2E0.
T:0703 252144.
Two-day non-residential courses are held four times a year (March, June, September, December) in Southampton.
The programme covers money matters, housing, leisure and health.
Cost, including course literature and refreshments, is £80 plus VAT per person; £110 plus VAT per couple.
Prime Time Retirement Services , 63 Lincoln's Inn Fields, London WC2A 3JX.
T:071–831 3141.
Offer two-day pre-retirement programmes, and also individual consultations, primarily aimed at the self-employed professional.
The courses focus on the various adjustments following retirement with financial advice to assist individuals in planning a new lifestyle, including for example such ambitions as moving home or starting a business.
The price, which includes accommodation, meals and all course literature, is £295 per person; £420 per couple.
Seminars designed for female groups ‘Women — Independence in Retirement’ arc also available, priced at £295 per person for two-day weekend course.
All prices are exclusive of VAT.
Retirement Counselling Service , Merritt House, Hill Avenue, Amersham, Bucks.
HP6 5BH.
T:0494 433553.
The Retirement Counselling Service runs about 25 open seminars a year including some for senior managers and executives.
The courses, which are non-residential, run over two days and cost £190 plus VAT per person, including refreshments and course literature.
Partners are encouraged to attend.
Finally two organisations which cater specifically for senior executives:
DPS Consultants Ltd .,
Dodd's Lane, 27 Preston Street, Faversham, Kent ME13 8PE.
T:0795–531472.
Three-day courses for small groups of senior managers and directors and also their partners are held twice a month at Leeds Castle near Maidstone and Ripley Castle near Harrogate.
The programme includes very good independent coverage of money management, emphasis on the emotional adjustment to change in lifestyle and much practical advice on different ways of being active and involved.
The course fee is £590 single, £870 per couple.
Accommodation is extra and costs £495 single, £830 double.
Identical style two-day courses for middle management are also held at various venues in the South East and Yorkshire.
Fees are £650 single, £1,000 per couple, including accommodation.
All prices exclude VAT.
Millstream Pre-Retirement Ltd .,
Mill House, South Harting, Petersfield, Hampshire GU3l 5LF.
T:0730 825711.
Millstream were the first to provide retirement courses specially for senior executives and now hold these regularly in the exclusive setting of the Royal Yacht Squadron in Cowes.
Small numbers combined with attractive hospitality make for a highly sympathetic approach and partners are encouraged to attend together.
Topics covered over the 2½ days include adjusting to retirement, health considerations, leisure activities and new opportunities for the future.
All financial planning advice is totally independent and a follow-up service is available on request.
Accommodation, all meals, drinks, newspapers and a number of books are included in the fees which (1992 prices) are £990 per person or £1,580 per couple, excluding VAT.
Chapter 14 also contains the names of one or two organisations that run pre-retirement courses as part of their holiday programme.
New focus for the retired
Over the past couple of years, a number of organisations have been launched offering services and facilities to people in the 50-plus age group.
While their aims and activities differ slightly, all are clubs in the sense of recruiting members and most provide a variety of discount opportunities.
Two of the best known are listed below.
ARP Over 50 ,(Third Floor), Greencoat House, 5 Francis Street, London SW1P 1DZ.
T:O7I-828 0500.
ARP Over 50 is a membership association for individuals and couples aged 50-plus which believes in improving opportunities, for pre- and post-retired people.
Local Friendship Centres offering various social events exist around the country.
There are two 24-hour emergency helplines, plus another giving legal advice.
Among other facilities, members receive the quarterly O50 Magazine ; there is a project called Age Works to help with job-hunting; and additionally, members have access to a range of discounts including favourable travel and insurance rates.
Membership costs £12 a year (or £10 by direct debit).
50-Forward , The Manor House, 46 London Road, Blackwater, Camberley, Surrey GU17 OAA.
T:0276 34462.
Members receive a quarterly magazine together with  details of discounts on various goods and services including holidays, entertainment and High Street purchases.
Membership costs £9.50 a year.
Useful reading
The Pre-Retirement Association compiles an annual Directory of Pre-Retirement Courses , covering short full-time courses and longer part-time ones run by educational institutions, companies and voluntary associations throughout the UK.
It includes some useful guidelines for those who wish to use it for choosing a course, either for themselves or for an employee.
Available from the Pre-Retirement Association of Great Britain and Northern Ireland , Nodus Centre, University Campus, Guildford, Surrey GU2 5RX.
Price £7.50; £6.50 for PRA members.
Regional offprints are available for £1.50 (including postage).
Money in General For most people approaching retirement, the major concern is money.
Some individuals have no worries; they have planned the event for years, made maximum pension contributions, carefully invested their savings, covered themselves and family in insurance policies, budgeted ahead and can even gleefully tell you about the exotic round-the-world trip they intend to take just as soon as their new life begins.
But for a majority of people, however, it is not like that.
After years of hardly giving a thought to their pension, panic suddenly sets in as they consider the prospect of no longer drawing a regular salary.
The fact that most of their friends who have already retired seem to manage pretty well is of little comfort.
Even quite wealthy individuals confess to conjuring up images of going cold and hungry.
Happily, the reality is far rosier than many people imagine.
For a start, those retiring today are better off financially than any previous generation.
Equally to the point, the spectre of drastic economies that haunts so many men and women is often the result of their having only the haziest idea as to their likely income and expenditure.
Doing the sums
Knowing the facts is the first priority.
To make a proper assessment, you need to draw up several lists:
Expected sources of income on retirement
Unavoidable outgoings
Normal additional spending (including holidays and other luxuries).
Stage two, you need to consider a number of options under the following headings:
Possible ways of boosting your retirement income
Spending now for saving later
Cherished plans, if affordable.
Most difficult of all, you will require a third list of variables and unknowns which, while impossible to estimate accurately, must as a matter of prudence be taken into account in any long-term budget planning.
The two most important are tax and inflation.
A survey of retired people by MORI revealed that nearly half of those questioned said that they had not made sufficient allowance for inflation.
Two-thirds of the total cited heating and fuel bills in particular as being more expensive than they had anticipated.
Additionally, there are all the possible emergency situations, such as your health, for which, if this ever were to become a problem, you might want to make special provision.
Your life expectancy is another consideration, as is that of your partner and any dependants.
Ideally, you should start thinking about at least some of these points, especially those that relate to your pension and to any savings or investment plans, five or even ten years before you retire.
When doing the sums, aim to be realistic.
Many people make the mistake of basing their calculations on their current commitments and expenditure, without properly realising that some of their requirements will change.
To get the figures into perspective, it is a good idea to imagine yourself already retired.
The good news is that, while some items will probably take a heftier slice of your budget, others will certainly be cheaper or no longer cost you anything at all.
Possible savings and extra outgoings are discussed below.
The most practical way of examining the list is to tick off the items in each column that you expect definitely to apply and, where possible, to write down the expenditure involved in the adjacent box (see Budget Planner, pages 120–25).
While inevitably this will be a somewhat rough-and-ready exercise — and obviously there will be gaps — the closer you are to retirement, the more worthwhile it will be.
The Consumers' Association has produced an action pack Finance Your Future to help people make financial decisions prior to retirement.
Price is £8.99, available from bookshops or by post from Consumers' Association, Castlemead, Gascoyne Way, Hertford X, SG14 1LH.
Possible savings
Going out to work generally involves a fair number of expenses.
When you leave your job, you will probably save at least several pounds a week.
Items for which you will no longer have to pay include: your travelling costs to work, bought lunches, special clothes; plus all the out-of-pocket incidentals such as drinks with colleagues, trade magazines and collections for presents or the Christmas party.
You will not have to pay any more national insurance contributions and, unless you choose to invest in a private plan, your pension payments will also cease.
Additionally, when you retire, you may be in a lower tax bracket.
At the same time you may have reached the stage when your children are now independent, your mortgage is substantially paid off and you have stopped subscribing to a life assurance policy.
Moreover, one of the gratifying aspects of attaining state retirement age is that you become eligible for a variety of benefits, for example: concessionary travel, free national health service prescriptions, cheaper theatre and cinema tickets (usually matinees), reduced entrance charges for exhibitions and a wide choice of special holiday offers.
Another point worth remembering is that many insurance companies give substantial discounts to mature drivers.
With motor insurance zooming in cost, this could give you a valuable saving.
In some instances, discounts apply to those aged 50; other companies restrict eligibility to those aged 55 or even 60.
Normally, but again this varies, the scheme is terminated when the policy holder reaches 75.
Most companies, but not all, extend the cover to a spouse or other named person with a good driving  record.
As to the discounts, these appear to range in generosity from 5 per cent to over 60 per cent.
Best advice is first approach your existing insurance company and ask what terms they will give you.
If these appear dullish, it could pay to shop around.
Among those that offer special rates for mature drivers are: Commercial Union Assurance, Sun Alliance, the Royal, the Provincial, Guardian Royal Exchange and Legal & General.
Extra outgoings
There is no escaping the fact that when you retire some only our expenses will be heavier than at present.
Firstly, you will probably be spending more time at home, so items like heating and lighting are liable to be costlier.
If you received any perks with your job, such as a company car or health insurance, then unless you have a very generous employer these will have to come out of your own pocket in future.
Equally, any business entertaining you enjoyed will largely cease, so any free lunches and the like will have to be paid for instead from the domestic housekeeping.
Another very important consideration is your extra leisure.
With more time available, you will understandably be tempted to spend more on outings, your hobbies and on longer holidays from home.
To avoid having to stint yourself, these need to be budgeted for in advance.
Most people say that in an ideal world they would assume to be spending roughly double on entertainment of all kinds, compared with when they were working.
Even voluntary activity is not without its hidden expenses, for example: more use of the telephone, petrol costs, raffle tickets, support of fund-raising occasions and so on .
Looking ahead, as you get older you may want more home comforts.
Likewise, you may have to pay other people to do some of the jobs, such as the decorating, that you previously managed yourself.
Anticipating the areas of additional expenditure is not to be pessimistic.
On the contrary, it is the surest way of avoiding future money worries.
Moreover, when you have sat down and worked out your retirement income in detail, you may even be pleasantly surprised.
Expected sources of income on retirement
Your list will include at least some of the following.
Once you have added up the figures in the budget planner, you will have to deduct income tax to arrive at the net spending amount available to you.
State basic pension
Occupational pension
State graduated pension
Personal pension
SERPS
State benefits
Additionally, you may receive income or a capital sum from some of the following:
Company share option scheme
National Savings interest 
Endowment policy
Other existing income (from a trust,
Investments (stocks and shares, property, family business) building society etc.)
Sale of business or personal
Bank deposit account assets
You might also be in receipt of income from an annuity.
However, since at this stage you will be unlikely to have purchased one, this really belongs in the category of investment decisions.
Unavoidable outgoings
One person's priority is another person's luxury — and vice versa.
For this reason, the divide between ‘unavoidable’ and ‘normal additional spending’(see section following) is fraught with obvious difficulty.
For example, readers who do not possess a pet would never include pet food among the essentials, whereas a dog or cat owner unquestionably would.
Almost everyone will want to juggle some of the items between the two lists; or add their own particular commitments or special enthusiasms, omitted by us.
Our suggestions are simply intended as memory joggers — and emphatically not as a guide to what should, or should not, constitute a luxury.
What matters is the basic principle behind the exercise.
If at some stage budgeting choices have to be made, decisions will be very much easier if you already know: your total outgoings, what you are spending on each individually and those you variously rate as important or marginal.
Whatever your own essentials, some of the following items will certainly feature on your list of unavoidable expenses:
Food
Domestic cleaning products
Rent or mortgage repayments
Laundry, cleaners' bills, shoe repair
Community charge/Council tax
Miscellaneous services, e.g.
Repair and maintenance costs plumber, window cleaner
Heating
Car, including licence, petrol, AA,
Lighting and other energy etc.
Telephone
Other transport
TV licence/rental
Regular savings and life assurance
Household insurance
HP/other loan repayments
Clothes
Outgoings on health
Normal additional expenditure
This may well include:
Gifts
Entertainment (hobbies, outings,
Holidays video purchase/rental, home
Newspapers/books entertaining etc.)
Drink
Misc. subscriptions/membership
Cigarettes/tobacco fees
Hairdressing
Charitable donations
Toiletries/cosmetics
Expenditure on pets
Other
Work out the figures against these lists.
Then in order to compare your expenditure against likely income, jot them down on the Budget Planner (see pages 120–25).
Possible ways of boosting your retirement income
Other than luck — winning the football pools or coming into a legacy — there are three main possibilities for providing you with extra money: your home, work and investment skill.
Your home
Your home offers several different options.
Moving somewhere smaller .
You could sell your present home, move into smaller accommodation and end up with the double bonus of pocketing a lump sum and reducing your running costs.
Leaving aside such considerations as whether you would still be able to have your grandchildren to stay and looking at the matter strictly in financial terms, it is as well to realise from the outset that the cash difference on the exchange — in other words, your profit — will invariably be less than you expect.
What with removal charges and lawyers' fees, moving home is a very expensive business.
Additionally, you will probably have some decorating expenses and there is bound to be a period of overlap when you will be paying two lots of telephone rental, extra electricity bills and so on.
This is not to say that moving may not be an excellent decision; simply that, if money is the main criterion, you need to be thoroughly realistic when calculating the gains.
An important new factor which has upset many people's sums over the past couple of years has been the state of the property market.
There are two aspects to the problem.
Firstly, if, as they have been, house sales are still sticking when you come to sell, you may have to accept a lower price than you had hoped to get (although, of course, you may also be able to buy your new property more cheaply).
Rather more serious, if you buy a new home before selling your existing one, you could be faced by a bridging loan problem, which with continuing high interest rates could soon eat into any profits you hope to realise on the exchange.
Ideally, you should try to dovetail selling and buying at the same time.
If this is not possible (and it usually isn't), the golden advice at the present time must be to sell first rather than risk lumbering yourself with the crippling expense of having to borrow for several months or possibly longer.
If you do decide to move, you should consider transferring an existing mortgage to your new property or getting a new one up to £30,000, even if you could afford to buy the property outright.
Too old?
Not at all.
In contrast to fifteen years ago, mortgages are  commonly available to people over retirement age.
However, especially with interest rates still relatively high, there may be reasons why a mortgage would not be sensible for you.
Also, as you probably know, mortgage interest relief is no longer allowed for higher rate tax but is now restricted to the basic rate of 25 per cent— so the savings are smaller than before for those in a high income bracket.
You will need to do the sums carefully to see whether there is any real gain.
If in doubt, consult an accountant or solicitor who will help you work out the various after-tax and other angles.
Taking in lodgers .
If your children have left home and you have more space than you need, you could consider taking in lodgers, either as paying guests or, if your property lends itself to the creation of a separate flatlet, in a tenancy capacity.
When assessing the financial rewards, it is wise to assume that there will be times when the accommodation is empty — so you will not be receiving any rent.
The good news is that you may be able to keep more of any earnings you make.
Until recently,any money you received in rent was counted as part of your taxable income.
However, since the start of the tax year in April 1992, people letting out rooms in their home can claim tax relief of up to £62.50 a week (or £3,250 during the year).
Any excess rental over £3,250 will be assessed for tax in the normal way.
The relief only applies to accommodation that is ‘part of your main home’, so if you are thinking of creating a separate flatlet , you will need to take care that this qualifies and that it is not at risk of being assessed as a commercial let.
Since the dividing line is somewhat hazy, check with your architect or other professional adviser that he/she fully understands the technical requirements.
Raising money on your home .
A third option is to part-sell your home either for a capital sum or regular payments, under a home income plan, and continue to live in it for as long as you wish.
Sounds wonderful?
There are both attractions and drawbacks which need to be considered carefully and you would be strongly advised to discuss the matter with your solicitor.
All these possibilities are explored in greater detail in Chapter 8, Your Home.
If you think any of the ideas sound interesting, see sections as follows: ‘Moving to a new home’, ‘Letting rooms in your home’ and ‘Raising money on your home’.
Work
If you would like to continue working, arguably the easiest solution if your employer is agreeable is for you to remain where you are and to defer your pension.
See ‘Deferring your pension’, in Chapter 3.
Alternatively, as many people do, you may look on retirement as the opportunity for a job switch (with perhaps a reduction in hours) or the chance you have always wanted of setting up on your own.
When assessing your budget plans, it is as well to err on the cautious side as regards the additional income you will be likely to earn as — although this has been improving — many so called‘retirement jobs’ are notoriously badly paid.
If instead of paid work, you are thinking of becoming self-employed or setting up a business, you will not only have the start-up costs but, as you are probably well aware, very few new enterprises make a profit during the first two or three years.
On the other hand — again, just looking at the economics — while you are working, you will not be spending money on entertainment.
Also, particularly if you are self-employed or own a business, there may be certain tax advantages as well as possible scope for improving your pension.
Lastly, of course, you may be one of the lucky ones for whom work after retirement really pays.
Quite apart from the money, work can be thoroughly enjoyable and rewarding in its own right.
For ideas and information, see Chapters 11, Looking for Paid Work, and 10, Starting Your Own Business.
Investment
Contrary to what some people believe, you do not need to be very rich; nor for that matter is it too late to start thinking about investing once you are over the age of 55.
As you will see from Chapter 5, investment can take many different forms and among the list of different options there should be something to suit almost everyone.
Although you may consider this to be specialist reading, we do suggest that you at least look at it, since maximising your income in retirement could make all the difference between being able to enjoy life or worrying about money.
Spending now for saving later
Although you may normally take the view that there is never a best time for spending money, retirement planning is different in that sooner or later you will need, or want, to make certain purchases — or pay off outstanding commitments, such as a mortgage.
Most people's basic list — at least to think about — under this heading includes one or more of the following:
Expenditure on their home
The purchase of a car
The termination of HP or other credit arrangement
Additionally, there may be a number of general domestic or luxury items which you had been promising yourself for some time and the only question is one of actual timing, i.e. determining the right moment to buy.
Typical examples might include: a duvet, gardening equipment, a video recorder, a home computer, hobby materials and so on.
To help you decide whether a policy of ‘spending now’ is sensible, or possibly self-indulgent, there are two very simple questions you should ask:
Can I afford it more easily now — or in the future?
By paying now rather than waiting, shall I be saving money in the long run?
True, the issue may be complicated by tax and other considerations but for most choices this very basic analysis helps greatly to clarify the financial arguments on both sides.
Home improvements .
If you plan to stay where you are, the likelihood is that at some point you will want to make some changes or improvements: install central heating, insulate the loft, modernise the kitchen or perhaps convert part of the house to a granny flat for an elderly parent who is becoming too frail to live alone.
Conventional wisdom has it that any significant expenditure on your home is best undertaken several years prior to retirement.
However, in our experience the matter is less clear-cut and what is right for some is not the solution for others.
As with many other important decisions, the question largely depends on individual circumstances.
Some people find it easier, and more reassuring, to pay major household bills while they are still earning.
Others specifically plan to use part of the lump sum from their pension to create a dream home.
To arrive at the answer that makes best financial sense, present commitments have to be weighed against likely future expenditure (together with what money you will have available).
Equally, as with insulation for example, you will need to work out what long-term savings you could effect by taking the plunge now.
There is also the safety aspect: if you have bad lighting or dangerously worn carpet on part of the staircase, waiting for a few years to tackle the problem because it is all part of the grand plan could prove very false economy indeed.
Another very important consideration is how certain you are that you intend to stay in your present home.
Investing a fortune and then upping sticks a couple of years later is generally a recipe for being out of pocket.
Despite what one or two people may have told you, it is very unusual to recoup all your expenditure by reaping a vast profit when you come to sell.
Though it involves a few minutes' paperwork, a worthwhile exercise is to jot down your own personal list of pros and cons, under the headings: ‘spending now’ and ‘spending later’.
If still in doubt, then waiting is normally the more prudent course.
Purchasing a car .
There could be two good reasons for buying a new car ahead of your retirement.
One is that you have a company car that you are about to lose.
The other is that your existing vehicle is on the old side and is beginning (or will probably soon start) to give you trouble.
If either of these apply, then it probably makes sense to buy a replacement while you are still feeling relatively flush.
However, on the principle of ‘look before you leap’, company car owners should first check whether they might be entitled to purchase their present car on favourable terms: over the past few years, the number of employers allowing this has been on the increase.
Also, dreary though the suggestion sounds, if economies look like being the order of the day, two-car families might assess whether, come retirement when perhaps husband and wife will be doing more things together, two cars are really such an essential as before.
Paying off HP and similar .
In general, this is a good idea since delay is unlikely to save you any money — and may in fact actually cost you more.
The only precaution is to check the small print of your agreement, to ensure that there is no penalty for early repayment.
A further exception to the rule could be your mortgage.
As already discussed, there could be tax advantages in retaining a mortgage.
Since quite a lot of money may be  involved, you would be well advised to consult an accountant: or, if you are thinking of moving (and the issue is really whether to transfer an existing mortgage — or possibly acquire a new one), include this among the points to raise with your solicitor.
Cherished plans, if affordable
The Budget Planner (pages 120–25) may help you to work out whether the various luxuries and plans of which nearly all of us dream could be affordable or are destined to remain as fantasies.
Fun as it might be to imagine what a ‘top twenty’ list might include, there would be little real purpose in discussing the practicalities, or otherwise, of going on a cruise, owning a race horse, buying a caravan, flying Concorde or whatever, since not only — even among married couples — would there be wide variations in choice but more particularly, since normal budget wisdom does not apply, any advice would risk being grossly misleading.
This does not mean that you should promptly forget the whole idea of noting items which come into this category; but that, as this is such a very personal decision area, only you can really make the assessments.
As a general point, however, if you plan your finances with a specific objective in view, you may find that against expectations a notion that first seemed impossible is actually affordable.
Or possibly, when you really think about the choices, some of your earlier priorities will seem less important.
Cheques Act 1992
Over the past year or so, there has been growing concern about the number of cheques being stolen in the post.
The risks have been somewhat reduced thanks to the 1992 Cheques Act which shifts responsibility to the banks provided all safeguards have been taken.
If you write the words ‘Account Payee Only’ between the crossings on the cheque, you can be certain that the cheque can only be banked by the person to whom you made it out.
If your cheques say ‘or order’, cross these words out and initial the amendment.
Making a deed of covenant
Making a deed of covenant used to be a popular and tax-efficient way for grandparents to help pay towards their grandchildren's education.
However, in the 1988 Budget the Chancellor abolished the tax relief on all inter-personal covenants except those made for charitable purposes.
This means that there is no longer any tax advantage in giving money for the benefit of individuals via a covenant.
Covenants existing at the time of the 1988 Budget are not affected by the change and can continue as before until their expiry.
Covenants in respect of charities .
Contrary to popular belief, it is possible to covenant (that is ‘promise’) quite small amounts of money to charities you wish to  support.
Many charities are happy to claim back the tax you have paid from the Inland Revenue for sums as low as £1 0 per annum.
Although slight changes have been made to covenant administration, the principle of committing yourself to giving, for four or more years, remains the same.
For further information plus details of their own very flexible scheme, contact:Charities Aid Foundation , 48 Pembury Road, Tonbridge, Kent TN9 2JD.
T:0732 771333.
Alternatively, as most of the larger charities will have covenant forms, you can approach the charity you wish to help direct.
Payroll giving scheme .
Also of possible interest to those attracted by charitable giving is the payroll scheme.
Give As You earn, as it is called, raised over £10m for charity in its first three years.
It allows anyone paying PAYE, either through their earnings or their pension, to give up to £600 a year, free of tax, to charities of their choice.
The money is taken out of your pre-taxed income, so if you choose to give £10 a month, it will only cost you £7.50 — with the tax you would normally pay (at 25 per cent basic rate) going to charity, instead of to the Inland Revenue.
You will, however, need to know whether your employer/former employer or pension paying organisation has or will be introducing the scheme before you can take part.
For further information, either write to one of the charities you wish to support or contact the Charities Aid Foundation (CAF), Give As You Earn Department, Foundation House, Coach & Horses Passage, The Pantiles, Tunbridge Wells, Kent TN2 5TZ.
T:0892 512244.
Gift Aid .
Introduced by the Chancellor in the 1990 Budget, this scheme allows individuals to make single gifts to charities of£400 or more with the benefit of tax relief.
Similar to covenant payments, the gift is made net of basic rate tax.
The charity will be entitled to claim repayment of the base rate tax from the Inland Revenue, which if you give £400 would mean the charity receiving an extra £133.33.
Charity Cheque Account .
The Charities Aid Foundation (CAF) operates a Cheque Book scheme which can be used for both Gift Aid and the Give As You earn scheme.
Instead of sending donations to different charities direct, providing the minimum annual sum is over £120 a year (or over £10 a month), donors can ‘gift’ the money to CAF who will maintain a ‘charity cheque account’for them and will distribute the money to whichever charities they nominate.
For further details contact the Charities Aid Foundation (CAF) at the address given under Payroll Giving Scheme above.
Extra Income
There are a great many state benefits and allowances available to give special help to people in need.
Definition of need covers a very wide range and applies, among others, to problems connected with: health, housing, care of an elderly or disabled relative, as well as widowhood and problems encountered by the frail elderly who for example may require extra heating during the winter.
While many of these benefits are ‘means-tested’, in other words are only given to people whose income is below a certain level, some, such as disability living allowance, are not dependent on how poor or how wealthy you are.
Moreover, even when‘means-testing’ is a factor, for some of the benefits income levels are nothing like as low as many people imagine.
Because this information is not widely enough known, many individuals or families are not claiming help to which they are entitled and for which in many cases they have actually paid through their national insurance contributions.
The main benefits and allowances are listed in their appropriate chapters: for example, housing benefit appears in Chapter 8, Your Home; invalidity benefit is briefly described in Chapter 15, Caring for Elderly Parents.
For further information about these and some others, such as criminal injuries compensation, obtain a copy of DSS booklet FB2,Which Benefit ?, available from any Social Security office.
Alternatively, telephone DSS Freephone number 0800 666 555.
A number of voluntary organisations also provide assistance to individuals: sometimes in cash or sometimes with facilities, such as special equipment for disabled people.
Details are given in the relevant chapters.
For further advice and information, contact your local Social Services Department or Citizens' Advice Bureau.
Another very useful source of help is your local Age Concern branch.
The national addresses of these organisations are as follows:
Pensions
Those retiring during the 1990s can count themselves lucky.
Firstly, State pensions are keeping well up with the cost of living.
Additionally, thanks to an increasingly enlightened climate, occupational pensions are not only becoming more widespread but most schemes have been steadily improving.
Because pensions come in a variety of forms, even many sophisticated people fail to collect all their entitlements or do not understand all the options that are available to them.
Since, next to your home, your pension is almost certainly your most valuable asset, it is important to check all the angles well ahead of time to ensure that when you retire you receive the maximum benefit.
Incidentally, this applies even to young men and women in their thirties!
State pensions
You can get a pension if you are a man of 65 or a woman of 60, provided you have paid (or been credited with) sufficient national insurance contributions.
In the not too distant future, at least one of these ages is likely to change as the Government has announced its intention to equalise the State pension age between men and women.
However, this is not expected to happen for some time and even when reform is introduced, the probability is that it will be phased in over a number of years.
Your right to a State pension
Your right to a State pension depends on your (or your spouse's) national insurance contributions.
Most people have to pay contributions into the national insurance scheme while they are working.
If you are an employee, your employer will have automatically deducted Class 1 contributions from your salary, provided your earnings were above a certain limit (currently £54 a week).
If you are self-employed you will have been paving a flat-rate Class 2 contribution every week and possibly the earnings-related Class 4 contributions as well.
You may also have paid Class 3 voluntary contributions at some point in your life in order to maintain your contributions record.
If you are over pension age (65 for men and 60 for women) you do not need to pay national insurance contributions.
There may have been times during your working life when you have not, either knowingly or unwittingly, paid national insurance contributions.
If you have not paid sufficient NI contributions to qualify for a full rate basic pension you may be entitled to  a reduced rate of pension.
However, your NI contributions record will have been maintained in the following circumstances :
If you have lived outside Great Britain .
If you have lived in Northern Ireland or the Isle of Man, any contributions paid there will count towards your pension.
If you have lived in a European Community country or any country whose social security system is linked to Britain's by a reciprocal agreements, contributions or residence there may be counted towards your pension depending on the country concerned.
If you have any doubts, you should enquire what your position is at your local Social Security office.
Countries with reciprocal agreements are: Australia, Austria, Bermuda, Canada, Cyprus, Finland, Guernsey, Iceland, Israel, Jamaica, Jersey, Malta, Mauritius, New Zealand, Norway, Philippines, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the USA.
If you have received Home Responsibilities Protection (HRP).
If you have not worked regularly at some time since 1978 because you have had to stay at home to care for either a child or a sick or elderly person you may have protected your right to a pension by claiming HRP.
This benefit allows you to deduct the years when you were required to give up work from the normal qualifying period for a basic pension and so, in effect, shorten the number of years when you would otherwise have been required to make contributions.
There are two important points to note.
Firstly, if you are a woman and were claiming child benefit, HRP would have been credited to you automatically, whereas a man staying at home to care for a child would have needed to arrange the transfer of child benefit to himself.
Secondly, HRP is only available for complete tax years in which earnings were less than 52 times the lower earnings limit.
While HRP can be claimed by both sexes, it predictably applies more frequently to women.
For more information, see ‘Pensions for Women’ at the end of the chapter or obtain leaflet NP 27 Looking After Someone at Home?
How to Protect Your Pension from your local Social Security office.
If you have been in any of the following situations , you will have been credited with contributions (instead of having to pay them):
If you were sick or unemployed (provided you sent in sick notes to your Social Security office or signed on at the Unemployment Benefit office);
If you were a man aged 60–64 and not working (from 1983);
If you were entitled to maternity allowance, invalid care allowance or unemployability supplement;
If you were taking an approved course of training (see leaflet NI 125 from your Social Security office).
When you left education but had not yet started working.
Married women and widows who do not qualify for a basic pension in their own right may be entitled to a basic pension on their husband's contributions at about 60 per cent of the level to which he is entitled (see ‘Pensions for women’ at the end of the chapter).
Since the change to independent taxation in April 1990, husband and wife are assessed separately for tax.
As a result, a married woman is now entitled to have her section of the joint pension (currently £32.55) offset against her own personal allowance — instead of being counted as part of her husband's taxable income.
For many pensioner couples, this should mean a reduction in their tax liability.
Reduced rate contributions note .
Many women retiring today may have paid a reduced rate contribution under a scheme which was abolished in 1978.
Women who were already paying a reduced rate contribution were however allowed to continue doing so.
(See ‘Pensions for women’.)
These reduced rate contributions do not count towards your pension and you will not have had any contributions credited to you.
How your pension is worked out
Your total pension can come from three main sources: the basic pension, the additional pension and the graduated pension.
There can also be additions, i.e. invalidity addition and age addition.
Anyone wanting to work out what they are due can write to their local Social Security office for a ‘pension forecast’.
This is normally expressed in percentage terms so, for instance, someone with full contributions will get 100 per cent of pension.
You can also get a forecast of the additional earnings-related pension to which you are entitled.
To obtain a forecast complete Form BR 19.
It is worth getting an early estimate of what your pension will be, as it may be possible to improve your national insurance contribution record by making additional Class 3 voluntary contributions.
These can, however, only be paid for six years in arrears, so this concession may not help if you think about it too late.
Basic pension
The full basic pension for a man or woman (April 1992/93) is £54.15 a week, £86.70 for a married couple (unless your spouse is entitled to more than the £32.55 spouse's addition on his/her own contributions, in which case you will receive more).
Pensions are uprated in April each year.
Up-to-date rates are contained in leaflet NI 196, obtainable from your local Social Security office and main post offices.
All pensions are taxable other than one or two special categories, such as war widows and the victims of Nazism.
If, however, your basic pension is your only source of income, you will not have to worry as the amount you receive is below the income tax threshold.
The rate of basic pension depends on your record of NI contributions over your working life.
To get the full rate you must have paid (or been credited with) NI contributions for roughly nine-tenths of your working life, although widows can also be entitled to a full basic pension on their husband's contributions.
If you are divorced, you  may be able to use your former spouse's contributions to improve your own pension entitlement, provided that you have not remarried before reaching pension age.
Your working life, for this purpose, is normally considered to be 44 years for a woman and 49 years for a man (i.e. age 16 until pension age), but it may be less if you were of working age but not in insurable employment when the National Insurance Scheme started in 1948.
Reduced rate pension
If you do not have full contributions but have maintained your contributions record for between a quarter and nine-tenths of your working life, you may get a pension at a reduced rate.
The amount is calculated according to the number of years for which you have paid contributions.
However, to get any basic pension you must satisfy two conditions.
Firstly, you must actually have paid enough full-rate contributions in any one tax year, from 6 April 1975, for that year to count as a qualifying year; or have paid 50 flat-rate contributions, in any one year, before 6 April 1975.
Secondly, your total contributions must be enough to have entitled you to at least 25 per cent of the full basic rate.
Additional pension
This is also known as SERPS, short for the State Earnings-Related Pension Scheme.
It is worked out on earnings since April 1978 on which you have paid Class 1 contributions as an employee.
It is not applicable to the self-employed.
Class 1 contributions are paid as a percentage of earnings between a ‘lower’ and an ‘upper’limit (currently £54 and £405 a week respectively).
The lower earnings limit is the same level as the basic retirement pension.
How much additional pension you get depends on the amount of your earnings over and above the lower earnings limit for each complete tax year since April 1978.
The earnings for each tax year are then increased in line with the rise in national average earnings and added together to produce the total earnings figure on which your additional pension depends.
Since the scheme only started in 1978, the current maximum amount of additional pension to which you would be entitled is £66.97 a week.
For details on how to apply for a statement of your current savings in SERPS, see Form BR 19 Pension Forecast Application Form , obtainable from any Social Security office.
Full details and examples of how the additional pension is worked out can be found in leaflet NP 46A Guide to Retirement Pension .
Although there are plans to scale down the additional pension, this will not affect anyone retiring before 1998 and will only marginally affect those retiring by 2009.
As you will probably know, if you think you can do better by making independent provision, you are not obliged to remain in SERPS but instead can invest in a personal pension.
For details, see ‘Personal pensions’ further in the chapter.
If you are a member of a contracted-out occupational pension scheme , you are legally entitled to a guaranteed minimum pension which must be broadly the same as you would have got under the State scheme (i.e. the additional pension).
Graduated pension
This pension existed between April 1961 and April 1975.
The amount you receive depends on the graduated NI contributions you paid during that period.
Anyone over 18 and earning more than £9 a week at that time will probably be entitled to a small graduated pension.
This includes married women and widows with reduced contribution liability.
A widow or widower whose spouse dies when they are both over pension age can inherit half of the graduated pension based on their late spouse's contributions.
Other additions
Invalidity addition .
Your pension will automatically be permanently increased if you were getting invalidity allowance with invalidity benefit within eight weeks before reaching retirement age.
The amount you get will be the same as the invalidity allowance you are already receiving (lower rate £3.60; middle rate £7.20; higher rate £11.55) but any additional pension (SERPS) and/or occupational pension will be subtracted from your invalidity allowance with only the balance (if any) being paid to you as invalidity addition.
Age addition .
Your pension will be automatically increased when you are aged 80 or over.
The current rate is 25p a week.
Other ways to increase your pension
Deferring your pension .
Your pension may be increased if you delay claiming it and instead continue working after normal retirement age.
This applies between the ages of 65 and 70 for a man and from 60 to 65 for a woman.
For every year that you defer retirement, approximately another 7.5 per cent a year will be added to your pension.
This extra pension is paid either when you claim your pension or when you reach 70(65), regardless of whether you have retired from work or not.
An exception to the age rule sometimes applies in the case of a married woman over 65 whose pension is based on her husband's contributions.
Her pension can continue to increase until such time as her husband gets his pension or reaches the age of 70, whichever is sooner.
For further details obtain leaflet NI 92 Giving Up Your Retirement Pension to Earn Extra .
Warning .
If you plan to defer your pension, you should also defer any graduated pension to which you may be entitled — or you risk losing the increases you would otherwise obtain.
Increases for dependants .
Your basic pension may be increased if you are supporting a dependent spouse or children.
Most typically, this applies in respect of a non-working  wife (or one whose earnings are very low) who is under 60 when her husband retires.
However, this also applies for a retired wife supporting a husband dependent by reason of invalidity.
The current rates are £32.55 a week for a spouse, £9.75 for the first child and £1 0.85 each for any other dependent children.
The definition of dependent child is one for whom you are receiving child benefit.
See leaflet NI 196 obtainable from your local Social Security office.
Income support
If you have an inadequate income, you may qualify for income support which is designed to provide those without sufficient means with enough money to live on.
There are special premiums (i.e. additions) for lone parents, disabled people, carers and pensioners.
As a single retired person, you can claim income support to bring your total income to £57.15 a week; for married couples, the amount is £88.95 (April 1992/93 rates).
These totals exclude mortgage interest and disregarded income, for example, attendance allowance.
Higher sums apply for disabled pensioners, for individuals over the age of 75 and for people living in residential care or nursing homes.
A condition of entitlement is that you should not have capital, including savings, of more than £8,000.
People with higher savings, however, receive less: for every £250 of capital over £3,000, individuals are deemed to be getting £1 a week income — so the actual amount of benefit will be reduced accordingly.
Additionally, those entitled to income support receive full help with their rent and up to 80 per cent assistance with their community charge.
See ‘Housing benefit and community charge benefit’, in Chapter 8, Your Home.
Even better, once the new council tax is introduced in April 1993, people on income support should normally have nothing to pay.
See ‘Council tax’ in the same chapter.
If your only source of income is your basic State pension, you are likely to be entitled to income support.
For more information, together with a claim form, see leaflet IS 1 Income Support , obtainable from any Social Security office or post office.
Social Fund .
If you are faced with an exceptional expense you find difficult to pay, you may be able to obtain a Budgeting or Crisis Loan, or Funeral Payment, from the Social Fund.
Ask at your local Social Security office.
Working after you start getting your pension
This used to be a problem for many people as a result of the Earnings Rule.
However, as you probably know, the Earnings Rule was at long last abolished at the start of October 1989.
Prior to this date, men between the ages of 65 and 69 and women between the ages of 60 and 64 who earned more than £75 a week had their basic state pension reduced.
Happily, this does not apply any more and today there is no longer any limit to the amount pensioners can earn.
If you are among the many pensioners who had their pension deferred (in other words you put off receiving it) as a means of escaping the earnings Rule, you have the  choice whether to start claiming your pension or to continue deferment.
If you continue deferment, which as a woman you can do until 65 and as a man until 70, you will earn what are known as ‘increments’ and your pension will be bigger when you receive it.
Early retirement and your pension
Because so many people now retire early, there is a widespread belief that it is possible to get an early pension.
While the information is correct as regards a growing number of employers' occupational pension schemes,it does not apply to the basic State pension .
If you take early retirement before the age of 60, it may be necessary for you to pay voluntary Class 3 national insurance contributions in order to protect your contributions record for pension purposes.
If you are a man over 60, however, you will automatically get contribution credits from the tax year in which you reach 60.
How you get a pension
You should claim your pension a few months before you reach State pension age.
The Department of Social Security (DSS) should send you a claim form (BR 1) at the proper time but if this does not arrive, then it is your responsibility to contact them.
Remember they will send the claim form to the last recorded address they hold for you, so if you have moved and not informed them do make sure they have your new address.
You should apply for the form about four months before you are due to retire.
If you claim your pension late, you could lose some of the money.
After you claim, you are told in writing exactly how much pension you will get.
You will also be told what to do if you disagree with the decision.
The information you are given should include the name and address of the organisation responsible for paying you any guaranteed minimum pension.
How your pension can be paid
If you live in the UK, you can choose to have your pension paid either by credit transfer or in order book form.
Credit transfer .
This method gives you the choice of having your pension paid direct into a bank or National Giro account; or, alternatively, into an investment account with either the National Savings Bank or with most building societies.
Payment will be made in arrears every four weeks or quarterly, whichever you prefer.
Order book .
You receive a book of orders (or pension book) which you can cash at a post office of your choice.
Each order is your pension entitlement for one week and is valid for 12 weeks after the date shown on the voucher.
If it is difficult for you to get to the post office, the coloured pages in the book explain how someone else can draw the payment for you.
Other situations .
If your pension is £2 a week or less, it will normally be paid once a year in arrears by a crossed order which you can pay into a bank or building society account.
Payment is made each year shortly before Christmas.
Pensions can be paid to an overseas address, if you are going abroad for three months or more.
contact your local Social Security office.
for further details see leaflet NI 38 Social Security Abroad and SA 29 Your Social Security and Pension Rights in the European Community .
If you are in hospital, your pension can still be paid to you.
You will receive a reduced amount if you are in hospital for more than six weeks.
Leaflet NI 9 Going Into Hospital (obtainable from your local Social Security office) provides full information.
Christmas bonus
Pensioners usually get a small tax-free bonus shortly before Christmas each year.
The amount and due date will be announced in advance.
For the last few years the sum has been £1 0.
The bonus is combined with your normal pension payment for the first week in December, so if you have not received it by the end of that month ask at your local Social Security office.
Advice
If you have any queries or think that you may not be obtaining your full pension entitlement, you should contact your local Social Security office as soon as possible.
If you think a mistake has been made, you have the right to appeal and can insist on your claim being heard by an independent Social Security Tribunal.
Before doing so, you would be strongly advised to consult a solicitor at the Citizens' Advice Bureau or the Welfare Advice Unit of your local Social Security office.
Some areas have special Tribunal Representation Units to assist people to make claims at Social Security Tribunals.
If you are writing to your local Social Security office with a query you should quote either your national insurance number (or your spouse's) or your pension number if you have already started receiving your pension.
DSS Freephone: for free advice on your pension, dial 0800 666 555.
For further information about pensions, see leaflet FB 6 Retiring ? and booklet NP 46 A Guide to Retirement Pension obtainable from any Social Security office.
Private pensions
The importance of persuading individuals to save for their own pension instead of just relying on the State has been recognised by successive governments.
Encouragement has been made through tax incentives, so that pension savings are now one of the most tax effective investments available.
You get income tax relief on contributions at your highest tax rate.
The pension fund is totally exempt from income tax and capital gains tax, providing excellent growth prospects for your money.
Part of the pension can be taken as a cash sum when you retire and that too is tax free.
Private pension schemes fall into two broad categories: those arranged by employers, e.g. company pension schemes, and those you can arrange for yourself.
Company pension schemes
About 11 million people, roughly half the employed population, are now participating in company schemes.
While these can vary considerably, the following basic features apply to all of them.
Pension fund .
Pension contributions go into a pension fund which is quite separate from your employer's company.
It is set up under trust and run by trustees, appointed from management and sometimes from staff.
It is the job of the trustees to manage the fund and its investments and to ensure that the benefit promises are kept.
Payments into the fund .
Your scheme may or may not ask for a contribution from you.
For this reason, schemes are known as ‘contributory’ or ‘non-contributory’.
If (as is normally the case) you are required to make a contribution, this will be deducted from your pay before you receive it.
Your employer's contributions to the scheme represent the money he is setting aside for your pension and other benefits.
The amount needed is estimated by the scheme actuary and this can vary from year to year, according to how much money is accumulated and how much the scheme is likely to have to pay out in benefits.
Benefits from the scheme .
All pension scheme members should normally be given a booklet describing how the scheme works, what benefits it provides, the names of the trustees and other information including the address of the Pensions Ombudsman.
If you do not receive one, you should ask the person in the company responsible for the pension scheme — this is often the personnel manager — to supply you with a booklet.
You can also ask to see a copy of the trust deed as well as the latest annual report and audited accounts.
The key benefits applicable to most pension schemes include:
A pension due at whatever age is specified by the scheme, usually somewhere between 60 and 65 (although there is a growing trend for companies to offer early retirement provision)
Death benefit (sometimes known as lump sum life assurance), paid out if you die before retirement age
A widow/widower's pension paid for life no matter when you die.
Benefit limits .
The Inland Revenue sets limits on pension benefits which members of company schemes can receive.
The main ones are:
The maximum pension you are allowed is two-thirds of your final pay (excluding state pension)
If you die, the pension can be passed on to someone else but no one beneficiary can receive more than two-thirds
The tax-free lump sum, if you choose to take it, cannot be more than one and a half times salary.
Since the 1989 Budget, the above figures have become governed by a ceiling, currently based on £75,000 earnings a year.
In other words, the maximum figure allowed for two-thirds of final salary is £50,000 a year; and the maximum tax-free lump sum allowed is £112,500.
The measure is not as draconian as it sounds.
Firstly, of course, because it only affects high earners, i.e. those earning more than £75,000 a year.
Secondly, because the £75,000 limit is not a static figure but is revalued every year in line with price increases.
Finally, the ruling only applies to members of schemes set up after 13 March 1989, and to new employees joining existing schemes from 1 June 1989.
Members of an established company scheme at the time of the 1989 Budget, who remain in the same scheme — or who change schemes within the same group of associated employers — are not affected by the change.
Types of scheme
There are four main types of scheme, as follows:
Final salary scheme .
This is the most common.
Your pension is calculated as a proportion of your final pay, which could mean literally the last year you work or for example(and this is a requirement for controlling directors and those earning over £100,000) the average of three consecutive years during the last ten.
The amount you receive depends on two factors: the number of years you have worked for the organisation plus the fraction of final pay on which the scheme is based, typically 1/60th.
So if you have worked 30 years for a company that has 1/60th pension scheme, you will receive 30/60ths of your final pay — in other words, half.
Final pay schemes can be contracted into or out of SERPS.
If a scheme is contracted out of SERPS, it must provide a guaranteed minimum pension that is at least as good as its SERPS equivalent.
Money purchase scheme .
This has been greatly increasing in popularity in recent years and, according to all the forecasts, looks set to become even more widespread.
Unlike the other three types of scheme, the amount of pension you receive is not based on a fixed formula but (within Inland Revenue limits) is dependent on the investment performance of the fund into which your own and your employer's contributions on your behalf have been paid.
Although there is a slight element of gamble with money purchase schemes, in that no one can forecast with certainty how well or badly a pension fund might do, in practice most trustees act very conservatively.
Different schemes have different ways of determining how members' pension entitlements are calculated.
You should enquire what the rules are and additionally, to give you a better idea of what size pension you might realistically expect, you could ask for some practical examples — say, over the last five years — of retired individuals in a similar earnings bracket to your own.
Average earnings scheme .
As its name implies, this is based on your average earnings over the total period of time that you are participating in the scheme.
Every year, an  amount goes into the scheme on your behalf, calculated in accordance with your level of earnings.
As your salary increases, so too do your potential benefits.
Each year, your ‘profits’ from the scheme are worked out from a formal table and the total of all these annual sums constitutes your pension.
Flat rate pension scheme .
Your level of pay is not a factor.
Instead, the same flat rate applies to everyone, multiplied by the number of years in which they have been participants of the scheme.
So, for example, if the flat rate is £200 a year of pension and you have been a member of the scheme for 20 years, your pension will be £4,000 a year.
Additional or other schemes .
There may be one scheme that applies to everyone in the organisation or there may be a variety of schemes for different grades of employee.
For example, there may be a works scheme and a staff scheme operating side by side.
It is also quite common for there to be a special pension scheme for executives and directors.
Executive pension plans
These are individual pension plans arranged by an employer for the benefit of some or all executives above a certain grade, In some companies, executive pension plans only apply to directors; in others, they may also include senior and middle management.
Equally, there may be a separate policy for each individual or a master policy, covering everyone in the scheme.
One of the attractions of executive pension plans is their potential flexibility.
They can be tailored to cater for differing retirement ages as well as for varying contribution levels, which explains why some organisations are able to offer early retirement on very attractive terms.
Historically, executive pension plans are of the money purchase type.
Because they are provided by the employer, the maximum benefit allowed is two-thirds of final salary; and, as from the 1989 Budget, the same rules apply as for final salary schemes.
Normally, one of the following four types of investment policy is used: with profits, unit linked, deposit administration and non-profit.
These are described in the section on pages 43–50, ‘Self-employed and personal pensions’.
See also ‘Top-up schemes’ in the following section.
Focus on high earners
Several changes in the tax treatment of pensions with particular implications for high earners were introduced in both the 1987 and 1989 Budgets.
The measures, except for the rule regarding accelerated accrual rates, are unlikely to affect anyone who has been in a pension scheme prior to March 1987 and remains with the same employer.
Individuals on current salaries of £75,000 or more who are thinking of changing jobs and either joining a new scheme or transferring their existing pension to one will need to weigh up the financial consequences.
Maximum tax free lump sum .
Prior to the 1987 Budget, the only restriction that applied was that the maximum was set at one and a half times salary.
For the vast  majority of individuals this is still the case and they have no need to be concerned about the changes described below.
In the 1987 Budget, a ceiling of £150,000 was imposed on the amount that individuals could take in the form of a tax-free lump sum on retirement.
The new rule only affected those on earnings of more than £100,000 who actually joined a new pension scheme after 17 March 1987.
In the 1989 Budget, the Chancellor brought in a new ceiling limit of £90,000, based on earnings of £60,000 to be revalued every year in line with price increases.
Accordingly, the 1992/93 ceiling limit is £1 12,500, based on earnings of £75,000.
As with the 1987 change, this latest rule only affects members of new schemes (set up after 13 March 1989) or new members joining established schemes after 1 June 1989.
Members of an existing scheme prior to these dates who remain with the same employer should not be adversely affected by the change.
Accelerated accrual rates .
The proviso whereby it was possible for some individuals to enjoy an enhanced accrual scale to qualify for full pension benefits after 10 years of service was altered in the 1987 Budget — with a new period of 20 years' service being required.
Definition of ‘final salary’ for high earners .
Up until the 1987 Budget, individuals could base their final salary for pension purposes on any one of their last five years' earnings.
In March 1987 a new rule was introduced, whereby anyone with earnings of more than £100,000 who joined a new pension scheme was required to base their final salary assessment on their average earnings over any three consecutive years over the last ten.
Two additional changes (also only relevant to joining a new scheme) were brought in at the same time.
Firstly, gains from share options in the final year of employment were no longer allowed in the calculation of final salary.
Secondly, individuals who were controlling directors were no longer permitted to resign just before retirement to boost their salary but instead had to use the three year average method of calculation.
These rules still apply with one important difference.
Instead of £1 00,000 being the ceiling limit for tax relief purposes, the maximum final salary allowed is now £75,000 (1992/93).
As already stated, the change only affects those joining new pension schemes set up after 13 March 1989 or new members joining existing schemes after 1 June 1989.
Top-up schemes .
Employers can still set up ‘top-up’ pension schemes to provide additional benefits above the new ceiling but such schemes are now taxable.
If given any choice in the matter, you should know that funded-in-advance schemes offer greater security but are not tax-efficient, as the employee has to make contributions out of his net income and is also taxed on the employer's contributions as a benefit in kind.
Unfunded ‘top-up’ schemes, i.e. where the employer does not fund the top-up benefits but simply promises to pay them at retirement, are more tax-efficient but offer less  security as you would be dependent on your employer keeping his promise.
In the event of a take-over especially, there would be no guarantees.
Additional voluntary contributions (AVCs)
If, as you approach retirement, you become aware that you are not going to have a big enough pension to live as comfortably as you would like, you might seriously consider the possibility of making additional voluntary contributions.
AVCs are a very attractive way of making extra savings for retirement for two special reasons.
Firstly, AVCs — as well as the growth of the plan — enjoy full tax relief, so for basic rate tax payers the Inland Revenue is in effect paying £25 for every £100 you invest.
A further key advantage for many people is that AVCs allow you to purchase ‘added years’, to make up any shortfall in your entitlement to benefit under a company scheme.
Until a few years ago, the opportunity to purchase AVCs was only available to members of occupational schemes that offered AVC facilities, which not all did.
Today however,all occupational schemes are required by law to provide AVC facilities.
Moreover, as you are probably aware, an option, known as ‘free-standing AVCs,, is now also on offer.
As the name implies, these are not linked to a company scheme but can be purchased independently from: insurance companies, building societies, banks, unit trusts and friendly societies.
Individuals can, if they wish, contribute both to company AVCs and to a free-standing plan or plans.
Although the rules only allow the purchase of one new free-standing AVC policy a year, it is possible to purchase a different policy every year, so building up a spread of investments.
The total of all your AVCs plus other contributions to the pension plan is not allowed to exceed 15 per cent of your earnings.
In the event of over-funding occurring, whether from a free-standing or company AVC, the surplus will simply be refunded to you in cash, minus the tax relief involved.
Individuals paying less than £2,400 a year in free-standing AVCs will not normally need to involve their employer but just have to certify that they are not paying more than 15 per cent of their earnings in total contributions.
Where larger amounts are concerned, the employer will need to become involved but this should not deter you if you believe that the purchase of free-standing AVCs is in your best long-term interest.
Recent rule changes .
There are three fairly recent rule changes of which you should be aware.
The new £75,000 final salary limit applies to AVCs in the same way as to other earnings.
It goes without saying that it is not £75,000 in respect of each but the total earnings’ figure which must not exceed £75,000.
Under the old AVC rules, individuals had to make a commitment to pay regular contributions for a period of at least five years.
This requirement has now been abolished and (provided the actual scheme rules permit) both the amount and timing of payments can be varied to suit members according to their personal circumstances.
The other important rule change is that whereas prior to 8 April 1987 AVC plans could be used towards funding an individual's lump sum, this is no longer permitted.
Instead the contributions can only be used for boosting the actual pension itself.
These arrangements, however, only affect policies that were applied for after the April 1987 deadline.
All policies, where a contract had already been entered into, are exempt from the ‘no commutation’ rule.
For most people, the only real problem with AVCs is the sheer immensity of choice.
As with any other important investment decision, you would be well advised to take your time, do some basic research into the track record of any policies you might be considering (specialist magazines such as Money Management provide a useful starting point) and on no account sign any document without first being absolutely certain that you fully understand all the terms and conditions including the administrative charges.
As general wisdom, these are likely to be higher with free-standing contracts than for a collective AVC scheme offered by an employer.
Finally, if you are already subscribing to company AVCs, before investing in a new plan check on your present level of contributions and the benefits that these are expected to yield.
Your company pension adviser should be only too happy to answer any questions.
Early leavers
In the past, the big problem, as everyone knows, was that early leavers tended to do very badly, due to the heavy financial penalties of withdrawing from a scheme in mid-term.
In recent years, however, the Government has introduced new rules which help considerably.
For example, employers can now pay full pension, without actuarial reduction, at any age between 50 and 70, provided an employee has completed 20 years' service with the organisation.
Companies are under no obligation to do so but, for those people lucky enough to work for an organisation willing to amend its pension scheme rules accordingly, this new provision could make an immense difference to the financial position of early retirees.
It has to be said, however, that most employers still apply actuarial reductions (although these are sometimes waived in special cases such as redundancy) so, if you are thinking of taking early retirement it is advisable to work out very carefully how this might affect your pension.
Another very important change concerns what are known as your preserved rights — in other words, your financial rights with regard to your pension.
Previously you were entitled to these rights only if you had been in an employer's scheme for at least five years.
However, the qualifying period has now been shortened to two years.
Even if you are not entitled to these rights by law, due to your leaving a scheme within two years, your employer may be willing to return the contributions you have paid.
But, as you will realise, the amount of money involved is not likely to be very large.
There are three choices available to people with preserved rights who leave a company to switch jobs.
Leaving the pension with the scheme .
Whereas previously most pensions got frozen, new legislation obliges companies to increase all your accrued pension rights by 5 per cent a year or the rate of inflation, whichever is lower.
(Until the start of 1991, this requirement only applied to rights accrued since 1985.)
If you choose to stay in the scheme, you may also share in its benefits — such as any additional increases that may be given.
Taking your pension to a new scheme .
You do not have to make an immediate decision.
You can transfer your pension scheme at any time, provided you do so over a year before you retire.
If you wish to switch to a new scheme, this could either be to another company scheme or to a personal pension.
Personal pensions are described a couple of pages further along, so if you are interested in taking advantage of this option you should read the section carefully.
Here, we explain the various possibilities if you wish to join a scheme run by your new employer.
Early leavers now have the right to move their pension — or more precisely, its transfer value — to a new employer's scheme willing to accept it.
The transfer value is the cash value of your current pension rights.
Calculating this, however, is fraught with difficulties and early leavers are usually at a disadvantage compared with those who remain in the scheme.
For example, if the job change has meant a salary increase, the new scheme will probably be more expensive to buy into as the likelihood is that it will be earnings-related.
Any added years will also be calculated in relation to your new salary, so these too will be more expensive.
Your new employer might appear to place a disconcertingly low valuation on your old company pension rights.
However, even if 10 years' worth of rights from an old company pension scheme are commuted to no more than two years' worth in your new one, it could still be worth accepting, particularly if your new job is likely to produce rapid pay rises.
As your pension is normally ultimately based on the size of your salary when you retire, the two years' worth of added rights could still be worth a tidy amount.
When doing the sums high earners will, however, need to take account of the £75,000 cap (see page 35) which applies to anyone joining a new pension scheme.
Taking your pension to an insurance company .
If neither of the two previous options appeal, or your new company will not accept your old pension value into its own scheme, you can go independent and have the transfer value of your pension invested by a life company into a personal scheme — normally either a Section 32 buy-out or a protected rights personal pension.
Such contracts are in fact very similar to self-employed pension plans, with the same choice of vehicles: unit linked, deposit administration, with profits and non-profit.
These are described on page 49 under ‘Types of investment policy’.
Advice .
Deciding on your best option is not easy, so before taking action you should at least consult your company pension scheme manager to give you an assessment of the likely value of your pension if you leave it in the scheme.
As a result of the improved  revaluation changes, explained earlier, this option could be considerably more attractive than it would have been a couple of years ago.
If you are planning to switch, you will need to decide between a Section 32 buy-out or a protected rights personal pension.
Although for a majority of employees a protected rights contract is usually likely to offer a higher return, there are certain limitations and the accepted wisdom seems to be that the older the employee and the larger the transfer value, the more attractive a section 32 buy-out becomes.
Because this is a complex area — and making the wrong decision could prove expensive — independent expert advice is very strongly recommended.
Particularly if a large sum of money is involved, it could pay you to get the advice of a pension consultant.
For a list of those operating in your area, write to the Society of Pension Consultants , Ludgate House, Ludgate Circus, London EC4A 2AB.
Becoming self-employed
If, as opposed to switching jobs, you leave paid employment to start your own enterprise, you are allowed to transfer your accumulated pension rights into a new fund.
You may have a choice of three options.
The more obvious solution is to invest your money with an insurance company, as mentioned above, or take a personal pension.
Alternatively, if you expect to be in a high earning bracket, you might consider setting up a limited company,even if you are the only salaried employee , rather than launching the same business as a self-employed individual.
The company could set up a self-administered pension scheme with attractive loan-back facilities plus other advantages.
However, there are various pros and cons that will need to be weighed up carefully depending on your age, the transfer value of your earlier pension and the anticipated annual amount available for investing in your new scheme.
This is rather a complex area, so before taking any action you are strongly advised to consult an accountant.
A third possibility which might be more attractive if you are fairly close to normal retirement age is to leave your pension in your former employer's scheme.
See page 38 ‘Leaving the pension with the scheme’.
Questions on your pension scheme
Most people find it very difficult to understand how their pension scheme works.
However, your pension may be worth a lot of money and, especially as you approach retirement, it is important that you should know the main essentials, including any options that may still be available to you.
If you have a query (however daft it may seem) or if you are concerned in some way about your pension, you should approach whoever is responsible for the scheme in your organisation.
If the company is large, there may be a special person to look after the scheme on a day-to-day basis: often this is someone in the personnel department.
In a smaller company, the pension scheme may be looked after by the company secretary or managing director.
The sort of questions you might ask will vary according to circumstance, such as: before you join the scheme, if you are thinking of changing jobs, if you are hoping to retire early and so on .
You will probably think of plenty of additional points of your own.
The questions listed are simply an indication of some of the key information you may require in order to plan sensibly ahead.
Before you join the scheme
As a basic point, you should enquire whether the scheme is contracted in or out of SERPS and whether the intention is that it should remain so in the future.
If it is contracted out, what are the criteria for eligibility to become a member of the scheme?
For example, there may be different conditions for different grades of staff.
There may be an age ceiling for new entrants.
Sometimes too, although this is becoming less common, there is a minimum period of service required before you can join.
Over the past few years, many companies have set up contracted-out money purchase schemes — or COMPS, as they are known for short — which operate on a different principle from final salary schemes.
You should enquire what type of scheme it is that you would be joining and if it is a money purchase one, how in particular members' entitlements are calculated.
(See ‘Money purchase scheme’ page 33).
If it is a final salary scheme, what is the exact definition of ‘final salary’? this could be very important if the organisation offers phased retirement or the opportunity of a sponsorship in the voluntary sector and, as some employers do, adjusts your remuneration to take account of a shorter working week or less onerous responsibilities.
Another point, if it is a final salary scheme, is whether guaranteed pension increases are given and, if so, whether these are 5 per cent increases (or higher or lower)?
Is anything deducted from the scheme to allow for the State pension?
At what age is the pension normally paid?
What is payable if you die within the next year?
Is there a widow/widower's pension and does it get contractual increases?
If you want to leave the organisation to change jobs
Could you have a refund of contributions if you were to leave within two years?
How much will your deferred pension be worth?
If you leave for other reasons
What happens if you become ill — or die — before pension age?
What are the arrangements if you want to retire early?
Most schemes allow you to do this if you are within about 10 years of normal retirement age but your pension  may be reduced accordingly.
Many schemes, in fact, operate a sliding scale of benefits with more generous terms offered to those who retire later rather than earlier.
The new flexi-age retirement provision is unlikely to help you if you move to a new job, since it only applies to employees of 20 years' standing.
What are the rules/options regarding pension age for women if, as is increasingly becoming the case, this has recently been raised to bring it in line with male pension age?
If you stay until normal retirement age
What will your pension be on your present salary?
And what would it be assuming your salary increases by, say, 5 or 10 per cent before you eventually retire?
What spouse's pension will be paid?
Can a pension be paid to other dependants?
Is there any contractual increase to reduce the effect of inflation?
If not, ask what the history of discretionary increases has been (both for members' own pension and for spouses).
What happens if you continue working with the organisation after retirement age?
Normally, any contributions you are making to the scheme will cease to be required and your pension (which will not be paid until you retire) will be increased to compensate for its deferment.
Whereas previously, however, by deferring their pension individuals could boost the amount above their two-thirds earnings, under a 1989 Budget change this is no longer allowed.
However existing members of a scheme prior to the change taking effect (i.e. 1 June 1989) are not affected and are still entitled to defer their pension under the old rules, provided their employer is agreeable.
What are the arrangements if you retire from the organisation as a salaried employee but become a retained consultant or contractor?
What to do before retirement
In addition to understanding your current pension scheme, you may also need to chase up any previous schemes of which you were a member.
This is well worth pursuing as you could be owed money from one or more schemes, which will all add to your pension on retirement day.
You may be able to get the information from your previous employer/s.
Or, if your previous employer has gone out of business, the Occupational Pensions Advisory Service (OPAS)— see below — may be able to tell you who took over the responsibility for payment of pensions.
Additionally, the Occupational Pensions Board manages a pensions registry and tracing service to assist individuals who need help in tracing their pension rights.
All occupational and personal pension schemes including free-standing AVC (FSAVC) schemes are required to register.
While only recently introduced, the service is already proving very successful.
Applicants can either write to the Registrar giving as much  essential detail about the scheme as possible; or alternatively can request a trace application form (PR4) to complete.
This is a free service.
The address to write to is:Registrar of Pension Schemes , Occupational Pensions Board, PO Box 1NN, Newcastle upon Tyne NE99 1NN.
Other help and advice
If you have any queries or problems to do with your pension, in addition to the registry there are three main sources of help available to you.
These are: the trustees or managers of your pension scheme; OPAS; the Pensions Ombudsman.
Trustees or managers .
These are the first people to contact if you do not properly understand your benefit entitlements or if you are unhappy about some point to do with your pension.
The scheme booklet should give you the names of the individuals and advise you how they can be reached.
Occupational Pensions Advisory Service (OPAS).
This is an independent voluntary organisation with a network of 360 advisers throughout the UK.
Over the past year the role of OPAS has been considerably expanded and, instead of as before only being able to assist on occupational pensions, OPAS can now give help and advice on all matters to do with any type of pension scheme — except State schemes.
The service is available to anyone who thinks they have pension rights including scheme members, existing pensioners, those with deferred pensions and dependants.
The usual way of contacting OPAS is via your local CAB.
Equally, if you prefer, you can write direct to: OPAS, 11 Belgrave Road, London SW1V 1RB.
T:071–233 8080.
Pensions Ombudsman .
As part of the new consumer protection arrangements, a Pensions Ombudsman with wide-ranging powers has recently been appointed.
You would normally only approach the Ombudsman if neither the pension scheme trustees/managers nor OPAS are able to solve your problem.
The Ombudsman can investigate:(1) complaints of injustice caused by maladministration by the trustees or managers of an occupational or personal pension scheme (2) disputes of fact or law with the trustees or managers.
He cannot, however, investigate a complaint that is already subject to court proceedings, one that is about a State social security benefit or a dispute that is more appropriate for investigation by another regulatory body.
There is also a time limit for lodging complaints which is normally within three years of the act, or failure to act, about which you are complaining.
Provided the problem comes within the Ombudsman's orbit, he will look into all the facts for you and will inform you of his decision, together with his reasons.
There is no charge for the Ombudsman's service.
The address to write to is:The Pensions Ombudsman , 11 Belgrave Road, London SW1V 1RB.
T:071–834 9144.
This is the same address (but different telephone number) as OPAS.
New protection for pension scheme members
Thanks to new legislation, pension scheme members can look forward to enjoying more protection in the future.
As already noted, since the start of 1991 early leavers now get their entire frozen pension uprated and not just, as had been the case, benefits earned after 1985.
Also, in the wake of the Maxwell disaster, the government has published regulations restricting self-investment by occupational pension funds to 5 per cent(a transitional period is allowed in some cases to give schemes time to reduce any existing self-investment).
A further welcome measure is that in the event of a scheme in deficit being wound up, the deficiency becomes a debt on the employer which the trustees can pursue.
New measures have also been introduced to protect pension scheme members in the event of a company take-over or proposed bulk transfer arrangement.
On a more technical note, since August 1990 pension schemes which are in surplus over the Inland Revenue limit (5 per cent) are no longer allowed to have the money returned to the company unless pension scheme members are first guaranteed certain benefits, namely: pension increases of either 5 per cent a year or the rate of inflation — whichever is lower.
The jargon term for these increases is LPI, short for Limited Price Indexation.
In time, all company pension schemes will be required by law to provide LPI.
The ‘Appointed Day’ marking the start date for LPI has not yet been announced but hopefully this will be before long.
Companies do not of course have to wait until the Appointed Day.
Indeed, many pension schemes are already giving these increases on a guaranteed basis.
Where this is the case, their members will not be affected and cannot expect to receive anything extra as a result of LPI.
Self-employed and personal pension schemes
The self-employed have long been able to make their own pension arrangements.
Since July 1988, this option is now available to all.
Everyone — whether self-employed or working for an employer — has the choice of continuing as they are or of switching instead to a personal pension.
Personal pensions are largely modelled on the old-style self-employed pensions — with one or two important differences, including in particular the age at which you can retire.
As from July 1988, however, the rules for self-employed pensions were also altered to bring them in line with personal pensions.
This will not affect anyone who was already contributing to a pension plan prior to July 1988 unless, that is, they actually wish to change.
Although, in general, individuals who have reached their fiftieth birthday are less likely to be tempted than younger people to leave a company scheme for a personal pension or to alter their current self-employed arrangements, if you are thinking of starting your own business, if you are moving to a new job or if you are ineligible to join  your company pension scheme, one of the options described below may offer you an attractive solution.
Self-employed pensions
The terminology is a bit confusing.
Firstly, because self-employed pensions have long also been called personal pensions — or, to use the former technical jargon, Section 226 policies.
Next, because while they apply primarily to those who work on their own account, they may equally be used by employees who work for companies which do not have a pension scheme or which have a scheme for which they, as individuals, are not eligible.
If you have an existing Section 226 policy (or retirement annuity contract, as it is sometimes also called), then, as you will know, it is an insurance policy designed to invest money for your retirement.
It will probably have been sold to you by an insurance broker or insurance company salesman and, at time of buying, you will have had a choice of four different types of investment policy: with profits, unit linked, deposit administration and non-profit policy.
Under Inland Revenue rules, you are allowed to invest, up to 17.5 per cent of your relevant earnings tax free in the policy (with higher limits, rising to 27.5 per cent, if you are over 60).
In accordance with the terms of the contract, you can choose to retire at any time after the age of 60, when the policy will buy you a regular pension plus the option of taking part of the money as a tax-tree lump sum.
Changes .
As stated a few paragraphs higher, the rules for self-employed pension plans have been altered to bring them in line with other personal pensions.
Section 226 policies have been abolished and are no longer available for purchase.
In consequence, individuals who wish or need to make their own arrangements will have to buy a new style personal pension (PP).
In practical terms, this change is unlikely to affect many people.
For a start, anyone with an existing Section 226 policy has no need, unless they wish to alter their arrangements, to do anything at all.
They can continue contributing to the policy on exactly the same terms and conditions as before.
As general wisdom, the view in the pensions industry is that for most people with an existing Section 226 policy there would be little point in changing — and for high earners, in particular, it could be positively detrimental.
However, as with most decisions there are advantages and disadvantages on either side and it is important that you should at least know what the choices are.
There are four main differences between Section 226 policies and personal pensions.
These concern: the age of retirement, the method of calculating the lump sum, allowable contributions into the plan and the possible size of your pension allowed for tax relief.
Age of retirement .
Under a Section 226 policy, retirement cannot be taken before the age of 60.
With a new personal pension, you can retire at any time between 50 and 75.
Method of calculating the lump sum .
Under Section 226 contracts, this is expressed as three times pensionable earnings.
The PP rules define the amount as 25 per cent(or a quarter) of the total fund excluding your protected rights.
Allowable contributions .
A Section 226 policy limits you to a maximum of 27.5 per cent of your earnings.
For personal pensions, individuals over the age of 50 can contribute up to 30 per cent, rising (depending on their age) to a maximum of 40 per cent .
Size of pension .
For high earners, the £75,000 cap is probably the strongest argument for hanging on to an existing Section 226 policy, since such policies are not affected by the earnings limit.
A new personal pension on the other hand would stand to be affected.
For those who might be interested in switching, perhaps because a major aim is to retire before age 60, you should know that whereas until recently insurance companies were virtually the only outlet for buying individual pension plans, today these are also available from banks, building societies, unit trusts and friendly societies.
Personal pensions for employees
A main aim behind the new personal pensions is to give people working for an employer the same freedom as the self-employed to make their own independent pension arrangements, should they wish to do so.
Virtually everyone who pays national insurance contributions is now entitled to acquire a personal pension.
Although some people may not realise it, if they are paying NI contributions they are almost certainly already contributing towards an additional pension: either to the State scheme, known as SERPS; or to a contracted-out company pension scheme.
Since July 1988, you have the right to take a personal pension in place of SERPS or alternatively, in place of your employer's scheme.
Membership of your employer's scheme is no longer, as it was in many companies, a compulsory condition of employment.
There is in fact a third option.
Members of a contracted-in occupational scheme may contract out of the State earnings Related Pension Scheme (SERPS) through a PP, while remaining in the occupational scheme (a solution not all that different from buying free-standing AVCs with the added benefit of extra tax relief advantages).
A major advantage of a personal pension is that if you change jobs you can take it with you without penalty.
There are attractive tax relief benefits.
The pension is protected against inflation after you retire.
You will have real choice as to how your pension payments are invested.
And if you change your mind after having taken a personal pension, you can switch back into SERPS; or, if the scheme rules allow it, you can transfer your payments into a company contracted-out scheme.
The big potential drawback of a personal pension, particularly for an older person, is that it may not offer you such attractive benefits as your present pension arrangements.
You will need to consider, not just your future retirement income, but also any extras that may be part and parcel of your existing company scheme: an early retirement  option; a pension before normal age were you to become ill; protection for your dependants should you unexpectedly die.
A further problem could be the sheer plethora of choice when selecting a pension plan.
Not only is there a variety of different types of investment (see next section) but you can obtain a personal pension from any of the following: insurance companies, banks, building societies, unit trusts and friendly societies.
Knowing what to choose, assessing one policy against another, weighing up the risk factor as well as trying to estimate what this will mean in terms of your standard of living after you retire could be a bit of a gamble even for a financial expert.
Although as a breed pension providers act very conservatively, and moreover, your money would be protected under the strict rules brought in by the Financial Services Act, no one can forecast with total confidence how well or otherwise any particular investment will do.
When taking a decision about personal pensions you should obtain as much information as possible.
Herewith some of the basics you will need to know.
Starting date .
You can decide to start a personal pension at any time you want and then, in order to receive all the DSS minimum contributions that will be paid into your pension plan, backdate it to the start of the tax year on 6 April.
The formalities involved are very easy.
Contributions into your pension plan .
There are four possible ways of building up savings in your pension plan.
Minimum DSS contributions .
These will be paid into your new scheme automatically.
They are worked out according to the level of national insurance contributions that both you and your employer are required to pay by law.
Instead of going into either SERPS or a contracted-out company pension scheme, they will be paid directly into your personal pension plan.
Despite fears that the rebate would be cut in 1993, the government has announced that for people over 30 it will continue to remain at its existing level of 5.8 per cent(i.e., 4.8 per cent which applies to everyone plus a special 1 per cent age-related addition).
Special incentive payments .
Most people who take a personal pension in place of SERPS will qualify for an extra 2 per cent payment by the DSS on top of the minimum contributions.
This will be paid until April 1993.
Extra contributions made by you .
You can make extra contributions into your pension plan.
If you do so, you will not only build up more savings for your retirement but you also enjoy full tax relief on these contributions.
A further advantage is that you will have more flexibility as to when you can retire.
If only the minimum DSS contributions (with or without the special 2 per cent incentive) are paid, you will have to wait until the normal state retirement age.
If you make extra contributions, you can use them to retire whenever you like between 50 and 75.
There are Inland Revenue rules as to the amount you can invest, which varies according to your age.
Additionally, for the purposes of tax relief, the £75,000  ceiling on earnings (£60,000 during 1989/90) applies to all new personal pensions taken out since the 1989 Budget.
However, see ‘Relating back’ below.
If you are aged 35 or under, you can pay up to 17.5 per cent of your earnings into a personal pension.
If you are between the ages of 36 and 45, the maximum is 20 per cent.
If you are between the ages of 46 and 50, the amount is 25 per cent.
If you are between the ages of 51 and 55, you can pay 30 per cent.
If you are between the ages of 56 and 60, the maximum is 35 per cent.
If you are over 60, you are allowed to invest up to 40 per cent of your earnings.
Ages are calculated at the beginning of the tax year.
Relating back .
Thanks to a little known rule, individuals are allowed to ‘relate back’ personal pension premiums.
This means that a premium paid during a tax year is treated as if it had been paid during the previous tax year; or the tax year before that, if there were no relevant earnings in the previous year.
So if a premium is paid before 6 April 1993 , it may be treated as having been paid during 1990/91.
It is also possible to carry forward unused relief.
Your financial adviser will be able to explain how you apply.
Voluntary contributions by your employer .
Your employer might decide that he wishes to help you improve your pension by making contributions over and above the statutory national insurance contributions into your pension plan.
If you are considering leaving a company pension scheme, this could be one of the questions you should ask as a means of comparing the value of a personal pension against your existing scheme.
The Inland Revenue limits described above include any contributions made by your employer, so the total must therefore not exceed the allowed amount.
Your Pension receipts .
As with all money purchase schemes, the amount of pension you eventually receive will depend on two main factors: the size of the fund you have been able to build up and the fund's investment performance.
As general wisdom, the longer you have been saving towards a personal pension and the bigger the total contributions paid, the larger your pension will stand to be.
You have a great deal of choice in the matter but there are also certain rules designed to protect you.
A basic rule concerns what are known as your protected rights .
These are the DSS minimum contributions including the value of the special 2 per cent incentive payment and tax relief you may have received — together with their accumulated investment growth.
Your protected rights can only be invested in a single contract, in contrast to your/ your employer's extra or voluntary contributions which can be invested in as many different personal plans as you please.
A further point is that your protected rights must be used to purchase the annuity which will pay for your annual pension when you retire; they cannot be used as a contribution towards your lump sum.
A point of special interest to women is that  annuities by law have now become unisex and so must provide the same rates for men and women alike.
Your lump sum derives from the extra contributions that you and perhaps also your employer have made including (as from the 1989 Budget) the value of dependants' benefits.
You can take up to 25 per cent(or a quarter) of this part of the fund.
The remainder will be added to your protected rights to purchase a better annuity.
Choosing a pension plan .
Personal pensions are offered by insurance companies, banks, building societies, unit trusts and friendly societies.
Before you make up your mind, you should aim to look at a variety of plans.
Furthermore, you should not hesitate to ask as many questions as you want about any points that are unclear or any technical term that you do not fully understand — including in particular any questions you may have about the level of charges.
Although all life and pension policy providers are now required by law to state their charges in writing, it is often extremely difficult for a lay person to work out exactly what is involved; or to make meaningful comparisons between one organisation's charges and another's.
Probably the best common yardstick is what is known as ‘the reduction in yield’; in other words, what charges cost as a percentage reduction in the rate of investment return.
Because choosing both the right type or investment and the particular institution with which you are likely to feel happiest is such an important decision, even after you have chosen a scheme you will have a 14-day cooling off period that gives you a chance to change your mind.
Is a personal pension a wise decision ?
This is a question that only you, or an adviser who knows your personal circumstances, can answer.
The most probable takers are likely to be in the category: under 45 (under 40 for women), high flyer, mobile worker in the sense of wanting to change jobs at some stage and well-off older people who are not covered by company arrangements.
The least likely takers are older people in a good company pension scheme.
The key issue is how your existing pension arrangements compare with the alternatives.
You will therefore need to know what the value of your pension would be if you stay in SERPS or your company scheme, whichever is applicable.
For information about the value of your SERPS rights, complete Form BR 19 Pension Forecast Application Form obtainable from your local Social Security office.
In the case of an employer's scheme, ask the pensions department or the person responsible for pensions (this could be the personnel manager or company secretary) to provide you with full information about your pension and future benefits.
Other points you will need to consider include: what type of investment policy would suit you; what size contributions (within Inland Revenue allowed limits) you could realistically afford; and what, after deduction of administrative and other charges, your plan might be worth when you come to retire.
When doing the sums, remember that the special incentive payments given by the government to mark the launch of personal pensions are due to end by April 1993.
This is not to say that taking a personal pension is either a right or a wrong decision.
Simply that you need to be aware of all the various factors before opting out of your present arrangements.
For further information about personal pensions, ask your local Social Security office for a copy of leaflet NP 41 New Pension Choices for Employees .
Also obtain a copy of leaflet IR 78 Personal Pensions from any tax office.
Types of investment policy
There are four different types of investment policy: with profits, unit linked, deposit administration and non-profit policies.
Brief descriptions of each follow.
With-profits policies .
These are one of the safest types of pension investments.
They guarantee you a known minimum cash fund and/or pension on your retirement and, while the guaranteed amount is not usually very high, bonuses are added at regular intervals, according to how the investments in the fund perform.
Additionally, a terminal (or final) bonus is given when the pension policy matures.
An important feature is that once bonuses are given, they cannot later be withdrawn or put at risk due to some speculative investment.
Unit-linked policies .
These are less safe than with-profits policies but they offer the attraction of potentially higher investment returns.
Unit-linked policies by and large have performed fairly well over the last few years and have consequently been growing in popularity.
However, there is always the risk that they might not continue to perform as well in the future and, if there were a down-turn, the size of your pension could obviously be affected.
For this reason, many advisers recommend that their clients swop their unit-linked policies to the with-profits type about five years before they retire, provided market conditions are favourable at the time.
The decision as to what is best will very much depend on timing.
Clearly if the stock market is depressed, then cashing in equity based contracts before you need could lose you money, unless of course your adviser takes the view that the stock market is likely to plunge even further.
Another factor that will need to be taken into account is the prevailing level of interest rates, since these affect annuity rates.
Deposits administration policies .
These lie somewhere between with-profits and unit-linked policies in terms of their risk/reward ratio.
They operate rather like bank deposit accounts, where the interest rate is credited at regular intervals.
Non-profit policies .
These have lost favour in recent years.
Although they provide a guaranteed pension payment, the return on investment is usually very low.
As a rule, they tend only to be recommended for people starting a plan within five years of their retirement.
Choosing the right policy .
This is one area where it really pays to shop around.
Great care is needed when choosing the organisation to invest your pension savings.
Once you  have committed yourself to a policy, you will not usually be able to move your money without considerable financial penalty.
As a general rule, it is sensible to select a large, well-known company that has been in the market for a long time.
Before deciding, you should compare several companies' investment track records.
What you should look for is evidence of good, consistent results over a period of 10 to 20 years.
An important point to be aware of is that insurance and other financial companies may give illustrative projections of their investment performance.
Projections, however, even when these take account of possible inflation, are not the same as guarantees and if, in the event, the results are disappointing you are most unlikely to have any claim.
A further fundamental consideration is the administrative and other charges you will have to pay.
Many people do not realise just how much they are being charged as most financial advisers make their money via commission, which is normally obscured, so making it difficult to work out what the true cost is.
You should aim at very least to talk to two or three financial institutions or other specialists such as insurance brokers and make it clear to all of them that you are doing so.
If you need further advice — and particularly if a large sum of money is involved — there could be a strong argument for consulting an independent pension consultant or other independent financial adviser who charges fees rather than earns commission.
For further information see Chapter 6, Financial Advisers.
You might also like to read the section on investor protection at the end of Chapter 5.
Another possibility, not previously mentioned, is to set up your own Self-Invested Personal Pension (SIPP).
As the name implies, these are do-it-yourself schemes which among other assets can include directly held shares.
Such schemes are only suitable for fairly sophisticated investors.
A lump sum?
Members of company pension schemes and people with individual pension policies are allowed to take a lump sum of money tax free when they retire.
The greatest amount normally permitted is one-and-a-half times your average final salary up to a ceiling of £1 12,500 (or higher if your pension plan pre-dates the 1989 Budget).
Taking a lump sum reduces the pension you receive but, on the other hand if you invest the money wisely, you could end up with a higher income.
Alternatively, of course, as many people do, you could use the capital for a worthwhile project such as improving your home; or, if you were planning to give something to your grandchildren, this could be an opportune time to settle it on them.
Thanks to Inheritance Tax which has replaced capital transfer tax, lifetime gifts (in contrast to money left in a will) will normally escape the taxman.
The first priority, however, is to ensure that you will have enough income for your own needs.
If you take a lump sum, the amount by which your pension will be reduced is mainly determined by your age.
The younger you are, the smaller the reduction.
Another consideration is your tax status.
Since the lump sum is tax free, as a general rule the  higher your top rate of tax after retirement, the greater the advantage in opting for a lump sum.
Your life expectancy can also be an important factor.
The shorter this is, the more sense it makes to take the lump sum, rather than deny yourself for a longer-term pension that you will not be around to enjoy.
If you come from a long line of octogenarians, then clearly you will need to work out the sums on the basis of the next 20 years or longer.
Contrary to what some people believe, it is not ‘an all or nothing’ decision.
You have considerable flexibility and can choose between: not taking a lump sum, taking the maximum amount allowed or taking a portion of it only (whatever sum you decide).
Often the deciding factor when choosing whether to take a lump sum is the problem of investing it.
If you have never had to think of it before, the prospect of what to do with several thousand pounds can seem a very daunting challenge.
It could be prudent to ‘invest’ some of it in good financial advice.
Before consulting an expert, it would be helpful to both of you if you could work out — at least in very general terms — what your financial priorities are.
The sort of questions your adviser will ask are: whether you are investing for income now or capital growth in the future; whether you need to go for absolute security with every penny you have or whether you can afford slightly more risky investments in the hope of making more money in the long run; what other sources of income you have, or might expect to receive.
As is normal conservative practice, you will probably find that you will be recommended to spread your lump sum across a mixture of investments.
Depending on your circumstances, these might be long- or short-term investments; income or capital producing; or quite likely, a combination of all of them.
An outline of the different types of investment is given in Chapter 5.
Pension rights if you continue to work after retirement age
When you reach normal retirement age, you will usually stop making contributions into your company pension scheme, even if you decide to carry on working.
Your employer would, of course, have to agree to your continuing to work, which he is under no compulsion to do.
Indeed, some organisations have fixed rules about retirement age and do not allow any exceptions.
If, however, you are allowed to remain, you probably have three options:
You can leave your pension in the fund where it will continue to earn interest until you retire.
In most private schemes, you can expect to receive an extra 9 per cent for every year that you delay retirement.
If you continue working, say for an additional five years, your pension will then be 45 per cent higher than if you had started taking it at the normal age.
You will also have been earning a salary meanwhile, so you are likely to be considerably better off as a result.
Unfortunately, this opportunity (see also paragraph below) no longer applies to individuals joining a new scheme after 13 March 1989; or an existing scheme after 1 June 1989.
You can leave your pension in the fund, as described above, and additionally contribute to a personal pension, providing your contributions do not exceed the allowed Inland Revenue limit, i.e. two-thirds of final salary (or whatever is allowed according to the rules of the scheme).
You can continue working, draw your company pension and put some of your earnings into a separate scheme.
Once you are over 60, the Inland Revenue allows you to invest up to 40 per cent of your earnings tax free into a pension plan.
Equal pension age
As a result of recent changes in the law, employers are required to treat men and women equally with regard to retirement and pension issues.
Already for a number of years, employers have not been able to oblige women to retire at an earlier age than their male colleagues but by law must have a common retirement age that applies equally to both sexes.
Now, as a further requirement, employers must also have a common pension age and pension schemes must (with effect from 1990) offer the same benefits to their male and female members.
Most companies have responded by raising the pension age for women, thus — in theory at least— obliging women to work extra years before becoming entitled to their full pension.
In practice, however, the majority of employers that have equalised upwards (i.e. instead of reducing the retirement age for men) are at this stage allowing women the option to take their pension early without reductions, instead of obliging those already close to retirement to prolong their working life.
The law is still somewhat ambiguous as to precisely what arrangements employers arc required to make, as several key points are awaiting clarification in the European Court of Justice.
Most legal experts believe that few, if any, further important changes affecting company pension schemes are likely to ensue.
Partly as a result of all these changes, the government has announced its intention to equalise the State pension age.
At time of writing no details were known, as the government was in the midst of an extensive consultation exercise.
Even when a decision is taken, nothing much is expected to change in the short term as in all probability there will be a fairly lengthy transitional period.
However, the policy of equal treatment is now firmly on the agenda and it is only a matter of time before men and women will be entitled to their State pension at the same age.
N.B. Whatever happens, the one virtual certainty is that people already in their mid-fifties have no cause for concern and would not have to postpone their retirement!
Pensions for women
Women who have worked all their adult lives and paid full Class 1 contributions should get a full basic pension in their own right at the age of 60.
The current amount is £54.15 a week.
This is up-rated each year in April.
Women who have only worked for part of their adult lives may not have enough contributions to get a full basic pension on their own record.
Instead, they may receive a reduced pension or one based on their husband's contributions; or one topping up the other.
A wife entitled to a reduced pension on her own contributions can claim it at 60, regardless of whether or not her husband is receiving his pension.
Married women who have never worked are also entitled to a pension on their husband's contributions.
In money terms, the value is about 60 per cent of the level of basic pension to which their husband is entitled.
There are several important conditions, however.
Firstly, women can only receive a pension based on their husband's contributions if he himself is in receipt of a basic pension.
He will have to have reached 65 and must have retired.
Additionally, the wife herself must be over 60 to qualify.
If she is still under 60 when her husband claims his state pension and does not work or her earnings do not exceed £43.1 0, he should be able to obtain a supplement of around £32.55 to his pension, on the grounds of having a wife to support.
If the couple are living apart, the earnings limit for the wife is £32.55.
Your local Social Security office will be able to advise.
In contrast,if a wife has had her sixtieth birthday but her husband has not yet reached 65 (or has decided to defer his retirement), she must wait until her husband retires to receive her share of the married couple's pension.
An important point to note is that since the introduction of independent taxation, a married woman is entitled to have her section of the joint pension offset against her own personal allowance instead of it being counted as part of her husband's taxable income.
For many pensioner couples, this should have the happy result of reducing their tax liability.
If a wife who formerly worked is over 60 and retired but cannot yet get a basic pension on either her own or her husband's contributions , she may be able to qualify for an additional or graduated pension based on her own contributions.
These are described a little further on.
But first a word about three other important matters: reduced rate contributions, abolition of the half test and Home Responsibilities Protection.
Reduced rate contribution
Many women retiring today have paid a reduced rate of NI contribution, also known as ‘the small stamp’.
This option was given to working wives in 1948 and withdrawn in 1978 but women who had already chosen to pay the reduced rate were allowed to continue, provided they did not take more than a two-year break from employment after 1978.
If you have never paid anything but reduced rate contributions, you are not entitled to a basic pension in your own right but instead must rely on your husband's contributions for the married couple's pension.
Abolition of the half test
Until a few years ago, married women had to have paid full NI contributions for half the  time they were married and working to get anything at all in their own right.
This rule, known as the ‘half test’, has now been abolished.
If you were born before 6 April 1919 and were a married woman when you reached age 60, having paid full NI contributions while working, you should contact your local Social Security office.
Home Responsibilities Protection (HRP)
Men and women whether single or married who have been unable to work regularly because they have had to stay at home to care for children and/o-r a disabled or elderly person may be able to safeguard their pension by claiming Home Responsibilities Protection.
This is a very important benefit, especially for the many single women in their fifties who are sacrificing their career to look after an elderly parent.
This measure was introduced in 1978 and protection only applies therefore from this date.
The person you are caring for must come into one of the following categories:
A child under 16 for whom you are getting child benefit
Someone whom you are looking after regularly for at least 35 hours a week, who is in receipt of attendance allowance, constant attendance allowance or the new disability living allowance
Someone — for example, an elderly person — for whom you have been caring at home and in consequence have been getting income support (or supplementary benefit in the past)
A combination of the above situations
A married woman or widow cannot get HRP for any tax year in which she was only liable to pay reduced rate national insurance contributions.
HRP can only be given for complete tax years (6 April to 5 April), so if you simply gave up work for a few weeks in order to help out, you would be unlikely to qualify.
Additionally, HRP cannot be used to reduce your total working life to below 20 years.
To obtain a claim form, you should ask your local Social Security office for leaflet NP 27.
Since 1978, anyone in receipt of child benefit, supplementary benefit or income support who is caring for someone in one of the eligible categories starred above is automatically credited with HRP.
All other claimants should obtain Leaflet NP 27 from their local Social Security office.
Graduated Pension
This scheme operated between April 1961 and April 1975.
Anyone earning over £9 a week and over age 18 at the time would probably have paid graduated contributions and be due a pension.
You can only get a graduated pension based on your own personal contributions.
However, the pension from the graduated scheme is likely to be small.
Further, women were penalised because their pension was calculated at a less favourable rate than for men on account of their longer life expectancy.
Additional pension
The scheme, which is commonly known as SERPS (or State Earnings-Related Pension Scheme) started in 1978.
Contributions are earnings related, paid by both  employer and employees, as are the pension payments.
Women in contracted-out pension schemes get a guaranteed minimum pension, which must be at least as much as the pension they would have received from SERPS.
The government is intending to scale down SERPS.
However, anyone retiring before 1998 will not be affected.
Divorced wives
If you have a full basic pension in your own right, this will not be affected by divorce.
However, if, as applies to many women, despite having worked for a good number of years you have made insufficient contributions to qualify for a full pension, you should contact your local Social Security office, quoting your pension number and national insurance number.
It is possible that you may be able to obtain the full single person's pension, based on your ex-husband's contributions.
Your right to use your ex-husband's contributions to improve or provide you with a pension depends on your age and/or whether you remarry before the age of 60.
As a general rule, you can use your ex-husband's contributions towards your pension for the years you were married (i.e. until the date of the decree absolute).
After that, you are expected to pay your own contributions until you are 60 unless you remarry.
If you are over 60 when you divorce, whether you remarry or not, you can rely on your ex-husband's contributions.
If you remarry before the age of 60, you cease absolutely being dependent on your former husband and instead, your pension will be based on your new husband's contribution record.
N.B. The same rules apply in reverse.
Although it happens far less frequently, a divorced man can rely on his former wife's contribution record during the years they were married to improve his basic pension.
Graduated or additional pensions are of no help to a divorced partner of either sex, as these are earnings related and, therefore, only benefit the individual who has earned and paid for them.
For further information, ask your local Social Security office for leaflet NI 95,National Insurance for Divorced Women .
You should also read leaflet NP 46 A Guide to Retirement Pension .
Separated wives
Even if you have not lived together for several years, from a national insurance point of view you are still considered to be married.
The normal pension rules apply including, of course, the fact that, if you have to depend on your husband's contributions, you will not be able to get a pension until he is both 65 and in receipt of his own pension.
If you are not entitled to a State pension in your own right, you will receive the dependant's rate of benefit, i.e. about 60 per cent of the full rate (or less if your husband is not entitled to a full pension).
In such a case, you can apply for income support to top up your income.
Once you are 60, you can personally draw the wife's pension of £32.55 a week, without reference to your husband.
If you are under 60 but your husband has reached 65 and is retired, he may be able to claim a dependency addition of £32.55 for you, provided he pays it to you or is maintaining you to an equivalent amount.
He will not be able to claim dependency addition if you are earning more than £32.55 a week.
If your husband dies, you will be entitled to widows' benefit in the same way as any other widow.
If there is a possibility that he may have died but that you have not been informed, you can check by writing to or visiting St. Catherine's House, where the indexes of registered deaths are filed.
The address is: St. Catherine's House, 10 Kingsway, London WC2B 6JP.
T:071–242 0262.
Widows
There are three important benefits to which widows may be entitled: widows' payment, widows' pension and widowed mother's allowance.
To claim these, fill in Form BW1, obtainable from any Social Security office.
You will also be given a questionnaire (BD 8) by the Registrar.
It is important that you complete this, as it acts as a trigger to help speed up payment of your benefits.
For more information, see leaflet NP 45 A Guide to Widows' Benefits .
Widows' payment .
This has replaced what used to be known as the Widow's Allowance.
It is a tax-free lump sum of £1,000, paid as soon as a woman is widowed provided that:(1) her husband had paid sufficient NI contributions;(2) she is under 60;or (3) if she is over 60, her husband had not been entitled to retirement pension.
Her claim will not be affected if she is already receiving a state pension,providing this is based on her own contributions .
Widows' pension .
There are various levels of widows' pension: the full rate and age-related widows' pension.
As with widows' payment, receipt is dependent on sufficient NI contributions having been paid.
Full-rate widows' pension is paid to widows between the ages of 55 and 59 inclusive.
The weekly amount is £54.15, which is the same pension as that received by a single person.
Prior to April 1988, younger widows from the age of 50 qualified for the full rate.
If you were already receiving this, your benefits will not be affected by the age change and you can continue claiming the full benefit even though you may not yet be 55.
Age-related widows' pension is for younger widows, who do not qualify for full rate.
It is payable to a widow who is between 45 and 54 inclusive when her husband dies; or when she ceases to receive widowed mother's allowance.
Rates depend on age and vary from £16.25 for 45 year olds to £50.36 for those aged 54.
As with the standard rate widows' pension, the qualifying ages were changed in April 1988.
Widows already receiving age-related pension are not affected.
For further information, see leaflet NP 45.
Widows' pension is normally paid automatically once you have sent off your completed form BW1, so if for any reason you do not receive it you should enquire at your local Social Security office.
In the event of your being ineligible, due to insufficient  NI contributions having been paid, you may still be entitled to receive income support, family credit, housing benefit or a grant or loan from the social fund.
Your Social Security office will advise you.
Widows who remarry, or live with a man as his wife, cease to receive widows' pension unless, that is, they are aged 60 or over in which case they may continue to receive their pension.
A widow who has cohabited and loses her entitlement to widows' pension will, if the cohabitation ends, be entitled to claim it again.
Widowed mother's allowance .
This is paid to mothers with at least one child for whom they receive child benefit.
The current value (1992/93) is £54.15 a week.
Additionally, widowed mothers receive an extra payment of£9.75 a week for the first or only child; and £10.85 a week for each other dependent child.
These allowances are usually paid automatically.
If for some reason, although eligible, you do not receive the money, you should inform your local Social Security office.
See leaflet NP 45.
Retirement pension .
Once a widow reaches age 60, she has the choice of claiming retirement pension or of continuing with widows' pension (until 65, when she no longer has a choice and will receive retirement pension).
If she is over 60 when her husband dies, she will usually receive a retirement pension rather than a widows' pension.
If at the time of death the couple were already receiving the State retirement pension, the widow will continue to receive her share.
An important point to remember is that a widow may be able to use her late husband's NI contributions to boost the amount she receives.
See leaflet FB 6 Retiring?
Your Pension and Other Benefits .
Other important points .
Separate from the basic pension, a widow may also receive money from her late husband's occupational pension, whether contracted in or out of SERPS.
She may also get half of any of his graduated pension.
Tax
Unfortunately, much as we should like to leave this out, the taxman never seems to retire!
Unless you are on a very low income, you will almost certainly be paying income tax and possibly one or two other varieties of tax as well.
Paradoxically, however, although over the years you may have been contributing many thousands of pounds to the Inland Revenue, in practice you may have had very little direct contact with the tax system.
The accounts department will have automatically deducted — and accounted for — the PAYE on your earnings as a salaried employee.
So unless you have been self-employed or have had other money, not connected with your job, you may never really have needed to give the question very much thought.
Come retirement, even though for most people the issues are not particularly complex, a little basic knowledge can be invaluable.
Firstly, it will help you to calculate how much money (after deduction of tax) you will have available to spend: the equivalent, if you like, of your take-home pay.
At a more sophisticated level, understanding the broad principles could help you save money, by not paying more in taxation than you need.
The purpose of this chapter, however, is not to suggest clever ways of reducing your liability — although in fact almost everyone has a certain amount of scope to do so without in any way cheating on the system.
Apart from some general points, listed here (as well as scattered elsewhere in the book where especially relevant, such as in Chapter 10, Starting Your Own Business), giving tax planning advice is the job for a specialist; and moreover one who is fully conversant with your financial affairs, so that he can advise in the light of your own particular circumstances.
If you are lucky enough to be fairly wealthy or if some of the points mentioned in connection with recent Budget changes give you genuine cause to wonder whether you are taking advantage of the concessions available to you, you should talk to an accountant.
The aim here is simply to remind you of the basics and to draw your attention to some of the new provisions that could have a bearing on your immediate or longer term plans.
Income tax
This is calculated on all (or nearly all) your income, after deduction of your personal allowance; and in the case of a married man, the married couple's allowance.
The reason for saying ‘nearly all’ is that some income you may receive is tax free: types of income on which you do not have to pay tax are listed a little further on.
Most income, however, counts and you will be assessed for income tax on: your pension, interest you receive from most types of savings, dividends from investments, any earnings (even if these are only from casual work) plus rent from any lodgers, if the amount you receive exceeds £3,250 a year.
Many social security benefits are also taxable.
The tax year runs from 6 April to 5 April the following year, so the amount of tax you pay in any one year is calculated on the income you receive (or are deemed to have received) between these two dates.
There are three different rates of income tax: the new 20 per cent rate introduced in the 1992 Budget which applies to the first £2,000 of your taxable income; the 25 per cent basic rate tax which applies to the next slice of taxable income between £2,000 and £23,700; and the 40 per cent higher rate tax which is levied on all taxable income over £23,700.
All income tax payers will pay the 20 per cent rate on their first £2,000 of taxable income.
Or put another way, for every £1 00 of your income that counts for income tax purposes up to £2,000, you have to pay £20 to the Exchequer — and are allowed to keep the remaining £80.
If you are a basic rate taxpayer, the amount you have to pay the Exchequer increases (after the first £2,000) to £25; and if you are a higher rate taxpayer, it goes up to £40 for every £100 of your taxable income over £23,700.
The different rates sometimes change or, as in the 1992 Budget, a new rate may be introduced.
The government has announced its intention to make further reductions, when circumstances allow.
Any changes, whether reductions or increases, are invariably announced in the Budget.
This has traditionally been held in the spring but as from 1993 on will take place in December.
Tax allowances
Personal allowance
Income tax is not levied on every last penny of your money.
There is a certain amount you are allowed to retain before income tax becomes applicable.
This is known as your personal allowance.
Therefore, when calculating how much tax you will have to pay in any one year, you should first deduct from your total income the amount represented by your personal allowance (plus any additional or other tax allowance to which you may be entitled, see sections following).
If your income is no higher than your personal allowance (or total of these allowances), you will not have to pay any income tax.
Calculating your personal allowance used to be fairly complicated as there were all sorts of variations according to whether individuals were married or single and whether only one partner, or both husband and wife, worked.
Happily, since the introduction of independent taxation the system has become very much easier to understand.
Today everyone receives the same basic personal allowance, regardless of whether they are male, female, married or single; and regardless of whether any income they have comes from earnings, an investment, their pension or other source.
•The basic personal allowance (1992/93) is £3,445.
People aged 65 and over may be entitled to a higher personal allowance than the basic, by virtue of their age.
Those aged 75 and above may receive even more generous treatment.
The full amount is only given to people whose income does not exceed £14,200.
People with higher incomes will have their age allowance reduced by £1 for every £2 of income above the income limit.
But however large your income, your personal allowance can never be reduced below the basic personal allowance.
For those aged 65 (or due to reach 65 before 5 April 1993) to 74:
•Personal allowance is increased to £4,200.
For those aged 75 (or due to reach 75 before 5 April 1993) and older:
•Personal allowance is increased to £4,370.
N.B .
Extra allowance linked to the age is normally given automatically .
If you are not receiving it but believe you should be doing so, you should write to your local tax office (see under Inland Revenue in the telephone directory) stating your age and, if married, that of your partner.
If you have been missing out, you may be able to claim back anything you have lost for up to six years and should receive a tax rebate.
The amounts as well as qualifying ages have been altered several times since 1986/87, so any rebate would only apply to allowances that would have been due to you at the time.
Married couple's allowance
The married couple's allowance replaced the married man's allowance when independent taxation was introduced in April 1990.
All married couples, provided they live together, are entitled to claim.
At time of writing the allowance would normally go to the husband unless, that is, he has a low income and cannot use all or part of the allowance — in which case, he can transfer the unused part to his wife in order not to lose the tax benefit.
After April 1993, couples will have greater freedom to decide how they wish the allowance to be split.
They will be able to choose to divide it equally or, instead, to allocate the whole allowance to the wife.
The wife, if she so wishes, will be able to claim half the allowance as of right.
The rules apply to the basic married couple's allowance and also to the age-related addition.
Couples who wish all or part of the allowance to go to the wife will need to arrange the transfer through their tax offices, by completing Form 18.
This will need to be done before the start of the tax year, i.e. before 6 April.
For the address of your tax office, see Inland Revenue in the telephone directory.
As with the personal allowance, older people enjoy a more generous married couple's allowance.
Increases are given when the husband or wife Teaches 65, with a bigger increase still at 75.
Further details are contained in leaflet IR 81 (see over).
Similar to (age-related) personal allowance, the married couple's age-related increases are subject to a couple's income so it is possible that they might get less than the full addition — or maybe nothing extra at all.
The current (1992/93) married couple's allowance, together with the ceiling limits for the higher allowance, are as follows:
The basic married couple's allowance is £1,720.
When the husband or wife reaches 65 (or is due to become 65 before 5 April 1993), the allowance is increased to £2,465.
When the husband or wife reaches 75 (or is due to become 75 before 5 April 1993), the allowance is increased to £2,505.
N.B .
Additions for age are normally given automatically.
If couples are not receiving any extra but believe they should be, the husband should write to their local tax office stating their ages.
If there has been a mistake, he will be given a rebate.
Useful reading
For more detailed information about tax allowances and other changes due to independent taxation, see the following Inland Revenue leaflets obtainable free from any tax office (see under Inland Revenue in the telephone directory).
IR 80 Income Tax.: A Guide for Married Couples 
IR 81 Independent Taxation: A Guide for Pensioners 
IR 82 Independent Taxation: A Guide for Husbands on Low Income 
IR 90 Independent Taxation: A Guide to Tax Allowances and Reliefs 
IR 91 Independent Taxation: A Guide for Widows and Widowers 
Widow's bereavement allowance .
This is an extra allowance, worth £1,720 a year at current rates, specially given to widows to assist them over the first difficult period.
The only qualification is that a widow's late husband must have been entitled to the married couple's allowance at the time of his death.
The allowance is given from the date of bereavement to the end of that tax year, and for the following year so long as she has not remarried by the start of that year.
As with other tax allowances, this is not a cash benefit that can be claimed at the post office.
It is an offset against income, before calculation of tax.
A widow would therefore be entitled to £5,165 (the total of her personal allowance and widow's bereavement allowance) before her income would start to be assessed for tax.
She would also be entitled to any unused portion of the married couple's allowance in the year her husband dies.
If a widow is aged 65 or over, she may also be able to claim the age-related addition (see ‘Personal allowance’ on pages 59–60).
Other tax allowances .
Extra tax reliefs can also be claimed in a couple of other circumstances.
Additional personal allowance (single parent's allowance ).
This can be claimed by any parent bringing up dependent children on their own.
The current value of the allowance is £1,720 a year.
N.B. A married man whose wife is totally incapacitated can also claim this allowance, in addition to the married couple's allowance, if he has dependent children living at home.
Registered blind people can claim an allowance of £1,080 a year.
If both husband and wife are registered as blind, they can each claim the allowance.
It is called the Blind Person's Allowance.
If you think you might be entitled to either of the above, you should write to your local tax office (see under Inland Revenue in the telephone directory) with full relevant details of your situation.
As with age-related additions, if you were entitled to receive the allowance earlier but for some reason missed out doing so, you may be able to obtain a tax rebate.
Tax relief
Separate from any personal allowances, you can obtain tax relief on the following:
Interest payments on the first £30,000 of a mortgage paid on your own home (the relief only applies to basic rate tax — see note below).
A covenant for the benefit of a charity; or donation under the Gift Aid Scheme
Contributions to occupational pensions, self-employed pension plans and other personal pensions
Some maintenance payments, if you are divorced or separated.
Private medical insurance for those aged 60 and over.
Rental income of up to £3,250 a year from letting out rooms in your home.
Mortgage interest relief .
Tax relief on mortgage interest payments is now restricted to the basic rate of income tax; all higher rate relief was withdrawn in the 1991 Budget.
The change affects both existing and new loans used for home purchase.
It also affects loans secured on an older person's (65 years or over) home which are used to purchase a life annuity.
No one loses their right to tax relief on borrowings up to £30,000 for these purposes.
It is only the amount of relief granted that changes, with higher rate taxpayers now treated identically to everyone else.
Self-employed and other personal pension plans .
According to your age, you can pay the following amounts into a pension scheme and obtain tax relief:
if you are aged 35 or under, 17.5 per cent of your earnings (up to a ceiling of £75,000)
between the ages of 36 and 45, 20 per cent of your earnings
between the ages of 46 and 50, 25 per cent between the ages of 51 and 55, 30 per cent between the ages of 56 and 60, 35 per cent ages 61 and over, 40 per cent Ages are calculated at the beginning of the tax year.
N.B .
The £75,000 ceiling on earnings applies to all age groups, although in practice, since it is only relevant to high earners, it is more likely to affect senior people.
The ceiling was first introduced in the 1989 Budget, at the then figure of £60,000, which as the Chancellor explained would be linked annually to the retail prices index.
The ceiling only applies to individuals who have joined a pension scheme since 1 June 1989; earlier members who are still with the same scheme are not affected.
Maintenance payments .
The rules were considerably simplified in the 1988 Budget, and, except for previous maintenance arrangements, are now as follows:
Individuals receiving payments are exempted from income tax
Individuals paying maintenance receive tax relief on the first £1,720 of payments to a divorced or separated spouse; other maintenance payments, including any to children, do not qualify for tax relief.
Maintenance arrangements existing prior to the 1988 Budget remain largely unaffected, other than that payments received by divorced or separated spouses are exempt from tax on the first £1,720.
Private medical insurance .
People over the age of 60 are able to get tax relief on private medical insurance.
This operates in the same way as the MIRAS scheme for mortgages, with relief given at the basic rate by deduction at source.
Where relief is due at the higher rate, it is given by the subscriber's tax office (e.g. by adjusting the PAYE code).
Relief is available whether premiums are paid by the insured person or paid by someone else (for example a relative) on their behalf.
In the latter case, the rate of relief is the marginal rate of the person who pays the premium.
For further information, see leaflet IR 103 Tax Relief for Private Medical Insurance available from any tax office.
Tax-free income
Some income you may receive is entirely free of tax.
It is not taxed at source.
You do not have to deduct it from your income, as in the case of personal allowances.
Nor do you have to go through the formality of claiming relief on it.
If you receive any of the following, you can forget about the tax angle altogether — at least as regards these particular items:
Disability living allowance
Invalidity pension
Industrial injuries disablement pension
Income support (in some circumstances, e.g. when the recipient is also getting unemployment benefit, income support benefit would be taxable)
Housing benefit
Community charge benefit/Council tax benefit (from April 1993)
Any extra which may be added to your state pension if you support children under 16
All pensions paid to war widows (plus any additions for children)
Pensions paid to victims of Nazism
Certain disablement pensions from the armed forces, police, fire brigade and merchant navy
Annuities paid to the holders of certain gallantry awards
£10 Christmas bonus (paid to pensioners)
National Savings Premium Bond prizes
SAYE bonuses
Winnings on the football pools and on other forms of betting.
Other tax-free money
The following are not income, in the sense that they are more likely to be ‘one off’ rather than regular payments.
However, as with the above list they are tax free:
Virtually all gifts (in certain circumstances you could have to pay tax if the gift is above £3,000 or if, as may occasionally be the case, the money from the donor has not been previously taxed).
Redundancy payment, or a golden handshake in lieu of notice, up to the value of £30,000.
Lump sum commuted from a pension with (1992/93) a maximum figure of £1 12,500 allowed.
Existing members of pension schemes set up prior to the 1989 Budget or who joined established schemes before 1 June 1989 may not be affected by the rule and may be entitled to a higher tax-free lump sum.
A matured endowment policy.
Accumulated interest from a Tax Exempt Special Savings Account (TESSA) held for five years.
Dividends on investments held in a Personal Equity Plan (PEP).
Income tax on investments
For most investments on which you are likely to receive interest or dividends, basic rate tax will already have been deducted before the money is paid to you.
If you are a basic rate taxpayer , the money you receive will be yours in its entirety and you will not have to worry about making deductions for tax.
If you only pay tax at the new 10 per cent rate , you will be able to claim a repayment from the Inland Revenue.
If you pay tax at the higher rate , you will have to pay some additional tax and should allow for this in your budgeting, as its deduction is not automatic.
Normally, you will receive a tax demand for the extra tax owing after the end of the year.
Exceptionally, there are one or two types of investment where the money is paid to you gross — without the basic rate tax deducted.
These include National Savings income bonds, deposit bonds, capital bonds, the National Savings Investment Account and also certain specialist types of gilts.
As with higher rate taxpayers, you will receive a tax demand for the amount owing.
Abolition of composite rate tax .
Since April 1991, non-taxpayers (people whose taxable income is less than their allowances) can request institutions such as banks and building societies to pay any interest owing to them gross, without deduction of tax at source.
This is already benefiting several million people, including in particular many married women and pensioners, who although not liable for tax, were losing money through the composite rate tax system.
In order to receive payments gross, anyone who qualifies should request form R85 from the institution in question, which they will then need to complete.
People with more than one bank or building society account will need a separate form for each account.
Forms are also included in the Inland Revenue explanatory leaflet IR 110 Can You Stop Paying Tax on Your Bank and Building Society Interest ?, obtainable from any tax office or from your bank/building society.
By now people who have filled in an R85 should be automatically receiving their interest gross.
However, some account-holders have not completed the form and have still been receiving interest from which tax has been deducted.
Anyone in this situation can reclaim the tax from their tax office after the end of the tax year in April.
Since abolition, people who are liable for basic rate tax suffer deductions at the normal 25 per cent, instead of the more favourable composite rate level of 22 per cent .
Useful reading
IR leaflet 110 Can You Stop Paying Tax on Your Bank and Building Society Interest ?;
IR leaflet 111 How to Claim a Repayment of Tax on Bank and Building Society Interest ; and
IR leaflet 112 How to Claim a Repayment of Income Tax , obtainable from any tax office.
Reclaiming tax overpaid
If your income consists mainly of taxed investments, then you can set your personal allowances against the income.
This will normally mean that you are entitled to a tax rebate.
To allow for this, there is a special tax form for retired people to reclaim any tax they have overpaid on investment income.
If you think this might apply to you, you should obtain Tax Claim Form R40 from your local tax office (see under Inland Revenue in the telephone directory).
Complete the form and return it to the tax office, together with the tax vouchers concerned.
For further information, obtain IR leaflet 112 How to Claim a Repayment of Income Tax .
In particular it is estimated by the Inland Revenue that there may be 2 ½ million married women who may be able to claim a repayment of tax on dividend income.
Married women who are claiming a repayment for the first time should fill in form R95(D) attached to leaflet IR 112 and send it to their local tax office.
A repayment claim form will then be sent to them.
The completed claim form should be returned with the certificates showing the amount of tax deducted.
For further information see IR leaflet 112 How to Claim a Repayment of Income Tax , obtainable from any tax office.
Mistakes by the Inland Revenue
The Inland Revenue sometimes also makes mistakes.
Normally, if they have charged you insufficient tax and later discover the error, they will send you a supplementary demand requesting the balance owing.
However, under a provision known as the ‘Official Error Concession’, allowances are sometimes made and it is possible that you may not have to pay the full amount.
This is more likely if you have a modest income.
Extra leniency is sometimes also shown to widows and the retired.
The limits governing  the definition of ‘modest income’ were fairly recently increased to, at their most generous, £35,300 in respect of taxpayers over 65.
Tax rebates
When you retire, you may be due for a tax rebate.
If you are, this would normally be paid automatically, especially if you are getting a pension from your last employer.
The matter could conceivably be overlooked: either if (instead of from your last employer), you are due to get a pension from an earlier employer; or if you will only be receiving a State pension — and not a company pension in addition.
In either case, you should ask your employer for a P45 Form.
Then, either send it — care of your earlier employer — to the pension fund trustees; or, in the event of your only receiving a State pension, send it to the tax office together with details of your age and the date you retired.
Ask your employer for the address of the tax office to which you should write.
If the repayment is made to you more than a year after the end of the year for which the repayment is due — and is more than £25 — the Inland Revenue will automatically pay you (tax free!) interest.
The Revenue call this ‘Repayment Supplement’.
Useful reading
For further information about income tax, see the following Inland Revenue leaflets, available from any tax office:
Income Tax — Separation, Divorce and Maintenance Payments (IR 93)
Income Tax: A Guide for One-Parent Families (IR 92)
Income Tax — Pay As You Earn (IR 34)
Giving to Charity — How Individuals Can Get Tax Relief (IR 65)
Independent Taxation: A Guide to Mortgage Interest Relief for Married Couples (IR 86)
Post-war credits
Post-war credits are extra tax that people had to pay in addition to their income tax between April 1941 and April 1946.
The extra tax was treated as a credit to be repaid after the war.
People who paid credits were given certificates showing the amount actually paid.
Repayment started in 1946, initially only to men aged 65 or over and to women aged 60 or over, but the conditions for claiming varied over the years until 1972 when it was announced that there would be a ‘general release’ and that all credits were to be repaid without any further restrictions.
In 1972 people who could produce at least one of their post-war credit certificates were invited to claim.
In cases where the original credit holder has died without claiming repayment and the Post War Credit certificate is still available, repayment can be made to the next of kin or personal representative of the estate.
Interest is payable on all claims at a composite rate of 38 per cent.
The interest is exempt from income tax.
All claims should be sent to the Special Post-War Credit Claim Centre at: Inland Revenue, HM Inspector of Taxes — PWC Centre V, Ty Glas, Llanishen, Cardiff CF4 5TX.
Capital gains tax (CGT)
You may have to pay capital gains tax if you make a large profit on the sale of a capital asset, for example: stocks and shares, jewellery, any property that is not your main home and other items of value.
CGT only applies to the actual profit you make, so if you buy shares to the value of £25,000 and sell them later for £35,000 the taxman will only be interested in the £1 0,000 profit you have gained.
Not all your profits are taxable.
There is an exemption limit of £5,800 a year : so if during the year your total profits amount to £12,000, tax would only be levied on £6,200.
Additionally, certain items are free altogether of capital gains tax; and others, such as the sale of a family business, get special treatment.
Details are given a little further on.
A very important point for married couples to know is that as a result of independent taxation each partner now enjoys his/her own annual exemption of£5,800 instead of, as before, their gains being aggregated (i.e. added together) for tax purposes.
This means in effect that, provided both partners are taking advantage of their full exemption limit, a couple can make gains of £11,600 a year free of capital gains tax.
However, under the new rules it is no longer possible to use the losses of one spouse to cover the gains of the other.
Transfers between husband and wife remain tax free, although any income arising from such a gift will of course be taxed.
Income would normally be treated as the recipient's for tax purposes unless, that is, the donor has the right to get the asset back in the future or retains some control over it — in which case the donor would be liable for any tax.
Since 1982, the burden of CGT has been eased by the welcome introduction of index-linking .
This means that any part of an asset's increased value, from 1982 or its subsequent purchase to its disposal, which is due to inflation is not counted for CGT purposes.
A further major reform was introduced in the 1988 Budget, namely: any disposals on or after 6 April 1988 will be rebased to March 1982, so that only gains or losses accrued since that date will be brought into account.
Gains are treated as a person's ‘top slice’ of income and are accordingly taxed at: 20 per cent(the new lower rate), 25 per cent (basic rate), 40 per cent (higher rate) or a mixture of two rates, i.e. in instances where a gain, or gains, pushes part of an individual's income into a higher rate bracket.
Free of capital gains tax
The following assets are not subject to capital gains tax and do not count towards the £5,800 profits you are allowed to make:
Your main home (but, see note below)
Your car
Personal belongings up to the value of £6,000 each
Proceeds of a life assurance policy (in most circumstances)
Profits on British Government stocks
National Savings Certificates
SAYE contracts
Building society savings
Futures and options in gilts and qualifying corporate bonds
Personal Equity Plan scheme
Premium Bond winnings
Football pool and other bettings winnings
Gifts to registered charities
Small part disposals of land (limited to 5 per cent of the total holding, with a maximum value of £20,000).
Additionally, over the years, there have been a number of changes with regard to the Business Expansion Scheme (BES).
The scheme is due to be wound up at the end of December 1993 but until then, excepting one or two minor technical amendments affecting mortgage rescues/property management subsidiaries, the rules will remain unchanged.
Relief is now given on the first sale of BES holdings.
Likewise, to reduce the amount of ‘year end bunching’, an individual who invests in a BES scheme during the first half of the year, can claim part of the relief against his/her previous year's income.
A point for potential investors to note is that funds raised by a company during any 12 month period under the BES are limited to £750,000.
Higher limits apply to ship chartering companies and to those specialising in letting residential property on the terms of the new assured tenancies.
Your home .
Your main home is usually exempt from capital gains tax.
However, there are certain ‘ifs and buts’ which could be important.
If you convert part of your home into an office or into self-contained accommodation on which you charge rent , that part of your home which is deemed to be a ‘business’ may be separately assessed — and CGT may be payable when you come to sell it.
(CGT would not apply if you simply take in a lodger who is treated as family, in the sense of sharing your kitchen or bathroom).
If you physically vacate your home and let it for profit — perhaps because you have decided to live permanently with a friend — under tax law, the property would be treated as an investment and subject to certain exemptions would be assessed for CGT when it was sold.
Part of the argument hinges on owner occupation .
If you are not living in the property (or a part of it which you have let out for rent), then the house — or that section of it — is no longer considered to be your main home.
People who are liable for CGT in these circumstances can apply for special relief of up to £40,000.
If you leave your home to someone else who later decides to sell it, then he/she may be liable for CGT when the property is sold (although only on the gain since the date of death).
There may also be inheritance tax implications, so if you are thinking of leaving or giving your home to someone, you are strongly advised to consult a solicitor or accountant.
If you own two homes , only one of them is exempt from CGT, namely the one you designate as your ‘main residence’.
An exception was sometimes allowed if a second home was occupied by a dependent relative, who lived in it rent free.
This concession was abolished as from 6 April 1988.
However, anyone who had a dependent relative living in a second home before that date will continue to enjoy capital gains tax relief.
But the relief only applies while the dependant is actually inhabiting the property.
If he/she moves to more sheltered accommodation and you keep the property as an investment, it will be assessed for capital gains tax purposes from the date of your relative's departure.
Selling a family business .
If you sell all or part of your business when you retire, you may not have to pay tax on the first £150,000 of capital gain with a further exemption allowed of one-half of gains between £150,000 and £600,000.
Relief is on a sliding scale and to get maximum relief, you must be aged at least 55 and when selling shares must have owned 25 per cent as a working director for 10 years.
(Lower share ownership is allowed if, together with your immediate family, you collectively own 50 per cent of the business.)
If you are forced to retire early through ill health, you may be entitled to more generous relief than would otherwise normally be the case.
There are also certain provisions for what is termed ‘semi-retirement’, which are hedged around with important rules.
Since this is a very complex field, before either retiring or selling shares, you are strongly recommended to seek professional advice.
Selling shares for gain should not be confused with giving part of your family business to the next generation, which was made easier a few years back under the inheritance tax rules.
However, the advice about seeking professional help still applies.
Useful reading
For further information about capital gains tax, see the following booklets, available from any tax office:
Capital Gains Tax — Owner-Occupied Houses (CGT 4)
Capital Gains Tax — Retirement Disposal of A Business (CGT 6)
Capital Gains Tax and the Small Businessman (CGT 11)
The Indexation Allowance for Quoted Shares (CGT 13)
An Introduction to Capital Gains Tax (CGT 14)
Capital Gains Tax — A Guide for Married Couples (CGT 15)
Capital Gains Tax — Indexation Allowance (CGT 16)
Inheritance tax
Capital transfer tax was abolished in the 1986 Budget and has been replaced by inheritance tax which, for those who can remember it, seems largely modelled on the old estate duty.
However, one or two changes have been made since inheritance tax was introduced which could have important implications for anyone planning to pass on gift s with a capital value.
To avoid confusion, we explain the main points first and deal with the more specialised capital gains aspects further along.
In general terms, tax has been largely abolished on most life-time gifts, provided certain important conditions are met.
For exemption to apply,the gift must have been made at least seven years before the donor's death and moreover, it must have been unconditionally given ; or to use the jargon, ‘without reservation’.
A gift in which the donor retains an interest or some direct control — for example, a house ‘given’ to his children in which the parent continues to live — does not qualify for exemption.
The seven-year period is not totally inflexible, in that there is taper relief : in other words, a tapering rate of tax, according to how close to the seven-year limit the death of the donor occurred.
Gifts made within three years of death do not qualify for any relief and the tax will have to be paid in full.
For gifts made more than three years before death, the rates are as follows:
Death between 3 and 4 years of gift 80%
Death between 4 and 5 years of gift 60%
Death between 5 and 6 years of gift 40%
Death between 6 and 7 years of gift 20%
The first £150,000 of an individual's estate is tax free.
Amounts over this are taxed at a single rate of 40 per cent.
Gifts made prior to the introduction of inheritance tax will not be assessed more harshly than they would under CTT, had it continued.
Similarly, the £3,000 annual exemption and the exemption on gifts to spouses remains unchanged (family owned business assets and agricultural land usually also fall outside the scope of the tax).
Other than the exemptions described above, tax has to be paid on any capital gain that has built up on an asset you give away during your lifetime.
As with capital gains tax, appreciation is only calculated from 1982 or subsequent year of purchase and any part of the asset's increased value due to inflation is not counted for tax purposes.
Moreover, not surprisingly perhaps, tax specialists say that there are legitimate ways of minimising the liability, for example by putting gifts into a discretionary trust which qualifies them for ‘hold-over’ relief.
Since this is a fairly complex matter, professional advice is essential.
Another important consideration that should not be overlooked is the need to make a will.
The rules of intestacy are very rigid and neglecting to make a proper will can have serious consequences for those whom you might wish to benefit.
For further information, see ‘Making a will’,(pages 448–50).
Likewise, if you have already written a  will, it is strongly recommended that you have this checked by a professional adviser to ensure that you do not give money unnecessarily to the taxman.
For further information about inheritance tax, see booklets Inheritance Tax (IHT 1) and An Introduction to Inheritance Tax (IHT 3), obtainable from any tax office.
Independent taxation
As most readers will know, independent taxation was introduced on 6 April 1990.
Throughout the chapter and elsewhere in the book, the key changes have been described as and where relevant, in particular under the headings ‘Personal allowance,, ‘Married couple's allowance’ and ‘Capital gains tax’(see pages 59, 60, 67).
However, because this is such a fundamental change, one or two of the essentials are worth repeating.
The switch to independent taxation affects nearly all married couples.
As well as allowing married women privacy over their own financial affairs, another major gain is that many couples — especially retired people — are better off financially.
In contrast to the old system, whereby a married woman's income was treated as belonging to her husband for taxation purposes, both husband and wife are now taxed independently on their own income.
Each has their own personal allowance and rate band; and each pays their own tax and receives their own tax rebates.
Most previous tax allowances have disappeared (the single person's allowance, wife's earned income allowance and married man's allowance) and have been replaced by a new personal allowance and a new married couple's allowance.
Everyone, whether male or female, single or married, now receives their own Personal allowance, which can be set against any income including savings or a pension as well as earned income.
For many couples, this represents a real saving in tax, in consequence of a wife's income no longer being aggregated with that of her husband.
Moreover, independent taxation applies equally to the age-related additions (formerly known as age allowance) and both husband and wife are now eligible for their own higher tax allowance from the age of 65 (and more generous still after age 75).
As a result of this change, the Inland Revenue estimates that over 200,000 older married couples have been taken out of the tax system and no longer pay income tax.
Another welcome gain is that if a husband's income is too low for him to use all or part of the married couple's allowance, he can request that the unused part be transferred to his wife — thus reducing his wife's tax bill.
As from April 1993, even more flexibility will be allowed with couples able to choose whether all the tax relief should go to one partner (husband or wife) or whether to split it on a 50–50 basis.
A further important point for many couples is that independent taxation does not simply apply to income tax but applies equally to both capital gains tax and inheritance tax.
As a result, both husband and wife enjoy their own capital gains tax exemption (£5,800 in the 1992/93 tax year) and their own exemption from inheritance tax (£150,000 in the 1992/93 tax year).
Property left to a surviving spouse remains, as before, free of inheritance tax.
Useful reading
For further information about independent taxation, see the following Inland Revenue booklets, available from any tax office:
Independent Taxation: A Guide for Married Couples (IR 80)
Independent Taxation: A Guide for Pensioners (IR 81)
Independent Taxation: A Guide for Husbands on a Low Income (IR 82)
Independent Taxation: A Guide to Mortgage Interest Relief for Married Couples (IR 86)
Independent Taxation: A Guide to Tax Allowances and Reliefs (IR 90)
Independent Taxation: A Guide for Widows and Widowers (IR 91)
Value added tax (VAT)
Unless you are thinking of starting a business or already run one, you do not require any special information about VAT.
You pay it automatically on most goods and services, at the flat rate of 17.5 per cent.
As a general rule, if you purchase a tangible object, it will be included in the price.
For most services, including restaurant bills, it is itemised separately.
Small firms that are not registered for VAT naturally do not charge it.
However, even for very small enterprises, there may be definite advantages in registering.
If you are planning to become self-employed or start a business after you retire, you should read the VAT section, in Chapter 10, Starting Your Own Business.
Corporation tax
This is a business tax and unless you are involved in running a company, there is nothing you need to know.
If you are already engaged in running a small business, you will probably hardly need reminding that the small companies' rate of corporation tax is 25 per cent(instead of the 33 per cent standard rate for larger concerns).
The lower and upper limits for the application of marginal relief are £250,000 and £1,250,000 respectively.
Useful reading
Allied Dunbar Tax Guide , published by Longman, 21–27 Lambs Conduit Street, London WC1N 3NJ, T:071–242 2548.
Price £17.99; U19.99, inc. p&p).
Your Taxes and Savings (1991/93)— published by Age Concern.
Price £4.50.
Inland Revenue booklets which could be helpful, especially if you are interested in the possibility of becoming self-employed or starting your own business include:
Starting In Business (IR 28)
Your Tax Office — Why It Is and Where It Is (IR 52)
Thinking of Taking Someone On ?
(IR 53)
Employed or Seif-Employed (IR 56/NI 39)
Thinking of Working for Yourself (IR 57)
Retiring abroad
The stories are legion of people who retired abroad in the expectation of being able to  afford a higher standard of living and who returned home a few years later, thoroughly disillusioned.
As with other important decisions, this is an area where homework really pays!
Holiday memories of dinner for two complete with bottle of wine for the princely sum of a fiver are, alas, no guide to the cost of actually living in a country — especially if the holiday in question took place five years ago or more.
While some services may be cheaper, others may be very much more expensive; and the same goes for any goods you buy in the shops.
In particular, if you want to purchase British brands, you can expect to pay considerably more than you do at home.
It is crucial to investigate property prices as well as, of course , the cost of health care.
As anyone who has ever needed a doctor or dentist abroad knows, the term ‘free health service’ does not always mean what it says.
While these and similar points are perhaps obvious, a vital question that is often overlooked is the taxation effects of living overseas.
Taxation abroad
Tax rates vary from one country to another: a prime example being VAT, which in some parts of Europe at the time of writing is over 20 per cent on certain items.
Additionally, many countries levy taxes that happily do not apply to Britain.
Wealth tax exists in quite a few parts of the world.
Estate duty between husbands and wives is also fairly widespread.
There are all sorts of property taxes, different from our own, which — however described — are variously assessable as income or capital.
Sometimes a special tax is imposed on foreign residents.
Some countries charge income tax on an individual's worldwide income, with none of the (by British standards) normal exemptions allowed.
Even so-called tax havens may fail to live up to their privileged reputation.
While admittedly not actual taxation, many impose all sorts of conditions on foreigners, effectively excluding all but the super-rich.
The terms may vary but could include any, or all, of the following.
Only property above a minimum (and pretty exorbitant) price may be purchased.
You might have to produce evidence of a sky-high annual income.
You may be required to invest in a local business.
Or, insultingly, you could be requested to deposit a sum with the government to cover you against repatriation costs, should the necessity arise.
The only sensible advice is to investigate the situation thoroughly before you take an irrevocable step, such as selling your home; or worse, investing in a property overseas.
However, if many people blithely ignore the ‘nasties’ that may await them overseas, an even more common mistake is to misunderstand their UK tax liabilities after their departure.
Your UK tax position if you retire overseas
Many intending emigrants cheerfully imagine that once they have settled themselves in a dream villa overseas, they are safely out of the clutches of the UK taxman.
This is not so, however.
You first have to acquire non-resident status .
If you have severed all your ties, including selling your home, to take up a permanent job overseas, this is normally granted fairly quickly.
But for most retirees, acquiring unconditional non-resident  status can take up to three years.
The purpose is to check that you are not just having a prolonged holiday but are actually living as a resident abroad.
During the check period, the Inland Revenue may allow you conditional non-resident status ; and if they are satisfied, full status will be granted retrospectively.
Rules .
The rules for non-residency are pretty stringent.
You are not allowed:
to spend more than 183 days in the UK in any one tax year
to spend more than an average of 90 days per year in the UK for four consecutive tax years
to come to the UK at all, if you continue to own property, and are not in full-time employment abroad.
Even if you are granted non-resident status, some of your income may still be liable to British taxation.
Income tax
All overseas income is exempt from UK tax liability
Income deriving from a UK source is, however, normally liable for UK tax.
This includes any director's or consultant's fees you may still be receiving, as well as more obvious income.
An exception is made if the country in which you have taken up residency has a double tax agreement with the UK (see below).
If this is the case, you may be taxed on the income in your new residence — and not in the UK.
Additionally, interest paid on certain British Government securities is not subject to tax.
Non-residents may be able to arrange for their interest on a British bank deposit or building society account to be paid gross.
Some former colonial pensions are also exempted.
Double tax agreement .
A person who is a resident of a country with which the UK has a double taxation agreement may be entitled to exemption or partial relief from UK income tax on certain kinds of income from UK sources and may also be exempt from UK tax on the disposal of assets.
The conditions of exemption or relief vary from agreement to agreement.
It is a condition of the relief that the income is subject to tax in the other country.
Capital gains tax
This is only charged on British residents, so if you are in the position of being able to realise a gain, it is advisable to wait until you acquire non-resident status a UK
An exception to the rule are gains made from the disposal of asset company.
These are subject to normal CGT.
Inheritance tax
You only escape tax if you are domiciled (as opposed to resident) overseas and if all your assets are also overseas.
If you do not have an overseas domicile, you will have to pay the tax at the same rates as if you lived in Britain.
Domicile .
Broadly speaking you are domiciled in the country in which you have your permanent home.
Domicile is distinct from nationality or residence.
A person may be resident in more than one country but at any given time he/she can only be domiciled in one.
If you are resident in a country and intend to spend the rest of your days there, it could be sensible to opt for a change of domicile.
If, however, you are resident but there is a chance that you might move, the country where you are living would not qualify as your domicile.
This is a complicated area, where professional advice is recommended if you are contemplating a change.
UK pensions paid abroad
Any queries about your pension should be addressed to the DSS overseas branch at Newcastle Central Office, Longbenton, Newcastle upon Tyne NE98 1YX.
Technically your state pension could be subject to income tax, as it derives from the UK.
In practice, if this is your only source of UK income, tax would be unlikely to be charged.
If you have an occupational pension, UK tax will normally be charged on the total of the two amounts.
Both state and occupational pensions may be paid to any country.
(If you are planning to retire to Australia, Canada, New Zealand or Norway, you would be advised to check on the up-to-date position regarding any annual increases you would expect to receive to your pension.
Some people have found the level of their pension ‘frozen’ at the date they left Britain.)
If the country where you are living has a double tax agreement with the UK, as previously explained your income may be taxed there — and not in Britain.
Britain now has a double tax agreement with most countries.
For further information, check the position with your local tax office.
If your pension is taxed in the UK, you will be able to claim part of your personal allowance as an offset.
A married man living with his wife may also be able to claim part of the married couple's allowance.