

The Rose: As Interesting as it is Beautiful
Perhaps if we can parody the eight gramophone records, and ask the question, ‘If you were cast away on a desert island, which eight plants would you wish to have with you?’ there is no doubt that the rose would be the first choice for most people.
That should not be surprising, because when asked to name one favourite flower, beautiful above all others, again there can be little doubt that most people — in Britain at any rate, and whether gardeners or not — would choose the rose.
So it has been for centuries, yet the multi-petalled bloom of modern times, epitomized by the modern Hybrid Tea rose (or, as it is abbreviated, H.T.) and probably most people's mental image of all that a rose is and should be, is a product of modern hybridizing and cross-breeding that did not exist even as recently as medieval times.
Long before then, however, the rose had already found a place in the heart of man.
To the human eye and senses, even the simply constructed single bloom of the hedgerow wild rose is so sublimely beautiful in the bud that it is represented in the earliest forms of art and pictorial decoration.
The common use of the rose in heraldry illustrates how deeply and firmly it became associated with and identified as a symbol of family arms and crest, class and dynasty.
In the twentieth century the rose is still regarded as something basically British, regal and exalted; it symbolizes quality and superiority.
It is one of the more perverse facets of human nature that the more we have, the more we want — and so it is with the rose.
Never a season  passes without something new being set before us; the resources of the rose seem limitless.
As it does with anything that is widely liked and appreciated, this modern money-mad world has made the rose big business, and the plant obeys all the ups and downs of fashion, high pressure competition and selling — even racketeering — as do pop records, clothes and motor cars.
It is so easy to be caught up in the whirl.
Why is the rose so universally admired and so highly cherished?
A famous psychologist (he was a customer of mine before he took his talents to America) once suggested in conversation that it was largely due to the contradiction between the beauty of the flower and the beastly danger and hurt of the thorn.
More important than all that, however, what is it that you, the reader, like about the rose?
Is it the wide range of colours, the beauty of the bud opening into full bloom, or the scent?
These are all factors that are essentially personal, and we are all different in our likes and dislikes.
It is this width of opinion and preference, and the infinite variety and ability of the rose to supply and please all tastes, that makes possible the incessant striving to breed, introduce and sell something new.
You don't have to be a historian to know a pretty flower when you see one, and although this is not intended to be a text book — there is more than enough literature available to fulfil that function — I do suggest that your enjoyment of roses can be enhanced by knowing just a little about the many different kinds, and such matters as why they are cultivated in certain ways, why they are pruned, and so on— and to see a strange word, and know what it means!
The genus has extraordinarily wide origins, with different species coming from the whole length and breadth of Europe, the Middle East, Persia, Afghanistan, India, China, Japan and across to the North American continent.
The Orient had well-developed civilizations long before anything in Europe, and they too appreciated the qualities of the rose and its potential when cross-bred and hybridized — a process that was well in advance of the horticultural achievements of European civilizations by the time the latter's explorations brought East and West together.
As with so many other plants, and indeed with many other arts, the developments that followed the introduction of oriental blood to the West were enormous and revolutionary.
The extent of cross-breeding and hybridizing has been an explosion that continues to this day.
Indeed, far from all the possibilities and permutations becoming  exhausted, modern understanding of hereditary principles plus enormous advances in scientific techniques has, if anything, quickened the pace and extended the possibilities of the rose, more than with any other single genus on Earth.
Of course, some people take hobbies, pastimes and other activities to incredible lengths, but you don't have to be able to converse knowledgeably about all the different types to enjoy an exquisite bloom.
If you are to enjoy the satisfaction of growing one, clearly it helps to know how to combat all the pests and diseases that conspire to stop you.
Succeeding against challenge is part of the satisfaction — if a rose were to grow perfect blooms every time without problems, that would be too easy and give no sense of achievement.
There is one word to cover our liking of roses, our desire to discover the different kinds, and ability to overcome the difficulties of growing them, and that is interest.
Unfortunately it can be very dull when you are faced with a dry reference book that retails facts and information and talks at you, not with you.
Good rose-growing should be about enjoyment as well as understanding.
Understand why something happens as it does and you are your own master, able to use your common sense and logic to make judgements and decisions.
Add a touch of background, humour, a whiff of romance, an anecdote or two, and you have the stuff of interest and enjoyment.
Is that not what all gardening is about?
I cannot tell you everything about roses, because I don't know it all — nobody does, or ever will.
However, there is plenty here that you will find interesting because, despite all the books, journals, newspaper articles, radio programmes and so on, gardeners still have problems and ask a lot of questions.
A lot of them are concerned and confused with the many different types of rose, so we will begin by describing them and explaining the meaning of many of the names you will come across — that will help you choose wisely, and without regretful afterthoughts.
Unusually, you may think, I shall not be listing and suggesting varieties for you to grow because I think that can be a misleading business and is not really helpful.
In the final analysis, beauty is in the eye of the beholder, and essentially a personal matter.
What pleases me may not please you, and my recommendation may disappoint you — and then what would you think?
Furthermore, new varieties come into the lists in such numbers that the same numbers have to be deleted, otherwise the lists would  become far too long, and the nurseries quite unmanageable.
All too often, a ‘best of all time show-stopper’ is difficult to find only a few years after its introduction, superseded by yet another new name.
Not only would a list of varieties make a book like this out of date in a short time, it would not help you either.
A comment here and there on a classic will not be out of place, but a list of recommended varieties is out!
Planting, staking and feeding have been talked and written about so frequently that it really is astounding how many questions and problems still occur about these subjects.
Instead of repeating all that has been said and written before, we will therefore discuss these matters in a way that enables you to use your common-sense judgement and understand why you decide to do something.
It is your garden; you do the work and make the decision according to your judgement.
You can never experience the real satisfaction of growing roses well by following a list of step-by-step instructions.
As with planting, so with pruning: hundreds of books, millions of words, lots of diagrams and illustrations, and still the questions come!
So, we will tackle pruning in a different way, one that takes the mystery out of it.
Propagation — by seed, budding, or grafting — will concern only the minority of rose gardeners, but has to be included, even if rather briefly.
So too with exhibiting: somewhere a reader may be able to grow significantly better roses than his or her neighbours, and he or she would like to put it to the test of the show-bench.
Pests and diseases have had innumerable volumes devoted to them, and still remain a never-ending source of trouble and worry.
Almost like new roses themselves, chemical insecticides and fungicides come and go with remarkable rapidity.
Some arrive in a blaze of publicity and promise, only — like DDT and many others — to be banished in disgrace for creating insufficiently researched ‘side effects’.
How, then, can one be definite about recommending chemical preparations?
How can I be sure that this year's cures will not be in disgrace and condemned by the time you read about them?
Such is one of the consequences of ‘progress’.
Following pests and diseases is a section that will interest those who would like to try their hands at raising their own new plants, and perhaps even achieving fame in the process!
The biggest section follows; this is a selection of the many questions received from readers — the more important, the most often asked, and therefore the sort of thing most likely to be worrying you — with ‘reason why’ explanations.
The Different Types of Rose
Many thousands of years of natural evolution and hybridization, helped in recent centuries by the bringing together of species from widely separate parts of the world, and in modern decades by the attentions of the human mind and hand, have produced a  multitude of rose forms, shapes, colours, habits and abilities.
With such diverse origins it is not surprising that occasionally some unsuspected gene from a complicated ancestral past asserts itself and a deviation pops up.
Such skeletons from ancestral cupboards can be most welcome — for example, a docile bush form may suddenly want to climb about, change colour, or show some other perverse side of its nature that we find attractive and wish to keep.
Sometimes the variation is slight, and a new variety is born, but occasionally variations are so great and distinctive as to found a new race, a new type, something quite different to anything seen before.
Catalogues, lists, the literature of the rose: all use a lot of words to classify the different kinds, but seldom tell us much about how they differ.
It will be helpful, therefore, to know something about what these words and classifications mean before setting about choosing what to grow.
For this purpose, I propose first to discuss the several bloom shapes and forms, then the growth and habit forms and variations, and then progressively to pass on to the many breed and race classifications.
That way we shall have a good idea of all the different kinds of rose, where to look to find the right variety to suit a particular purpose, and more importantly, where not to look, and what to leave alone.
Before looking at the bloom shapes and forms, we need to clarify a few terms which are not as simple or straightforward as might be supposed.
Clarification of terms
A single bloom is one with a single circlet of five petals, as you will invariably find in the wild rose of the hedgerow and, of course, in a number of the modern bred varieties as well .
In many cases, the anthers at the centre of each blossom are highly coloured or contrast with the petal colour to add to the attractiveness of the flower.
Figure 1.
Rose blooms take a variety of different forms, best summarized as (a) single, with a single circlet of five petals,(b) double, with anything from 10 to 30 petals,(c) semi-double, with up to 15 petals but opening more like a single than a double, and (d) the old favourite quartered rose, with its many petals curled into four ‘quarters’.
As ‘single’ means five petals, you may deduce that the word double would mean ten — but not so.
‘Double’can mean ten petals, but it can also mean 15, 20, 25, 30, 35 — nominally any multiple of five.
Some petals do not fully develop and may be only partial petals, so in practice the actual number can mean pretty well anything.
There is no precise meaning to ‘double’ with regard to petal number, and the word is taken to mean a number of petals so closely packed that until the bloom fully opens and then ‘blows’, it is virtually impossible to see the anthers and other sexual parts of the flower — they are quite hidden.
A semi-double bloom, of which there are a great many, is somewhere between, but tending more towards ‘single’ than ‘double’so that, although there may be as many as 15 petals, the flower opens more loosely than a double and reveals the anthers more readily.
(See also question number 84 on page 243.)
Especially in the description of the blooms of older breed types, you will often see the word quartered .
This is a rather apt description of a bloom that is flat,(compared to the high central point of the Hybrid Tea, for example) and in which the many petals seem to curl and divide into four sections or quarters.
This was a favourite feature in olden times, and a similar petal formation can be seen in some modern bred fuchsias.
Weather, temperature, position, fertility and such factors all have an effect upon the flowering period, but by and large, most roses will begin to bloom, or be almost ready to do so, from late May into June.
There is not so much variation at the front end of the flowering season as there is in autumn and winter, when some varieties and types show a marked reluctance to end their activities.
Indeed, a few are notable for their apparent determination always to herald the New Year with a fresh bud!
That apart, we should bear in mind that roses vary greatly in their ability to bloom more or less continuously after the first flush.
Those that do are described as perpetual flowering , and those that bloom in short repetitive bursts are called repeat ,recurrent , or the French remontant .
Many roses, especially the ramblers, have one single flush and no more.
Growth form and habit types
The bush — or, as it used to be called, dwarf (misleading these days in view of the growing popularity of the miniature and patio types)— is the form that is most popular and commonly planted in gardens everywhere.
Its branches fork from an implanted bud just above ground level and normally make 2–4ft (0.6–1.2m) high, although — and this has to be said — too often encouraged by incorrect and only partial pruning that permits new growth to break not from near ground level but from 1ft (0.3m), 2ft (0.6m), or even higher, they are frequently to be seen consisting of younger bloom bearing growth on top of old barky stems, the whole reaching 5ft (1.5m), even 6ft (1.8m), or more in height.
This kind of mistreatment highlights how descriptive words and terms can be confusing if they are taken to mean anything more than a means of distinguishing form — and not size, for instance.
If mistreatment and eventual size confuse matters, those catalogues and articles that lump bush and shrub roses together only add to the confusion.
Some shrub types can be quite small compared to a mistreated overgrown bush type.
Most often identified with the widely known and popular Hybrid Tea, the bush form includes many different kinds of so-called ‘Old’ roses as well as‘Moderns’.
Figure 2.
The bush rose, usually 2–4ft(0.6–1.2m) high, is the most popular type.
Standards are basically bush forms that have been budded, or less often grafted, on to single stems anything from 2–2½ft (0.6–0.8m) high (half-standard ) to 3½ft (1m),(1.2m), 5ft (1.5m) and sometimes even a little higher than that.
The objective with half standards is mainly to lift a particular plant above its neighbours, and add height and variation in an otherwise uniform bed.
They are also used in pots and containers on patios and courtyards, where they look attractive and are not so liable to be blown over as the taller full standard.
With the standard rose, apart from the aesthetic beauty of its form, the main purpose of the extra height is to lift blooms to eye and nose level where they can be more easily appreciated.
The standard is really an aberration of the natural form — a manufactured monstrosity  albeit a beautiful one — and, as so often happens when man confines, restricts and changes the shape of plants, there is an inherent structural problem, which we will discuss when we come to aftercare, pruning and feeding.
Figure 3.
The standard rose is really a bush rose growing on a single stem.
Heights of 5 ft (1.5m) or more call for strong staking; this standard has three ties to a stake carried well into the head, for extra protection.
A weeping standard achieves a different form by having not a bush type but a rambler budded into the top of the stem, from where the long flexible rambler stems hang and drape down like a floral curtain.
Regarded by many as the most beautiful form of all, it is usual to enhance the curtain effect by budding 1–2ft (0.3–0.6m) higher than the normal bush type standard — 6ft (1.8m) or even 7ft (2.1m) from ground level — and to spread and support the draping stems from a wire umbrella like a large floral crinoline.
Ramblers are for the most part hybrids of the Japanese species Rosa wichuraiana , or have it somewhere in their not-too-far-distant  ancestry.
In their natural environment, ramblers spread and sprawl over the ground or up into and over other plants or objects that offer support — a more literal name would be ‘scrambler’— and their frequent use is to be tied to and draped over arches, pergolas, fences and similar supports.
They have one short season of bloom, with large trusses of relatively small flowers, then all is over, and they have to be cut back to produce new growth for next year's display.
Perhaps for the sake of brevity, although not for precision and clarity, it is not unusual in some catalogues and lists to find some species roses included under the rambler heading, which like R. wichuraiana , have the same sprawling habit and are sufficiently vigorous to get up into trees.
Figure 4.
A weeping standard rose — a rambler growing from the top of a single stem — is especially beautiful when draped over a shaped top support, as here.
Climbers are often confused with ramblers, which is perhaps not altogether surprising in view of their similarities, and is not helped by the practice in many nursery catalogues and garden centres of grouping the two together.
However, without being too pedantic about it, there are clear differences which it is as well to realize and bear in mind.
The typical climber develops a thick strong stem which, although pliable enough when young to be bent and trained to a support, becomes woody and rigid by its second year.
They are more suitable, therefore, for straighter runs and flatter surfaces, like fences, house walls and trees, than to being turned, twisted and trained to an arch or pergola.
Another effect of the development of the hard woody stem is that, as soon as they are established, climbers drop the tendency to put up new growth from ground level (as ramblers do) and so pruning has to follow a different principle (see pages 54–72).
Normally, climbers produce larger flowers than ramblers, and quite often several times again during a season — hence the description ‘repeat’ flowering.
Climbing sports originate for the most part from bush types ‘sporting’ extra long canes which still bear the same flowers as the parent.
As we have already discussed, the ancestry of the rose is extremely wide and complicated, and although extraordinary genealogical detective work has been carried out into many family trees, one wonders how it is possible to be sure of the right direction when travelling through the mists and fogs of time, especially during the period before copyright was extended to plants, when secrecy was a safeguard against competition.
Occasionally, a hiccup in the genetics occurs.
If the aberration can be propagated and maintained, we have a climbing version of a conventional and matching bush type.
However, climbing sports differ from true climbers in that invariably they do not bloom until the second year wood, and then only on side shoots, and seldom repeat much after the first burst of bloom during June.
Pillar roses are in the main simply less vigorous ramblers — climbers and climbing sports are sometimes included — that normally do not reach more than about 9–10ft (2.7–3m) in height or cane length.
The term ‘pillar’ indicates the purpose for which they are well suited — tying and training to a pillar, pole, tree stump or whatever — although of course they will also do quite well on a fence or wall.
The term shrub rose is often used confusingly with bush rose.
There is no clear definition of precisely what is, and what is not, a shrub rose — indeed, some catalogues, from quite reputable houses too, describe the shrub type merely as one that differs from the bush, the climber, the rambler, the miniature and others, and cannot be conveniently classified with them.
Smaller forms can be interplanted with bush roses, but normally shrub roses grow much larger than the bush forms — 8ft (2.4m) and 10ft (3m) high and wide being quite common — with considerable variation in habit and the way they carry their branches and blooms.
A shrub rose may be a true species, pure and simple, it may be ancient, or it can just as well be a highly cross-bred product of more recent times.
By and large, however, shrub roses are not so far  from their natural origins and include many that are perpetual or recurrent flowering.
Miniature roses, sometimes not more than 6 inches (15cm) high when full grown, are often denigrated and derided as toys — which is most unfair because a great many people with the most limited facilities who would otherwise miss out are thus enabled to experience the satisfaction of rose growing.
It is not surprising that the demand for and popularity of miniature roses have increased as garden sizes have diminished.
For a long time the type remained quite insignificant, but in recent years the increasing attention has added many new varieties, and a few miniature standards are also now available.
The same circumstances that have brought more attention to the miniatures are no doubt a big factor in the development of a grouping as yet not officially recognized, but being listed and offered by more and more growers.
Patio roses occupy a small niche between the true miniatures and the ubiquitous bush size, and are therefore eminently suitable for planting in and around patio paving, pots and containers.
‘Breed types’
As stated earlier, the vast numbers of rose species and natural hybrids have been multiplied out of all knowledge by the intuition and skill of the human mind and hand.
It is not possible here, neither is it necessary for our purpose, to attempt a historical analysis of the evolution of the rose genus into the many classifications, types and kinds.
However, what I feel will be of interest to many rose gardeners, bearing in mind the many questions asked, is an explanation of terms like Hybrid Tea, Floribunda, Polyantha, and the rest.
The Hybrid Tea (abbreviated to H.T.) is the type most gardeners regard as the epitome of all that a rose can and should be.
Whether the bloom shape is the ultimate, only time will tell, for there have been other occasions in the development of the rose when a new type has been regarded as the last word.
In recent years the H.T. has been grown more than any other, both as bush and standard, and such is the sublime beauty of the opening bud that H.T.s invariably take all the prizes at the shows.
They are in such demand that we have the  phenomenon of an industry geared to satisfying a craving for new varieties every year.
So many thousands of differences have been hybridized and bred for that it has become well nigh impossible to find a variation that has not been tried before, but which is new, and can reap a rich reward for the nursery that is first on to the market with it.
Today, the rose, especially the H.T. and its offspring, the Floribunda, is very big business indeed, and played for huge winnings, with large multi-national companies paying fortunes to have a new rose variety given the company name.
The basic characteristic of the H.T. is that the flowers are invariably double with so many petals — sometimes to their detriment in wet weather — that the centre becomes pushed up to a high point — in the classic shape that everybody likes to see.
We have run the whole gamut of colour with the post-war American varieties, then the swing back to Europe for scent with the colour, then the bi-colour with the petals showing contrasting colours on each side, revealed so attractively as the petals curl back on themselves.
We have nearly every colour of the spectrum from purest white and cream through yellow, orange, pink and scarlet to deepest velvet black crimson.
Barring the almost frantic effort in the search for the elusive clear and genuine blue, it must be a colossal headache to the raisers to think up something new.
And yet, the astonishing fact is that the H.T. that we know and take for granted today is not much more than a hundred years old, generally accepted as having originated in 1867 with the variety called ‘La France’.
It is quite certain that the poets Shakespeare, Keats, Byron and Wordsworth never saw a Hybrid Tea rose.
Even the early varieties developed in the time of Browning and Tennyson were nothing like the splendours of today, and one wonders what the genius of their poetic expressions would have made of the ethereal glow in the half light of ‘Super Star’(see page 129), the exquisite shape and deepest of all crimson-black red of ‘Charles Mallerin’ or a hundred and one other modern marvels.
As we have said, the ancestry of the modern H.T. is a genealogical maze — not to say minefield — and although tracing parentage is an absorbing passion for some, going to that extent is not the purpose here.
The point to bear in mind is that all that glisters is not gold, and there has been a price to pay for all the splendour.
The more the hybridizing and crossing back and forth has concentrated on the spectacular, the further it has taken the plants from the vigour of their natural origins, and the less resistant many have become to pest and  disease.
Evolved in the cut and thrust of nature, ‘wild’ plants have to fight and resist — or perish.
The high society platinum beauty brought up in a secluded hot-house may look a million dollars on the show stand, but is all too liable to fall flat on her face at the first pinprick of adversity and does not stand a chance unless she is cocooned in protective sprays.
Hybrid Perpetual (abbreviated to H.P.) is a term not much used now.
This grouping derived primarily from the Tea, Pernetiana and Bourbon roses, all with their origins in China, were the parents of the Hybrid Teas and naturally bear a close resemblance to them, having passed on much of their form, fragrance and perpetual or recurrent flowering.
Because of the popularity of the Hybrid Tea, H.P.s have been largely superseded by their offspring.
Not many growers offer them any longer as a separate classification, and there is a general tendency to lump a few — if any — with others in a rather cursory grouping as Old roses.
Any collection worthy of the name, and the space of course, should contain a representative or two, but you will probably have to go to a specialist grower like David Austin to find a decent descriptive list from which to choose.
Floribundas If there was one criticism of the H.T. it was that, although the blooms were undoubtedly beautiful, there were not many of them — not enough at any rate to satisfy many gardeners who simply wanted more on each plant.
So, the H.T. was cross-bred with Polyantha varieties derived from Rosa multiflora .
This has produced a type with the upright carriage and bearing of the H.T., but which flowers in clusters like the Polyantha.
The individual blooms can be single, semi-double, or fully double like the typical H.T. — although normally just a little smaller — and the clusters succeed each other almost continuously, or at least are recurrent, from early summer to November.
The Floribunda has become very popular, and as this has increased so has the H.T. influence increased over the Polyantha to the extent that we now have H.T. type roses being borne in abundance.
Nowadays vying with the H.T. for the most varieties offered and space occupied in many catalogues, the Floribunda is available in bush and standard form and, more recently, in patio and miniature forms.
The Polyantha was developed from R. multiflora , a white multi-flowered climbing species from China and Japan.
It is now available in a wide range of colours, small flowered clusters, and in bush form.
As you might expect from such headlong cross-breeding and  hybridizing in the incessant search for something different and new, the various types are so widely stretched that the edges tend to run into each other and merge, and the dividing line becomes ever more difficult to discern.
The genealogist has a job to sort it all out, so it is no wonder that many rose lists get into a mess and tend to lump types together more for brevity and convenience than for strict botanical clarity.
Bear this in mind when you peruse the catalogues and the plants on offer in the nursery garden centre plunge beds.
Alas, in most gardens, especially suburban, most of the Old and shrub roses will hardly be thought suitable (size alone rules them out) but that is not to say all will be unsuitable, any more than all H.T.s and Floribundas are really suitable.
Whatever we may think of their evocative names, ‘Queen Elizabeth’ and ‘Peace’are much too boisterous to be given room in genteel society.
But if you are prepared to spare the time, settle down in an armchair and explore among the oldies in a good descriptive catalogue like David Austin's Handbook of Roses (see Bibliography), who knows what nuggets of gold you might find to fit into your garden?
In gardening, he who does not seek, does not deserve to find.
Breed and species names
In many catalogues you will find exotic-sounding breed names and references to them, but seldom much explanation of just what they amount to.
Here we look at the more important names.
Alba is a very old breed, originating from a European species dating back at least to medieval times.
The flowers can be semi-double, double and quartered, but have a limited colour range from the white of the base species through blush to pink — which is attractive when seen against the grey-green foliage.
They require little or no pruning or other attention, being remarkably resistant to disease, and are among the hardiest of all roses, thriving in conditions that would frighten the life out of most others.
They will make from 4–6ft (1.2–1.8m) high and wide, with a tendency to branch and spread at the top, so are not really suitable where space is limited.
The fragrant large blush-tinted but rather ragged double R.a. maxima is the emblematic ‘Jacobite Rose’ often seen in Scottish gardens.
The Bourbon group derive from a cross between two Chinese species, but took the name from the Ile de Bourbon, later renamed Reunion Island, in the Indian Ocean, from where they came to Europe in 1817.
They can make large shrubs — some will get up to 7ft (2. 1m) high and as wide — with large flattish blooms and a colour range from white through pink and red to deep crimson.
Heavily scented, they share the parentage with another scented Chinese species of the Hybrid Tea.
The Bourbon variety ‘Mme Isaac Pereire’, with huge crimson blooms, has for long been widely regarded as the most powerfully scented rose of all.
Be careful however; it is vigorous and can make 7ft (2. 1m) high and wide without trouble (see page 132).
The China roses derived from R. indica — one of the parents of the Bourbons, and thus the H.T.s — have small blooms that are borne regularly and repeatedly throughout the entire flowering season.
They are often listed with others of similar appearance but not the same derivation, consequently causing some confusion to the purists.
The old and still very popular variety ‘Old Blush China’ is reputedly ‘The Last Rose of Summer’of the nineteenth-century poet Thomas Moore, no doubt due to its remarkable reluctance to stop blooming each autumn.
Mostly twiggy bushes about 3–4ft (1–1.2m) high and wide, although some are larger, China roses must have full sun.
In fact, that is allied to their one main fault: they are rather tender, don't like exposed positions and can be badly cut about by cold winds.
They require very little attention — the only pruning needed is the removal of old barky wood, and of course that cut back by wind.
The Damask rose grouping is characterized by an elegant, upright, stately growth, taller than wide, and holding its double, semi-double and quartered flowers, all with a pleasant fragrance, more in open bunches than tight clusters.
The ‘Versicolor’ form of the species type R. damascena has flowers sometimes white, sometimes rose-pink, sometimes a mixture of both, and is reputedly the origin of the emblems of the feuding York and Lancaster families.
A smaller-growing, more compact form, the Portland roses, are closely related and are often listed with the Damasks.
They are distinguished by bearing their blooms very close to and within the foliage, but are repeat flowering.
The French or Gallica roses are probably the oldest cultivated roses of European origin, and can arguably be traced back for 3,000 years.
They were much favoured by the French (hence the name), who  developed and raised them to prominence in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, until the introduction of the Chinese wonders.
Mostly short bushes, seldom over 3–4ft (1–1.2m), they are notable for crimson and purple single and semi-double blooms, all having the typically ‘French’ perfume.
Included in this grouping is the celebrated ‘Rosa mundi’, with single crimson cerise flowers vividly striped with white — a showy flower beloved of the Elizabethans and Tudors.
Incidentally, although sometimes called the Tuesday rose, it has nothing to do with the French words for either Monday (lundi) or Tuesday (mardi).
It is much more likely that the name commemorates ‘fair Rosamond’, the mistress of Henry II.
However that may be, there is no doubt at all that it is still the most popular of the Old roses.
The Noisette roses are an old cottage garden favourite of yesteryear, consisting of repeat and perpetual flowering climbers, invariably of considerable beauty.
However, there is wide variation in the group, and care is needed in the selection.
All have fragrance, some very strong.
Some are vigorous and will make 15–20ft (4.5–6m) with ease; others will have difficulty making 10ft (3m).
Some are remarkably hardy, whereas others need the protection of a warm wall or even a greenhouse.
The Japanese or Rugosa rose grouping contains some very attractive dense rounded shrubs with longish stems, furry with innumerable small thorns.
In addition to single blooms, there are several semi-double and double kinds that open wide and full with a ‘mop’ of smaller curled petals at the centre, sometimes shading to a deeper colour at the base that suggests bi-colour, a different and almost foreign appearance.
All are vigorous, forming tough prickly 5–6ft (T.5–1.8m) shrubs — and one or two up to 8ft (2.4m) or more — so read the individual descriptions very carefully when choosing.
The species type is very resistant to disease and is used extensively as a stock root for budding bush types.
The basic species type of the Musk rose,Rosa moschaia originates from southern Europe, has white-yellow blooms, and can easily reach 30ft (9m) high.
The type was developed considerably by German growers, with more amenable size, choice blooms and scent, becoming known as Hybrid Musks .
Not a little confusion followed the development in the early 1900s of a distinct group by a clergyman gardener, Joseph Pemberton.
Sometimes the Pemberton Musks are listed separately, sometimes they may be listed in with Modern Shrub  Roses as well as Hybrid Musks, or they may be listed in with it, which is all very confusing.
However, we don't have to be exact and precise to enjoy this very fine group of roses with their large bunches of fragrant bloom.
The Pembertons clearly have the edge over others in the group, bearing much more bloom on long arching canes, and heavily scented.
They require little attention beyond cutting back long canes by about a third in early spring, just as growth begins to stir, and then trimming back any remaining side shoots to no more than three buds, taking out old wood that becomes dark and barky to promote new growth from the base — and, of course, removing the flower trusses as they fade.
The basic species of Provence and Moss roses,Rosa centifolia , forms a wide, loose, open bloom (an influence to be seen in some modern hybrids), which has given them a rather derogatory name ‘cabbage rose’.
Being heavy, the blooms have a very pronounced tendency to hang their heads, which has passed on to its derivative the Provence rose.
R. centifolia is also called the ‘Painters’ Rose' as it became a favourite still life subject with French and English painters.
A mutation that became popular in Victorian times was called the ‘Moss Rose’ because of a minute thorny, moss-like growth that forms on and around the bud scales, in some cases very heavily, and which is coloured.
It is curiously attractive.
Although not large shrubs, there is considerable variation in size: some are no more than 2ft (0.6m) high and wide, and others three times that.
Take careful note of the potential size — it is very easy to go wrong with these.
English and New English roses One of the more diverting, interesting, and some will say downright difficult to explain, trends in the midst of all the modern development, breeding and hybridizing of H.T.s, Floribundas and the other Modern types has been the steady unrelenting interest of a sizeable body of enthusiasts in older rose types.
Perhaps this is due to a reluctance to let go of the past, and perhaps too there is a parallel in other parts of the garden with the modern revival of interest in ‘wild’ and ‘natural’gardens and plants.
In the past 30 to 40 years or so, one of the ways that interest in Old rose types has been manifested has been the crossing of modern hybrid varieties directly with old varieties and species.
There is little doubt that this particular development was motivated largely by the wish to restore something of the vigour and resistance to disease of the older types to modern colours and shapes.
In the event, the crossing of the  very new with the very old has produced an entirely new race of roses that combine the softer colour and fragrance charms of the old with the advantages of the modern forms.
A common criticism of the early varieties was that they were only ‘once flowering’, and that the colour range was rather limited — but no more.
The Wolverhampton rose-grower David Austin (who has led the way, and to whom the world of roses owes a vast debt of gratitude) has continued and persisted, with the result that what have become known as English and New English roses now contain recurrent flowering varieties, a very wide colour range, fragrance, vigour, and an undefinable but strangely characteristic old-fashioned charm and flower formation.
English roses now include bush growth forms — both large and small — climbers, singles and the fullest possible doubles.
They are a race of roses that are well worth exploring and are yet another example of the inexhaustible resources of the rose to come up with something new and different.
Species roses As remarked with regard to the English roses above, and in addition to the crossing back of the new with the old, there has been a return to and seeking after the more simple and unsophisticated beauties of the species roses, their forms and near hybrids.
Most of the true species are single-flowers, and seldom bloom beyond the one initial burst — this showed out in the early English crosses.
However, we shouldn't grumble, because that is all that we get with many other plants, and at least the reason of interest and attraction is extended by colourful fruits (hips) in autumn.
Many nurseries are adding species and Old varieties to their lists and you may well find shrub forms, ramblers and climbers all grouped under the one heading.
Be very careful if ordering from a catalogue and not actually seeing the plants in full growth; read the descriptions most carefully.
There are some very distinctive and interesting roses to be found among the species which are well worth exploring and looking for, as you will see from the following examples.
Rosa ecae from Afghanistan, a 5ft (1.5m) shrub with fern-like foliage.
Although the flowers are only 1 inch (2.5cm) across, there are lots of them, and they are the deepest, purest yellow.
R. hemisphaerica is the very old ‘Sulphur rose’ associated with the Redouté pictures of the art world.
The large, full, double, pale yellow blooms are heavy and turn over to hang down.
It makes a beautiful 6ft (T.8m) shrub, but it does need dry sunny weather to get the blooms to open.
R. moyesii is a well known species name, with large 3 inch (7.5cm) deep red flowers and contrasting centres followed by large conspicuously coloured and shaped fruits.
The type has long arching canes and easily makes a 10ft (3m) shrub.
It has several forms — of which ‘Geranium’ is perhaps the best known — that are of smaller stature and more amenable to the average garden (see pages 138 and 142).
R. primula from Turkestan (6ft — 1.8m — tall with small yellow flowers and fern-like foliage), and R. rubiginosa from central and eastern Europe (an 8ft — 2.4m — thicket smothered with single pink flowers and, later, with red hips), are both noted for the scent not of their flowers but of the foliage.
This will pervade a surprisingly large area with fragrance, particularly on a warm moist evening.
R. rubrifolia is the rose much beloved by flower arrangers for the copper-mauve foliage.
In themselves, the cerise-pink flowers are insignificant, but seen contrasting against the foliage colour they are very, very attractive.
It makes a 6ft (T.8m) shrub that produces a second fine display in autumn with masses of dark red hips.
Finally,R. xanthina ‘Canary Bird’ is one of the most popular of the species roses, having 2 inch (5cm) bright yellow flowers on 7ft (2m) shrubs clothed with delicate fern-like foliage.
It is an apt and evocative name — but do try to see potential purchases in bloom before you buy, as it is not always reliable and can disappoint (see pages 139 and 140).
There are very many more species, but I believe enough have been indicated to let you see that the rose is by no means restricted to the Hybrid Tea — there are many other kinds to provide variation and interest.
just how much you can have depends on what you have space for and the kind of garden you have.
I cannot emphasize enough, however, the importance of learning all that you possibly can about the varieties you are interested in before you buy and plant.
Modern H.T.s vary considerably in their vigour and size, the Old and species types even more so, and it is a simple matter to run into problems.
A few years ago I saw a catalogue offering Scotch, sometimes called ‘Burnett’, roses.
There are several forms and variations of size, bloom colour and form; the variety ‘Double White’ has the added attraction of a sweet lily-of-the-valley scent.
It is very easy to respond to brief descriptions in catalogues that are not fully descriptive.
The basic species type,Rosa pimpinellifolia (or, as it used to be called,R. spinosissima ) grows very well in most soils, but flourishes particularly in light sandy soils in which it can indulge its natural habit of  spreading to form large prickly thickets by means of underground runners and suckers.
Hybridizing with other species and forms dampens this ardour to some extent, but some varieties on offer are merely forms of the base species, and therefore can present problems in a small garden where space is limited.
This is an example of why you should judge catalogues — and nurseries — by the candour, honesty and fullness of the information they provide.
Selection is not a matter of having everything that takes your fancy.
If you are to get the maximum enjoyment from growing roses, just as much care is needed in choosing one as a hundred, and it is to selecting what to grow — and where to buy — that we now turn.
Choosing Where to Buy and What to Plant
The previous chapter shows that there is an extremely wide range of roses, and although buying one may not seem a major event, costly mistakes can be made.
Even this simple job can be a pitfall for those who do not pay due attention, so let's discuss a few salient points.
We have some armchair gardening to do, a thoroughly enjoyable pastime and most important if you are to get the best from your roses.
There will be gardeners with established rose gardens who can only introduce a new plant at the expense of something else — a replacement of a loss perhaps, a substitution for something better, an extension or changed layout.
Some readers will have been growing roses for years, others may be starting for the first time from scratch, with no preconceived ideas, pattern or convention to adhere to, and a great many more will be at every stage in between.
No two readers are the same, any more than their gardens.
All will want something different, and the only way to help everyone, whatever they might already know about roses, is to start at the beginning.
The first thing to do is to rephrase the question that everyone asks themselves, not ‘what would I like to grow, what do I want to grow?’ but ‘what do I have space for, and how much time am I prepared to devote to looking after what I plant?’
This means that, before you begin to think about colours and the names of varieties, you have to be clear about what you would like to do and what it is possible to do, perhaps planting kinds and types about which you may have heard but are not familiar with and which would add variation and interest to  your garden.
H.T.s and Floribundas are glorious, but there is such a thing as too much sameness, as the saying goes: ‘having too much of a good thing’.
Planting one rose or a hundred makes no difference — you have to think about it if you value your garden.
Replacing a loss is straightforward enough, but a new planting, a new feature or breaking new ground in a collection all need even more careful planning.
This is why we have discussed the many different types first, and thus have some idea of all the possibilities available to us.
Relatively few amateur gardeners will be in a position to plan an entirely new garden of any serious size, so it would be rather academic to the majority of readers to go too much into siting and orientation of north, south or other aspects.
 Ninety -nine gardeners in every hundred have to put up with the garden they have, facing the way it is, and cannot pick and choose or move it around.
In any case, even for those with the extent and shape of garden to be able to consider size, shape of beds, borders and orientation, aspect is not of crucial major importance, because with very few exceptions, roses are hardy and do not need mollycoddling.
Indeed, several are at the other extreme and are so hardy as to be used for screening and protection in exposed positions.
Except for the climbers and ramblers, which are amenable to being trained and grown on walls and fences, roses can be said to positively dislike being shut in.
They like open situations where fresh air can move through and circulate freely.
Any obstruction and tendency to stagnant air conditions is an encouragement to the arch enemies of pests, like aphids, which get the chance to settle, and fungus diseases like mildew and black spot which also are able to settle, spread and press their attack.
By and large, roses are for open situations and full sun, not dappled sunlight or shade.
For those gardeners able to cut out and plant up new beds, the nature of the rose does impose certain conditions if it is to be appreciated fully.
Compared to many other flowers which achieve greatest effect when planted en masse , the rose is essentially an individual beauty which has to be seen and smelled close to.
Admittedly, one has to stoop down to smell a low shrub, but that is not such a problem for most of us as it is to struggle through to the middle of a bed.
Imagine a collection of a dozen roses, planted in four rows of three in a nearly square block — two plants are beyond reach in the middle, and the inner sides of the others are not easy to reach.
The  nature of H.T. and Floribunda bushes suggests that they should be planted in isolation, or in long and narrow strips where they can be approached both sides.
At the least they should be planted no wider than two abreast where each plant can be approached from one side.
Of course, some kinds, particularly the Floribundas with their abundance of bloom, are suitable for mass colour effect, especially when colour is vivid but individual bloom quality and scent are not pronounced.
The problems that then have to be borne in mind, as with large pads of H.T.s, are access for dead-heading, protective spraying and, if not weeding as such (they should be suppressed anyway), regular hoeing to keep the soil surface open.
It is one thing in a park, where gardeners are working full-time, but for the average amateur with a job to go to five days a week, these are the sort of things one should think about even before placing an order, let alone planting.
Roses need looking after, and it is no good at all planting a collection, or any number of them, if you are not going to be able to give them the time and attention they need.
Borders at the edge of the garden are usually fairly narrow; fences and walls at the back of a border may need thinking about.
Pergolas and arches are not so bad for accessibility, but dead-heading means work above your head and that entails the use of steps, which require a firm path or surface before you place yourself at risk on them.
The time demanded in maintaining roses is not great, it does not mean a number of hours or days a week, but it does mean a regular tour around, if only of a few minutes' duration, perhaps in the evenings, with secateurs in hand to snip or prune away faded flowers, and a puff or spray here and there as and when you find aphids or other pests.
Over the years, I have seen so many private gardens and advised so many gardeners on labour-saving tools and equipment, and what comes through loud and clear is that the biggest problem facing gardeners is that they are caught in the trap between growing all they would like to grow, doing all they want to do and having the lime to do it.
Too many take on too much, for the time they can or will devote.
This leads directly to a situation that you should avoid.
All too often, shrubs, including roses, conifers and the like, are planted not for their intrinsic beauty, not for an attractive combination of colour, but because they do not need so much looking after as plants that have to be lifted before the frost, and replanted fresh each year'.
We might almost call it ‘convenience gardening’; whatever takes the least time and trouble.
The times I have heard: ‘We want it to look  nice, mind you, but not take a lot of time.
What about a few roses?’
This is hardly the best of reasons for planting, and not the right attitude.
If you just plonk roses in the ground and leave them to get on with it, they will probably get by somehow and you will get some blooms for a season or two, but if you are to get the very best out of them, roses most definitely should not be chosen, planted and forgotten about.
One point that is appropriate to bear in mind at this juncture, and that is often overlooked, is the difficulty, because of their nature, of mixing H.T.s and Floribundas with other plants.
Somehow they just do not look right and blend.
Old roses do mix much better, the Albas, Centifolias, Bourbons and Gallicas are happy in a mixed throng, but the H.T.s and H.T.-type Floribundas are more formal in carriage, and need a more formal setting.
Underplanting is another association with other plants that has its problems.
I do not think that there can be any combination that we did not try during my time in the parks, and the only thing that did not look positively awful were the short growing, pale, less intense blues of violas and lobelia under pink and red roses — other colours and growing heights were invariably a tasteless rag-bag.
Even these plants are difficult, because there is the practical problem of keeping the soil surface hoed loose and open with underplanting in position, and mulching becomes quite impossible.
By all means try underplanting if you prefer, but without question bulbs of any kind should not be grown under roses.
For one thing, they do not look right; for another, the decaying foliage makes an awful untidy mess.
Furthermore, liking the bulbs for dividing is bound to disturb the roots of the roses, which is just about the worst thing you can do to them.
This is an appropriate place, perhaps, for a few words about the use of roses for hedging and screening.
No doubt the thorns are a very useful asset in providing a child and dog barrier, but there are a few points to bear in mind.
First, make sure that a barrier — or any other rose for that matter — is entirely within the confines of your own boundary.
Growth that overhangs a pavement, footpath or anywhere to which the public have access renders you liable for damage or hurt to passers by.
Secondly, the impression created by some advertisers, invariably at one end of the quality table, of a clipped formal hedge covered in double blooms, is an improbable exaggeration, if not a downright falsehood.
Do not be taken in!
There was a practice at one time — no doubt it still continues in certain quarters — of collecting the rootstocks in which implanted buds had failed, bundling them up and selling them off as hedging.
These are no good for trying to implant a second time because the wood is a year older and much less likely to ‘take’.
As at any other self-respecting nursery, we always gathered ours up and burned them — but not these lads.
If there is a bob or two to be made, old rootstocks may be sold as ‘hedging roses’ with a bit of brash advertising — it does not matter if the illustration is nothing like the truth, the media do not know any better — and somebody will buy them, they always do.
True enough, the stock species Rosa rugosa is often used for hedging, but if that is the hedge you want, you will do much better to buy plants raised for the purpose.
There are much better ways of creating a rose hedge anyway; ramblers on a low supporting frame provide a more impassable barrier, with better blooms than R. rugosa's singles.
So much for some of the more salient principles in deciding what you would like to grow, what you have the space for, and what you are letting yourself in for in terms of looking after them.
Let's bear them in mind while we turn to the next step in choosing.
Quite often, this begins with looking at the enticing pictures in the catalogues.
Most catalogues begin, usually with some proud and flamboyant phraseology, by describing the new varieties being introduced for the first time, and invariably, because they are the kinds that get most of the breeders' attentions, these will be H.T.s and Floribundas.
However, I must warn you to be on your guard and to approach the picture gallery with caution.
An enormous amount of skill, equipment, patience, money and sheer luck goes into the breeding of new varieties, and if it has become customary to have to be seen to be introducing six, eight, ten, a dozen or whatever new varieties every year in order to be regarded as one of the top flight nurseries, then that is what they have to do — and who can blame them for wanting to recoup their investment by selling all they can?
There is no doubt also that there is a peculiar element of ‘one-upmanship’ among many gardeners in being able to boast of having the very latest rose in their gardens.
You may be affluent enough, in space as well as money, to be able to indulge in such fancies — and run the great risk of finding, in a year or two, that your early triumph turns to sad disappointment.
One of the most frequent questions I have been asked about roses  goes something like this: ‘I bought some of the variety x when it was first exhibited at Chelsea and the other shows.
It was hailed as a new sensation and we thought so too.
Now we have lost one and want to replace it but the nursery do not grow it any more, and we cannot find one that does.’
(See question 3 on page 145 for the solution to this.)
The most important duty that I owe you, the reader, is that I be absolutely honest and candid, and therefore, although I have no doubt that the growers will not like me for saying so, I suggest that unless you aspire to the show bench, or base your gardening on taking chances, you should not heed the blandishments but look instead for the shortcomings.
There are so many things that can go wrong.
The new show-stopper may look a million dollars on the show bench and the exhibition stand, but be of little value in your garden.
The prima donna admired by the crowds in the marquee may give up outside in the rain — like the glamorous film star whose bikini must never be allowed to get wet!
The advice is often given to see roses at the shows, and make your selection there.
There's no doubt, of course, the big shows like Chelsea, Harrogate and Shrewsbury are evidence of the remarkable skill and ingenuity of our rose breeders and growers in producing something new, and assorted tribes of writers, scribes and newspaper correspondents vie with each other to find extravagant superlatives to describe them — but it is all delusion.
Fed, pampered, cosseted, all ‘psyched up’ for show day, what is the show-stopper like a day or two later?
Does the exquisite bud become a floppy washed-out rag?
Does the colour fade?
Does dew or rain reduce it to a sodden pulpy mass?
How many plants were needed to furnish the buds for the exhibition vase?
Is it mean and sparing with its flowers?
Is it soft and prey to pest and disease?
Be warned: time is a great leveller and it takes a few seasons in the hard world outside the show marquee for a new rose to find its true level.
Five years can change opinions; ten years can erase memories.
In all honesty, the history of commercial rose-growing is a trail of trumpet-blowing and publicity, so often followed by silence as the subjects ran out of steam and fell by the wayside.
It is difficult to find out about such things; catalogues need to be read between the lines and the shows are full of razzmatazz.
Of course— and especially when you only want a single rose to fill a gap — it is all very easy to succumb to the highly coloured and neatly packaged entreaties to impulse buying, conspicuously displayed in supermarkets, DIY garden  centres, and even the local street market.
You will find precious little information there — they stock quick-selling commodities, not the kind of roses we are looking for.
The basic principles in deciding what to grow remain unchanged whether one is growing one, a hundred, or a thousand.
The only difference is that, the fewer roses you have space for, the more certain you have to be that the varieties you grow give the greatest possible pleasure, for the longest possible period and with the most resistance against pest and disease.
Small gardens should not carry passengers or invalids with a limp.
Naturally, we look for deportment and how the flowers are carried, for colour and splendour, for abundance, for the sweet scents and the period over which the bloom is carried, and for resistance to rain, pest and disease.
The rose fulfils these desirables more than any other flower, but we should not deceive ourselves.
Of the vast multitude of varieties that are available, old and new, and despite the astonishing achievements of the modern breeders and growers, not many varieties match up to all or even most of the desirable specifications, and it is difficult, nay, impossible to name one that does not have some fault somewhere.
For this reason, instead of joining in the stampede for the latest and newest, I suggest it would be more prudent to wait for a year or two to see if the strawberry blonde holds her place as a glamour queen, or in reality is a blowzy old dame hobbling into the has-beens in the back row of the chorus, where she will find plenty to keep her company.
Let's turn to practicalities.
It is clear that we should not be led astray by glamorous starlets.
By all means we may admire, but it is prudent not to judge by what we see at the shows.
We should read the catalogue descriptions with circumspection — what they do not say is invariably more important than what they do — and we need to be more guarded when reading articles by newspaper reporters whose effusions are often more flamboyant than they should be.
The best and most reliable way to get good information — there is no comparison — is to go and see roses actually growing.
It is rather like something that I used to do as a young groundsman coming up through the ranks, when I applied for vacant jobs all over the place, the bigger and more prestigious the place the better, and more often than not without the slightest intention of taking the job if it had been offered!
Apart from the invaluable experience thus acquired of conducting oneself at interviews, I was able to walk over grounds and sporting venues and to compare the standards with my own at home.
Without being in the least conceited about it, I soon was able to judge whether my cricket square was as good as some county grounds, whether my soccer and rugby pitches compared to professional clubs, and whether my tennis courts were as good as the big venues seen on TV.
That was the best way to find out how good you were at your job, whether you could regard yourself as being on a par with the best — or still had a lot to learn.
I learned a vast amount!
I wasn't the only one to do this.
Other young fellows were doing the same thing; we used to meet and recognize each other and compare notes — and pretty scathing we were at times with what we found.
If that was revealing in its way, then it is just as revealing to see roses actually growing, and not just read what others say about them.
Without a doubt, if you can make the journey from where you live, the very best thing to do is to visit the Trial Grounds of the National Rose Society at St Albans, Herts,— the Mecca of the rose — where you will be able to get as much information as you want, and straight answers from knowledgeable staff.
If St Albans is beyond your reach, perhaps you are better positioned for the gardens of the Royal Horticultural Society at Wisley in Surrey, or those of the Northern Horticultural Society at Harlow Car, Harrogate, in Yorkshire.
The respective national capitals each have rose gardens that are well worth visiting: Regent's Park in London, Saughton Park in Edinburgh, and Roath Park in Cardiff.
You would be wise to phone ahead, especially if you are coming a long way, to check opening times because they vary from time to time.
Another avenue of enjoyable information-seeking — sadly, not as well-known and patronized as it deserves to be — is the programme of private gardens opened in aid of various charities like the Gardeners' Benevolent Fund, from whom you can obtain a county-by-county week-by-week guide giving details of location, times of opening and points of interest.
Many of these have roses in mature growth, and this is where you not only see potential sizes but can also get ideas of settings of other roses or other plants that you can copy in your garden.
This is  thoroughly enjoyable and could not be more informative.
Always carry a notebook with you!
Finally, there are the several nurseries which specialize in roses — indeed, some grow nothing else — and which welcome visitors to walk around the pads and fields to look at what they are buying.
In the reference section on pages 264–5 is a list from which you may be able to find one or more near you.
They are given in alphabetical order, and from my own experience I know them to be absolutely reliable.
In fact, I knew the principals of all these nurseries personally, and enjoyed a mutual respect with them.
Of course, there are many more very good rose growers around the country, some relatively new on the scene, just as many old and respected names have moved aside for one reason and another.
I cannot get around now as I was once able to for my newspapers — but I stick to my policy now, as then, of wanting to see and size up would-be advertisers beforehand, so beg the pardon of the newcomers not included in my list.
Even if you cannot reach any gardens or nurseries to see roses in action and have to rely on catalogues and lists, there is a great deal of enjoyment to be derived from weighing up the pros and cons and in the anticipation of the pleasures to come, just like choosing a holiday from the glossy brochures.
The parameters one will use to decide where to place an order are somewhat similar to choosing which holiday and which brochure.
Essentially, you will be looking for the fullest possible information, not only about how fantastic the colour is, but about all the other factors we have been discussing, and how candid are the comments on the shortcomings.
A good rose-grower is proud of what he grows and what he sells.
He earns the right kind of reputation not by extravagant claims and dressing-up, but by reliability, interest in and service to his customers.
Any fool can go out, ring a bell, shout his head off, and get some new customers, but will he keep them in the future?
Will they come again?
And will the repeat business keep the nursery going for many, many years?
That is the acid test.
And then comes the hard work as, like packing your holiday case, you have to whittle down all that you would like to take — or in our case, grow — to the short list.
All the things you ‘ought’ to take on holiday — just in case it turns chilly, rains, is too hot, or whatever else — have to be reduced by sheer practicality, when forced to it, of deciding what you can possibly do without and leave behind.
For most gardeners, a garden is like a pint pot — you cannot get a quart into it.
Which catalogue helps you most in this respect?
There is no better way to compare them.
One way or another, you place your order, but the wise gardener does not just sit and wait for it to come.
He gets ready to receive it, and we will discuss this most important aspect in the next chapter.
However, before that, we have to deal with an aspect of buying roses that we have scarcely mentioned yet: ‘container grown’ plants at garden centres.
There are garden centres — and for the most part, they  will be attached to nurseries where the plants are propagated and grown, not just bought in wholesale — where ‘container grown’ really does mean grown in a container, and not potted up a few days beforehand.
This is not to disparage growing in containers.
It has several benefits, such as being able to slot a ready-growing plant into a gap to replace a loss or, on a bigger scale, plant up an entire bed, in bloom, overnight!
The entire 1951 Festival of Britain on the South Bank was organized and dependent upon container-grown plants, shrubs, even trees 30ft (9m) and more high — I was on the preparation end of all that!
But ‘container grown’ means planted, established, growing away and capable of being planted in the open ground without root disturbance and without check.
It does not mean — what it all too often has become — an aid to  impulse buying, ‘immediate’ gardening, and the idea that ‘if we lift them and pot them up instead of leaving them in the ground, we can sell them in a couple of weeks time as ‘container grown’’.
Because of the very obvious advantages of growing in containers the practice, in far too many hands, has become a circus.
I am anxious that no reader of this book becomes a clown.
If, for whatever justifiable reason, you consider buying a container-grown rose, or any other plant for that matter, turn it on its side, and look for fresh root action around the drainage holes.
If it is in a whalehide pot, you will be able to plant the root ball and the pot because this will rot, without disturbing the root.
If it is in a smooth plastic pot, and there is insufficient root coming through to prevent movement (i.e. the plant is pot bound), it should be possible to slide the pot away just enough to see if the root ball is held intact by root action.
If it is not, and the root ball crumbles, you are not going to be able to plant it in the ground without disturbing the roots.
It was potted up too recently, so reject it.
If the nursery or garden centre do not like the idea of you looking, walk out and go somewhere else.
The best way to buy roses is still ‘bare root’.
They will be sent to you during the dormant season, and assuming that you have bought some in this way, we will now turn our attention to our preparations to welcome them.
Preparation Before Planting
As soon as your order is placed, you will have to give some thought to the welcome your plants will receive.
Catalogues come out early — you may have ordered as early as the Chelsea Flower Show in May — and although you know that the plants will not arrive before the back end of October at the earliest, more likely into November, you will have to plan where the temporary reception centre will be placed.
You are going to need an area about a yard (metre) wide, for as long as you need to accommodate the plants — and that you will be able to judge as you read on.
Whether you will be able to do the job in a vacant spot in the vegetable plot, at the back of a border or wherever, a suitable area has to be earmarked and reserved so that it can be empty and vacant from the second half of September on.
You can have no idea at all what the weather will be like when the plants arrive: it could be wet and the soil like a quagmire, it could be too dry, or frozen hard, and planting quite out of the question.
Good nurserymen watch the weather forecasts, and do not despatch when cold weather is imminent.
However, like a bad-tempered dog, the weather can turn very quickly, and whatever the weather charts show, by the end of October you could have frost and a covering of snow.
The better nurserymen pride themselves on their packing, so much so that they often advise you to leave the plants in the packing when planting is delayed, and to lay them up in a cool garage or shed.
That probably is the best procedure if you don't prepare properly, in the time-honoured way, by ‘heeling in’.
At the end of September, dig out a trench two spits wide (the width of two spades) and pile the soil in a ridge on one side.
Trench and ridge  will occupy about a yard or a little more at this stage; you will judge the length.
Dump alongside a barrowload of compost, peat or fallen leaves or, failing that, old newspapers or straw.
If you can lay your hands on some old sacking or cardboard cartons, so much the better.
When the order arrives, unpack it carefully and check the contents against your order and the condition of the plants.
If the order is wrong, or if the plants appear badly dried, shrivelled, broken or in similar bad condition, now is the time to say so, and not weeks later, when they are not growing well or are dead, as so many complainants do!
It is unlikely at this time of year, and so soon after lifting, but if the plants do show signs of dryness and shrivelling, immerse them in water as completely as possible before heeling in.
Quite often, you will find that bush and shrub roses have been cut back to maybe half their height in order to reduce the overall size so that they fit into the sack or bag — perhaps to get this through the postal system.
This is usually done by a guillotine that cuts back a bundle of a dozen or so plants at a time, and it is not unusual to find the cut ends chopped and bruised rather roughly.
Use your sharp secateurs to trim such stems to the first next bud, as if you were pruning, where the wound will heal quickly.
Don't shorten the stems, just tidy them to a clean cut, and do the same with any broken roots.
Make sure that the identity labels are securely attached, and take them out to the heeling-in trench.
Bush and shrub roses you can lay with roots in the trench and the top growth laid against the soil ridge, standards will probably need a third spit out so that they can lie supported and not blown around and damaged.
Once the plants are laid in the trench, turn the next spit of earth loosely over the roots.
Keep it loose, you are not planting yet; the purpose is simply to hold the bushes steady, to protect the roots from drying out and keep them in an environment that will encourage them to begin making new growth.
If they have to stay in the trench long enough for new roots to develop, they are not so likely to be damaged if you lift them from loose, friable soil.
Throw over a covering of compost, peat, leaves or newspaper, wrap with sacking or cartons, and hardy plants will then be happy enough, for a few weeks if need be.
Planting, the make-or-break job, follows as soon as conditions allow, but there is still a lot of preparation that should have been completed beforehand.
By and large, planting roses will be in one of two ways: either planting into fresh ground, a new collection perhaps, where they have not grown before, or you may be making a  replacement of an old worn-out plant, or where one has failed.
The very first and most important principle to bear in mind when planting a rose or any other shrub or tree is that this is the last opportunity you will have to do anything basic about the soil underneath, where the roots will have to work.
We can do a lot after planting, but in no way so fundamental as doing the job properly beforehand.
If the ground is vacant, and can be dug over, this is by far the best policy; the time and effort is worth it.
The usual advice is to prepare the ground by digging two spits deep, but we are rarely given an explanation why, and for that very reason, therefore, we do not see the correct way to do it.
It is hard work for most amateurs, using unaccustomed muscles, to double dig a whole plot, and although it undoubtedly improves fertility, the effort and perspiration always feels more justified when you understand why you are expending it — so here is the explanation.
The ability of soil to support plant life is an extraordinarily involved and technically complicated science, and although you do not have to become a scientist in order to grow roses well, you do need to use a lot of judgement in all sorts of situations.
In order to do that, you need to know what you are doing.
Soil is comprised of several component parts that combine and behave together in a most remarkable way.
The first component, the basic rock particle, can be large like sand and grit or microscopically small like the individual grains of clay, thereby imparting respectively much of the basic behavioural characteristics of different soil types: light and quickly draining, heavy, sticky and liable to waterlogging, or a happy medium in between.
Plants live with their roots in soil, which enables them to anchor themselves and stand upright.
Through their roots they absorb nutrients that have to be in water solution — so water is the second component.
Plant nutrients are derived in the most part from the decomposition of plant and animal remains, during which process they reach a peat-like structure that has remarkable powers of moisture absorption and retention, and at the same time has considerable influence on the physical texture and structure of the soil.
In the final stages of decomposition this once-living (organic) matter, the third component, becomes jelly-like and is then, and correctly not until then, called ‘humus’.
The decomposition process is the function of a whole myriad of microscopically small living creatures, bacteria, which must have  access to the fifth component, air.
All five component parts react with and are interdependent upon each other, so much so that all five behave as a single living entity.
Remove any one and the interdependence breaks down, and is no longer able to support plant life.
Generally, infertility does not come as a sudden cut-off point; rather it declines gradually, and when it is observed we have to look for the cause in the interdependence breakdown, and not just regard it as a shortage of one or other nutrients.
Fertility is not restored merely by putting down chemical plant nutrients or fertilizers, neither is one component more vital than any other.
Interdependence is interdependence of all components in a living working relationship.
Students are generally taught that soil consists of these five components, but actually, there are two more, the larger macroscopic animal life like earthworms, grubs, larvae and such creatures, and the living plants — but we need not get any more deeply involved.
just a point however, about ‘soil-less composts’— this is really a misnomer.
The term is used mainly for made up composts in which the rock particle is the missing component, usually to avoid the risk, despite sterilization, of introducing disease.
However, the basic structural principle remains, and the primary constituents are present: air, humus, bacteria and moisture.
To the extent that a soil fulfils this interdependent function, it is fertile, not so fertile, or not fertile at all.
To the thoughtful reader, it will be interesting — and sobering — at this point to interject an observation for your contemplation.
In some places, this living layer of fertility exists less than an inch (2.5cm) deep, in other places at a depth of several feet, but in relation to the overall dimensions of Earth, it is very, very thin.
Within this incredibly thin and fragile veneer lies the entire capacity of this planet to support land-based life forms as we know them, and that includes you and me.
Extraordinary as it may seem, it nevertheless is a fact that plants breathe through their roots, not in the same way as you and I with lungs, but the same chemical process of respiration goes on and, unless like seaweed and water lilies they are adapted to do so, plants can no more live in an airless waterlogged soil than you can live with your head under water.
Apart from other mechanical purposes like weed removal and the admixing of organic matter, the main purpose of digging is to greatly increase the air content and revitalize the bacteria.
Of course, if we do this two spits deep, so much deeper do we increase the potential for fertility.
However, all too often when two-spit digging is recommended, the point that is not made clear is that we should be thinking primarily about the needs of the plants that are to grow in the dug soil.
Compared with a lettuce, for example, our rose roots are going to work at a lower level, and at planting time are going to have to work and make fresh growth (become established) in that second spit region.
As a rule, and with regard to its proximity to the free atmosphere, air content and organic content derived from leaf and debris fall — and perhaps your cultivations, such as mulching — the top spit level is always more fertile than the spit under it.
It makes sense, therefore, if you are going to be a hero and dig a plot two spits deep, to know whether to ‘double dig’(reverse the spits) or to ‘bastard trench’(leaving them in the same position).
To ‘double dig’, dig a trench two spits deep and barrow the soil to the other end of the plot, keeping the spits apart.
Throw the next top spit into the trench bottom, and then the second bottom spit on top.
Work your way to the end of the plot — top spit into the bottom, bottom to the top — filling in the last trench with the barrowed soil.
To ‘bastard trench’, take out the top spit of the first trench and barrow it to the end of the digging area.
Instead of digging out and removing the bottom spit, simply fork it up, break it open and leave it where it is.
If you can fork in some compost, so much the better, but the bottom spit stays down, and the second row top spit goes over on top.
Work your way to the other end — the last trench is simply filled in with the barrowed top spit from the first row.
If you decide to dispense with a thorough dig through the whole plot and merely take out planting holes, at least try to follow the above principle: dig two spits deep, and reverse them with the more fertile top spit going down to root level.
Under the new planting, work in a good lump of compost, moist peat, or contents from a spent growbag; this will serve as a moisture-absorbent reservoir to guard against the arch enemy of new plantings: drying out.
Planting and Staking
Planting roses or other shrubs and trees, whether bare root or container grown, is a two-stage job if done in the best possible way, and an art in itself.
Dig a hole wide and deep enough to accommodate the root system without undue bending and fill it with water.
If you have time and can take a couple of days over the job, wait until the water has drained away, and fill the hole again.
Do this a day or two before planting, so that after one or two waterings, the soil under the planting position is thoroughly wet, with the moisture where it should be — deep under.
Lift the plants from the heeling-in trench very carefully.
Roses do not like root disturbance at the best of times, and any damage at this stage is another shock that they can well do without.
Trim any broken or damaged roots cleanly and, if you are planting a bush, hold it up and look at it carefully.
Visualize how it is going to fit in with its neighbours: the stems may be rough-trimmed, but you will prune them later in early spring, not now, and then the new growth will follow much the same line of the present branches.
Some budded bushes like roses can be a little lop-sided at the start, and tight packing in the nursery rows does not help.
Decide which side to ‘face to London’ for the best viewing position.
It may help to build a shallow cone of soil around which to spread the root system evenly.
Then spread a little soil covering, shake it through the roots, put on more soil, firm, and when there is sufficient covering for you to firm without damaging the roots, tread with me heel, not the sole, of your foot.
If the filling-in soil is a little moist, so that a moisture contact is  made with the wet soil underneath, there should be no need for further watering.
If the filling-in soil is dry, watering is needed only to make this contact, and no more.
The bulk of moisture should be underneath, which is why you filled the planting hold beforehand, so that root action is encouraged to work down to seek it and in so doing become established.
There has been much advice given in recent years to plant with the graft bud just at or below the soil surface.
The explanation is usually that the top variety — the scion — is encouraged to put out its own roots, and then you have two lots of root and a better plant.
To put it mildly, this is misguided and misleading nonsense.
Good roses obtained from a good grower are on reliable vigorous stocks which need no help from the ‘weak top half’.
Indeed, a good strong stock needs to be able to get rid of all it has to push into the scion, without any hindrance.
Any resistance or reluctance by the scion to take everything, perhaps because it is getting some of what it needs from its own roots, and the stock has to start looking for ways to get rid of the unused energy, and that means making its own top growth, which takes the form of suckers or ‘briars’.
The old practical experience is still the best advice: leave a good clear inch (2.5cm) or more between bud and soil when planting, and make quite sure it stays that way, especially when mulching later.
It is a good idea to lay a thin cane across the planting hole, as an indicator where the soil level is, and as you plant and firm, adjust the plant height accordingly.
Climbers, ramblers and larger growing shrub roses can be expected to grow away and quickly make more top growth early on than the bush types.
The demand for moisture at root level is therefore greater, and the pre-planting organic input and soaking needs to be more carefully attended to.
Planting of standards and standard weepers is basically the same as far as soil preparation is concerned — the essential difference being that the plants have to be staked, and staking is something that has to be done properly.
You will need to have your stake ready well before planting begins because it will have to be prepared properly if it is not to be a waste of time.
A stake is there to hold up the tree and not, as is so often seen, the other way round.
Furthermore, a stake has to be substantial enough and in good enough condition to prevent the tree from breaking its neck.
This can happen, and all too often does, in two ways.
Nine hundred and ninety-nine standards in every thousand are staked in a dangerous, albeit orthodox, manner — it is a wonder that losses are not much greater.
The normal procedure is to link a standard to a stake with the top tie just below the head of fanned out branches, and very close to the implanted bud or buds.
The sail effect of wind on the top foliage therefore concentrates stress at the top tie and in the vulnerable buds, which will be weak anyway for at least the first year or two.
There is no recovery; the loss is total.
The solution is to take the stake a foot (0.3m) or more higher and to loop branches to it so that the head cannot be turned over.
The extended stake can look rather unusual, especially for a while after pruning, but that is a small price to pay to ensure safety.
When you pay good money for a standard rose, you don't expose it to this kind of danger for the sake of short-lived appearances.
The long stake is ridiculed by the theory merchants, and no doubt will be so again, but when they have had the practical experience, as I have, of losing hundreds of trees through their necks breaking under the weight of an Easter snowstorm, they will learn the commonsense of long staking.
The second type of breakage occurs not at the top tie but near ground level, when the extra leverage imparted by wind on the long stem reveals the weak spot in a stake that has been allowed to rot and deteriorate.
The danger area is at ground level where wet soil and air meet, where rot sets in and where a wind-blown standard leans heavily on its ‘support’.
If the stake cannot take the strain and goes at the ground level weak spot, the plant stem has to bend sharply where it is trapped between its firmly-held root and the bottom tie.
The result is then a nasty looking and virtually impossible to repair greenstick fracture.
Where stakes are needed, preparation for planting therefore includes preparing stakes of sufficient length and strength, and protecting them against rotting.
A rose stem is not very thick, and it does not look very nice to use a stake so thick as to be out of proportion to the stem it is supporting.
Ash stakes 1¼ inches (3cm) square are best — they will be expensive, but cheaper softwood stakes are treacherous and a waste of money.
You will need each stake to be at least 2½ ft (0.75m) longer than the height of the standard from ground level to bud to give 18 inches (45cm) in the ground and another 12 inches (30cm) up into the head; a 5ft (1.5m) standard would therefore require a 7½ ft (2.3m) stake.
If you can find a stake that long at the garden centre, it will probably be painted green, with perhaps a black  painted end for the ground — don't be deceived.
Invariably, this is ordinary paint and not protection against rotting.
If you cannot find ash stakes, use square planed hardwood — usually beech — from a DIY centre.
Point one end and paint with Cuprinol green — make sure it is the green kind for garden use; the brown wood preservatives are very like creosote and can be harmful to plant life.
Paint the entire stake liberally, especially the ends where end grain is exposed.
Three days later, give the pointed end another coat along 2 ft (0.6m) of its length, to protect it to 6 inches (15cm) above ground level, and repeat again three days later so that there are three coats all told.
Standard weepers will be very much more ‘top-heavy’ and require a much more substantial stake.
Bearing in mind that it will be mostly hidden by the curtain that will fall around it, and that it may also have to support a wire umbrella frame, a 3 inch (7.5cm) diameter or square stake is not too big.
Protect it with Cuprinol green in the same way, similarly the timber of rustic arches and pergolas.
The section that will be in the ground definitely needs three coats of Cuprinol treatment, but if you don't particularly want the part of the stake among the foliage to look green, use clear Cuprinol or varnish.
Never, under any circumstances, use creosote.
Pillar rose plantings do pose a special problem, because they will grow so much taller and wider, and thus need very much bigger and stronger staking.
Bearing in mind the awful job involved in renewing or replacing the pillar stake, you can see the sense in putting up a concrete post, or at least a concrete spur to which a timber can be bolted.
Stakes protected in this way should have a reasonable life.
You will have to prepare them beforehand, of course, and have them ready for use before planting — plus the material to make the ties.
The one thing you do not do is to plant your tree and then start looking for something to use for ties, any more than you bash a stake in afterwards and damage the roots.
Preparation for planting means having everything ready to hand before you start the job.
I dislike plastic ties — and you will see why as we proceed.
Making tree ties properly is an art, and it needs practice to do it well.
You will need hessian sacking, soft string (called ‘fillis’) and thick ‘tarred string’, both of which you can obtain from the garden sundries store.
You will also need scissors, which are more convenient for this job than a knife.
A standard stem should be between the stake and the point from where you will normally view the tree, so that the stake is out of sight behind the stem.
Begin by offering up the tree to the hole, some root systems will be rather one-sided and you may need to adjust the hole accordingly.
If the standard is single budded, the bud should be on the side away from the stake, and therefore ‘facing to London’.
When a standard is double budded, these are usually on opposite sides, one an inch (2.5cm) or so above the other.
In this case, position the tree with the buds to the left and right, and the stake behind facing bare stem.
You can thus arrange the tree in two positions, so try to have most bloom-bearing wood towards the viewing point, and away from where the stake will pass into the top growth.
When you are happy with the exact planting attitude, mark the stake position in the planting hole and, using a crowbar or pointed pole, make a hole some 12 inches (30cm) deep into the hole bottom to receive the stake.
If you use the stake itself to make the hole, you could easily split it.
Drive the stake in and tread it firm.
With the stake firmed in the hole, hold the tree up with a simple string loop, and plant it just as you would for a bush — except that, without the bud to go by, you will have to look carefully for the soil ‘tide mark’ where it was growing in the nursery and finish off to that height, with the standard stem about 1½–2 inches (4–5cm) from the stake.
Again, you may find it helpful to lay a cane across the planting hole.
At this point, whatever you are planting, take a firm hold of your plant with a gloved hand and give a gentle but firm pull, as though pulling it up again!
If the plant lifts, you have not firmed enough and will have to do the job again.
Now for the ties, an aspect of planting and staking that is widely underrated.
Ties can be literally of make or break importance, and many a fine tree is scarred for life and ruined by carelessness and neglect, purely as a result of not doing this part of the job properly.
When I took my practical working examinations, making tree ties was worth a lot of marks and considered so vital that candidates who failed their tying failed tree planting, however well they did otherwise.
Harsh, you may think, but that was as it should be.
This is how to do it — and earn high marks!
If you value your trees, you will take pains to master this art.
It is worth it, believe me.
For a standard rose, cut a strip of hessian sacking about 3–4 inches (8–10cm) wide, and long enough to go round the plant stem twice.
(Other standards like fruit and ornamental trees will be thicker and the  sacking strip will need to be wider and the actual tie bigger, but the principle remains exactly the same.)
Fold the edges over 3/4 inch (2cm) top and bottom, so that you now have a double thickness 1½–2 inches (4–5cm) wide with a clean folded edge top and bottom.
Starting with an end between stem and stake, wrap the rose stem twice, snipping off the excess at the same point opposite the stake.
Tie the wrapping in position top and bottom with the soft fillis string.
This first collar is made as high as you can work, just below the buds or branches, and tied firmly so that the hessian is not loose, which can lead to twisting and rubbing.
Under the string will be four layers of sacking and this provides cushion enough for the stem to grow and swell without restriction until you remake the tie — in a year's time, at the most.
Now for the tie itself.
The purpose of a tie is not, as you might think, merely to hold a stem upright, but also to hold it firmly away from the stake and so avoid any possibility of chaffing or rubbing.
As we proceed with making a tie, the purpose of it will become apparent — as well as the reason why plastic straps, loops of string and, worst of all, wire loops, do not do the job and can be so dangerous.
Figure 5.
A properly made tie keeps your standard rose safely secured to, but not rubbing against, the stake.
Ties should be inspected regularly and renewed annually, so as not to constrict the stem.
Make a hitch with the tarred string around the stake adjacent to the top of the sacking collar, lock knot it between stake and stem, and leave 3–4 inches (8–10cm) hanging (you will need this for tying off at the end).
Use a piece of wood — or, better, a block of polystyrene — 1½–2 inches (4–5cm) thick, held between stake and stem as a distance piece.
Wrap the string around four or five times, with the loose end dangling down in between.
As you pass round the plant stem for the last time, turn the cord through between stem and stake and wrap the turns, pulling the cord tight to form a firm collar as shown in Figure 5.
Finish off by tying with the hanging loose end, cut away the surplus, and tuck it up into the collar out of sight to leave a neat and tidy tie.
Remove the distance piece — the softer polystyrene block is easier to remove without damaging the stem than a harder wooden block.
It will take a little practice to get right, but a tie made properly and firmly in this way will ‘feel’ right, and it will at once be clear how and why this method does a job that other methods and materials do not do.
Make another tie about 6–9 inches (15–23cm) from ground level.
Two ties may be enough for a 3ft (0.9m) stem, a 4 or 5ft (1.2 or 1.5m) stem will require three, and maybe even a fourth if you also need to pull in a bent stem so that it can be held straight to grow out of its misshapen state gradually.
Loop in top growth using the fillis soft string, to prevent the head swaying about, check over for any broken or split damage and, finally, make quite sure that the identity label is legible and attached securely.
No pruning is done at this stage.
Never mind what you read and hear to the contrary; your plants have had quite enough shock as it is without adding to it.
Give them time to settle, make new roots and get established.
Spring, when the swelling buds indicate movement and rising sap, is quite soon enough to direct their energies by pruning — and that is the area to which we will now direct our energies!
Pruning
If there is one aspect of growing roses that creates a degree of bewilderment — if not actual fear — in the minds of gardeners, it is pruning.
The reason, quite simply, is that pruning is little understood — again that word why .
Understand what it is we are trying to achieve by cutting off a lot of top growth, and the where, when and how of it lose much of the mystery.
As always, we have to be prepared beforehand, and as we cannot start the job without tools, this is the place for a few dos and don'ts.
For a long time the professionals had a preference for a pruning knife over secateurs.
To what extent this was a natural conservatism and reluctance to use a different method of cutting, or a preference for the clean cut of a knife in skilled hands over the often not so clean cut of earlier designs of secateurs, or a bit of both, I'm not so sure.
However, ‘skilled hands’ were the operative words, and because most amateurs found secateurs easier to handle and use, whether they were good, clean, bad, or indifferent in the cut, secateurs — often of the most inexpensive and dubious quality — have always been the amateurs' cutting tool.
Modern secateurs are now so good, however, that professional opposition to them has virtually disappeared, and it is a rare sight indeed to see a knifesman carefully honing the curved blade with his special fine-grained carborundum stone, invariably kept in an oilskin tobacco pouch in his apron pocket.
That is another old skill that has gone!
Without a doubt, the Rolls Royce of secateurs (incidentally, not ‘a pair of secateurs’) are those manufactured by Felco in Switzerland, and readily available in Britain.
The crème de la crème of their range  also solves the problem of blistered hands by removing the cause of blisters — sliding friction between skin layers under frequent and repeated pressure — through the design of a revolving handle, and is used, I think it is fair to say, by professional rose-growers and other nurserymen more than any other.
They are rather expensive, but the best never comes cheap, no matter what it is.
Less expensive, but very good and popular among amateur ranks, is the range of secateurs produced by Wilkinson Sword.
Both they and Felco achieve their cut by curved blades that slice with a scimitar-like action.
Less expensive still, is the ‘rolling cut’ action of a blade against a broad anvil — the Rolcut is the best-known example.
This cutting blade has to be kept sharp to perform its job properly without undue pressure in the hand, and is therefore made from a very hard steel — so hard in fact, that it can be brittle when subjected to a common form of misuse: the correct action with all secateurs is a firm steady squeeze, with no wrenching and definitely no twisting, which can cause the blades to break.
Unless you are snipping soft growth where there is little space between stems you wish to prune and those that you do not wish to harm, always cut with the object wood well back in the blades to reduce stressing the blades and their pivot.
If this does not cut cleanly, never use excessive force — you are using the wrong tool.
Put down the secateurs, and use long-handled pruning loppers — the type made by Wilkinson Sword are as essential to rose-growers as secateurs.
While on the subject of secateurs, if you cannot rise to the cost of the revolving handle type, at least make sure that the handles are polished smooth.
Keep a little box of french chalk or talc handy to keep your hands ‘lubricated’ so that the skin slides as easily as possible over the handles, and so reduces the likelihood of friction.
To meet this problem, most makes have polished smooth plastic handles — unlike one well-known manufacturer who, for many years and until only relatively recently, proudly proclaimed the brand name by imprinting it deeply all over the handles — which gave the user a good ‘grip’, but therefore virtually ensured sore, blistered hands whenever there was much work to be done
Sometimes, we have to deal with very old hard and thick wood that taxes the strength of even the loppers.
Usually, such wood will already be redundant and dead, and a saw is needed.
The ‘pruning saw’ normally sold for such work has teeth on two edges and, used in tight positions where it is invariably needed, great care and patience is  essential to avoid the back edge causing damage to stems and growth that should not be harmed.
You will find it very much safer to use instead the thin blade known as a ‘key-hole saw’ or, as it is called in the form in which the blade passes into the handle and is gripped by a screw, a ‘pad saw’.
These blades are very thin, and although the metal is often a little softer to allow for bending without a dangerous snap, they therefore bend that much more easily and should be used carefully.
Unless you are forced to do so, never use a saw on live green wood — the roughly cut surface it leaves is not conducive to healing — and you definitely will need a pruning knife to pare the surface clean and smooth.
If you have to use a knife anywhere in the garden, and for whatever purpose, keep it sharp, very sharp.
A blunt knife is a dangerous knife, because you then have to use excessive pressure, which makes a slip more likely, and then you will be lucky to avoid hurt and damage.
On the whole, good secateurs are safer and cleaner for your roses, as well as yourself.
They are one of your most important tools, so always keep them clean, sharp and oiled, and use them with care.
Finally, the rose-grower's tools will include a pair of leather gloves — not those flimsy rubber gloves used for washing up.
They will have to stop thorns getting through to your skin — otherwise you had better also equip yourself with a fine needle, tweezers, and a strong light!
Right!
You are ready to prune: how and when do you do it?
There is an old adage which runs: ‘If you don't know why you are pruning, don't prune’.
It is certainly true that more roses are ruined by incorrect or purposeless cutting than any other cause.
The basic purposes of pruning are two-fold: first, to divert and concentrate sap flow and energy into the buds and shoots that will grow in the direction we want, to promote or provoke new growth from dormant buds, and to better utilize energy by removing growth that has borne bloom, will not bear more, and cannot make worthwhile contribution to the plant's processes; and secondly, surgically to remove dead, diseased and infected wood.
Left to their own devices, most roses tend to develop new growth into which they direct their sap and energy, bear bloom, and which then — as it becomes old and tired — gradually either becomes starved, by-passed, neglected and finally aborted as the plant constantly turns its attention to new growth, or it develops a barky exterior layer as it settles down to becoming no more than a main road communicating between the raw material goods received from the warehouse in the  soil and the production factory upstairs — quite often, a very long way upstairs.
In the natural course, a lot of the energy of the rose is directed into new growth — after all, the plant's continued and future existence depends upon it — but not all.
The older growth of roses becomes by-passed, deprived and finally starved to the point of die-back only slowly; the transition is gradual, which means that some not inconsiderable part of the plant's energy is wasted in trying to sustain growth that can no longer produce the best bloom.
The primary purpose of pruning, therefore, is to prevent this situation and anticipate the plant's own eventual rejection or abortion of its aged growth by hastening its removal, and utilizing the energy to better advantage, diverting it into the production of new growth, shoots, stems and blooms.
In the case of bush and shrub types, this will ideally be from the base of the plant to avoid the main road from becoming any longer than it need be, and to preserve and constrain the overall size of the bush.
Some species and types bear the best bloom on the current year's growth, others on the previous year's wood, yet others on short side shoots of current growth from last year's main stems.
Some have a marked reluctance to break out new growth from the base, and are more ready to sprout shoots from growth high up.
Some varieties, even compared with close relatives in the same group or type, are much more vigorous than others.
Clearly, you have to know about the strengths, tendencies and habits of a plant before we even open the secateurs, or you could be cutting away the best bloom-bearing wood!
It is absolutely essential, therefore, that each plant carries a durable and legible identity label, perhaps also a code or indication as to the pruning degree and method.
Failing that, you must at least keep a detailed plan or map of your rose garden with such information.
If we may define the purpose of pruning as stimulating, promoting, maintaining, directing and prolonging the vitality of the rose, it becomes evident that we can segregate a great many principles, dos and don'ts into those that are general and applicable to all roses, and those that are specific to particular species, types and varieties.
We have already been using a few special words, and as we shall be using several more, let's define the meaning of some words and phrases connected with pruning.
The following are not in alphabetical or order of importance, but of convenience so that we may keep our discussion in an interesting and logical sequence.
Definition of terms
New wood means stems and branches of the current year's growth.
Most types, including H.Ts and Floribundas, develop their flowers on this new wood — in other words, new shoots and stems form and bear bloom during the one season.
Old wood means a stem or branch of the previous year's growth, or earlier.
Thus, by this definition, and for pruning purposes, late produced growth in autumn will have become ‘old’ as distinct from ‘new’by the following spring, when it is scarcely six months old!
Ramblers and many of the climbers flower on year-old wood: new stems grow out to their full length one year — and in the more vigorous kinds, this may be very long indeed — and then bear bloom the following year.
Figure 6.
The eye forms in the angle between leaf and stem.
The eye is the infantile, incipient and sometimes scarcely discernible growth bud that forms in the axil or angle of a leaf where it is attached to a stem.
Usually the word is applied at the immature stage before the eye swells with rising sap, often changing colour a little— which helps to identify it on a leafless stem.
Bud is also applied to a more developed eye as above, especially when one is implanted in a stem in the process of ‘budding’.
Of course, we also use ‘bud’ to describe an unopened bloom.
Figure 7.
The eye grows out from the stem to become a bud.
Budding is the process by which an eye or bud is inserted in a slit made in the bark surface layer of another, usually more vigorous, type (see also Chapter 9 on propagation).
Grafting is a similar process to budding, but not often used with roses.
Instead of inserting an eye as in budding, the shoot tip of a host plant is removed and replaced with that of another.
A scion is the growth that arises from an implanted bud or graft, whereas the stock — sometimes referred to as the root- stock — is the host plant that receives the bud or graft, with its own top growth removed so that its sap and energies are made to support the new guest.
A leader is a main or central stem that extends and grows along its own line of growth.
This may be vertical as in a typical tree, or horizontal as in a trailing or rambling plant.
Lateral is the word given to a shoot, also called a side-shoot , that arises sideways from a leader.
Invariably, this is an axillary shoot.
A sucker is a stem growth arising either from a previously dormant eye in the stem or the root-stock, or from the healing tissue (callus ) that follows a wound and damage to stem or root, and they occur in many plants, not only roses.
Sucker top growth is often called briar in the case of roses, after the name by which the wild rose was known, and following the old practice of using rooted briar stems dug out of hedgerows for budding and grafting — at one time this was one of the chief occupations of gypsies, who would ‘hawk’ them by the bundle around less reputable nurseries.
Briar growth is easily recognized by the different foliage, usually lighter in colour, and with seven or more leaflets to each compound leaf.
Scion varieties are normally darker with leaves of only three or five leaflets, but this is not absolutely the case.
In some parts of the country spur and snag can mean the same thing, and in others have quite different meanings — but they are still caused by the same thing: bad pruning.
A spur, sometimes inappropriately called a snag, is the result of either a breakage not being cleaned back properly to an eye or growth bud, or of pruning too far above a bud — a common case is cutting a bloom, and not paying attention to what is left behind on the plant.
When a stem is cut midway between nodes, there is nothing the plant can do with the stem part above the last growth or eye, and so it dies back.
In most cases, the stem simply withers back to the first node, and remains as an unsightly brown spur.
It is then dead tissue, and open to attack by coral spot fungus.
However, the withering or die-back can run back  beyond the node before the plant is able to form a self protective barrier of special cells, and keep on running, even into the main stem, and obviously cause serious trouble.
This is most likely to occur in weak sappy growth that has grown fairly recently, like a flower stem, and where leaves on that stem have not yet had time to make the carbohydrates and store the energy in the storage cells of the node.
With insufficient resources stored ready to hand, healing tissue, callus, cannot be formed quickly enough at the exposed cut, which remains wide open to infection.
Figure 8.
Pruning faults can be easily identified.
(a)
This ragged cut, more of a tear, is too far above the node, and is certain to cause unsightly die-back.
(b)
This stem has been cut at too sharp an angle, and too close to the bud.
(c)
Here the cut slopes towards instead of away from the bud.
(d)
A flat and internodal cut won't encourage bud growth but will cause die-back.
(e)
A correct cut, properly angled, just above the bud.
Like a wound in your own flesh, a clean cut heals quickly, but a jagged, ragged, bruised gash can take a long time to heel and is open to infection all that time.
Whether it is a spur of useless stem which does not, cannot, heal quickly, or a bad cut from blunt secateurs, disease spores are ever ready to accept the invitation of a door carelessly left open.
Node is the name given to the swollen area of the stem at the base of each leaf created by the special cells which store carbohydrate energy elaborated during daylight by the green leaf.
For the most part, a node is a staging post area, collecting energy during daylight, and passing it on to other parts of the plant during darkness, when the elaboration stops, and there is not so much traffic on the stem main road.
It does not all go, however; there is always some energy left in store for emergencies like leaf fall or breakage that needs sealing with callus  no fools, these plants!-and it is this stored energy in the node that is utilized to form firstly healing callus tissue, and then ‘adventitious’ tissue, such as roots when we make cuttings with stem growth above a node, or growth buds when the cut is above the node and its attendant eye.
Internode and internodal simply relate to the stem area between nodes and where the energy storage is minimal or absent.
General Principles
Always, and without fail, remove dead, diseased and ailing wood, and spindly, feeble growth.
Whatever other pruning is done or not done, this first principle is obligatory — even when the catalogues and reference books state ‘no pruning needed’.
Always make cuts clean and smooth with no ragged, broken edges to the cut, or slivers of stem left exposed.
Always cut back to clean, healthy wood, with no discolouration or other sign of disease.
Healthy, clean wood can heal — sometimes you may be trying to get ahead of spreading disease as it works its way into a plant, and pruning to discoloured, infected wood or leaving bruised, sawn and anything other than clean cuts only causes more trouble.
Always make cuts at a slightly sloping angle — as shown in the sketch, and never at an angle that would allow rain, dew, and heavy moisture to lie on the open cut.
Always make a cut just above a bud or eye where the exposed surface is near the nodal storage cells and will quickly form healing callus, and where the growth bud will receive the diverted energy.
Never leave a snag or spur.
Always remove suckers and briars thoroughly and completely.
They have two sources of origin, above and below ground level.
Briar shoots on standard stems and from the base of bushes should be rubbed off while still juvenile and ‘finger and thumb’ fragile.
Don't leave them until they are so developed and tough that they will not easily pull away and have to be cut; this is merely pruning and you will thereby ensure that several adventitious shoots will grow to replace the one being removed.
Stem growth originating from the root-stock below ground can be a problem because, by the  time these shoots push their way up through the soil and show out, they are well advanced and reluctant to ‘let go’— gloves are essential.
Clear the soil down to the point of origin, take a firm hold and wrench the growth away — never cut, no matter how resistant it is.
Occasionally, you will meet a brute that refuses to pull away, or can even break or lift the root.
Don't struggle: take a grip with pincers or pliers and remove the sucker as though pulling out a nail.
Unless you are growing a rose specifically for the hips, always remove spent blooms — or the entire truss in the case of cluster-flowering types — a job called dead-heading.
This is to avoid the plant needlessly spending energy on making seed.
Even if you want the hips, never let a rose take on this effort until it is well established — three years old at least.
Furthermore, especially when blooms are double or have many petals, it is quite likely that spent blooms will collapse into a rain-soaked soggy mess that quickly becomes a haven a breeding ground for mildew.
This fungus is problem enough without encouraging it.
Always, when dead-heading or taking flowers as cut bloom, observe the above principle of cutting or cleaning back to just above a node.
Casually snipping off ‘a nice bloom here, and a nice bloom there’ may be very enjoyable, but unthinkingly can leave an internodal spur.
Always clear up fallen material.
Dead-heading climbers and ramblers can often be a massive job involving step ladders to reach up to pergolas, arches and walls, and the larger shrub types can present the same problem.
If you have much of this kind of work to contend with, you may well find it worthwhile to invest in a ‘pole pruner’.
This is literally secateurs on the end of a pole 6ft (2m) long or more which enables you to reach up, with your feet safely and firmly on the ground.
The main problem then, inevitably when cutting at this distance from your eyes, is to make pruning cuts as clean and precise as when the secateurs are actually in your hand.
It is generally much easier simply to let cut material fall with this kind of work, but remember that clearing up every scrap afterwards is just as important as cutting it off in the first place.
Old leaves, twigs and bits and pieces left lying about are the ideal propagating material and position for mildew, black spot, coral spot and all manner of troubles.
Always remove rose prunings, leaves, blooms and other bits to the fire and not to the compost heap.
Even if you are confident of your  ability to manage a compost heap so that it becomes hot enough to cleanse itself of disease spores, there remains the risk of the subsequent compost matter containing thorns which are extremely resistant to decomposition.
Handling such compost is then dangerous, because any wound in your fingers and hands, a splinter perhaps, has to be a dirty wound.
So much then for what may be regarded as general principles, applicable to all.
It is when we come to the particular that you have to use your own personal judgement, opinion, interpretation of what you observe and experience.
You will be concerned with what may be called the degree of pruning: do you prune hard, ruthlessly to ground level, or not so drastically?
When do you prune?
Just as many experts advocate autumn pruning as waiting till spring — who is right?
Gardening, and rose growing, is all about opinions.
No two gardeners are the same, so how can their opinions be identical?
What is certain is that, although a lot of ‘experts’ are ready to tell you what to do — and you may be the kind of gardener who merely wants a set of step-by-step instructions — the point entirely missing is that it is you, and only you, who has to use your judgement and make the decisions.
So before moving to the particular let's see if we can draw some general conclusions regarding degree and timing.
It is true that much of the subsequent shape and form that a rose assumes is determined more during the first year or two of pruning than any subsequent factor.
Most amateur gardeners are ‘afraid of the knife’ and do not prune hard enough, leaving too much old wood, with the result that the growth buds that grow on are at the top end of 3 or 4 or more inches (8 or 10 or more cm) of the previous season's growth.
The base wood of the plant therefore grows higher each year and we get the familiar ‘bush rose’ consisting of 1 ft (0.3m), 2 ft (0.6m) or even more of old, bare and barky wood, with the current year's bloom-bearing growth starting from way up in the air!
All this is the result of being afraid to prune hard enough early enough.
The inevitable result is that a plant young in years becomes old and senile in form and shape.
When, in desperation, this kind of badly pruned bush is cut back hard to retrieve the situation, the base is so old and hard, that any dormant bud buried within is quite incapable of awakening and breaking out.
The root-stock then has no option: with no or insufficient shoots to take the upthrust, it has to get rid of its energy with top growth of its own.
This explains why so many  drastically cut back plants respond by sending up suckers.
Bushes, standards and most shrub and Old roses should be pruned to outward-facing buds that will emerge to form an open ‘shuttlecock’ or cup-shaped structure, which is open in the centre.
This not only produces a balanced form to the plant, carrying and showing the blooms to advantage, but reduces hindrance to air movement to a minimum.
A stagnant, slow moving and bad circulation of air is a direct encouragement to disease spores to settle and take hold.
The ‘open cup’ principle holds good for most types — there are just two or three growth habits like Bourbons and Musks that do not lend themselves to it too well, and we will deal with them later.
A rule that does hold good, however, concerns crossing branches and stems; these inevitably result in rubbed, chafed and damaged stems.
Crossing is difficult to avoid in some of the larger shrub types, and in these cases, the stems should be pulled and held apart by a judiciously placed loop of twine.
The object is to promote stem growth in the desired direction line, but this will not be achieved if, as sometimes happens, a dormant eye emerges as two or three buds, or as not infrequently occurs on too weakly pruned stems, growth emerges in a completely wrong direction from lower buds.
If this should happen, carefully rub out the unwanted shoots while still very young, leaving the strongest among multiple buds.
The first pruning after planting is the important formative prune — the plant cannot be expected to grow right if it does not start right.
All first year pruning should be harder and closer to the base than in subsequent years.
Bushes are on short, almost non-existent, stems, whereas standard top growth is exposed high up, and is more vulnerable to the consequences of weak and incorrect pruning.
When in doubt, and given a choice of bud direction, always choose to prune standards a little harder rather than softer than bushes.
Some varieties have a weaker, less vigorous growth disposition than others and, even on the same plant, some stems and branches will be somewhat weaker than others.
Contrary to what might be expected, these do not want mollycoddling or softer treatment — in fact the reverse.
We have to make them concentrate what they have on the job in hand.
Clearly, then, you have to know your individual roses to get the best from them, know their strengths, and their weaknesses.
The response to pruning is a concentrated and redirected burst of growth which will be more readily sustained by good, fertile  conditions than can be expected on sandy, barren and infertile soils.
Fertility conditions play a part then, and as hard pruning provokes the greater growth response, we should judge to ease back a little on poor, dry soils compared with more fertile conditions.
It is all judgement and decision, weighing up many factors that all have varying influence, and you do what your commonsense tells you is the logical and rational thing to do.
Figure 9.
An unpruned bush may suffer from wind rock over winter, opening up a funnel around the base of the stem which could fill with water and freeze.
Prune the bush and firm the soil.
Especially in exposed positions, it is sensible, for example, to trim back long stems and tallish growth in order to reduce the sail effect in wind and the resulting problem called ‘wind rock’.
This is a particular risk also with stakes — when wind blow rocks the plant or stake, there is a likelihood of the stem or stake opening a funnel-shaped hole around itself as it rocks and compresses the soil.
In clay and heavy soils the risk is increased that the hole will then hold water for considerable periods, with the plant and stake actually standing in water.
If it freezes, a collar of ice is then so much the worse, so it is a wise precaution to go round your roses after windy conditions and tread firm and close out any ‘funnels’— but of course the danger to taller bushes can be much reduced by shortening sail.
When should you prune?
Timing has always been, and no doubt will always be, a subject of debate.
Extreme opinions are taken up — which is not easy to understand when you consider the principles involved.
Fundamentally, roses are as much shrubs as any others in the garden and, like them, divide broadly into two categories as far as pruning is concerned; those that flower in spring and summer on wood developed during the previous growth period (i.e. last year), and those that flower, necessarily a little later, from mid summer on, upon wood  that has developed during the current season.
In the former case, the plants are pruned as soon as flowering has finished in order to divert energy into producing new wood to bear next year's flowers.
Roses in the second category — including those that have been repeated flowering well into autumn — are pruned towards the end of the winter dormancy period when the sap begins to move, and the axillary growth buds begin to swell.
Ramblers, weeping standards — which are for the most part rambler types budded into tall standard stems — climbers, climbing sports and several species types all fall largely within the first category, but so often have peculiarities of their own that we should not generalize.
It is wisest to treat each variety according to the details and information that will be contained in the better kind of catalogue — the sort of information which will also influence your decision where to order.
The overwhelming majority of bush and shrub roses come within the second category, that is, they are pruned towards the end of the dormancy period.
When is that?
I don't know — nobody does, and I cannot resist a smile of despair every time I see one of those gardening page headlines that advise us to ‘prune those roses now’ and such like.
It is evident that the experience of those responsible for such advice has not extended to the fact that the north and south of Britain are as much as 500 miles (800 km) apart, and the climates can be very different.
It is quite impossible, and very misleading to suggest, that pruning can be done according to the calendar.
Winter dormancy may be ending in February in the balmy south-west, not till a month later in the northern counties, and weeks after that around Aberdeen.
How can any writer know where lives the reader for whom the advice is intended, and what the weather will be?
You have to use your eyes, watch points and, again, use your judgement.
Some varieties are early birds, and anxious to lead the way.
Make a note of these in your garden diary, and watch carefully for the first sign of bud swelling, for they will need pruning first.
Many gardeners will argue that there is a risk in pruning very early, that frost can burn and shrivel young foliage that unfolds as the buds expand.
True, it is a risk — many a spring in Britain has thrown a frost at us in April, even May is not unknown — but you are not going to be so daft as to muffle up and go out to do the pruning just because the date or some idiot article says the time is right.
If you are unlucky and suffer a bad frost-burn, be prepared to prune the stems further back to the next dormant eye, whatever its direction, and whatever the date.
Pruning specifics
One of the rules of gardening is that all rules have an exception!
Bear in mind that, while we may group and classify according to this or that pruning rule, you must expect to meet exceptions.
When they occur, your catalogue and reference list will point this out — you really cannot know too much about each and every rose in your garden.
Hybrid Tea bush types After attending to the basics or primary aspects — removing completely all dead, diseased and feeble wood (you won't find much of this in the first year)— seek to prune to outward-pointing buds that will grow out along the line of growth, not sideways, so that this growth leads to an open cup or shuttlecock shape.
At the first pruning, take each stem down to a suitable bud, so that ideally it is reduced to no more than 3–4 inches (8–10 cm) in length.
At the second and subsequent prunings, a widely advocated rule of thumb guide is to reduce the stem length by about a half.
As I mentioned earlier, you must always bear in mind the effect of poor fertility, and less vigorous habit.
If you cultivate and feed your plants well — we shall discuss both later — you should be able to make heavier demands.
My personal preference and practice — but it has to be supported by very fertile conditions — is to prune much harder than many think that a rose can stand (remember, don't be afraid of the  knife, to three or four buds as necessary to find the outward pointing direction from the previous years prune.
Figure 10.
First year pruning will take each stem of a bush rose down to no more than 3–4 inches (8–10cm), cutting where possible to suitable outward-pointing buds.
Pruning does not end with the use of your secateurs; you will need to watch that the growth bud develops properly, reducing any multiples to one single and strongest.
Watch also that the cut surface dries and heals.
Any sign of browning or other discolouration could be the onset of die-back, and if this is confirmed, you may be able to trim it away, but if it goes back below the node, you will have to prune back to the next growth bud irrespective of its direction.
Remember also that cutting blooms for the house and dead-heading are forms of pruning, and the general principles should be observed, particularly with regard to leaving spurs.
Floribundas Pruning for Floribundas follows the same general principles as for H.T.s, except that it should & not so hard — the first year cut-back should be T-2 inches (2.5–5cm) longer, leaving some 4–6 inches (10–15cm) of stem from the base and still aiming for outward-pointing buds to develop the open cup shape.
Particularly in secluded, well sheltered, and not so well ventilated gardens, the open centre — and perhaps also the planting distance between plants so that they do not merge and clash — is more important with Floribundas.
They bear more blooms than H.T.s: some are very floriferous indeed, and bear large clusters which in stagnant air conditions, can increase the risk of diseases like mildew and those pests that don't like being blown about.
Before leaving the pruning of H.T.s and Floribundas, here are just a few words about some popular varieties that are examples of exceptions proving rules.
Not all catalogues draw attention to the fact that extra vigorous varieties will be overpowering when planted alongside less precocious members of their own family.
Pruning to the same hard degree invariably results in an explosion of growth, and such varieties are really much better given enough space elsewhere to do their own thing, and be treated as shrub roses.
The variety ‘Queen Elizabeth’ is a case in point and is the cause of not a little correspondence.
Nearly in the same class are ‘Peace’ and, the purest white of all, ‘Iceberg’(see page 130).
Climbers Some climbers are so strong-growing — almost rampant — as to be unsuited to being kept on a lead, restricted and cramped to the confines of arches and pergolas.
They need the wide open expanses of a high wall, fence, side of a house, or even trees, where they can fling out and stretch their long stems — 30ft (9m) high is by no means unusual.
So it behoves you to be wary when planting.
It is no good  thinking that secateurs will keep a 30ft (9m) monster down to 10 or ft (3 or 4m)— the plant will take on the challenge, break forth with even greater vigour, and fight you all the way.
Figure 11.
Climbers usually need only a light pruning,(a), to build up strong main stems and develop lateral side shoots.
But if new growth breaks out too high on older wood,(b), the stem can be cut out to encourage new growth from the base.
As they age, many climbers — especially the ‘climbing sport’ variations of H.T.s and other bush forms that develop a liking for wanderlust and travel — get into the habit of flowering mostly, if not only, at the growing extremities of their stems.
Depending upon each plant, where it is planted and how it is supported, this tendency can often be countered by cutting back hard, encouraging the break-out of new growth from the base — and then using a little plant ‘psychology’.
Given full rein to run as far as they want, the plants are living very well and don't feel in any particular danger, so there is no need for them to waste energy by perpetuating the species and going to the trouble of producing flower and setting seed.
So, we give them cause to fear, and reason to give attention to reproducing themselves.
This is done not by more pruning, but by making life distinctly awkward.
The long stems soon become woody and resistant to bending, so while they are still new, young and supple, the growing tips are bent repeatedly — at right angles, or thereabouts if you can — every foot (30cm) or two, left and  right, up and down.
You may be able to accommodate this bending by tying in to a longish pergola or trellis on a wall or fence.
The bending and difficulty for the plant of getting sap through the restriction constitutes a threat, and the reaction to this is to try to make sure of the perpetuation of its own species by making seed — which, of course, has to be preceded by flower, and lots of it!
Unlike the true rambler types with only one flush of bloom, the climbers group contains varieties that flower more or less continuously, and others that make two or more bursts or displays with periods between, during which little or no bloom is carried.
The continuous types are usually described and listed as perpetual flowering, whereas the intermittent types are called recurrent, repeat flowering or, as the French call them,remontant (see also page 17).
Apart from the name of each variety, it is clearly important to know exactly the type and habit of each climber you grow.
You may have only two climbers, but their habit, and pruning therefore, can be quite different.
Generally, then, the basic objective is to build up a strong framework or system of main stems, and to develop lateral side shoots which are pruned back each spring to 3 or 4 inches (7.5 or 10cm), with a terminal bud pointing in the right direction to fill spaces and gaps.
Only occasionally does it become necessary to cut out main stems, such as when they become old, gnarled and barky.
When grouped together with others, the climbing sports are correctly prefixed by the word ‘climbing’ to distinguish the subject from the bush type, for example‘Shot Silk’and ‘Climbing Shot Silk’, or sometimes less noticeably by the word abbreviated to ‘Clg’after the name, for example ‘Shot Silk Clg’.
Pillar or ‘short climbing roses' By and large, training and tying into a single pillar or post is only suitable for shorter growing climbers that do not grow long enough to clothe larger areas like walls and pergolas.
They are virtually a border line grouping between the strong climbers and the ramblers inasmuch as they need more use of the knife to keep young stems coming from the base.
Ramblers With very few exceptions, the ramblers are distinguished from the climbers by flowering in one display of bloom and then no more, on long flexible stems that have developed the year before.
The basic pruning principle, therefore, should be to remove wood as soon as it has flowered in order to dived energy into the production of good strong stems to carry the next year's bloom.
However this should only be in proportion to the individual plant's  capacity to produce new wood, and you may have to compromise and resort to some lateral side-shoots like a climber.
Figure 12.
Wood is pruned from a rambler as soon as it has flowered, to divert growth into strong new stems for the next year's bloom.
A good performance in later years means the sacrifice of bloom in the first year from planting.
As soon as the growth buds begin to show signs of movement in spring, take the existing canes down to about 15 inches (38cm) from ground level.
If you have prepared really well with a good wodge of organic matter underneath and a ‘starter’ of Humber or Growmore, you can ask rather more of a good strong plant by taking it down a little more — and, of course, to outward-facing top buds.
This will remove any possibility of bloom in the first year, but it will concentrate the plant's mind on good long stems which will need tying in to a support like a pergola or arch to show next year's bloom to best advantage.
Pruning in the second and subsequent years should try to begin a routine or system — and only your cultivation and experience will determine this — of removing wood that has flowered in proportion to the amount and vigour of new wood that the individual plant puts up.
Even in the same garden, plants of the same variety will vary.
To get the very best results you will need to observe closely, compare, make notes, and use your judgement while bearing in mind that if you make heavy demands you will have to feed well.
Producing this amount of new growth also means adequate moisture below: when weather is  dry, remember the thirsty ramblers; lay the hose out and let it dribble for a few hours.
Fast cars drink petrol, and if you don't fill up often, your roses will become stranded with empty tanks.
If you are hesitant about pruning flowered wood hard, some of the more vigorous varieties will reflect your hesitancy by sending out new growth from half way along old stems.
If this happens, it is usually better to leave things for that year, and to take them right down after the next flowering.
Always try to encourage growth from the base, and never let wood become old, brown and barky — that shows you are timid.
Until a young planting gets into its stride and you feel confident, a fair enough procedure would be: if the plant made three new stems last year, it should be well established and capable of making three this year, so three oldies to come out.
Next year, it could make four or five, and you can then decide whether to push it gently by taking out three stems, or harder by removing four or more.
Shrub roses Most, but by no means all, shrub roses rule themselves out of small and average size gardens by their dimensions, but some are small enough to be captivating and defy rejection.
In fact, the range of size is exceeded only by the range of habit.
Accordingly, it is impossible to generalize a policy or principle for pruning.
The first step, of course, is to tidy the shrub by removing dead, diseased, weak and crossing stems.
After that, the framework of garden size and the plant's neighbours constrains the subject from spilling over the edges.
In general, a reasonably safe procedure would be to prune back main stems by a third during the dormant season plus, with shrubs that are well established, a somewhat vigorous removal of old, spent stems before they become senile.
Species roses These and varieties of species, being much nearer to their natural original, are capable and best left to do their own thing.
They will need little or no pruning beyond dead-heading and keeping them within bounds.
Miniature and patio roses Pruning of the miniature and patio forms should follow the same general principles as for bushes, standards, climbers and the rest.
The size is different, of course, but the scale remains.
Feeding
In Chapter 4 I stressed the importance of preparation before planting — what you do afterwards cannot put right what you fail to do before a plant is in the ground and growing away.
A rose is like a dog: you do not and cannot get back more than you put in and, in the same way that a dog is more rewarding than most other animals, you get more back from a rose than other flowers.
Roses are heavy feeders at the best of times, and pruning for more and better bloom drives a plant even harder.
A good balanced meal for yourself is traditional ‘meat and two veg.’
and not tonics and pep pills.
Plants, particularly roses, are no different, they need good and balanced feeding just as much as you do; nitrogen for leaf production, phosphate for root growth and potash to keep the system toned and resistant to sickness and disease.
Too much nitrogen encourages an abundance of leaf tissue that is not balanced by enhanced root activity to support it, or enough potash to keep the plant structure hard.
Soft flabby growth in plants is as much at risk to disease attack and structural collapse as it is with ourselves and other animals.
Also vitally important is the way in which the chemical nutrients are presented.
It is perfectly possible, for example, to analyse your meat and two veg.
and to give yourself a tablet containing the chemical contents in a concentrated form.
That would provide the nutrients your body needs, but whether the mechanics of your digestive system would be happy with a diet of tablets and pills instead of bulky food is of course more than doubtful, as our bodies are not constructed that way.
But that is precisely what happens when we expect plants to live and thrive, not as nature intended, but on chemical fertilizers.
A fertile soil is dependent upon its physical structure just as much, if not more so, than upon its mere plant nutrient content.
It has to contain organic matter, which is at once the moisture-retentive component and the source of plant nutrient as it decomposes to its simple chemical components.
It is the haven, therefore, for the bacteria that perform the decomposition process — they need air, and we can say that, in order to be fertile and support our roses, the soil has to contain organic matter, moisture, air and bacteria.
The bacterial reduction of organic materials to simple compounds that dissolve in the water content of the soil is a long and slow process.
Only in the final stages of breakdown does the nutrient become available for uptake by living plants, and this can take weeks or even months.
The nutrient availability, as an end product, is therefore gradual and prolonged in contradistinction to the availability of artificial chemical fertilizers which are manufactured to be quickly soluble, and are as quickly washed out of the soil.
By its very nature, the organic content in a fertile soil constitutes a reservoir, a bank balance that will stand withdrawals for some time with little or nothing going in, which explains why fertility can often be maintained for a while by replacing lost nutrients with straight chemicals.
But that cannot continue forever.
It is more prudent, more rational and more natural to use organic materials — manures.
They may be concentrated naturally as in animal tissues like bone, blood, hoof and horn, or processed to contain a high proportion of one or more nutrients, or they may be bulky and contain very little as in plant tissues like peat, compost and leaf mould.
Any organic material must inevitably reflect its origin, and cannot contain what it wasn't in the first place.
Horticultural peat, for example, is derived from mosses and sedges, both of which are lowly forms of plant life that live in areas of poor fertility.
Consequently, their partly decomposed forms — peat — cannot contain much by way of those nutrients that are required by higher plant forms like roses.
You will have to add that.
Compost, leaf mould and rotted manure all derive from varied sources and the residual content will therefore be greater and wider than peat.
The greatest value of all such bulk matter, however, is not in the nutrient content, but in its effect on the soil structure, its retention of moisture and harbouring of the bacteria.
Natural materials like ‘blood, bone and fish’ will between them supply nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P) and potassium or potash (K), hence (NPK), but how  do you ensure the diet is balanced?
You can buy a proprietary mix that will provide end residues that balance reasonably well — eventually.
The problem is that, for example, the nitrogen in blood can become available to plants in days and continue for a week or two, whereas the phosphate in bone cannot possibly become available for several months.
You could use a largely inorganic balanced source like Growmore, and rely on the bulky peat or compost for the organic input, but better still is to use organic matter like sewage sludge, poultry, farmyard and animal manures, blend them to achieve balance both in content and time, and to dry and concentrate them so that they are pleasant to handle and easy to spread.
This is a manufacturing process, and of course a proprietary product.
By far the best I ever used was ‘Humber Eclipse Fish Manure’ which used the waste from the fishing industry as the raw material, but it is no longer obtainable as such because the fish content is redirected to cattle and poultry feeds.
Other materials have to be utilized, and although not quite so good as the old fish manure, it is still way out in a class of its own.
Humber Manure is not easy to get because it has a strong smell and shopkeepers think it drives their customers away!
Personally, I do not find it objectionable, and in any case the smell goes off very quickly when it comes into contact with the soil and bacteria get to work on it.
If you cannot find it locally, contact Humber direct — the details are given on page 267.
Tests show that, after a slow beginning, availability of the nutrients rises to a peak in about 80 days and then tails off with the potash being held late, when it is needed.
The steady release and peak indicates the best way to use this manure: if it is put down at the end of March, the peak comes towards the end of June.
Similarly, if we want the food supply to tail off in September, the last application must be spread during June.
No autumn dressings are needed — the late potash takes care of that.
I find that 1 ounce (28g) to the square yard (square metre) as a starter, towards the end of March, then a little more — 1½ to 2 ounces (43–57g)— at the end of April, May and June is all that is required.
If you can spare the time to sprinkle out ½ ounce (14g) every week, that is even more gradual.
Lightly scratch it into the soil or mulch the surface so that the bacteria can get at it — they are the chaps that do the work and unlock it.
Alternating periods of flood and drought are not to the liking of any plant, certainly not to roses.
They do best not only with a steady food  supply but also with a steady moisture availability at root level.
There are two ways to ensure this: one is to make sure that there is plenty of moisture-retentive organic bulk under each plant at planting time, and the second is a steady carrying down and mixing into the soil by worm action from a blanket cover on the soil surface, a cover that also drastically reduces evaporation.
This cover, called mulch, can be peat, compost or even material that is not well rotted (see question number 21 on page 168).
Pulverized bark or even wood shavings can be used as it is so exposed to the air that denitrification is avoided.
A layer 2 inches (5 cm) thick suppresses weed growth, reduces moisture evaporation, is easily scratched open to help air penetration, and as it decomposes is pulled down into the soil by worms.
I have had many letters asking for advice and questioning the use of bark and shavings because of coral spot fungus appearing.
This invariably only occurs when the mulch is allowed to pack and remain undisturbed — mulching is not intended as a boon to lazy gardening by putting an end to the need for hoeing.
The cover has to be disturbed and scratched open by frequent hoeing; a claw hoe is ideal for this, as it is less likely to snag and damage the root stems.
Any weeds that are able to get through the cover are knocked over, but the important purposes for keeping the mulch jostled about are air penetration and the prevention of rain run-off from a packed surface.
Saprophytic fungi like coral spot on mulch are an indication of insufficient hoeing.
If there is one overriding golden rule with feeding any plant, but especially with roses, it is the meaning of the old saying ‘you can lead a horse to water, but you can't make it drink’.
Unfortunately, this is not quite true, we can — and it is possible to overfeed one or other of the three main elements and so cause what is called an ‘induced deficiency, of the other two.
You can create this situation quickly, by providing, say, a highly nitrogenous chemical like sulphate of ammonia, or much more slowly by lashings of the ubiquitous bone meal under the mistaken impression that it provides all the major elements and is a balanced feed (see also question number 24 on page 171).
Several proprietary fertilizers, mixed and formulated specifically for roses, show a marked bias in favour of one or other element.
They are far from being the same or even similar, and you can check this by comparing the analysis on the packets.
Whether you feel that these cocktails are what your roses will be happy with is very much like you considering whether you would be happy and healthy on a diet of fast and convenience food like hamburger and chips and little else.
Balance  is the key — and moderation at all times.
We shall be taken to task if we disregard foliar feeding.
It has its proponents, but has become all out of proportion, I feel, and needs to be put into correct perspective.
See what you think.
Unless they have evolved in such a way that they are specially adapted to do otherwise, most plants — and our roses certainly — naturally absorb nutrients through their root systems.
Several deficiencies, particularly of trace elements, which frequently cause characteristic blemishes and structural damage to leaves and stems, can often be remedied quite quickly by spraying a solution of the appropriate element directly on to the foliage.
The speed of absorption and remedial effect can be astonishing.
Without doubt, when the need occurs, this method of by-passing the roots and ‘injecting’ deficient nutrients directly into foliage is extremely valuable and cannot be denied.
It has been known for a long time, and has led to the more modern practice called ‘foliar feeding’, in which the purpose is not so much to correct deficiencies, but to encourage a boost in performance, yield and so on by spraying major element solutions on to the leaves in the same way.
There is no doubt that performance can be improved in many cases, but the fundamental question has to be asked whether such foliar feeding or boosting is merely making up and filling a gap left by normal cultivation that is not as good as it could be.
Plants have evolved to live according to certain natural laws and procedures, and it is no logical solution to improving cultivation to ask plants to live differently to what nature intended.
Foliar feeding may be good for emergencies, but not in my book for basic cultivation of roses.
Perhaps this is an appropriate place for a few brief notes on the more common chemical fertilizers and organic manures of plant and animal origin.
Chemical fertilizers
Sulphate of ammonia is perhaps the most commonly used nitrogenous fertilizer.
Nitrogen becomes available very quickly because the two fractions break apart readily in the soil.
It is best used on calcareous soils — chalks and limes — and light soils that can stand being made a little more heavy and sticky.
It is very easy to cause  scorch (plasmolysis) if used too strongly — never exceed 1 ounce (28g) per square yard (square metre).
Nitrate of soda is another common nitrogenous fertilizer.
Very quick acting, it is quickly soluble and liable to cause scorch.
Never exceed the equivalent of ½ ounce (14g) per square yard (square metre) dissolved in a gallon (4.5 litres) of water, and never allow direct contact with stems or leaves.
If used with care, it is to be preferred to sulphate of ammonia on heavy soils.
Nitro-chalk was at one time a by-product of the gas and other industries, but now that manufacturing methods have changed, it is not so plentiful or cheap.
It breaks down to provide both lime and nitrogen, and is therefore most suitable for use on heavy acid soils.
It is least effective, even counter-productive, on chalky soils.
Not so quick acting as sulphur and soda compounds, it is a lot safer.
As with all nitrogenous fertilizers that boost leaf growth, use this only in spring and summer when growth is fastest and can respond and absorb the spur.
A dose of 1 ounce (28g) to the square yard (square metre) 3–4 weeks apart is the maximum rate, otherwise scorch can result.
As can be seen from Chapter 7 on feeding, high nitrogen can produce imbalance and soft, lush, disease- and pest-prone foliage with roses.
If they need any bias at all, it is towards potash for hardening and ripening leaf and wood, and phosphate for stimulating root activity.
Basic slag is another by-product of industrial processes that has become scarce due to changed methods.
It is mainly used as a phosphate source which, as it also contains some lime, has an alkaline reaction.
Slower-acting than most artificials, it is best hoed or dug in during winter, some months ahead of renewed springtime growth and activity.
The strength can be variable depending on the source, and it is therefore wise not to risk damage by exceeding a maximum rate of 4 ounces (113 g) per square yard (square metre).
Nitrate of potash, saltpetre and bonfire ash supply both potash and nitrogen, and a lot of it, which, when released very quickly by reaction with other chemicals and ignition, provides an explosion like gun powder.
They are very soluble, hence the admonition to ‘keep your powder dry’ and why bonfire ash is very quickly spoiled if allowed to become damp with rain.
They are liable to scorch (plasmolysis), so use sparingly and keep them away from leaf and stems.
The straight chemical should be used dissolved in water no stronger than ½ ounce (14g) per gallon (4.5 litres) per square yard (square metre).
Iron sulphate's main use is as a quick-acting source of iron in cases of chlorosis on soils where iron is either in short supply or is locked away and unavailable to plants by a chemical combination with lime.
It is one of the main constituents of the old lawn sand method of weed-killing in lawns.
The inference is clear to keep the application rate very low — no more than ½ ounce (14g) in 2 gallons (9 litres) of water per 2 square yards (2 square metres), and applications at least 3 weeks apart.
Most samples of muriate of potash , a commonly-used potash source, also contain enough common salt (sodium chloride) and other salts to constitute a danger to shallow root activity.
It is normally used in association with ripening and colouring, and for roses therefore apply in June onwards — hoe and water in ½ ounce (14g) per square yard (square metre) at no more than 3–4 week intervals.
Superphosphate is the most commonly used phosphatic fertilizer to promote root activity.
Use it at 1½–2 ounces (43–57g) per square yard (square metre) in spring and summer, hoed or dug in to the soil.
Organic manures
Bone meal is basically a phosphate source, but with sometimes a little nitrogen depending upon the source.
Universally used, especially at planting time — which is something of a hoot, as it needs a long and involved bacterial breakdown process for the phosphate to become available for plant uptake.
The coarse grist can take as long as six months, by which time many plants that are intended to benefit will have long since gone.
Dried blood is another animal product from the  abattoir , this time to supply nitrogen.
It breaks down readily — indeed, if allowed to become damp it invariably smells of ammonia, which is the indication that the nitrogen is already being released and lost into the air.
It is best used after being steeped in water for a few hours.
Use it at 1 ounce (28g) to the gallon (4.5 litres) per square yard (square metre) or 5–6 yards (5–6 metres) row run.
Hoof and horn is yet another animal end product valuable as a long-lasting slow-release supplier of nitrogen, and in the same class as bone meal for the length of time it takes.
It is rather expensive — there are so many competing demands for the raw material — so you will  naturally be sparing with it.
Useful in composts for potting up plants that will need nitrogen later on, I wouldn't use it for roses — it can lead to soft leaf growth just when you don't want it.
Farmyard, horse, cow, pig, sheep, goat, poultry and similar ‘raw’ manures are all very variable because they must depend upon the food intake of the animals concerned, and the age of the manure — the time it has been stacked for nitrogenous urine to have drained out or been decomposed.
It is best stacked and composted beyond the denitrification stage (well rotted).
The one exception, if you can get it, is goat droppings.
Unlike the others, the goat is a ruminant, and will eat almost anything given half a chance.
The result of browsing off hedges and other plants, not just grass, goat manure normally has the most balanced NPK content of any, and is worth its weight in gold.
Mushroom compost is the material from mushroom beds after cropping has finished, by which time the urine content has gone, but it still needs composting if it is to be dug in.
It is ideal as a mulch, where the bacteria can get all the air they want to break it down, but often contains limestone chippings or a residue, and therefore needs watching for use on the acid-lovers.
Best bought in by the load, it becomes expensive when stacked, composted, mixed with a little poultry, bagged up and given a fancy proprietary name.
By and large, the above are ‘natural source’ materials, with little or no attempt to balance the NPK content, and you will need to take this into account when you use them for whatever particular bias they give.
Balance is better achieved by a mixture — often sold as ‘blood, bone and fish’— although in recent years the fish content has been considerably reduced as it is used more and more in animal and pet foodstuffs.
However, the problem is not so much the balance, but the varying times taken for the raw materials to complete their respective breakdowns and become available to the plants.
True balance in this respect is only achieved by composting, processing and blending, and that means a proprietary product such as Humber 1-1-1 Garden compound.
Pests and Diseases
If your efforts at feeding and cultivation are designed to make your roses happy, there are plenty of creatures and other life forms about whose objective is to give them hell.
The rose is on one of the higher rungs of the evolutionary ladder, and its sap stream and physical structure contain many complicated chemical compounds that are particularly attractive and useful to insects.
The high proportion of carbohydrates in the leaves makes them an ideal target for creatures that bite and suck out the energy rich sap.
Others find in the rose elaborated chemical compounds readily available that they can utilize for colour pigments, their own body structures — and even scents to attract each other!
A list of only the more common villains and what they get up to reads like a catalogue of horrors enough to intimidate anyone and put them off rose-growing for all time.
Greenfly, with their extraordinary reproductive method that enables millions-strong plagues to suck the sap from young shoots and buds, are described in the answer to question number 1 on page 123.
Aphid attack is crude flat-out assault by hordes that can quickly replace their losses.
Others are more subtle, if not downright clever, like the frog-hopper or spittle-bug that, instead of spitting back the sap it doesn't want — like greenfly — uses it to surround itself in a frothy mass that hides and protects it from predatory birds and also prevents the soft-skinned body from drying out.
Another is the sawfly, which lays its eggs always along the midrib of the leaf, and with them a hormone that causes the leaves to roll up from the edges in to enclose and protect the emerging larvae in a neat tubular hideaway.
There are many more, and to them have to be  added the spores of fungal diseases, always produced in countless millions and ever-present, carried on the wind, ready to take advantage of easily-penetrated soft flabby tissue, a wound or a point of entry perhaps left open by insect damage, to invade, debilitate, deface and even destroy an entire plant.
The rogue's gallery is formidable, but help is at hand, because we have friends, both natural and those of our own devising.
The very first rule, as with all sickness, is that prevention is better than cure.
Pests and diseases are clever enough, persistent enough, and serious enough to need no help from us.
It is one of the primary purposes of cultivation that we affect and change conditions in favour of the plants and to the detriment of their enemies.
We readily accept the need for digging the soil to open it to the air, for good drainage and manuring, for the elimination of weed competition and for the provision of nutrients for our plants.
Just as important, but generally not accorded due attention, are such factors as the clearing up of fallen and accumulated debris from under shrubs, hedges, fence bottoms and odd corners, all of which are hibernating havens and breeding grounds for all manner of enemies.
It is not very clever to spray and fight off enemies from the front door, while letting them take up residence outside a wide open back door.
No matter how thorough our precautions, however, trouble will strike from time to time and, as with all forms of sickness, the very first thing we then have to do is diagnose or identify the cause.
What are we faced with?
The maladies of the rose separate into three basic groups: insect pests, fungus disease, and physiological (that is, internal structural) disorders.
Some readers will hasten to add children and animals!
My goats used to adore roses and hawthorn: how their tongues, throats and stomachs dealt with the thorns never ceased to amaze us.
Distinguishing the problem area and making a diagnosis should not present much difficulty.
Insect damage is usually fairly evident — the physical damage can be seen, the creatures themselves can be seen, and even those that hide or run away cause tell-tale signs that can be noticed and recognized.
Similarly, fungal diseases show characteristic effects that reveal both presence and identity.
Physiological disorders, like cancer in humans and animals (according to the present state and progress in scientific knowledge and understanding), are not diseases caused by other life forms like bacteria, bacilli , fungus or virus (although cancer opinion is beginning to waver with regard to virus).
Structural, cellular disorder and collapse in plants is usually a reflection of old age, bad growing conditions or inadequate feeding.
True, pest and disease may follow, but we should always keep in mind the possibility that the initial breach in the defences is due to physical disorder.
The signs are not always immediately apparent or indicative, and can easily lead us up the garden path; we have to learn to recognize the various spots and blemishes, however small.
Let's look at the groups and the enemies in more detail.
Insect pests
As control of pests and diseases consists basically of subjecting them to conditions or substances that are harmful to them, we have to recognize that, as they have all evolved defences of one kind or another — and very successfully too, which is why they are still on this Earth and contending with us for our roses — somewhere in their life cycles are periods and stages when they are more exposed and vulnerable.
It is no good throwing things at them when they are safely in their dug-outs and shelters, but at some time they have to come out into the open, if only to change their clothes and appearance, and that is when we can get at them.
It may be with a contact poison that quickly enters a soft-bodied creature like a greenfly and kills on contact, a stomach poison that works through the digestive system, a neurotoxin that paralyses the nervous system, or an asphyxiant that enters through the creature's respiratory system, or we could encourage a natural predator.
Less practical is physical destruction like squashing or bashing them on the head.
Insect pests sub-divide into three groups: those that bite, those that suck sap, and those that do both or either, but from within the soil.
The biters are usually the easiest to detect because they eat away the foliage.
They are normally found on the plant, exposed as with caterpillars, or concealed, like sawfly and tortrix larvae.
They bite, so the obvious step is to make sure that they bite poison.
Instead of chewing into or biting off the leaves and shoots, the suckers are interested only in the liquid sap, which they obtain by probing a very fine tubular proboscis into the surface tissue cells.
The typical examples are greenfly, the frog-hopper, and capsid bug.
As  they do not actually devour the tissue but merely pierce through the skin to get at the sap inside, the problem of making contact can become a little more difficult.
For a long time, control was confined to contact killers — effective enough with greenfly, less so with frog-hoppers, and hardly at all with capsid.
However, the relatively recent development of toxins that enter the plant sap stream without harming the plant enables us to kill all who dare to suck.
The third group are the creatures that still bite and suck, but from the safety of beneath the soil surface.
Physical contact by means of drenching the soil to a requisite depth is expensive in terms of quantity needed to thoroughly soak deep enough, and the consequences from those it does not reach.
Contact killers are therefore problematical, and we have to adopt a different technique.
All these soil-inhabiting creatures have to breathe, not with lungs like us, but by a process called diffusion through their porous skins or through special breathing pores.
This is a much slower atmospheric change than lungs, of course, and is suited to the confined and restricted conditions of a ‘soil atmosphere’, which is just what we need for them to breathe in poison.
Let's deal with them all in a little more detail that will enable us to recognize them and understand how to deal with them, beginning with the biters.
There are many more pests than those we shall discuss here — but these are the most serious, and those you are most likely to meet.
The biters:
Leaf-cutter bee There are many kinds of bee, and they do not all swarm and live in hive communities.
Some are solitary, and this one constructs a nest for its eggs and offspring by cutting away half-moon shaped pieces of leaf, carrying them away and sticking them together like bricks!
One or two bits chopped out is not too serious, but a really big attack is another matter and has to be taken seriously.
The old DDT sprays got into them through their feet and through the biting jaws but, like so many poisons, just as many friends are knocked over as foes, and the indiscriminate use of DDT is now banned in this country.
Systemic poisons will not stop the bees from taking a building brick, but they will be feeling pretty queer by the time they want to come back for more.
Leaf-roll sawfly This clever little beast is given a fair description and discussion in the answer to question number 52 on page 208, which, with Figure 13 above, will enable you to spot that it has been on your plants.
Another sawfly, the rose slugworm , chops out the soft parts of the leaf tissue between the veins to leave a skeleton.
Yet another, fortunately quite rare, follows you around when it sees secateurs in your hands and drops a few eggs into the soft pith of the stem when you make a cut, before the cut wound has had time to callus and heal itself — another reason why you should always try to confine cutting to a fine dry day.
The little larvae soon emerge — they know which way to go!— and bore down into the stem where they pupate and eventually emerge as adults.
Figure 13.
Pests make their unmistakeable marks on the host roses.
These leaves are the work (a) the leaf cutter bee,(b) the rose slugworm,(c) the tortrix moth,(d) the leaf roll sawfly.
The bud (e) has been burrowed into by the tortrix moth, and if it opens at all will be badly damaged.
Tortrix moths There are more than one kind, but the differences do not matter to us, they are all crafty and clever at hiding where you cannot see them.
The damaging period of their life cycle for our roses comes when, as minute caterpillars and chewing for all they are worth, they can be detected by knocking a plant so that it judders.
Alarmed, they drop quickly and remain suspended at the end of fine silk-like threads.
Later, they will attach the threads to leaf edges, which will pull together as the silk dries and shrinks, and thus roll the leaf around themselves.
You can distinguish this leaf-roller from the sawfly by the extent and nature of the curling.
The serious damage occurs under cover of darkness, when the little blighters make tracks for the flower buds and burrow into them which, if it doesn't ruin them completely, means a damaged and distorted flower when it opens.
When you observe leaf-roll, it doesn't take a moment to pinch the leaf firmly between finger and thumb or, better still, to pick it off and burn it.
All the biting pests above can be controlled by planned, routine, repeat spraying with systemic insecticides.
These pests were a headache at one time, but the modern rose-grower has a much easier life — and there is no excuse!
The suckers:
Aphids , or as they are commonly called,greenfly (and not uncommonly blackfly ), are given a fair description and discussion in question number 1 (see page 123).
They are soft-bodied and physically utterly defenceless.
Being little more than thin skinned bags of sugary carbohydrate sap from the plants they are sucking, they are an easily taken source of energy for many predators, including other insects and birds — a slaughter that is countered by the extraordinarily rapid rate of reproduction.
The spittle-bug or frog-hopper is equally as soft as an aphid, but three or four times the size.
Its defence mechanism is not rapid reproduction like the greenfly, instead it surrounds itself with the familiar frothy blob of air bubbles that it forms as it spits out the sap it has taken from the plant — instead of spitting it back into the plant.
This not only hides it from predators but ensures that its soft body does not dry out.
Another sucker, the capsid bug , is very seldom seen.
It must have telescopic eyesight and be extremely sensitive to vibration because it is off as soon as it knows you are coming.
There is a bewildering array of contact and stomach poisons based on chemicals such as lindane, malathion, nicotine, pyrethrum, BHC, Derris, and many more — indeed, rather like the introduction of new rose varieties, new chemicals become available and push others off the market with almost equal rapidity.
Some are better at controlling one  pest than another, and at one time a well-stocked garden shed contained enough chemicals to stock a chemist's shop — but no longer.
The control of both biters and suckers has been revolutionized by the advent of the systemic insecticide.
The problems associated with achieving physical contact have been superseded and replaced by the certainty of killing as soon as the pests bite or suck.
The plants' metabolism is not affected and absorption into the sap stream and tissues is effected from a simple spraying and wetting.
The effectiveness usually lasts for some weeks, but is variable, depending largely on the amount of new growth being produced, and therefore the rate at which the toxic content is being diluted, and the speed of living — called the metabolic rate — which affects the rate at which the plant is able to break down and divest itself of what after all is a ‘foreign body’.
After an initial recommended strength spray, all that is needed is a ‘topping up’ spray every three or four weeks.
There are several systemics to choose from, but advisedly you should go for one that is compatible with systemic fungicides which you will no doubt need to apply and which we shall be discussing shortly.
The soil dwellers
By and large, the soil-dwelling enemies of the rose are confined to the several kinds of chafer .
These are flying beetles that begin their lives in the soil as the familiar white or cream-coloured grubs, fat from feeding on plant roots, horny headed, usually brown in colour, very slow and sluggish moving and curled rather like a large letter C. There are several kinds, from the large cock chafer to the much smaller greenish rose chafer.
The adults emerge from the soil in May and June — hence the common name ‘May Bug’ when they at once attack open blossoms of many kinds.
It is better to control them during this ‘in-ground’ period, the best control being achieved by watering down a solution of a chemical, one of a group with the long name ‘chlorinated hydrocarbons’, and used primarily in this case on lawns as a wormkiller.
Obtainable under the proprietary name Chlordane, the toxin gradually works down into the soil diffusing into the soil atmosphere.
Taken in by the slow-breathing soil creatures, the toxin accumulates in their bodies until it reaches lethal proportions.
The trouble with this, as with many another insecticide, is that there is no selectivity or distinction made between  soil creatures that are harmful and those that are beneficial, like earthworms.
Finally, before leaving the harmful insects, mention must be made of horrid little blighters that for long were regarded as exceptions to the normal methods of control.
Thrips or thunder flies as they are sometimes called because of their tendency to fly in clouds when thunder threatens — are minute midge-like flies that like to get into buds just as the bud scales (sepals) are opening and lay their eggs there.
Minute they may be, but the effect is traumatic.
For long it was thought that wet spraying turned the buds to a wet mash, and therefore dusting each individual bud was necessary.
Imagine dusting each bud with a soft brush and malathion dust!
In fact, the collapse of the bud to a mash is a consequence of the egg laying.
Dusting with malathion is probably still as effective a deterrent as any, but clearly it has to be applied early before the little blighters are on the wing.
If you can spot the minute pinprick and area of discolouration around it — a magnifying glass is useful — the fly has already left a visiting card.
The wisest course is to take off the bud and burn it — you will not get a bloom anyway.
Beneficial insects
Not all small creatures are pests, some are predatory on the pests themselves, and we should regard them as friends.
However, encouraging them to the extent that they can be relied upon to keep roses clean is hardly practical.
Taking out some and reducing the number of pests is one thing, but reliable eradication can hardly be expected or hoped for, and much as it may displease those purists who do not like the idea of using poisonous chemicals in the garden, they have to be our main line of defence and protection of our roses.
Perhaps the one big glaring example where natural predation can have a significant effect, quite astonishing on occasions, is with greenfly, and no doubt the most familiar example — it seems to get the most publicity — is the ladybird .
There are several forms of ladybird, with wide variation in colour and number of spots, but all remarkably similar in the voracious manner in which the dark, blackish larvae, which look like tiny crocodiles, gobble up the defenceless prey.
Very  soon, they eat enough to pass on to the next stage of their life cycle.
It is worth getting to know and recognize the small black blob-like chrysalis that adheres to stems and leaf stalks because it can very easily be mistaken for caterpillar or similar droppings and knocked away.
At the risk of being regarded as a gardening Miss Marple or Sherlock Holmes, it is a good idea to have a magnifying glass in your pocket when you take a turn around the roses.
In the opinion of many, even more effective than the ladybird beetles are the several forms of hover or serphid flies , and this opinion is growing following the work of the Henry Doubleday Research Association (HDRA) into other plants that attract and encourage creatures that prey upon pests.
These remarkable flies with wasp-like markings hang motionless in the air — hence the name of hover fly — and suddenly shoot off to a different position; their flight is a series of sudden darting movements.
Their larvae are small almost leech-like creatures, variously green, brown and grey, and all with an enormous appetite for greenfly.
The research done by the HDRA has shown that the hover flies are much attracted by a bright little annual plant, much beloved in old-style cottage gardens, which rejoices in the delightful common name ‘poached egg plant’, as each whitish flower has a golden yellow centre just like a poached or fried egg.
Correctly named Limnanthes douglasii , the seed is readily available and, when conditions suit, it seeds itself so readily that it becomes self-perpetuating and can even become invasive.
Hardly a colour combination to enhance or blend with the pinks and reds of roses by underplanting (see question number 15 on page 160), but a nearby border or patch of it is widely being reported as being responsible for clearing out all the greenfly!
A creature of docile and fragile beauty when closely examined is the lacewing , with its thin pale green body, borne between two pairs of transparent lace-like wings.
Gentle the adult may be, but the tiny yellow and brown larvae are definitely not, and is fiercely active as it attacks greenfly with relish.
The eggs of the lacewing can often be seen as a tiny little cluster at the end of a thin hair-like little stalk usually attached to the undersides of leaves.
When seen, they are all worth trying to preserve, perhaps by postponing cutting back until the eggs have hatched, or by hitching up the egg-bearing leaves among the remaining foliage.
Another predator — perhaps not quite in the same class as the others described here, but still worth a mention — is the Ichneumon fly .
It looks like a slightly small-sized cross between a bee and a wasp, but  with a longer drooping tail.
It too regards greenfly as a good meal, so don't go bashing at everything that looks remotely like a wasp.
There are other friends of the rose, but, for the most part, with less actual and potential effect.
However, the hover fly and poached egg association shows clearly that this is a direction in which a great deal of research needs to be done.
There is so much that we don't know, and the HDRA organization does nothing but good for our knowledge and understanding.
Fungal Pests
Pests and diseases are different forms of life, but they often go hand in hand.
In addition to, and apart from , susceptibilities built into some varieties of rose (as a result of breeding for colour, habit, scent or whatever at the expense of vigour and resistance), growing conditions, cultivation and weather all have an important influence on the ability of the plants to withstand and ward off fungal attack.
One of the basic factors we have to bear in mind about fungi is that, unlike insects, which make their attack at certain predictable times depending on their life cycles, fungal attack in one form or another is about and ready to take advantage of any weakness for much longer periods — in fact, at almost any time of the year.
It is not often that secateurs or the knife is proven to be the carrier of infection; of course, if you know you are working on infected wood, it is only common sense to disinfect your tools with Lysol or a similar substance before moving on to plants that are clean.
By far the two most common and important fungal diseases are mildew and black spot, and both arise from microscopically small spores in the air being able to settle on leaf and stem tissue that is unable to offer sufficient resistance to their invasive germination.
The first line of plant resistance is the surface skin layer, the epidermis, like your own skin.
The tough leathery top surface of a mature leaf is not so easy to penetrate as the softer epidermis of the underside, which is why mildew in particular can often be found by turning over leaves that are glossy and apparently quite healthy, even protected by fungicidal deposit, on the top.
Similarly, young emerging leaves and shoots that have not yet developed a tough skin are easier for fungus spores to  penetrate as they are for sucking and biting insects, and this is why the first signs of mildew especially are always to be found on such tissue.
Whether young leaves remain soft, flabby and vulnerable for longer than they should depends largely upon growing conditions, and essentially upon the toughening effect of potash.
Even so, tough or not, fungus attack is persistent, and the principle of prevention being better than cure means that we have to try to prevent the development and growth of spores into our roses by spreading a film of fungus-toxic material on leaf, shoot and other vulnerable parts — a contact killer — or, as we are now able to do for insects, we can render the sap stream and internal tissue poisonous to invading fungus by introducing a systemic fungicide.
Contact fungicides can be general and fairly generally effective, or specifically designed for one particular fungus, and therefore very effective.
There are several fungi known collectively as mildews, the most common to attack roses being powdery rose mildew — which is not a bad description, because it has the appearance of a dusty, powdery covering on the affected foliage.
It can develop strongly in almost any weather, but contrary to popular and widespread belief and advice, the conditions that most favour and encourage it are not damp and mugginess, but hot dry days interspersed with clear, cold, dew-laden nights.
The reason is not hard to understand: hot dry weather puts great strain on the continuity of moisture supply at root level, and as a result the plants slow, the foliage flags, and in the wet dew the fungus runs like mad.
Enclosed gardens in which the air cannot move freely are just what the fungus likes and increase the likelihood of attack.
For the same reason of poor ventilation, the less resistant ramblers can suffer badly when grown against walls.
The one thing that can be said with certainty about mildew is that it is unpredictable.
Glossy dark bronze-green foliage is widely held to be very resistant; in some places it is, but in others it can look as though a flour sack has burst.
I had a customer friend high on Epsom Downs whose garden was the admiration of everyone — the passengers on the buses at the stop outside had a grandstand view.
He planted a hundred ‘Zambra’ roses when that variety was first introduced by Wheatcrofts — the brilliant orange flowers against the bronze-green foliage were a show-stopper at Chelsea.
In his windswept position he had never known a serious attack of mildew — but he did then!
I have known gardens where the roses never had a moment's fungicidal attention and didn't know what mildew was, and there have been others where the  roses received every care and attention, and each year the place looked like a flour mill.
How do you find a reasonable and consistent thread of explanation through this?
There is one: Epsom Downs may be high up with plenty of air movement, but there is only a thin soil cover on solid chalk.
The natural organic content is thus very low, the moisture reservoir non-existent and, as is invariably the case in such conditions, there is a chronic shortage of potash.
Mildew is too prevalent and persistent to be wiped out completely, but those three factors are the key to helping our roses to resist it.
The first visible signs of the disease are a slight increase in the red tinges and colour of shoots and young leaves, and of course that is very easily missed because it is the normal colouring of many varieties.
Generally, there is also a slight twisting and distortion reaction in the way that the leaves are held, but again, this is difficult to detect unless you know exactly what you are looking for.
Faint white spots next appear on the top surfaces of leaves, but turn the leaves over, and more prevalent patches will be found.
If these first signs are missed, they are soon followed by spots on new shoots, buds and leaf stalks, by which time it is much too late for prevention and contact fungicide because the fungus is already well embedded within the plant tissue.
The only hope then is rather like injecting antibodies into our own blood — a systemic fungicide.
Mildew is not so very difficult to stop in the early stages, and there are several fungicides that will give it a severe check — all the chemical manufacturers have their own products and trade names which, like everything else, are constantly being improved and changed — but by far the most important point to bear in mind is that it has to be hit early and repeatedly.
Mildew is more debilitating and weakening than is generally realized.
(See also question number 46 on pages 200–1.)
Another all too prevalent fungus that attacks roses,black spot , is a different kettle of fish.
First appearing as tiny black spots on the upper surfaces of leaves, this is the outward sign that the fungus has already been inside the tissue and working for some time.
Even so, it is worth getting to know and keeping a sharp look out for the signs from as early as May on, because if you act quickly enough it is possible to stop the attack before it spreads through the rest of the foliage by picking off, and, this is important, burning the infected parts.
Left undetected, the spots will expand to discs, then to coalesce, by which time, as a rule, the fungus will already be on its way down the leaf stalks and into  the main stems.
Black spot has to be taken very seriously because, given the right conditions, it can ravage and virtually destroy a rose garden in just a few days — I have seen this happen, and it is not a pretty sight.
It can occur much earlier, but the peak danger period for the disease generally begins from the early part of July, and may persist right through the growing season until the big temperature drops of late autumn upset it.
Three important factors encourage the disease: warm humid muggy weather, clean air, and lack of hygiene.
The weather we can do nothing about, except to recognize what it can be letting us in for, and to take precautions accordingly by spraying contacts or systemics.
The clean air is a little more involved — surprisingly, the disease was markedly less prevalent before the advent of modern clean air policies.
The sulphur-laden dirty atmospheres of industrial localities virtually guarantee a grimy but effective fungicidal deposit — the indication could not be more clear that, whether accidental or intentional, a fungicidal film on the foliage does have an effect.
The third factor, hygiene, is perhaps the most insidious and difficult to control.
While it is true that the spores can easily hop over the garden fence, and there is not a lot to be done about sources of infection further along the road, much can be done by being entirely ruthless in cleaning up your fallen leaves and rose debris.
No matter if it does not appear to be infected, clear up all leaf matter and burn it.
Don't put the debris on the fire heap to be burned later, which merely prolongs the possibility of infection, but burn it immediately.
The spores of black spot are persistent, and accumulated debris and rubbish are perfectly capable of spreading the disease far and wide.
The two courses of defence are by contact and systemic fungicides, such as Maneb, Zineb, Dithane, Orthocide and others.
This entails starting early and topping up with repeat spraying on the young growth every few days.
An old method that is still worth trying is to soak-spray the plants and soil all round early in the new year with Bordeaux mixture (this can be bought as a proprietary mixture ready for mixing) that combines the fungicidal properties of copper and sulphur.
It is the same spray material that has been used for ages on potatoes and other crops, and can be a great help here also.
A word of warning: don't use metal containers or sprayers because they can corrode.
Wash out any containers thoroughly with hot water and make the spray fresh for every spray.
Systemic fungicides, especially those manufactured by Murphy Chemical, can sometimes be combined with systemic insecticides — a cocktail that simplifies preventive spraying and saves time — but do check very carefully for compatibility.
Don't throw any two products into a bucket and mix them; they may well destroy each other.
Fortunately rose rust doesn't occur very often, but when it does it can be a killer.
Treat it in the same way as black spot, with particular attention to clearing up fallen leaves on to the fire.
Systemic application and Bordeaux mixture in the dormant period should keep it at bay.
(See also question number 51 on page 206.)
Other disorders
Now a couple of problems which are frequently taken for fungus trouble, but which in fact are not, so perhaps we should talk about them here, between the fungus diseases and the physiological disorders.
An ailment, descriptively called purple spot , is caused not by fungus but by poor soil conditions and serious nutrient  imbalance (see question number 26, page 174).
Another problem is canker .
There are different kinds and, although the rose is ailing and liable, invariably the trigger is injury like hoe damage, rubbing and chaffing, bad stake ties and bad careless pruning (see question number 50, page 204).
Amputation of all affected wood has to be ruthless and drastic — there are no sprays, dusts or systemic cures, because they do not affect the cause.
Having regard to the causes, it has to be recognized that the conditions that lead one plant to canker are also putting others to the same pressure, so look to your overall cultivation methods.
Physiological problems
Finally, a few words about some physiological problems which result from nutrient  deficiencies and weather conditions.
Sometimes these are confused with pest and disease.
First, the weather.
The most common problem arises from that annoying characteristic of British weather, the late spring frost .
Leaves scorch, mainly from the edges in, becoming crinkled and brown.
It can look more serious than it actually is.
Not very serious, the plant grows on unharmed, new growth soon takes over, and the damaged foliage, while a little unsightly, is eventually cleared away by dead-heading and cutting back.
You ought never to see nutrient deficiencies because they are a sign of incorrect feeding.
However, it is prudent to become aware of the signs.
Make a note of the symptoms, and pin it up in the garden shed — the remedies are self-evident.
Main element problems are most often caused by the artificial feeding of fertilizers that are either unbalanced in themselves or become unbalanced because of the local soil conditions.
Phosphate is the least problem and, perhaps because of the almost profligate use of bone meal and the very long time it takes for the phosphate to be released by bacterial decomposition, is very seldom indeed the cause for worry.
Nitrogen shortage normally shows out as small, sickly, pale green foliage.
When it is serious, spots and patches of yellow and red appear as the green chlorophyll is not made, or breaks down.
Potash shortage is often an induced condition caused by too much nitrogen reducing the potash content to an unbalanced proportion.
In addition to the flabby growth and increased susceptibility to pests and disease that follows, the visible indications show out as brown patches which spread and coalesce round the leaf edges.
These collapse, shrivel and dry as though scorched — but this is not to be confused with frost scorch.
A further characteristic to aid a correct diagnosis is a marked shortening of the bloom stalks.
Sandy, chalk and other quick-draining soils with low organic content are particularly prone to potash shortage and imbalance.
When they are experienced, the three trace element deficiencies you are most likely to meet concern iron, manganese and magnesium.
Iron shortage shows out as an overall pale colouring in the leaves.
Iron is a component part of the green colouring matter chlorophyll, and any iron shortage inevitably means that fewer green chloroplast cells are made, hence the pale colour.
What chloroplast cells there are tend to concentrate near to the veins, so that the little carbohydrate that is elaborated is quickly moved into the nearby veins and carried to where it is needed, thus we get a characteristic green outline to the veins in an otherwise pale green, even yellowish, leaf.
The indication is serious  because, with leaves not able to work properly, the carbohydrate energy food supply is not being elaborated and the entire plant is only firing on one cylinder.
The remedy often suggested is to get iron into the system quickly by foliar feeding.
This is fair enough when the proprietary foliar feed is made up and used correctly.
When, however, another suggestion is followed — similar feeding through the leaves by spraying with iron sulphate — extreme care must be exercised.
This is the main chemical ingredient of a method of lawn weed killing that literally sucks the sap out of leaves upon which it rests by reversing (plasmolysis) the principle (osmosis) by which plants absorb nutrient solutions from the soil.
Spectacular cures for iron deficiency are possible with iron sulphate, but the safest way to use it is as a very weak solution — no more that can be heaped on a 1p coin in a full gallon of water — mist-sprayed on just enough to make the leaves glisten, not drench and drip.
Serious iron deficiency is most likely to occur in chalky soils where, although iron may well be present, lime locks on to it in a chemical combination that then makes it unavailable to plant uptake.
The condition can also follow heavy applications of lime and is one of the risks that have to be taken when a heavy liming is needed to neutralize severe acidity quickly when it is causing problems like canker for example.
It is not easy to distinguish between iron shortage as such and shortage induced by lime (chlorosis), and therefore the remedial action needed.
The give-away is to watch carefully: chlorosis has the same yellowing between the veins, but it begins and becomes more advanced in the topmost leaflet, and is followed not by a pale green leaf continuing to struggle, but by its total collapse and withering as the iron becomes not just short, but wholly denied.
Manganese shortage is very similar to iron, but is less marked: the yellowing tendency is blotchy, margined and striped along the lesser veins.
Magnesium shortage is more identifiable, with patches in the centre of the leaves that yellow, turn brown and die.
Leaves are one of the most important parts of any plant, and healthy hard-working leaves are crucial to the rose.
They are the factory where carbohydrate is elaborated in the presence of light to provide the energy source for all living and growing processes.
Anything at all that hinders or prevents the energy factory from doing its job throws a plant into a lower gear, and it has to work so much the harder to make progress.
Straight chemical fertilizers are for the most part designed to provide the three major elements nitrogen, phosphate and potash, and seldom if ever contain any of the minor elements.
So little of the minor traces are required, that organic manures invariably contain enough of all that is needed.
 Deficiencies should not be allowed to occur, and they will not if you ensure steady organic input to the soil by mulching.
For a concentrated nutrient source use an organic manure like Humber, which of course contains all the various elements from the materials that go into its composition.
Propagation
It is all very well to say that the production of a new rose plant is a skilled job and best left to specialists, but that takes little account of the satisfaction to be derived and enjoyed by trying something difficult, and being successful.
So if you feel inclined, why shouldn't you try your hand?
It can be interesting and satisfying — even just to read about it!
Having said that, one or two points need to be put and kept in perspective.
A lot of encouragement has been given in recent years to the idea of increasing one's roses by making cuttings — almost proposing it seems, that it is a way of avoiding the cost of buying new plants.
It is not particularly difficult to get rose cuttings to sprout roots, and to suggest that that is all one needs to do to raise new plants of any and all roses is to mislead by disregarding why all the trouble is taken to propagate H.T.s, Floribundas and many more by budding and, less often, by grafting.
Currently, one of the rather loosely applied definitive differences between plant and animal life is that plants can be propagated in either of two ways, sexually by means of seed, which involves male and female contributions from different plants or from different parts of the same plant, or asexually (vegetatively) by means of cutting and layering, which is analogous to cutting off an arm or a leg and growing an entirely new individual from such a part into a whole new body.
Propagating roses by seed is more involved, so we will begin by looking at the less complicated vegetative methods favoured by a majority of amateur gardeners.
Asexual propagation
A cutting is simply a length of stem top growth — with some plants it is a soft-tissue tip, with others a more mature hard-wood section — which, when inserted into soil or a suitable growing medium, and sometimes helped and encouraged by the presence of artificial hormones, will fight for life by producing roots, and so grow into a new individual plant.
By using our understanding of the nature of a node and the storage therein of energy, the development of callus healing tissue, and the development from that of adventitious tissue (see page 59 et seq .),
we can greatly increase the chances of a cutting ‘striking’.
Many roses are very ready to make root in this way.
The ramblers, Rugosas, Musks, Gallicas and most of the Old and species roses make root easily, whereas Rosa centifolia , the ‘Moss Rose’, is reluctant, as are (for some reason not at all understood) roses that have yellow, or predominantly yellow, flowers.
With roses that are normally grown on their own roots, propagating your own by cuttings is quite feasible, but with H.T.s, many Floribundas and those which are budded and grafted, apart from the fun it is not worth the trouble.
In being bred intensively for colours and scents, so much vigour is often lost that in order to realize its full potential a plant needs to have the much more vigorous upthrust of a ‘wild’ rootstock pushed into it.
When such top growth can be persuaded to produce its own roots as with a cutting, the best you can expect is an indifferent plant and a poor root system.
By all means try it, but don't think that you are going to produce lots more of your favourite budded roses by this method.
Where the type is suitable this is how to set about propagating roses by cuttings.
Towards the end of August or early September you will need wood of the current year's growth that is quite firm and mature.
The easiest procedure is to leave a stem unpruned in early spring, so that a number of lateral side shoots are produced.
These are ideal for our purpose and by late summer should be just about right.
Prune out the stem and take it into the shed where you can sit down comfortably to prepare the cuttings — they will have to be made very carefully, and you will need a very sharp knife.
Sever each side shoot by pulling away, or cutting if necessary, so that a heel is left attached.
Remove the shoot tip to leave a cutting about 9 inches (23cm) long, and then trim away the lower leaves to leave only the top two.
Remove the lower  thorns to make the shoot easier to handle while you pare the heel clean and smooth to encourage the formation of callus tissue.
Dip this end into hormone rooting powder while it is still moist from the cut so that some powder adheres, shake or tap off the surplus and lay it aside for a few minutes while the others are being prepared.
This gives the shoots time to dry which, short as it may be, helps the formation of callus tissue and in fact inserting cuttings too quickly while the cutting tip is still moist and unhealed is one of the most common reasons for failure.
This is more important with softer cutting like geraniums and fuchsias, but it also makes a lot of difference with roses.
Figure 14. (a) Half fill the slit trench for your cuttings with sand.
(b) With the cuttings in position in the sand, dig another slit 3 inches (7.5cm) away, take out the soil and firm it against the cuttings.
In a partially shaded part of the garden, not overhung by trees, shrubs or other plants that can lead to rain drip and where air movement will not be impeded and so encourage fungal attack, make a slit trench by driving in the spade full depth with the blade held vertically, and forcing open a narrow V-shaped slit, as shown in Figure 14.
If there had been no rain and the soil become dry, we used to prepare these slit trenches the day before and fill them with water from a can, but carefully, so as not to wash the soil back into them.
Sprinkle sharp sand along the slit — enough to fill in the bottom 4–5 inches (10–12cm) or so.
Systemics didn't exist in my nursery days, and we had to use contact pesticides.
It is a lot easier these days, so make up a little cocktail of compatible systemic insecticide and fungicide, plus a drip or two of washing-up detergent to achieve a good wetting, in a small bowl, and  swish the two leaves of each cutting in the solution so that they get a good wetting and protective coating.
Insert the cuttings by pushing each one down into the sand about 4–5 inches (10–12cm) apart and with the leaves at right angles to the line of the slit, so that growth emanating from the axillary buds grows out into free space between the rows, not into the cutting next door.
The leaves will need to be clear of the soil surface, which means that you will have a row of cuttings protruding some 3–4 inches (8–10cm).
Drive in the spade again, about 2–3 inches (5- 8cm) from the cuttings slit, and lever the soil over tight against the cuttings — check this by taking a few between thumb and finger, and try to lift them: they should be quite firm.
Leave the second slit open, or fill it with compost or sand, and use it to water the cuttings with a can in dry weather, without splashing and wetting the foliage.
The cuttings will remain in this position until the following autumn — 12 months — during which period you will need to keep an eye on them for pest and disease and, of course, include them in your routine precautionary spraying and care.
These are new-born babes facing a rough tough world: they need help, not neglect.
After 12 months you should have nice young plants nearly ready for moving on to permanent quarters or, if the cuttings are of the rugosa type and intended for rootstocks on to which you are going to bud other varieties, they can be planted out ready for working.
You will not be driven like the commercial nursery into getting as many as you can per acre (hectare), and can therefore afford to be a little more generous with spacing to give yourself room to move about more comfortably.
If you have that many to deal with, spacing them 2ft (0.6m) apart and 3ft (0.9m) between the rows would be ideal.
The second method,budding is where vegetative propagation becomes distinctly more involved, difficult — and interesting.
Some nurseries will supply rugosa rootstocks for those amateurs who want to try their hand, or you may raise them yourself by cuttings as described above.
There are two main methods of budding — that which may be regarded as the traditional way, and another ‘new’ method that is more often used for other shrubs and trees — although we were using it 40 years ago on both bush and standard roses.
The take was not quite so certain with some of the more ‘reluctant’ varieties, but the more vigorous types were quite successful, and the method is a little quicker to do.
First, the traditional method.
It is usual to grow on the cuttings for a  year so that the stock stems become somewhat thicker than a pencil but rather less so than your little finger.
In about late July, with the scion foliage strong and healthy and the rootstock main stem still green with no sign of ageing, we are ready to think about the most back-breaking job in gardening!
It is very easy to look at diagrams and read how it is done, but quite another matter when you have to get down to soil level with thousands to do and a foreman standing over you!
A proper budding knife will be required — a penknife is no good at all— which is like a planting trowel in that both ends are used and the handle is not just for holding in the hand.
The knife blade makes the cut, but the budding knife handle has a thin wedge-shaped end that is used, on turning the knife round, to open the cut.
Select a strong healthy stem that has borne a good bloom, or is still carrying one that has gone over the top, and look at the stem lower down — to see if you can find nice plump axillary buds or eyes in the leaf axils — these are latent growth buds, and they are going to become your new roses!
You can either cut this stem away, as you would at pruning or after flowering, or, if you are only budding one or two, take a bud and leave the stem standing.
The fresher the bud, the more likely it is to take without trouble.
Cut away the leaflets from the leaf-stalk at the bud you are taking, but leave the stalk, which you will need as a handle.
If you are cutting from a severed stem, take it with you to the stock to be budded, or if you are taking a number of buds, get the stem into a deep can of water at once and use it as soon as possible.
At this point, technique becomes personal preference: you can either make the cut in the stock first and then prepare the bud for insertion, or prepare the bud, put it into your mouth (handle protruding) to keep the cut surface wet, make the stock cut and slip the bud in straight away.
Our hardwood propagator would do even better.
Standing up to straighten his back, he would take as many as half a dozen buds, popping them all into his mouth, then down he'd go, snick, snick, bud in, and on to the next — he went so fast that it took two assistants following behind and  tying in to keep up with him!
With the stem in your left hand (if you are right-handed) snip off the leaf and make a shallow curving scooping cut, with your thumb against the stem to steady your hand and control the cut, and take out the bud with about an inch (2.5cm) long scoop, as shown in Figure 15.
According to which procedure you are following, the final preparation of the bud is done immediately before implanting, so into your mouth or implant now accordingly.
Figure 15. (a) Cut the buds which will make your new roses from a good strong stem that has borne healthy flowers.
(b) Strip the leaflets from the stalk, leaving the stalk as a handle.
Cut away and down behind the bud in a gentle curve.
Bend the ‘handle’ down to pull away the cutting with a heel.
(c) Pare the surface of the heel clean, straight and smooth.
(d) Square off the top of the heel.
(e) Bend back the lower end and use the knife to lift a sliver of pith to reveal the swelling of the embryo bud.
(f) The bud is now ready for insertion.
To make the implanting cut in the stock stem, drag a little soil away from the stem to give you a little more room in which to work, wipe away any mud splash with a wet rag and nick a T-shaped cut, ideally about an inch (2.5cm) or so above soil surface level.
If you have any choice in the matter, try to do this on the south-facing side, and as the bud will grow out to the south, rows should lie east-west, so that the shoots grow out into the row space, and not into each other.
The horizontal top bar should be scarcely ½ inch (15cm) long, and the vertical cut from it about 3/4 inch (2cm) long.
The cuts do not have to be deep, just enough to enable the two lapel corners to be lifted with the thin wedge end of the knife handle to reveal the green cambium layer beneath.
Final preparation of the bud consists of cutting square the top tip of the bud shield, and lightly bending back the other tongue end just enough for a tiny sliver of pith wood behind the eye to lift.
Slip the blade tip under this, and carefully prise it out to reveal the back of the embryo bud as a tiny swollen area.
If there is a hollow instead of the swelling, you have prised out the bud with the pith sliver and ruined it — start again with another.
Figure 16. (a) The T-shaped cut in the stock stem, 1 inch (2.5cm) above soil level.
(b) Lift the two lapels to show the green cambrium layer beneath.
(c) Insert the bud under the lapels with the squared-off top held tight under the cross cut.
(d) Tie in with raffia or (e) a cut length of elastic band.
Careful speed is the essence now.
As soon as you can see that the embryo is unharmed, don't touch it (keep it virgin clean or you may infect it), but hold it by the handle and ease the shield shape into the T-shaped cut.
If you have judged the T and the square trim well — this comes with experience — you will be able to press it down so that the squared-off tip sits firmly under the top of the T and is held there.
Close the two lapels, and continuing the old traditional method, bind firmly but not too tightly with raffia — you can buy this as ‘bass’ from a sundries shop — that has been prepared previously into 18 inch (45cm) lengths and well soaked to make it soft and pliable.
Don't cover the eye itself, as it will want to swell, and you will want to be able to see it.
Tie  off above the implant, push back the scooped-out soil and that part of the job is done.
A variation that we used to do, but which takes a little practice to get right, is to cut an elastic band, hold one end with your thumb or finger tip just below the implant, reach round the back with the other hand, stretch the elastic and, keeping it stretched, bring the end round and over the section under your thumb, grip it in the same way, pass round again and over the starting point.
If you have kept the elastic stretched enough you should be able to now lift your restraining thumb and use two hands to wrap the elastic round and round, working up to the eye and past it, holding in the lapels firmly under the stretched elastic.
When clear of the top of the T, finish off by passing the last but one wrap over your finger tip to form a loop, pass round again and slip the end through the loop and pull tight, and the elasticity will hold everything tight.
Long in the telling, but as soon as you have the hang of it, very much quicker than bass.
Thin plastic tape is also obtainable for this purpose, and I've seen narrow strips of cling film used very successfully!
Both are used exactly in the same way as the elastic.
The second way of budding is a little easier, perhaps, but needs practice to get things just right.
Again, it is a matter of personal preference whether you prepare the bud or rootstock stem first, but until you have had some practice and know just what is involved, I suggest that you start with the bud.
About ½ inch (1.5cm) or a fraction more below the selected bud, make a cut about ⅛ inch (0.3cm) deep and sloping downwards a little as shown in Figure 17.
Next, from about the same distance above the bud, begin a curving cut to pass behind the bud and clear of the embryo to meet the cut below — the bud shield should come away quite cleanly, still with its little handle.
Now comes the skilful part.
You have to repeat the same size cut on the rootstock stem but, as it will probably be a slightly different thickness, you will not need to cut in quite so deeply (the object is to take out a shield shape that the bud will fit as perfectly as possible).
This method is best suited to materials that are of approximately equal thickness, and it works quite well with ‘maiden cuttings’(see page 99) used as rootstocks.
The important thing to aim for is a good match; when the bud sits in its little step and is ready for binding in, you want to see scarcely any stem wood showing at the sides and top.
This ensures that the cambium layers at the edges of the bud shield and the bared section of the stem are directly in contact for their entire length and there is no space between.
Figure 17.
An alternative method of budding.
Take a ledged inset out of the stock stem with two cuts,(a) and (b).
Cut out your embryo bud as before, but this time squaring off the base rather than the top of the shield.
Fit the shield into the stem,(c), and bind as before.
This sounds more difficult than it is — you'll be surprised how quickly you can become quite proficient at it.
There is no top ledge as with the T-cut method to hold the bud in position while you bind it in, so you have to be careful how you handle the bass or the elastic band.
We tried taking out the pith from behind the bud, and we tried leaving it in — it made little difference.
Special elastic strips can be bought nowadays for this method, but I cannot see that they are any improvement on our elastic bands!
Three or four weeks later, you can take a close look.
If the handle and what you can see of the bud are still green, the prospects are good.
A fortnight later, bass binding can be very carefully snicked at the side to allow the bud to swell, whereas elastic binding will stretch and can be left a little longer.
If the bud turns brown, it is likely that the union has refused.
Remove the failed bud, clean off any browning on the stem and paint over with a protective fungicidal paint such as Arbrex.
There is still time to try again: insert a bud on the other side of the stock and cover all with the binding.
If the second bud fails, don't waste any more  time.
Depending on how close it is to successful neighbours and the risk of root disturbance, grub the rootstock out.
The unscrupulous growers sell these failures as ‘hedging roses’(see page 35 and question number 32 on page 181).
Stems for standards can be raised, either by seed or cuttings from Rosa canina or R. rugosa , each run up as ‘whips’(single main stems with all side shoots removed as they appear).
It is fun to dig out a nice long briar stem from the hedgerow for this purpose, but how can you be sure about what you are getting or whether two identical buds will behave the same as each other when they are on different stock stems?
Hedgerow briars are best left for walking sticks.
The implantation will have been carried out — hopefully, not too painfully!— with the thorny rootstock top growth still growing away merrily.
I have seen and heard advice that it is easier to cut the top growth out of the way first before budding.
No doubt it is easier, but it is quite wrong.
The stock must be grown on as though nothing has happened — the top growth is needed to pull up the sap from the roots, past and into contact with the bud.
A weekly routine of inspection has to begin at about the end of February.
A new season of growth is about to start, and as little as possible of the rootstock's upthrust must be wasted on its own foliage.
As soon as you can detect a slight swelling and reddening of the implanted bud, we have to think about diverting thrust into it — with care.
If you are a professional grower, this bud is merely one among thousands, and you will not have the time to fuss and mollycoddle it — the head comes off in one go, and the bud has to take it full blast.
Either the union is strong enough and can stand it, or it can t, and hard luck.
For the amateur, however, this is your creation, and you won't want it to fail at this stage for the want of a little time and thought.
I have seen beheading done too early and too suddenly — with the result that the still not perfectly united bud is literally pushed out by the sudden flood having nowhere else to go.
The way to avoid this disaster is to behead gradually — we took off about a third of the top growth every 7–10 days, so that the final beheading can be completed just above the implant by the end of March or mid April.
Paint the final cut with Arbrex to seal the wound.
With the top finally off, leaving a sloping cut to make sure that rain and dew doesn't lie there, you can expect the bud to grow away fast.
Do make sure that there is no crossing and crashing between neighbours; loop in with soft fillis string as necessary.
You now have a  maiden.
Some will try to bloom during the first year, others will not; it is better not to let them.
Remove any buds so that energy is concentrated into building up strength.
In the autumn, it is ready either for planting into its permanent position or for sale in the nursery.
Standards are much easier to work on — the work is at eye level and your back doesn't have to break.
It is usual in this case also to implant two buds, or even three with weepers, in order to get a nice full and evenly balanced head.
A single budded standard, or a double where one has failed, can look distinctly lop-sided for the first few years until it has had time to develop — this is the sort of stuff you have to watch out for in the cheap ‘end of season nursery clearance sales’ and street markets.
Standard weepers are produced by budding and sometimes grafting, rambler types into stems a foot (30cm) or more higher than bush types in order to enhance the weeping effect.
A further enhancement is to spread the top growth over a wire umbrella to get the hanging stems well away from the central support.
Frowned upon by the purist, the ‘Irishman's weeping standard’ is similar to the ‘Irishman's cutting’, in which a basal cutting is taken with roots already attached.
Very much easier to produce, these weeping standards consist simply of an easily struck rambler cutting with only the one single strongest shoot allowed to develop into a whip and stopped off at the desired height — or you can throw all convention to the winds and simply use a short pillar, fix an umbrella into position, and let a normal growing rambler fall over it.
A glorious garden belonging to a customer friend in Hampshire had an avenue of these leading to the dining room patio, and the effect from the house was no worse for not being puritanical.
However, whatever form the ‘standard’ takes, you must realize that the lofted shape increases the sail effect and makes it prone to wind damage and greenstick fracture.
A very firm stake is imperative.
The third method, grafting, is similar to budding and differs in that a short section of wood with more than one eye is enjoined instead of a single bud.
It is seldom practised with roses now — there is so little advantage over what can be achieved by budding — and is really of superfluous interest to be included here.
Sexual propagation
Raising more roses by seed can be a very frustrating business, or they can seed themselves with the efficiency and enthusiasm of weeds.
Some species,Rosa moyesii for example, seed themselves with such abandon that it is not at all unusual to find self-sown seedlings growing freely underneath the shrub, and others are enough to tax the patience of a saint — that is all part of the challenge.
The thrill, and perhaps the claim to posterity, is in being able to bestow a name on a rose that is different to anything seen before.
Figure 18.
The simplified anatomy of a rose flower in cross section.
Some amateur rose-growers are not interested, but more than just a few regard hybridizing and crossing their roses to see what happens as the summit of the rose-grower's art, so here is a short discourse for them on this delightful aspect of rose growing.
Hopes and anticipation you will have, but it is necessary to temper the feelings with a warning lest the expectation evaporate in a cloud of disappointment.
We all know the story of the two beautiful swans who brought forth what was regarded as an ugly duckling but which later surprised everyone by turning into a swan itself.
Even the professional hybridist, with masses of detailed ancestral records and statistics at his disposal, invariably has to raise thousands of seedlings — all calculated and, theoretically, designed — before finding one that might, and only  might, interest the rest of the world.
That is only the beginning — there is then the budding on to vigorous rootstock to see if the bloom's promise and prospects are confirmed.
Then follows the practical experience of time, resistance to pest and disease, a too-similar competitor nipping in and beating you to it — these are just some of the hurdles and obstacles to commercial profit.
However, roses are not swans, and all too often ugly ducklings remain ugly  ducklings .
The mathematical odds against you producing a new miracle are incalculable, and there can scarcely be a permutation that hasn't been tried before, but it has happened, and no doubt will again, that an amateur somewhere in a small garden with limited resources will beat the pants off the professionals.
That is not the reason for trying however, nobody will deny that it would be very nice to achieve fame and fortune with a world-beater, but the amateur gardener seeks primarily the satisfaction of creation.
In his eyes, all his chicks are swans, and anything else will be a bonus.
So, without any likelihood, and certainly no guarantee, let's talk about hybridizing.
The mechanical processes involved are straightforward enough, albeit requiring no little patience, delicate handling and care which, all told, is a skill in itself.
Many who take their hybridizing seriously prefer to have their roses growing in the controlled conditions of an unheated greenhouse, but with simple precautions, the beds outdoors are quite feasible.
The amateur is most unlikely to have, or want to be bothered with, all the nuances of hereditary dominance and recession — in any case, good old-fashioned luck of the draw is the biggest single factor.
Select carefully the plants you want to cross — it is important to work with clean healthy plants with good vigour and constitution.
Instead of allowing a natural and haphazard fertilization, we have to control it.
Basically, therefore, the job consists of transferring male pollen from the anthers of the variety that is to be the male parent to the stigma of the variety that is to become the female or ‘seed parent.
Of course, you can reverse the roles, make a cross both ways, and compare the results.
Modern botanical science knows a lot about dominant and recessive genes (which characteristics are dominant over others) but despite all the science, the one thing that you can be sure about is that there is no certainty about which characteristics of either male or female parent will show through in their progeny.
Although you naturally hope to reproduce the desirable qualities, you are just as likely to reproduce  the undesirable ones, and not only those of the parents, but those also of the ancestors from some way back.
Some varieties do not produce good pollen, others are very good, but are poor receivers and not good seed-bearers.
As we have already said, the whole process is an enormous game of chance.
Plants will normally come to bloom earlier in a greenhouse than outside, but in either case the most propitious time for the operation is during a spell, and after a couple of days, of bright sunny weather.
It is usual to prepare the seed parent first.
If the bloom is a double or semi-double, wait until the outer petals peel open but the inner petals remain closed and covering the stigma.
With a single bloom, we have to work just before the petals open.
As soon as the stigma is revealed and exposed, you cannot be sure that some keen and inquisitive insect won't beat you to it and carry in pollen from heaven knows where.
Some people like to remove all the petals to ‘clear the decks’, others will remove just enough from the centre to give enough space to work.
Remove enough petals very gently and carefully then, using tweezers, remove all the male filaments with their pollen-bearing tips.
Cover the bloom with a polythene bag — or better, if you can make them up, fine muslin bags that will let the air in but keep the insects out.
Seal the bag with a wire ‘twistit’ to protect the female stigma which, in a day or two, will become sticky and thus ready to hold any pollen that touches.
We have to be absolutely sure that only the pollen we want reaches the stigma.
Look now for a bloom of the male parent.
As soon as it is well open, and perhaps already dropping pollen grains on to its own stigma and petals, pick up a few grains with a small paint brush, and transfer them to the stigma of the female.
Take the bag off, fertilize the stigma, and replace the bag again as quick as you can — interlopers still have to be kept out.
If you don't have a male flower with pollen dropping, take the most developed flower, open it carefully to expose the anthers, use tweezers carefully to take out some filaments and lay them on a clean dry plate or saucer.
Place them in a warm dry position away from draughts or you'll lose the lot.
In a few hours, you will find the pollen dropping and you can proceed as before.
If your experiments are blessed, the ovary will soon show signs of swelling and the unventilated plastic bag can come away as the stigma is no longer receptive.
Tie on a label carefully to identify the cross or with a number or code to refer to your records book.
By autumn, the seed pods or hips will be turning red and ripening, and you will need  to follow the procedure outlined in the answer to question number 41 on page 193.
Naturally, when the seedlings are planted out, you will be all agog to see what the blooms will be like.
Some will show you what they are made of early on, when only a few inches (centimetres) high, others will be more reluctant, and will make you wait.
Now comes the hard part of scrapping those that are worthless, and that may be many or all!
Those that you think are worth persevering with can be grown on for another year, getting a second chance to bloom.
If that confirms your first fancy, use eyes from ripe wood to bud onto rootstocks as discussed earlier in the chapter.
You may find the first year's bloom on the rootstock pleasantly and surprisingly different to the original bloom on its own roots.
If it disappoints, don't scrap it at once, but wait for a second year and give it another chance to redeem your hopes and optimism.
At all stages, label everything, and keep a record of everything you do.