

PUBLIC WINDOWS INITIATIVE TO COUNTER MICROSOFT's PRE-EMPTIVE STRIKE AT WABI
Microsoft Corp and Insignia Solutions Inc are reportedly planning a pre-emptive strike against SunSelect's Windows-on-Unix WABI solution this week, pitting a Microsoft-backed Insignia SoftPC against it in the market.
SunSelect is due to make its WABI announcement on Wednesday May 5 at a gala in California with IBM Corp, Hewlett-Packard Co, Santa Cruz Operation Inc, Unix System Labs and Sun Microsystems Inc there as licensees and SunSoft Inc saying it will bundle the software with Solaris (UX No 428, 431, 432).
Reportedly WordPerfect Corp has withdrawn its support (UX No 433).
WABI is now also expected to go forward into the COSE initiative.
Sun, which has refused to license Windows 3.1 from Microsoft has literally had to re-invent Windows from scratch.
The process is technically demanding and time-consuming, to say the least, and leaves WABI snookered as far as staying current with Windows development goes, a situation Microsoft is likely to exploit.
However, in an attempt to forestall or derail Microsoft's likely objections to WABI, legal or otherwise — including its promise to ‘make Windows such a moving target that Sun could not keep up’(UX No 431)— Sun is also expected to unleash its latest secret weapon that's guaranteed to raise the stakes once again.
It has orchestrated a Public Windows Initiative pressure group of vendors that will attempt to force Microsoft to open up, if not make public, future plans for Win16, its 16-bit application programming interface for Windows 3.1, so crucial for Windows developers.
Membership of PWI is reportedly a condition of taking a WABI licence — all licencees are understood to have been sworn to secrecy under the direst of threats for disclosure.
PWI — with COSE at its side — will attempt to claim the high moral ground over the issue of open specifications and is likely to cast Microsoft in a mantle that was once the preserve of IBM.
Moreover, it's surely no coincidence that PWI comes at a time when anti-trust allegations against Microsoft are reportedly still under investigation by the US Federal Trade Commission.
Sun is clearly demonstrating to Bill Gates some of the black arts on which the Unix industry has cut its teeth — more of which Microsoft can  undoubtedly expect to face with its Windows NT challenge.
More details, see below.
NQUE TAKES THE ALTERNATIVE UNIX-ON-WINDOWS APPROACH
nQue Technologies Corporation, a small Silicon Valley start-up, has mapped out a wholly different approach to the Windows-on-Unix issue so wily and obvious it's amazing it's taken the industry this long to come up with it.
Rather than porting Windows applications to Unix, in the current fashion, nQue is porting the Unix operating system to Windows.
It is taking SVR4.2 and putting it on top of Windows 3. x as a Windows application.
It says the two complete kernels will be able to sit side-by-side on Windows systems and run their respective applications.
Its technology is the first integration of both the Unix and Windows operating systems on a single machine.
nQue fancies itself a non-threatening bridge to migrate Windows users painlessly to Unix and snatch them, in the process, from the jaws of Microsoft Corp's Windows NT.
(It believes that's where Microsoft ultimately intends pushing all its Windows clients.) nQue, however, is using Microsoft's own technology to create a low-cost shrinkwrapped retail package called OpenAgent that adventuresome users can install on their Intel machines without hazard to explore the potentials of Unix: its standards, maturity, 32-bit architecture, connectivity, multitasking, distributed computing strengths and application base which nQue believes will be stronger than NT's for some time.
The company calls OpenAgent ‘Unix with training wheels.’
Unlike UnixWare, Solaris-on-Intel or even NT, OpenAgent won't require users to wipe their disks and then replace their applications, an inhibiting thought for most people, according to nQue founder William Thompson.
Thompson says OpenAgent can be a 30-minute install from a CD-ROM and everything already on the machine is protected.
nQue believes its approach, which harnesses the full potential of Enhanced-Mode Windows using its Virtual Machine capabilities, yields performance and compatibility far superior to any Windows emulator.
It claims 100% compatibility with Windows 3. x (as it is now and as it may become to ward off emulators) and no degradation in the performance of any Windows application.
nQue also claims native-mode Unix applications will run at 94% of their potential performance.
The company is currently raising a million dollars in seed financing from private sources and will seek a final $8m round, perhaps in part from key OEMs.
It expects to beta test the initial pieces of OpenAgent early third quarter and ship to OEMs late in the fourth.
Details below.
INDUSTRY ‘IS TEA-BAGGING’ PENTIUM CPUs
Last week, when Unigram.X broke the news that Intel Corp wouldn't be able to deliver Pentium in any serious numbers before October, we had some trouble identifying the five pet companies that will get what can be had of the scarce chips.
As it turns out they are Compaq Computer Corp, Dell Computer Corp and NCR Corp (as we said), NEC Corp and Hewlett-Packard Co.
The shortage of Pentiums is so bad the industry has reportedly taken to what some people call ‘tea-bagging,’ moving their precious chip supply from system to system to prove to customers their box works, then quickly back to the treasure vault.
SUN SPARCSERVER 1000 BRIDGES GAP BETWEEN 500 AND 3,000 USERS
On May 11 at the SunWorld expo Sun Microsystems Computer Corp will complete its Enterprise Server family with the introduction of its scalable, COSE-compliant, 1,500-user, 8-way Scorpion, now officially tagged the Sparcserver 1000, a mid-range multiprocessor.
The departmental application server fits between Sun's 500-user Sparcserver 10 and the high-end 3,000-user SparcCenter 2000.
The Solaris 2.2-based system, whose profile resembles a ‘deep dish’ or ‘Chicago’pizza box, expands to eight 50MHz SuperSparc+ processors and up to 2Gb of memory with 200 Mb/second I/O bandwidth, 12 expansion slots, 100Gb disk capacity and built-in high-availability fault-resilient commercial features.
The system will be field upgradeable to next-generation Sparc microprocessors.
List prices start at $36,700 for a uniprocessor with 32Mb internal and 1Gb disk going to $46,700 for a two-way with 64Mb and 2Gb disk or $75,700 for a 4-way with 128Mb memory and 2Gb.
The single-image 350-TPS maximum Sparcserver 1000 tops out at $110,000.
SMCC is expected to claim that the unit is a ‘hot box,’ taking the number one position in benchmarks such as MIPS, Database TPC-A, Specint92 (figure a maximum 9000+), Specfp92, AIM III and Laddis.
It will compete against Hewlett-Packard Co's G, H and I series, IBM's 570, 580 and 980 and Digital Equipment Corp's Alpha 3500 AXP 4000 AXP.
Sun will claim the Sparcserver 1000 sets a new standard for configured system cost comparing one of its fully configured 4-ways at $76,500 to an HP H50 at $105,475, an IBM Corp 580 at $107,522 and a DEC 4000/620 AXP at $151,544.
Similarly, it will claim a new standard for upgradeability.
Because the Sparcserver 1000 is scaleable and highly modular upgrading from a base system to the high end is by simple addition and would run $96,400 in upgrade charges.
At HP it would require a minimum three systems swaps and run in excess of $500,000.
Sun has also bundled a one-year on-site warranty into the system to make it attractive to business environments.
It is specifically targeting manufacturing, retail, teleservices, decision, support, information publishing and branch automation as well as its old standbys engineering, scientific and electronic design automation.
Sun has been finding management information system departments, traditionally a cost factor at corporate customer sites, getting more involved in decision-making in the department, a corporate profit centre where budgets are now flowing.
Reportedly Oracle 7, Sybase, Ingres and Informix have all been tuned for the 1000.
…
SUNBOX AIMED AT AUSPEX
Meanwhile, when we first mentioned a new eight-way box coming from Sun we called it SunBox (UX No 429).
As it turned out that was wrong.
The code name for that box was Scorpion, now officially the Sparcserver 1000.
There is however a real SunBox: a four-box rack-mounted cluster due in July and aimed at Auspex Systems Inc's NFS file servers.
DISTRIBUTED MANAGEMENT — THE DISEASE FOR WHICH TIVOLI HAS THE CURE?
By William Fellows
Conceived as an open, shared environment for academics and scientists, Unix was not designed with the goal of running commercial businesses in mind.
Nevertheless, it has become established as the only real alternative for organisations seeking to avoid or escape proprietary, single vendor solutions.
Features and functions enabling commercial data processing across distributed systems are or have been added, whilst holes and voids in the system have been plugged and patched.
Apart from basic, but effective system administration facilities, Unix has lacked a proper mechanism for managing the overall application environment as a single entity.
Whilst the benefits and opportunities presented by distributing tasks and applications across high-performance, inexpensive Unix processors are being realised across the industry, commercial users are used to well-proven systems management utilities such as Digital Equipment Corp's Enterprise Management Architecture and proprietary solutions from the likes of IBM Corp.
Tivoli Systems Inc, based in Austin, Texas, has a growing band of acolytes which are supporting its effort to bring a framework for distributed systems management to Unix.
Tivoli's boss, ex-IBMer Frank Moss, believes that in many organisations up to 40% of the cost of owning Unix kit can be attributed to managing systems that are distributed across networks.
Whilst technological advances and competition are driving hardware, operating system and application software prices down, systems management costs are rising, he says.
Tivoli's aim is to reduce the cost and complexity of managing heterogeneous distributed environments which include Unix systems and personal computers.
Systems management is ‘the disease for which we have the cure,’ he believes.
As well as a basic management framework a variety of applications are required to suit different commercial environments, including change and configuration management, security management, inventory monitoring and analysis, client/server application management and operations management.
To get independent software vendors interested in its technology, Tivoli first had to get a system management framework and basic services established for applications to reside on.
The Tivoli Management Environment, TME, includes Tivoli/Works — a framework and installation facility, administrator facilities and services.
There are add-in applications for software distribution, system monitoring and configuration and change management for file systems — known respectively as Courier, Sentry and FSM — plus an application development environment and extension facility toolkits.
The technology has already been picked up in one form or another by many sections of the Unix vendor community.
Tivoli was selected to provide the framework for the Open Software Foundation's Distributed Management Environment — which will provide another application development environment to the industry when it comes on stream — has Unix System Labs, SunSoft Inc and others backing it too.
TME is already available on SunSoft Inc Solaris and Hewlett-Packard Co HP-UX operating systems.
Versions for Unix System Labs' Unix SVR4 and IBM Corp AIX are due this year.
A Microsoft Corp Windows NT version will be on show at the forthcoming Comdex exhibition —‘if we can get it lined up by then’— whilst Tivoli investor, mainframe system management software house Legent Corp will take the technology into the IBM MVS world.
Although most of these implementations will be layered on top of the operating systems — Moss believes users will turn to Tivoli for solutions and applications.
‘TME Inside’
If the Unix suppliers are able to agree on a consistent systems management application programming interface — and each also uses a similar implementation of the Object Management Group's Common Object Request Broker Architecture — Corba — independent software vendors would be able to offer binary system management applications running across a variety of platforms.
The vendors need a ‘more intimate relationship than they're getting in Corba,’ to get this together believes Moss.
One way would be for the Common Open Software Environment firms, HP, IBM, Sun Microsystems Inc, Santa Cruz Operation Inc, Unix System Labs and OSF — plus arbiter X/Open Co Ltd — to endorse an API that Tivoli has already offered up for their use (UX No 429).
Providing a ‘fast path to systems management,’ wouldn't be the only benefit to Tivoli —‘TME Inside’would undoubtably prove a powerful marketing tool.
The goal of Tivoli's own ‘united framework theory’ is to realise a consistent graphical user interface, application portability and intermanageability across emerging Unix systems management solutions such as USL's Distributed Management system, SunSoft's Distributed Objects Everywhere and OSF DME.
Moss favours COSE establishing a combined superset of OMG standards plus the Tivoli API that could be quickly implemented by its adherents.
Moss says Tivoli could have TME source re-written in the Corba IDL language within six months and says there is only around 5% difference between the object technologies in the OSF, SunSoft and USL solutions.
The problem with relying on COSE is that no-one's really sure if it wants or is ready — or knows how — to solve the problem yet.
Executive voices have been raised several octaves over the issue (UX No 433), and there does not appear to be any clear agreement yet on how COSE firms would level this playing field.
COSE firms could still decide to use systems management — or even different object request broker implementations — to gain competitive advantage over each other.
‘That would be like each doing their own version of NFS or TCP/IP and handing the advantage to Microsoft Corp's Windows NT, which has no systems management API yet,’ warns Moss.
At the end of the day, he says Tivoli will offer TME APIs that comply with whatever COSE comes up with in the way of systems management.
Once systems management technologies start coming on stream, operating system suppliers are expected to begin integrating system management APIs into existing and future, object-oriented versions of their operating systems.
Moss says independent software vendors don't need to wait for Unix suppliers to release integrated offerings to begin application development and porting work — if they develop to TME now, applications should move across to integrated operating systems ‘almost intact,’ he claims.
Transfer
Ideally Moss would like the open system vendors to go one step further and take over development of Tivoli's distributed management framework entirely —‘because they should be doing the standards and API work.’
However, with the current uncertainty of COSE's intentions and the range of systems management and other API options being considered by various open systems groups and organisations it is ‘no time to bow out now,’ says Moss.
Tivoli will continue to develop the framework alongside solutions for the time being.
On current form, Moss thinks the transfer of development responsibility for its framework technology to the vendor community is at least two years off.
Although Tivoli has the open systems distributed management market pretty much to itself at the moment, Moss knows that the provision of a pervasive technology standard to the industry cannot generate a revenue stream much further into the future.
Indeed he does not expect the firm to derive any long-term revenues from object services, common management services or common interface layers.
His plan is to establish the Tivoli framework as a standard technology by licensing — and creating APIs — for as many vendors as possible and attract ISVs and developers to create a systems management application market on top.
Once the standards and interface issues have been ironed out, Tivoli will concentrate its efforts on developing applications for configuration and change management, security management and inventory monitoring and analysis.
In addition, Moss expects to form a bunch of third party relationships with firms doing things like client/server application management tools, data centre management packages and operations management solutions: niche markets he will leave to others.
Moss believes much of Tivoli's future success depends on getting framework technology and solutions out through the Unix channels.
He says several start-ups — plus some established firms — are expected to follow in the footsteps of Canadian firm Open Vision (UX No 433), and begin developing for and upon the Tivoli framework.
Moss says he has negotiated with the unnamed firms to ensure they won't be duplicating each others' efforts.
The Unix systems management market is thought to be worth some $40m now — its expected to top $1bn by 1997/98.
Moss says he'll be more than happy if Tivoli can grab up to 50% of an enlarged market.
Last year saw half of privately-held Tivoli's revenues come from sales of Tivoli Works, the framework, toolkits and services.
The other half came from end user applications.
This year Moss expects less than 20% of turnover to come from sales of framework technologies — he hopes end user products will make up 80% — and only 5% or 10% during 1994.
He says the company isn't looking for any more investors and should soon start generating cash.
Tivoli has around 100 customers worldwide and is looking for an OEM deal in the Far East around the end of the year by which time its internationalisation efforts should be complete.
Six UK licencees include the Prudential Building Society, the Post Office and Swiss Bank — North West Water is said to be taking a look.
Distributed computing solution supplier Protek Ltd, Maidenhead, Berkshire, has an exclusive deal to peddle Tivoli products in the UK and provide training and support.
MICROSOFT AND INSIGNIA STRENGTHEN ALLIANCE AGAINST SUNSELECT's WABI
To steal SunSelect's WABI's thunder — see front page — Microsoft Corp and Insignia Solutions Inc are believed to be moving on the accord that will strengthen their relationship.
The much-rumoured pact will see Insignia admit it has a license to Windows source code and the right to modify it at the application programming interface level to improve the performance of SoftPC, its Windows-on-Unix package.
Access to Microsoft's technology, which Insignia has had in-house for some time, is expected to make SoftPC run MS-DOS and Windows programs at near native performance probably by the end of the year.
The Microsoft-Insignia alliance spells trouble for Sun which has refused to license Windows from Microsoft.
Sun's technical approach with WABI means they must literally re-invent Windows from scratch.
The process is technically demanding and time-consuming, to say the least, and puts WABI behind the eight ball as far as staying current with Windows development, a situation Microsoft is likely to exploit.
As it is, SunSelect has reportedly validated only a dozen Windows applications on WABI and the thing still doesn't print.
Meanwhile, WABI is making its debut to suggestions from Microsoft that it might sue for violating its intellectual property rights (UX No 431).
Though Microsoft might be posturing, licensing WABI to HP, IBM and USL also reportedly exposes Sun to risk of legal action by Insignia.
WABI was written by people who worked at the BIOS house Phoenix Technologies and later at Integrated Technologies Inc.
Insignia bought the Phoenix and ITI technology years ago and continues to hold the residual rights.
Sun itself has rights to that technology but only on Sparc platforms and maybe not all of them.
Insignia is believed to have spoken informally to Sun on the matter.
Meanwhile, sources contend that IBM's and HP's commitment to WABI is fairly weak.
The two are said to be concerned over Sun's ability to deliver code on time and suspect it may not prioritise their platforms over Sun's own.
On the other hand, being box shifters, they may not care what software they ship and some people are betting they'll both wind up licensing from Microsoft.
OSF TO SPELL OUT DISTRIBUTED MANAGEMENT FUTURE, AS IBM TAKES THE REINS
Under pressure to clear up the confusion surrounding the direction of its Distributed Management Environment, Open Software Foundation DME technology manager Kathryn De Nitto says the group will make a statement within two weeks which should answer some of the questions on many lips.
OSF had planned to do the work on integrating the various DME components itself after members were scared off by IBM Corp's experience of integrating DME's companion piece DCE, the Distributed Computing Environment.
OSF and Tivoli Systems Inc — source of the DME framework — are said to have appealed to IBM and Hewlett-Packard Co after sensing a loss of interest in DME due to the slow progress (UX Nos 421, 428).
OSF says final contracts specifying who is responsible for re-working and integrating which pieces of DME have yet to be exchanged, although Tivoli Systems Inc boss Frank Moss says ‘we now report to IBM, not OSF.’
Aside from integration difficulties, OSF has also been bogged down trying to figure out how to implement a standard version of the Object Management Group's Common Object Request Broker Architecture (Corba), a mechanism for managing objects across distributed systems.
The fact that the DME framework was not interoperable with other OSF founders' Corba technologies has meant that some layers of DME have had to be re-designed and/or re-written using donated parts of Hewlett-Packard Co's Distributed Object Management Facility and IBM's System Object Model (SOM).
IBM is apparently now convinced that DME can succeed — it will get a distributed object application development environment and Corba-compliant object dispatcher — and because of the resources available to it, will take over the role of key integrator.
Tivoli continues in its role as a sub-integrator of the systems management portion of DME.
Its framework object model will become more interoperable with the HP and IBM environments as a result.
Although IBM's SOM has only some 10% code in common with Tivoli's technology, only a small percentage of Tivoli source is replaced in DME's re-worked systems management component.
Indeed, Tivoli says it may even adopt SOM as a subset of its own future offerings.
Moss says once OMG declares the results of its request for object services, then all this stuff should become a lot more standardised.
OSF decided to split DME into two manageable sections some time ago.
De Nitto says the third snapshot of the distributed services module was frozen last Thursday and will go out to members in September, following testing.
It'll include most software distribution and networking technology, though print services will lag some two months behind.
DME's framework component includes the object management and network management systems.
Work on integrating the HP, Siemens and Bull-derived network management pieces will be complete by the end of the year.
OSF won't put a date on when the re-worked Tivoli-based object management system will be delivered until its announcement later this month, though observers speculate it may be as late as the middle of next year.
THREE VERSIONS OF NT NOW EXPECTED, AS SEQUENT EXPANDS MICROSOFT PACT
Microsoft Corp has told Sequent Computer Systems Inc, one of its allies in the upcoming Windows NT  blitzkrieg , that the server version of Windows NT will start shipping by the third week of June.
Sequent was also told the NT client could ship at the end of May, simultaneous with system's launch at Comdex Spring/Windows World.
Sequent says there are to be three versions of NT: the client, an inexpensive four-processor retail iteration of the Advanced Server and a 16-processor OEM-only version of the Advanced Server.
Whether or not the software is production-ready, Sequent intends taking revenue orders for its anticipated new Intel Corp-based, NT-exclusive WinServer symmetric multiprocessors starting June 1 and shipping almost immediately (UX No 418).
It will deliver the Beta 2 version of NT if necessary.
Sequent claims its Fortune 200-targeted customers are unconcerned.
Sequent will ‘preintegrate’ NT, network and application software, particularly SQL Server and Oracle 7 databases, in its new boxes under an expanded joint development pact with Microsoft to be announced this week.
The pair are hoping the custom-configured WinServers will prove as easy to deploy as personal computers.
The line includes only one home-grown box, the high-end 16-way WinServer 5000, priced at $247,000 with 384 disks, 32 SCSI channels, 2Gb memory and parallel-processing comms facilities and unavailable until the fourth quarter.
Sequent expects the mainframe-class 5000 to go to 30 processors.
The other three members in the family are all being OEMed from Tricord Systems Inc (UX No 420) and will be available soon from Sequent as the entry-level 2-way WinServer 1000 priced at $29,900, the 2-way WinServer 1500 priced at $39,300 and the 6-way WinServer 3000 priced at $75,300.
Like everybody else, Sequent is waiting on Pentium deliveries from Intel, now not expected much before the end of the year.
Until then it will use 66MHz 80486 parts instead.
It describes the 1000 with 512Mb RAM, nine 3.5-inch disks and two SCSI channels as fit for business-critical client/server workgroups and small departments.
The 1500 is also designed for LAN consolidation, decision support and workgroup computing with 512Mb RAM, 21 disks, four SCSI channels and optional redundant power supplies.
The 3000 supports large-scale LAN consolidation, TP and decision support with 16 SCSI channels, 1Gb RAM, 192 disks, optional fault-tolerant protection and redundant power supplies.
Sequent is targeting Oracle NLM users and OS/2 estimated to be running out of power.
It is working from a list of 20,000 OS/2 sites supplied by Microsoft.
Resellers will include Novell Platinum types and Tricord VARs.
It is also experimenting with a hybrid telemarketing scheme called WinCentralDirect that fits in with the company's plug-and-play attempt and puts customers in contact with NT-certified technical and business consultants.
DESTINY SUES USL FOR RIGHTS TO NAME
Now it's Unix System Labs' turn in the dock.
Destiny Technology Corp, a nine-year-old printer controller and ASICs developer which sells to OEMs, is suing Unix System Labs, Novell and Univel for trademark infringement, deceptive trade practices and unfair competition for using ‘Destiny’ as the code name for SVR4.2.
The suit was originally filed in February in the US federal courts in California and is being  pursued now that attempts at an out-of-court settlement have failed.
Destiny Technology claims the code name created confusion between USL's operating system and its controller software and hardware products with its customers though none of its products apparently bear the name Destiny.
Destiny Technology president Gary Cheng called USL's alleged infringement ‘a clear example of improper usage of our assets including intellectual property.’
Destiny Technology's suit demands that it be paid ‘all profits, gains and advantage’ the three defendants have realized ‘since commencing their unfair and competing activities’and reimbursed ‘all damages’it sustained from their ‘infringing actions and acts of unfair competition including loss of sales and advertising expenses necessary to dispel public confusion.’
It also asks that the trio cease using the name, correct any public misconceptions, destroy all papers mentioning ‘Destiny’ and pay attorney's fees.
A spokesman for Destiny Technology said settlement talks fell through because they ‘were not moving as rapidly as they could have.’
Destiny Technology reportedly sent cease-and-desist notices to USL in March, April and May of last year before the operating system was formally introduced as SVR4.2 in June.
Each time, it says, USL said all references to ‘Destiny’ would be eliminated.
The  plaintiff claims USL took insufficient remedial action.
Destiny Technology, which says Destiny is its trademark, recently defended a successful action against DeliveryMan Corporation, a New York software company, for using Destiny Technology as its corporate name.
USL counsel Sandy Tannenbaum dismissed the suit as ‘frivolous,’ saying it was unclear what the company really wanted.
Destiny Technology wanted a press release sent but the wording was a admission of wrongdoing USL was unwilling to make.
He also questioned whether Destiny had clear rights to the mark since he said USL's search showed a number of companies have registered it.
DUN & BRADSTREET MAKES ITS NT MOVE
As expected (UX No 429), Dun & Bradstreet Software Inc and Microsoft Corp last week signed a joint-development and marketing agreement to move SmartStream, D&B's account and decision support client/server software, to Windows NT and SQL Server, NT's desktop database front-end from Sybase Inc.
SmartStream provides data access, distribution, presentation and development functions for managing purchasing, asset management and manufacturing systems.
It includes the SmartStream core decision support software, Financial Stream, HR Stream, Distribution Stream and Manufacturing Stream.
SmartStream for NT is expected to ship in the autumn.
In addition, D&B will resell Microsoft's Access database as an embedded SmartStream application whilst Microsoft will license a beta NT version of SmartStream for  worldwide internal use.
D&B launched Unix versions of the software for Hewlett-Packard Co's HP-UX and Data General Corp's DG/UX in February, and is currently developing application programming interfaces for Unix and Windows NT to ensure user access between both environments.
EOS SHIPS SPARCSTATION CLONE IN FIVE GUISES
Having abandoned Sparc compatibles as unsaleable, EOS Technologies Inc has just started shipping the first full production fabrication of its new third-generation EOStation 1030L, a performance clone of Sun's Sparcstation 10 Model 30.
It is the first member of the company's L-Series SuperSparc line using LSI Logic's ASIC chipset and Texas Instruments Inc's 36MHz chip on an EOS-designed PCB layout.
It comes in five configurations: System Upgrade Kit, Base System, Server Ready System, Supermini Desktop Server and Standard System Package.
The L-Series motherboard fits into the Sparcstation 1, 1+ and 2 formats so EOS can provide a plug & play upgrade path from older Suns.
The Standard EOStation 1030L comes with 32Mb ECC memory, 424Mb high density drive, 1.44Mb floppy, 19-inch colour monitor, GX graphics, Sparc 2-style chassis and shrinkwrapped Solaris 2.1.
The Base System loses the HDD, monitor, GX card and ECC memory.
The Server Ready comes with the Base features plus 32Mb ECC memory and 424Mb HDD.
The Supermini Desktop Server replaces the 424Mb HDD with a 1Gb HDD.
EOS is also getting its first 40MHz 1Mb Superchache SuperParc CPUs ready to ship this month.
The EOS 1041L models will be the same configurations as the 1030L.
EOS is still  tussling with the fact that shrinking the board's size reduces the number of memory banks it fits from eight to six.
Also while the L-Series boards were designed to provide two Mbus and four SBus connections, when using the SS2 chassis, the height restriction doesn't allow for the second bank of Mbus and SBus slots.
The company is currently designing a new chassis to provide full mechanical functionality, expecting it to ship in June.
Also in the works and due out in June are the LS-Series EOS SuperSparc workstations.
This set of models (1030LS, 1040LS, 1041LS, 1052LS) are to be exact duplicates of Sun's Sparcstation 10 line in performance and mechanical functionality.
The L-Series systems are targeted to list at 20% less than Sun on all models.
The company is selling largely direct domestically; in Europe, Canada, Asia and Australia it's going through resellers.
It has opened a preliminary EOS Europe office and its EOS Korea has been in full operation for six months.
EOS also offers a Sparcstation 2 clone, the EOStation 10L, not a focus product.
EOS' pet research and development project is a slickly designed prototype transportable, 1280 x 1024 16-inch diagonal gas plasma monochrome flat panel display SuperSparc machine that weights under 20lbs with a desktop footprint of about 9 inches by 6 inches and depth of 3.5 inches  minimum to 5 inches maximum.
However it isn't scheduled for production until EOS can develop a colour solution.
IONA CLAIMS ORBIX IS ‘FIRST FULL OBJECT REQUEST BROKER’
Iona Technologies Ltd will unveil Orbix — described as the first full implementation of the Common Object Request Broker Architecture — at the Object World trade show in June.
Colin Newman, business manager of the Dublin, Eire company acknowledges the other object managers already in the market from the likes of Hewlett-Packard Co and Hyperdesk Inc, but argues that Orbix is the first CORBA-compliant one to be built from scratch and as such scores in terms of size and efficiency.
Moreover it is the first to offer direct hooks to the C++ programming language and last week, Iona, Sunsoft Inc and Hewlett-Packard made a joint submission to the Object Management Group proposing a standard C++ CORBA interface.
Iona sees US-based in-house software developers as its largest market.
Prices have yet to be set, but the company says that it is looking at $3,000 to $5,000 for a development kit and around $100 per user for run-time use.
OPEN VISION TO FIGURE IN COSE PLANS
OpenVision, the unusual nine-month-old start-up with $25m in funding and a $12m revenue stream, made its formal debut last week as anticipated (UX No 433).
The company and its 15 systems management products, which will be integrates together as Open V*OPSS by the end of the year, may become central to COSE's systems  management efforts.
Unix System Labs president Roel Pieper, a member of the COSE anschluss, predicted USL's partnership with OpenVision will ‘be able to drive the COSE effort in systems management forward’ by establishing common tools and technologies.
OpenVision came to its debut armed with a licensing agreement with Hewlett-Packard Co, a reseller agreement with IBM Corp and Sun Microsystems Inc and on-going discussions with the Open Software Foundation, Tivoli Systems Inc, USL about technology exchanges and a chair on X/Open's network security committee and working relationships with Informix and SHL Systemhouse.
OpenVision's technology is aimed at managing large geographically dispersed networks of heterogeneous computers with controls similar to those found on mainframes.
Its solution is derived from an architecture that integrates disparate products and applications around an event-drive core providing an automated ‘alarm’ system  activated in anticipation of a user-defined problem and takes immediate action.
The product strategy is combined with fixed-price package services that provide a ‘no-shelfware’ commitment that OpenVision's products will be successfully installed and functional within a predictable budget.
MATISSE TO GO UP ON KENDALL's OSF/1
Object Databases, the US arm of France's Intellitic International, this weeks expects to announce that it has started porting Matisse, its object-oriented database, to Kendall Square Research's KSR/1 family of general-purpose highly parallel systems based on OSF/1.
The Kendall port should be ready at the end of the year.
The company is also having discussions with Hewlett-Packard Co and Digital Equipment Corp.
Matisse claims to be a production system fit for mission-critical heavy load transaction processing environments.
For the last eight months it has been in use at a $10bn nuclear reprocessing facility in France with no hiccups, according to ODB president Jeff Sutherland.
The application captures all sensor readings in real time and stores them for 30 years as required by law.
The Matisse Server Engine will support up to hundreds of users in a client/server environment.
The US National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has used it to increase performance of robotic factory operations.
It is also in the running to handle a 100-user 5GB card catalogue at the new French national library up against Sybase, Oracle and Adabase.
Matisse guarantees consistency of data through two-phase locking for data update.
Using object replication, it automatically generates duplicate versions of objects on multiple disks with negligible overheads.
When a disk fails, objects are re-replicated on remaining disks and the system becomes fault-tolerant again with replacing the failed disk.
The Matisse client software incorporates a micromodel for ease-of-use that will reportedly support any data model and includes an object-oriented template for integration with other applications.
GATES — WHY WORLD IS WAITING FOR NT
Addressing the Computer Journalists Club in Paris last week, Microsoft Corp boss Bill Gates acknowledged newly emerging client-server applications and the rise of personal computer technology in corporate computing, but said the missing element in making all these applications work easily is a proper operating system.
‘Windows was not considered robust enough, Novell's NetWare was considered good for sharing files but not for these new applications.
Then there are the many forms of Unix which, unfortunately, are not compatible with each other, so you have to choose one hardware supplier, which means a lot less choice.
None of the three choices was ideal.’
Windows NT, he said in a shameless publicity spot, ‘is really taking the best of the three — Windows, network operating systems and the workstation or Unix world and pulling those together.’
He predicted Microsoft will sell 1m copies of Windows NT in the first four months after it is released this summer, but that the time between NT's introduction and its arrival as ‘the dominant operating system’ will be as long as three years.
‘We're not trying to set unrealistic expectations.
Now if you come from the Unix world, 1m is a huge number,’ he said.
‘It's five times what Sun has ever sold as the most successful Unix vendor.
If you come from the world of MS-DOS or Windows, 1m is not that big, because we sell over 1.5m copies of Windows and over 2m copies of MS-DOS every month.’
He also quipped that, since NT stands for New Technology, ‘we will will have to change that when it's a few years old.’
On competition, he said ‘the second biggest software company is Novell, and on the server, which is one of the areas in which I expect NT will be very successful, they have a very high market share.
So if you want to look for a short-term, meaning 18 months, competitive battle that will be the most interesting, the server battle between NT and NetWare will be a major area of competition.’
NQUE's UNIX-ON-WINDOWS GAMBIT
The initial pieces of nQue Technology Corp's Unix-on-Windows OpenAgent software — see front page — include the two-user Destination, the Unix SVR4.2 binary execution platform, the utilities and the graphical desktop interface, and Connection, the networking and multiuser sets.
nQue envisions these first two pieces appearing simultaneously on retail shelves priced at under $300 each and distributed on CD-ROM.
Follow-on products include Generation, a development set, Transaction, with Tuxedo and an auditing set, and Projection, with the Open Software Foundation's DCE and DME technologies.
nQue's distribution strategy puts OEMs first and retail channels such as CompUSA six months after.
Unix System Laboratories, whose SVR4.2 nQue licensed as its Unix system, reportedly has right of first refusal as an OEM channel.
nQue says USL is waiting to see how the system shapes up.
nQue sees USL making OpenAgent technology available to its OEMs, such as Univel, as an installation option for SVR4.2.
To run, OpenAgent needs a 33MHz 386DX box with 16Mb or better a 33MHz 486DX with at least 8Mb.
The hard disk should be an 80Mb IDE or larger with a network install option, a 200Mb SCSI is optimal.
OpenAgent Destination needs Windows 3. x and MS-DOS 5.0.
OpenAgent Connection may require Windows for Workgroups to take advantage of its management interface or Windows 3.1's follow-on Windows 3.2. nQue figures its marketplace is the downsizing scientific and engineering workstation user, the rightsizing PC workgroup and the upsizing PC power user.
Interesting William Thompson, nQue's founder and an old Unix soldier, developed the key technologies in Lachman Associates' Stream-based NFS and TCP/IP while at Convergent Technologies and later joined Lachman.
Lachman president Ron Lachman was of course the force behind the creation of WABI, Sun's Windows-on-Unix solution due out this week.
David Van Daele, a Lotus alumnus, who was once vice president, sales and marketing at Digital  Research Inc and chief architect of the DR-DOS' retail strategy is a member of nQue's board.
He believes the product would give Univel a competitive advantage and be a ‘no brainer’ for Windows users.
IBM DUMPS VERSANT, OBJECTIVITY, FOR OBJECT DESIGN WITH EVERYTHING, BUYS STAKE
IBM's Programming Systems Division last week announced a strategic partnership with Object Design Inc and says it will use the Burlington, Massachusetts-based firm's ObjectStore object database for all of its future object-based application development.
To cement the deal, IBM has bought a $27m equity stake in the firm — Philips and Eastman Kodak also have holdings.
IBM plans to use ObjectStore in more than 50 object projects it is currently working on.
Products will begin shipping by the end of the year, according to IBM's vice president of software engineering, Irve Trager.
First up will be a central object-oriented repository for AD/Cycle, now renamed the Application Development Platform (ADP).
ADP is IBM's troubled attempt to develop a complete LAN-based application development environment for client/server systems — IBM failed outright with AD/Cycle for MVS, and abandoned it last year (UX No 353).
An ObjectStore repository for Information Warehouse, IBM's corporate software architecture for accessing data across System Application Architecture platforms, is also planned.
Future workflow management, document management and compiler tools will implement ODI technology.
ObjectStore will also feature in IBM's Distributed System Object Model (DSOM)— an object-oriented schema which provides a common mechanism for communicating between objects.
IBM intends to integrate parts of ObjectStore with DSOM to help in the identification and storage of  persistent and  non-persistent data.
It will also use ObjectStore to recognise code, data and objects written in different  programming languages.
Sun Microsystems Inc's Distributed Objects Everywhere (DOE) project also uses aspects of ObjectStore.
Object-oriented versions of AIX and OS/2 will also use ObjectStore subsets, and ODI is currently  negotiating to get its stuff into the IBM/Apple Taligent Inc object operating system effort.
IBM and ODI plan to develop a series of products linking ObjectStore to IBM's range of databases.
First is an object-oriented interface between ObjectStore and DB/2 to allow users to view relational data without using SQL (Standard Quey Language) commands directly.
To do this, an interface will be built to IBM's database access technology, the Distributed Relational Database Architecture — support for third party DRDA-compliant databases will follow later next year.
An SQL gateway will follow.
IBM's existing object projects and software using technology from companies such as Versant Object Technology Inc and Objectivity Inc will be moved to ObjectStore in their next releases.
HP TEAMS WITH BANYAN
Hewlett-Packard Co has teamed with Banyan Systems Inc to put Banyan's Vines and enterprise network services up under HP-UX Unix on Precision Architecture machines, and provide Vines users with easier means of using HP printers with a network adaptor to work with the new MIO interface.
CONVEX TAPS HP-UX APPLICATIONS BASE FOR PARALLEL BOX
Convex Computer Corp and Hewlett-Packard Co last week said they are hotting up the alliance that saw Hewlett take a 5% stake in Convex last year with a potentially substantial technology exchange to plug the massively parallel applications gap.
Convex is building a massively parallel system out of HP's Precision Architecture RISCs, and under the new agreement, will swap its parallelising compilers for Hewlett's HP-UX implementation of Unix so that it should be a relatively straightforward task to adapt the 4,000 HP-UX RISC applications to run on the planned Convex machines.
In the context of the agreement, analysts were quoted as suggesting that acquiring a software base for a new supercomputer has traditionally been the biggest drag on sales, and doubting that Convex and HP had cracked it — but up to now there has been no massively parallel machine that is both hardware-and software-compatible with a big existing applications base.
Convex's plans call for a massively parallel machine that will be scalable to TFLOPS performance, in an air-cooled, stand-alone, general purpose system.
The company is aiming for three generations of products over the next few years.
The first generation will be scalable to 128 processors with up to 25 GFLOPS performance, expected to be available in first half 1994, and the firm aims to improve performance by at least an order of magnitude per generation.
The operating system will consist of three components: HP-UX; the ConvexOS environment; and a hardened implementation of the Open Software Foundation's I/AD Mach microkernel — running HP's Visual User Environment front end — developed specifically for massively parallel systems.
The machine will ironically be more compatible with HP applications than Convex C Series ones, but it will be source code-compatible with the latter — an applications base of 1,300.
The Convex Application Compiler will have automatic interprocedural analysis capabilities to provide a high degree of optimisation from existing applications.
Critical applications will be able to be further optimised with the advanced parallel environment to be provided with the planned scalable parallel processing systems.
The multiple instruction-multiple data scalable parallel processing system will support a shared memory programming model called global shared distributed virtual memory to provide a Fortran and C programming model very similar to current production supercomputers.
The system will also support message passing models such as parallel virtual machine and the high performance Fortran extensions of Fortran 90.
In September 1992, Convex founded and sponsored the Scalable Computing Working Group of scientists and engineers from industry, academia, and research: it meets quarterly to advance scalable algorithm and application development, and currently has some 40 members.
In addition to HP-UX, HP will provide a suite of standards-based libraries, commands, and utilities including Motif, X Window System, software distribution and system administration utilities.
Convex says it is enhancing the Mach 3.0 microkernel with faster input-output capabilities and parallel processing extensions in a scalable architecture.
IBM ‘TO PUT VERSION OF DB2 DATABASE UNDER NT’
IBM Corp's dismantling of the Armonk politburo to follow Chairman Mao's ‘Let 100 Flowers Bloom’ dictum has really let the genie out of the bottle, and Infoworld has been talking to consultants that say the company is planning to enter the tents of the enemy by putting a version of the DB2 database up under Windows NT.
It is not clear whether the effort involves simply the client end or the full DB2 — both have just been announced for AIX Unix on the RS/6000.
Consultants told the paper that IBM has been dissecting the two most recent pre-release versions of NT at its Toronto labs to assess the time and money that would be required to do the implementation, and reckon a product could arrive at the turn of the year.
The move is bad news for IBM Personal Software Products in its efforts to get OS/2 2.0 established, because many corporate users have gone for OS/2 specifically for its relatively easy integration with mainframe DB2.
HP ADDS SOFTBENCH 3.2, VERSION FOR SOLARIS 2.1
Hewlett-Packard Co has taken its SoftBench software development environment up to release 3.2, which adds the SoftBench Message Connector mouse-driven task-automation tool — and announced that SoftBench 3.2 will be available under the Solaris 2.1 operating system from SunSoft Inc.
SoftBench Message Connector will be bundled with SoftBench 3.2 for Solaris 2.1, HP-UX and SunOS 4.1.
X operating systems and is available with the SoftBench Framework.
Other new capabilities for Solaris 2.1 include the Distributed Debugger Environment and embedded SQL support to access databases in C or C++.
SoftBench 3.2 for C is $2,300, for C++, $4,500.
SYBASE LAYS FOUNDATIONS OF A NEW MARKET?
Gary Flood reports
Last November, Emeryville, California, based Sybase Inc began outlining its next generation relational database management system database server and tools suite, System 10 (UX No 410).
At the time the name seemed just too obviously a snipe at rdbms rival Oracle Corp, which began rolling out its delayed Release 7 over the course of 1992: Sybase's current release name is 4.9, and there seemed no logical reason to start calling anything out of the fast-growing system software supplier's warehouses ‘System 10.’
Now things begin to make a little more sense.
‘We decided to call it System 10 because we wanted an order of magnitude improvement,’ claims Stu Schuster, vice president of marketing, speaking at last week's announcement of the availability of seven components of the 11 System 10 database server family products (more details of the tools components will come later in the year).
Sybase claims to have launched the client/server market itself with the release of its Open SQL Server and Client products in 1987: now it sees itself launching a further market, enterprise client/server, mainly for mainframe customers downsizing to new platforms, as opposed to the departmental (and usually Unix or VAX/VMS) first generation of SQL-based database system.
The foundations for this new form of client/server computing are claimed to be found in the following System 10 vision.
At the bottom level sits the SQL Server engine itself.
Above it are three products fulfilling the role of distributed system management; the OmniSQL Gateway, detailed last month, is designed to provide interoperability between a number of non-Sybase and non-relational systems, and the Replication and Navigation Servers.
Above this layer sits a set of open client/server APIs, Open Client, Open Server and Embedded SQL.
Orthogonal to the database server layers are a set of control servers, for back up, monitoring, and administration.
What all these elements are supposed to do is answer what Sybase claims are the five big reasons users are unwilling to finally go all the way with open systems as opposed to host or legacy solutions.
First, they need a well proven advanced technology to minimise the risk of moving from a departmental system supporting up to maybe 100 users to hundreds if not thousands of users.
Secondly, they want scalable systems for immediate high capacity of data storage with low entry cost.
They also want to move from single function, stand alone and relatively simple to administer departmental or small solutions, to corporate wide, integrated and larger versions which will be harder to administer.
They want (or need) interoperable systems to take advantage of heterogeneous, multi-vendor architectures, with reliable data and transaction delivery, controllable from a single location, supporting up to hundreds of Gb of data.
Some wish list.
Sybase says this is what Unix and distributed systems need, however, if they can really challenge the mainframe.
And, you guessed it — Sybase can give it to you!
Or at least some of it, in beta, right now, and the rest later in the year (in beta again).
Of the eleven System 10 elements, some are new, some have been developed with technology partners such as NCR and are revamped older products.
Seven were announced at the company's well attended (1,800 turned up instead of the expected 1,000) 5th annual international user group show in San Jose, California, last week.
Announced were: a new, and supposedly high-performant and OLTP friendly version of its database engine, SQL Server; enhanced versions of the Open Client and Open Server offerings, plus the Embedded SQL for SQL C, Cobol and Ada precompilers; and new and enhanced control servers, the technology Sybase argues customers need to control distributed applications, Sybase Backup Server (with backup, loading and recovery facilities, database consistency checking three times faster than in the previous release, and bulk loading of data — now capable of loading up to 1Gb an hour, and claimed to be seven times faster.
Standards
For vendors and users committed to standards, often said to be a weak spot in Sybase's message, System 10 is supposed to be so standards friendly you'll fair quiver with joy.
The promise is to provide standards transparency instead of picking one (or any of the five million we've come up with so far).
In terms of programming an interface to System 10, existing Sybase DB-Lib API library codes or embedded SQL precompilers will talk easily to the new and simplified CT (for client) Lib — with only 50 instead of 350 calls, this should be simpler.
The client application, can, however, talk through the X/Open XA, ESQL, Microsoft ODBC or other APIs as desired.
To talk to the network software layer in the Open Client, the application will then work either through Sybase's proprietary tabular data stream protocol or other protocols Sybase says it will support, in particular, IBM's DRDA, the Open Software Foundation's RDA and Borland's emerging IDAPI.
It also notes the Open Software Foundations's DCE RPCs are becoming more popular, and may be supported.
Open OLTP monitors, including IBM's CICS/6000, NCR's TopEnd, AT&T's Tuxedo and Transarc's Encina, will be supported as part of the X/A Distributed Transaction support — no matter that few customers seem to have built many applications in anger with such products, Sybase says it just loves standards to death these days!
In fact, with it supporting the very latest ANSI/ISO SQL-92 standard, it's so standard it's more standard than anyone else.
With OmniSQL Gateway already in beta, three more important products, and in some ways the most interesting, and yet to be unveiled: the Replication, Navigator and Configurator servers.
These will handle reliable distributed data and transaction delivery, scalable  parallel processing and capacity planning and design for database environments.
The seven announced products are to be shipped on HP 9000, IBM RS/6000, NCR System 3000, Sun SunOS, Sun Solaris, DEC VAX/VMS and DEC Alpha VMS in 1993.
After 90 days 12 other platforms will be supported: Data General Aviion, DEC Alpha OSF, Motorola, NEC, Novell NetWare, Pyramid S Series, Sequent, Silicon Graphics, Stratus FTS and VOS and Unisys U6000.
The twelfth is notable: for the first time (UX No 430) Sybase will be available on the ICL DRS6000, ending a long and tense stand-offish relationship between it and ICL formerly wedded to the Ingres toolset, and  Sybase , and joining rivals Oracle and Informix on the ICL Unix platform.
And in 1994, expect an IBM OS/2 and Microsoft Corp Windows NT port ‘when NT has settled down a little bit,’ says Schuster.
Prices of the product set range from $290 to $256,000 with the Backup Server bundled with SQL Server 10 at no additional cost.
At the conference three companies were enlisted to back up Sybase's pitch: Andersen Consulting, up and coming US client/server human resources and financial applications provider PeopleSoft, Bachman Information Systems and BP Exploration, the first representing VARs or system integrators and the latter end-users.
All outlined how fab System 10 was, and how it would help them, with PeopleSoft rooting for database cursors and the new Open Client because it wants to offer customers better performance, distributed data management, system administration tools and very large database support, and Bachman promising to support System 10 — well, because it just liked Sybase so much.
(Its presentation was a sales pitch for the relatively  beleaguered ex-AD/Cycle company, and was the most content free.)
Andersen's Mark Miller described the Passenger Revenue Accounting System built by Andersen for North West Airlines between 1987 and 1990 and now being customised for Delta and three other US carriers — a huge mainframe and workstation system with the North West application handling around 90Gb of data (80% of which is host-based DB2, the rest Sybase).
Miller described how the original system users 1,000 mainframe Cobol programs and 75Gb of data on a DB2 DASD data farm, with 400 plus Sun SPARC workstations running C application code and 15Gb of Sybase-held data.
The new carriers are being offered a slimmed down, mainframe fat-free version: between 10 and 20 SPARC 10 Sybase database servers (with up to 18Gb per server) replacing the mainframe, a set of batch servers with up to 4Gb of flat file space per server and a range of on-line application server Sun workstations running Sybase Open Client.
Delta will have about 180Gb of data, all in Sybase, for their implementation; the other three combined, again all Sybase, 320Gb.
The north West application is said to handle 200,000 transactions a day — Delta want 400,000.
Phew.
How can System 10 help?
Miller picks out data backup and integrity enhancements as areas System 10 can make the  system easier to manage.
Two hours of every night can be spent backing up data: Miller demands System 10 improve this by an order of magnitude.
And since every table in the application has triggers for primary and foreign keys and last update id and data information, he thinks 80% could go if the promised integrity enhancements features work.
Invisible
So with System 10 offering high performance OLTP support, standards transparency and distributed large database application control, roll over Oracle, hand in your keys Informix and lights out Ingres?
Well…not quite.
Though no-one can deny Sybase's recent figures aren't fabulous, Informix is doing well, too, and Oracle is still several times as large.
For a reminder of some market realities, look at Sybase in the UK.
In an eerie reversal of the situation in the North American market, Oracle's next biggest competitor isn't the plucky standards-hot Sybase but virtually legacy operation Ingres, currently owned by ASK Group.
Sybase has done very well in financial markets and companies in Wall Street and the City, mostly because for a long time it could offer facilities such as triggers and stored procedures that Oracle couldn't.
Outside of the Square Mile, it's practically invisible in the UK rdbms market, where Oracle runs unchecked, Ingres still does well on the back of its ICL agreement into local and central  government , and Informix, while selling like hot cakes, still mostly shifts its C-ISAM and Standard engines, not the high ticket OnLine.
Changing that is partly the job of recently headhunted former Oracle staffer John Spiers, now marketing director for Northern Europe.
He's got a lot to do.
System 10 may well help change that, but Sybase can't play the triggers now: everyone else, and even Oracle in System 10, has caught up with such features now.
Moving the game to a new playing field is a great idea, but you need not only another team to play against, but some spectators to pay at the gate.
But at the moment, technologically, Sybase can do no wrong.
Let's hope for its sake that the customers really do want to build the huge and ambitious downsized applications System 10 is for.
POWEROPEN WILL HALT APPLE's A/UX
Apple Computer Inc will roll out an enhanced version of its A/UX Unix operating system in June.
Derived from AT&T Unix System V.2.2 with BSD 4.3 enhancements.
There won't be many more iterations of Apple's Unix effort before the PowerOpen environment running on Apple PowerPC RISC boxes supersedes it.
Apple will continue to support A/UX on its 680x0-based systems, but will be pushing PowerPC/PowerOpen-based systems into these markets.
The enhancements to A/UX release 3.0.1 are already available on Apple's Unix server line, but things like asynchronous input/output, large buffer caches and support for 500Mb and 1Gb drives will now be available as part of a general release.
Apple says A/UX customers are demanding more CPU performance and will be able to get it through PowerPC.
The basis of PowerOpen — the operating system which will run on the Apple/IBM/Motorola Inc PowerPC RISC — will be based upon IBM Corp's AIX Unix, probably version 4.1.
It will be compliant with the OSF/1 operating system, but does not include the Mach microkernel, a point Apple is adamant about, as it has yet to make up its mind on the issue of microkernel strategy.
Mac-in-a-box
Meanwhile, Apple's Macintosh Application Services software for PowerPC includes a native implementation of the Macintosh Toolkit and allows well-behaved Macintosh applications to run within an X-Window on PowerPC and IBM Rios RISC machines.
It is not a full operating system implementation and so far only IBM has signed for what observers have dubbed ‘Mac in a box.’
The version unveiled at the PowerOpen roll-out (UX No 427), used AT&T-backed start-up Echo Logic Inc's binary-to-binary translation of the 680x0 into native PowerPC code.
Echo Logic is expected to debut its FlashPort tools at Apple's developer  conference next week (UX No 433)— Apple says won't be offering the Echo technology directly.
Although the company used FlashPort to create a native version of ToolBox for PowerPC, Apple's David Payne, engineering project leader for PowerOpen on Macintosh systems, says it will use internal emulation technology to bring current Mac  applications over to PowerPC, although he concedes the Echo software can do the job too.
Payne says the advantage of using emulation over binary-to-binary translation is that ISVs do not have to tinker with their applications one iota to get them up on PowerPC, they just run, although some performance is lost.
‘If there are no special performance requirements then emulation is fine.
If higher performance is needed, then binary-to-binary translation may be required,’ says Payne.
ISVs will be able to use Echo technology for this purpose.
Apple is currently thought to be working on two efforts to move the production version of the Mac environment onto to the PowerPC, one using a large amount of emulation, the other a large amount of translation.
Those working on the PowerPC version of Mac, as opposed to the provision of a Mac environment within an X-Window under PowerOpen are thought to favour emulation (UX No 427).
Mac applications should run in an X-Window on any PowerOpen application programming interface-compliant implementation on a PowerPC system.
The diagram below shows how Macintosh functionality will be feature under PowerOpen.
The mixed mode switcher can flip between 680x0 and PowerPC applications, allowing either to run.
Traslated code (ie the ToolBox) is regarded as native code.
HP ADDS BOARD-LEVEL HP9000 742i
Hewlett-Packard Co has now introduced its most powerful VMEbus board-level computer yet, and calls it the HP 9000 Model 742i.
The new computer is based on the 50MHz PA-7100 version of the Precision Architecture RISC, rated at 61 MIPS, and joins the company's family of industrial computers.
It is bundled with HP-UX Unix and is designed for system integrators and the OEM market in manufacturing, aerospace and defence.
It fits into two 6U VMEbus slots, enabling the Model 742i to outperform multiboard computers, which typically have more intensive development and support requirements, the company claims.
It offers standard VMEbus interface option, eliminating the need for a separate controller board.
With 16Mb of memory — going to 32Mb or 64Mb — it is $8,800 and has on-board local network connector, a Centronics parallel port, two RS-232-C ports and an SCSI-2 SE port; the bundled HP-UX 9.01 operating system carries a two-user licence.
BULL UNVEILS ITS ANSWER TO IBM's AD/CYCLE
Compagnie des Machines Bull SA last week introduced what it says is the ‘last major component of the Distributed Computing Model,’ an integrated software engineering environment called PCTE-based Integrated System Development (ISD).
Bull is positioning ISD against IBM's promised but undelivered AD/Cycle (UX Nos 433, 353, 338), and says it'll ship a client/server implementation in July.
AD/Cycle is due for release in the second quarter 1994.
The first version comprises a repository based on Programming Common Tools Environment technology from GIE Emeraude, Louveciennes, and the Neutral Information Model (NIM), which in turn is based largely on the Exchange repository interfacing technology from Software One Ltd, Marlow, UK.
ISD will initially be available for Unix, Bull's GCOS and IBM MVS systems.
The PCTE repository and the Neutral Information Model are the key components of ISD and allow different tools to share data across distributed environments.
To achieve interoperability, information is fed into the PCTE repository via NIM, which captures data, tools and even parts of applications in a neutral format, irrespective of design, methodology or programming language.
An exchange data interface provides a bridge between the tool and the information model to do this.
Other ISD features include a OSF/Motif and Microsoft Corp Windows graphical user interface and a control integration system based on IBM Corp's SDE WorkBench/6000 — which is derived from Hewlett-Packard Co's SoftBench.
Integrated System Development is now available for beta test.
Among the primary analysis tools the first version supports are those from Bachmann Information Systems Inc, KnowledgeWare Inc and Intersolv Inc.
To start small, a Cobol application development environment with compiler, development and debugging tools is priced at $15,000.
A beginner's repository plus two tools would cost $50,000 or so, which includes a workstation and the software; then the user would need between one to four weeks of consulting.
There was also a new release of Bull's Integrated Systems Management software, which includes new Unix functions such as back-up and restore facilities, trouble ticketing and Bull's BOS/TP Tuxedo-based transaction processing monitor.
It also supports Oracle7.
BOS/TP extensions include upgrades to Tuxedo 4.2, GCOS 7 mainframe support, Oracle7 and the Informix Corp transaction tool kit.
The O2+ object database is now supported on the Rios-based DPX/20 Unix systems.
And Bull also has new DPS 7000 702 and DPS 9000 500 mainframe models.
INFORMIX STRIKES LESS FANCIED UNIXES OFF LIST
Informix Corp has decided to hedge its bets, and broaden its definition of open systems — as a result, its relational database will, in future, no longer run purely under Unix, but also under Microsoft Corp's Windows NT and Novell Inc's NetWare.
If the Unix versus NT struggle ends in a bloodbath, it at least the company will not have all its eggs in one basket.
Director of product marketing for engines, A J Brown, realises that, when compared with other database vendors, the Menlo Park, California-based company is late in announcing its move to NT, but said it wanted to be sure there was enough customer demand.
He also added that there was an element of fear involved — vendors must respond to Microsoft, he said, because the firm may well become ‘the IBM of the 1990s and beyond’.
The group's high-end Informix On-line database, however, will not be available under NT until the first quarter of 1994 because of the added complexity of the product.
NT tools will appear at the same time, although drivers for Microsoft's Open DataBase Connectivity tools, ODBC, should be released during the third or fourth quarter of 1993.
Brown reckons NT will be more popular on client machines initially —‘Microsoft is not a server company’.
The decision to convert for NetWare is customer-driven, he said — with NetWare's 60% to 70% market share in both Europe and the US, Informix can be sure that Novell's operating system will be running in at least one department in the majority of companies.
While there will be a delay of between four to six months before the NT and NetWare releases become available, Brown reckons that by 1995, or three versions of the database on, Informix should be able to launch the three versions simultaneously.
He also expects the three versions to be interoperable by 1995.
Informix's standard database engine generates about 40% of revenues in the US and the On-line product the remaining 60%, the reverse is true in the UK.
While both databases run in 30 separate environments, only about eight or nine of these generate between 85% to 90% of worldwide turnover.
So, over the coming year, the company plans to reduce its number of supported environments to 10.
This includes IBM Corp, Digital Equipment Corp, Hewlett-Packard Co, and ICL Plc's Unix machines.
Informix has strategic agreements with all of the above.
But the deal with Hewlett-Packard Co may well have far-reaching results.
In the first quarter of 1994, the company intends to release a new version of its fourth generation language, 4GL++, which will have object-oriented extensions.
If there is any demand, it may well add Hewlett-Packard's object database management system, OpenODB, alongside of its own On-line product.
MINIGRAMS
Pyramid Technology Corp has reported second quarter net profit of $1.4m against a loss last time of $7.2m, on turnover up 34.5% to $58.0m.
Mid-term net was $1.9m against a loss last time of $25.7m, on turnover that rose 22.2% at $113.1m.
Net per share was $0.12 in the quarter, $0.16 in the half.
Pyramid notes that it is scheduled to begin shipments within the next six month of its next-generation high-end symmetric multiprocessing product line, based on the Mips Technologies Inc R4400 RISC multiprocessor.
Concurrent Computer Corp says it has signed up Cranfield Data Systems Ltd in the UK and Istar SA in France to market complete systems for the dynamic analysis and vibration control sectors of the Measurement and Control market using its Series 7000 real-time Unix systems.
Santa Cruz Operation Inc's prospectus for public offering indicates it will offer an initial 6m shares, 3.6m of them new, with 1.2m to be sold outside the US, at a target price of $12 to $14 a share; it doesn't give any plans for the $14m or so net proceeds.
Underwriters are Goldman, Sachs & Co and Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette Securities Corp.
SCO will launch Open Desktop 3.0 on May 18th.
Denver, Colorado-based Unidata Inc is to integrate Transarc Corp's OSF Distributed Computing Environment-based Encina transaction processing monitor into release 4 of its UniData database due mid-1994. +1 303 294 4848.
Meanwhile, Powersoft Corp is to interface its PowerBuilder 3.0 environment with a Windows version of Encina, allowing users to build  PowerBuilder PC clients for Encina-based distributed OLTP environments.
Santa Cruz Operation Inc has moved its director of product management, Grover Righter — a former Univel Inc vice  president of engineering — to the position of vice president, product management.
Reports say OSF is now negotiating with oil industry users in the Petrotechnical Open Software Corporation on a range of new  initiatives .
IBM is expected to ship OSF Distributed Computing Environment for OS/2 2.0, 2.1 and Windows 3.1 in the summer — DCE for MVS should be complete by year-end — whilst Novell Inc is readying a DCE NetWare loadable module which will allow DCE clients to see NetWare files.
Intel Scientific is readying a plan to get low-end versions of its i860 RISC-based massively parallel systems into universities and other sites that can't afford the full-blow Paragon XP/S models: Paragon's OSF/1 microkernel operating system is due this month.
 Financially troubled Sequoia Systems Inc says it is no longer looking for a buyer — it didn't get any acceptable offers in the first place — and is talking to minority investor Hewlett-Packard Co about new funding to get development its PA-RISC-based fault tolerant machines back on the tracks.
On the threshold of the WABI announcement this week — see front page — doubtless its most famous product, SunSelect general manager Carl Ledbetter has cashed in his chips in favour of becoming president of AT&T Consumer Products, the division responsible for corded and cordless phones, videophones, cellular phones, answering machines and AT&T first personal communicator, its Hobbit-based widget.
Unisys Corp has named veteran Ronald Bell its chief technology officer responsible for defining the company's long-term technology direction and strategy, oversee R&D and investment in key technologies, leveraging core  competencies into new products and handling partnerships.
He was previously vice president and general manager of the Unisys' Unix Systems Group which he will continue to head in an acting capacity.
DEC is importing Yoji Hamawaki, the former president and chairman of BMW Japan, to be president and representative director of Digital Japan.
His predecessor Edmund Reilly becomes president and managing director of DEC's 13-country Asia region based in Hong Kong.
Borland International Inc chief executive officer Phillipe Kahn told InformationWeek that Computer Associates wined and dined Novell Inc boss Ray Noorda in an attempt to acquire the company.
Kahn said Noorda quoted an inflated price and CA chief Charles Wang and executive vice president Sanjay Kumar stormed away from the table.
CA has also try to get Borland, Kahn said, going so far as to threaten a hostile takeover.
Univel Inc president Joel Applebaum last week in an interview said WABI ‘is not baked yet.’
He thought it was good for the RISC environment but he's content with the Windows solution Univel is adopting for the Intel environment, which is apparently on the brink of shipping.
Meanwhile, Univel claims to be selling into Europe, South America and the Middle East.
The X Business Group is organising ‘X and Beyond,’ a major X industry conference focused on customers' perceptions of X and client/server computing.
It's scheduled to be held at the Fairmont Hotel in San Jose, California June 7–8, just prior to Xhibition.
It cost around $900. +1 510 226–1075
In the month and a half it's been delivering its high-end SparcCenter 2000s Sun has shipped 130 systems to paying customers: the firm has reportedly come up with a new 50MHz MPU module for its high-end SparcCenter 2000 that adds 2Mb external caches and improves database throughput from 20% to 40%.
Apple Computer Inc and Novell Inc have successfully completed their project to bring the Macintosh system to mainstream computing, but no decision has yet been made on a commercial follow-up: Novell chief financial officer James Tolonen says the companies wanted to see whether Macintosh System could run atop a different operating system and on a different chip, yet still maintain the user-friendly features of the Apple system.
Paris-based Advanced Computer Research International SA is designing a massively parallel processor around DEC's Alpha RISC (UX No 422), and will now develop Fortran 90 compilers and applications for use on parallel systems with Cray Research Inc.
ACSET, which develops compilers for Advanced Computer in Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium, will use Cray's Fortran 90 front-end technology to create and market Cray-compatible compilers for ACRI and, eventually, other European computer manufacturers.
Cray will take an equity position in ACSET.
ACRI and Cray will convert applications for both companies' parallel computer systems — Cray is also designing parallel machines around the Alpha RISC.
ACRI was founded in 1989 by Jacques Stern, founder of Sesa SA and former chief executive of Compagnie des Machines Bull SA, to develop a new generation of European high-performance systems for the scientific, technical and engineering markets.
ACRI Alpha machines are not due until the end of 1995.
This week SunSoft Inc is supposed to unveil its latest iteration of Interactive Systems Unix, release 4.0.
Reportedly its binary compatible with SCO Unix and most of the major SCO applications will run under it.
Some of SCO's fringe applications, however, will only run single-user, not networked, on the stuff.
SunSoft is also supposed to announce new European distribution deals and new users like BMW for Interactive Unix.
It had looked as if Robert Palmer was getting Digital Equipment Corp back onto an even keel, but now comes cause for great concern.
Too many companies decide that if the product is having a tough time in the market, the answer is to change the packaging, and DEC is tarting up its famous lower-case ‘digital’ logo, which has stood the company in excellent stead since 1957.
The updated logo features ‘a more contemporary typeface and slight modifications to the spacing of the design's blocks’, and the white letters now appear on a burgundy background instead of the traditional blue — and we hope the company gets some very tough questioning at the annual meeting over the cost.
Confused between Cray Research Inc and Cray Computer Corp?
Can't remember which is which?
It's simple — you just have to remember that Cray Research makes computers and Cray Computer does research…
Amdahl Corp is not known as an IBMulator for nothing: it too is cutting its dividend — to five cents a share this year from a dime last year, in an effort to conserve its capital base: the company, which reported a first quarter $240m loss after a $243m restructuring charge said its revenues were lower than expected because of soft economic conditions and competitive pressure on prices.
It also said that while it was committed to the IBMulator business, it plans to expand its open systems products line because demand is increasing in that field.
Next week, Network Computing Devices Inc will introduce NCDWare 3.0, a personal computer version of its X server software.
The software will apparently replace the firm's current PC-X software, PC-XView — the stuff it acquired from the GSS Personal Graphics Inc acquisition last year (UX No 331).