

BACON AND BENNETT
Bernard Denvir comments
The juxtaposition is not perhaps entirely self-explanatory, but it has something to do with art and out appreciation of it.
Francis Bacon is accepted as one of the few ‘greatest’ British artists of the 20th century, on a level with say Henry Moore in sculpture.
Untrained in any art school, commencing his career in the early 1930s, a homosexual, addicted to the sleazier pleasures of Soho, living for a large portion of his life in the same seedy studio in South Kensington, eschewing all official honours, and a stranger to what used to be called the ‘salons’ of high society, he succeeded in expressing in frightening imagery the horrors which lie embedded below the surface of life.
He spoke of his incentive to art as being that of ‘exhilarated despair’ and from nearly all of his paintings there emerges a scream as chilling as that which Munch so memorably depicted 99 years ago.
No other British painter of our time has received such widespread recognition, reaching as far as the imagery in Bertolucci's Last Tango in Paris and Pasolini's Teorema .
Bacon died earlier this year, and is reported to have left sixty million pounds, in his will published in September.
this is extraordinary.
It is a well-known fact that certain Victorian painters, Millais, Frith, Homan Hunt, left considerable fortunes, but none approaching this.
Their fortunes too sprang from the fact that they were immensely popular.
Barriers had to be put around their pictures when they exhibited at the Royal Academy to protect them from the crowds of ardent devotees; reproductions of their works were sold in their tens of thousands.
Moreover, unlike Bacon, they painted portraits — always a useful adjunct to any artist's income.
Yet nobody could suggest that Bacon's works are ‘popular’.
visually they are frightening, if not repellent.
Only microscopic number of reproductions hand on the walls of ordinary peoples' houses, and in terms of the national population those people who really ‘like’ them — as opposed to professing admiration for them — must be very much of a minority, so Bacon's millions must have come from institutions and a very small body of very rich patrons.
This exemplifies one of the enigmas of the contemporary art world, and it touches on the problem of what decides out likes and dislikes in art.
It is one which is closely allied to a problem raised by implication by Alan Bennett, that imaginatively cynical Yorkshire dramatist and actor, who recently chose Mantegna's Agony in the Garden as his choice in this month's Dramatist's Choice’ series in the National Gallery.
In his gripping TV drama about Anthony Blunt: ‘A Question of Attribution’ he described the painting thus: ‘The apostles, oblivious to all considerations but those of perspective, are fast asleep on ground as bare and brown as an end of the season goal mouth, this sleep signifying indifference.
Above them on a rocky promontory of convenient geology, Jesus kneels in prayer, an exercise that still goes on in some places, though with less agony and less certainty of address.’
He also comments on the angels posed in the sky above.
‘Even as angels go, these seem a little unconvincing, airborne cherubs which seem like a bad special effect or a funerary monument that's suddenly taken flight’.
Here there is nothing about tonal values, composition, or any of the phrases which critics and commentators use with such abandon; merely a straightforward statement of what Bennett sees.
And that to him seems to be the answer to a problem which at sometime or another must have exercised most of use, and which he explains in the pamphlet which accompanies the display; ‘The art gallery, that supposed refuge and den of tranquility, I find a troubled place.
Casements on eternity, these great patient masterpieces ought to calm the mind and nourish the spirit, but seldom do, and its rare that I emerge from the National Gallery feeling I have really taken advantage of what's on offer.
What am I supposed to think?
What am I supposed to feel?’
Art is indeed a mystery — a ‘truth which is above reason’, and here are two facets of it, which, if we are honest, must have perplexed most of us.
How can paintings which are at once great and at the same time repellent earn their creator such a disproportionately large sum of money?
And how often do we, when faced with great masterpieces, say with the Apostle, ‘I believe, Lord help my unbelief’ and express to others an ecstasy which we do not actually feel?
in conversation
‘I like to encourage precise, analytical draughtsmanship which is best executed in pencil,’ Norman Blamey told Julian Halsby when he talked to him recently about his teaching and approached to his own paintings


Norman Blamey is an artist of deep convictions; a devout Anglican and an upholder of the traditional values of draughtsmanship, both of which are evident in much of his work.
I visited Blamey's house and studio in Hampstead and admired his highly disciplined and organised working methods which were reflected in the immaculately tidy house with its magnificent north-facing studio, built as a rear extension over two floors.
Born in 1914 Blamey began his art studies in 1933 at the Regent Street Polytechnic where Harry Watson was the most influential teacher.
Largely forgotten until recently, Watson's fine sun-dappled landscapes had elegant figure studies have begun to reappear in London galleries, including Richard Green, and Blamey was surprised that I had heard of him.
‘A good teacher of drawing with great style and panache.
Art teaching in those days centred around drawing and subjects such as design and composition were rarely discussed.
We all started in the ‘General Room’ where we drew cones, cubes and pyramids, then we moved on to heads, hands and feet from plaster casts.
If we passed the regular tests, we were then allowed to draw the whole figure from casts and heads fro life.
Then, having passed that stage, we were allowed into the Life Room.
So you see the teaching was very structured.
Still life was taught by G H Lenfesty who was a good traditional painter.’
Family in Reflection 1983, oil, 45 × 73 ″.
(114.3 × 185.4 cm)
A period of teacher training followed, after which Blamey returned to teach at the Regent Street Polytechnic where he remained, apart from a brief period during the war, until it combined with the Chelsea Polytechnic.
he continued to teach at Chelsea School of Art, and has also taught at the Royal Academy Schools since 1975 when Peter Greenham invited him to teach in the Life Room.
‘I believe it is good for artists to teach students.
Drawing should engage the intelligence, rather than the emotions.
It demands a complete understanding of form; in fact the artist has a more difficult task than the sculptor as he has to add  perspective to his comprehension of form.
I find that there is far too much expressionist drawing today, executed in broad strokes in a broad medium such as charcoal.
To me this is not analytical.
Drawing in charcoal is more like painting where as I like to encourage precise, analytical draughtsmanship which is best executed in pencil.’
Study of Professor Higman. 1985, pencil and wash, 15 × 23 ″.
(38.1 × 58.5 cm)
All works by Norman Blamey
Series 2 at Old St Pancras, 1972, oil on board.
40 × 72 ″.
(101.6 × 182.9 cm)
As a teacher Blamey is gratefully remembered by many of his students Jacqueline Rizivi remembers him as one of the most effective teachers at Chelsea ‘He taught a ‘state of mind’, an honesty, a need to look clearly and precisely at any object or figure.
He stressed construction and encouraged analytical rather than Impressionist drawing, observation rather than superficial technique.
His way of looking and drawing became ingrained in us, and has too me in good stead ever since.’
John King, 1965, oil on board, 76 × 33 ″.
(193 × 83.8 cm)
Peter Kuhfield recalls Blamey as an inspiring teacher at the Royal Academy Schools.
‘He had a great gift for teaching.
His drawings were so clear and he was always able to get directly to the important issues.
His knowledge of anatomy was outstanding.
He usually started drawing a figure from a certain point and then worked outwards, as if his drawings worked from within to without; but in addition they were also extremely beautiful drawings in their own right.
We all admired his integrity as well as his great knowledge of techniques and painters of the past.
I think we all struggled to come up to his level.’
We talked about the influences on Blamey's art.
‘As a student I admired the English Impressionists especially Augustus John Steer and Sickert.
I loved their flourishes of paint, their swaggering brush strokes.
but around 1950 I began to realise that this wasn't getting me anywhere, so I gave up painting with oil paints and began instead to draw with oils.
Since then I've been very much my own man.
I have no commercial gallery and I sell only through commissions and the Royal Academy; moreover having always had a teaching job, I have no real need to sell.
Since 1950 my influences have come from the Flemish Primitives, Frances de la Tour and Stanley Spencer.
Subjects
Blamey paints people in interiors.
‘These are the things I can see.
I never paint landscapes and I rarely travel abroad.
My subject matter is to be found here in the house.
As a young man I believe that the purpose of painting was to make something took real, and I have never abandoned the idea, even if you might think it an old fashioned concept.
I am only really happy when working in front of my subject or from careful drawings made in front of the subject.
I have used my wife and son as models, and my wife, who sadly died three years ago, was often heroic, posing for up to 30 hours for a single drawing.
I remember one subject that required that she lay flat on the ground, and this she did for hours on end while I drew her.
‘My subjects are either domestic or ecclesiastical.
In 1956–7 I executed a huge mural in the church of St Luke, Leagrave, Luton.
This was 17 feet high.
My second  commission was for the Lutheran Church of St Andrew in Suislip.
In both cases I worked on oil on panel which I later fixed to the walls.
I keep all my drawings and quite often reuse them years later.
Thus a recent work,The Penitent (Royal Academy 1991), was based on a drawing of my wife done in 1948.
I borrowed the vestments from my own church, St Pancras Old Church.’
Portraits also play a major part in Clamey's work, ‘I'm probably very old fashioned but I believe still that the principal aim or a portrait is to achieve a good likeness of your sitter, but you also have to create a picture.’
I asked Blamey how he set about painting a portrait.
‘I begin by posing my sitter in carious positions in different places in the studio.
I take photographs at this stage simply to decide on the basic composition, as this saves much time.
Once I've settled on the right composition, I invite the sitter back and start serious drawings.
For these I use a well sharpened, hard pencil.
When I am satisfied that I have enough information, after maybe seven or eight sittings, I will square the drawings up and transfer them onto board.’
He showed me a number of meticulous pencil drawings which had served for portraits.
Some concentrated on the sitter's head, while others depicted clothing or background.
‘I use objects around the house for the background, not only for portraits, but also for figure paintings.
I have collected many interesting objects such as old clocks, rugs, oak chests and chairs.
‘I often find myself painting academics.
I have five portraits at Oxford University and have also painted several headmasters.
More recently I painted Sir Bernard Weatherall, the former Speaker of the House of Commons, and Sir William Rees Mogg.
It is very dangerous to show a portrait to a sitter before it is finished, as they always want to change something.
It is even more dangerous to show it to the sitter's wife!
I have a rule that once I consider a portrait is finished, I will never make alterations; after all, as the painter, you are painting a portrait for yourself and not for the sitter's wife.’
Technique
We move on to Blamey's very personal technique.
‘I square up onto a prepared board which for the larger paintings is medium density fibreboard, or MDF, half an inch thick which I have primed on both sides.
For smaller pictures I use hardboard, but on a larger scale it can warp, which MDF will not.
For the primer I use gesso which I make myself form rabbit size and whiting.
I like to use board rather than canvas because I always make alterations, and I can rub out with steel wool or even paint stripper (which does not affect the gesso primer) without damaging the board.
To treat canvas like this would ruin the surface.
I also like the pure white gesso primer as it gives luminosity to my colours.
I draw in pencil onto the board and then work directly into the drawing.
I apply my paint with a palette knife, rarely using a crush, and I work in small areas using masking tape to create the hard edges.
I also use a compass point to draw into the wet paint to reveal the colour beneath.’
This was an aspect of Blamey's work I had not appreciated, but a close inspection of his work reveals the carefully worked, overlapping planes created by the use of masking tape and palette knife.
Blamey worked in oils, and his basic palette consists of titanium white, yellow ochre, burnt sienna, Indian red, cadmium red, cadmium yellow, ultramarine, occasionally cerulean, viridian blue black (a favourite colour) and occasionally alizarin crimson.
he is a slow and meticulous worker and will only complete three pictures a year.
Moreover, he only works on one picture at a time and only by natural daylight.
Blamey was reluctant to comment on modern developments in art.
‘My art is based upon my desire to create my own realism, my wold as I see it.
I follow my own course.
What I will say is that good art education is vital to the future and it must be based upon an analytical study of anatomy and perspective.’
The retrospective of Norman Blamey's work, organised by Lynda Checketts, started in Norwich and moves on to Bath and London.
Anyone interested in the figurative tradition in modern British art and in art education in its broadest sense should ensure that they visit the retrospective of this fascinating and influential painter.
My Wife and Son, 1959, oil on board 65 × 35 ″ (165 × 89 cm)
Learning the basics behind
Picture-Making
4 COLOUR, PATTERN & TEXTURE


With the ability to convey deep emotion, evoke strong feeling and rekindle atmosphere, colour is one of the most powerful elements within a composition.
We use napthol crimson and cadmium red to explore the searing intensity of heat, and we quietly express spiritual pleasures with purple, deep magenta and violet; whichever colour we choose, each has its own profound effect upon the individual.
Rich is personal expression and influence we mix pigment not only in response to the subject, but through our mood at the time of painting.
Feeling reflective and pensive we are more likely to reach for a sensitive ultramarine or restful cobalt than a stinging chrome yellow or vivid lime.
On a day full of energy and excitement our reactions might be to favour more vibrant reds and succulent oranges.
by their very nature hues appeal to the senses and directly influence our behaviour.
this can sometimes cause problems, for an over-night change in mood often leads to total dissatisfaction with the previous day's work.
colour has tremendous impact on our daily lives.
We have favourite colours for clothes, which give strong indications of character and temperament.
Yet in painting, colour is regularly treated as some kind of mystery, beyond out understanding.
but why should this be so?
An emotional response to colour
In responding to a particular colour we associate the hue with some past experience and draw upon our cultural background to assess its nature.
For instance, blue conveys a sense of calm and tranquility because we associate the colour with blue skies, calm water.
Green feels reassuring and fertile due to its association with the rejuvenation and lush growth of spring.
In our assessment of colour, association is the key word.
Those familiar with evening dress will always associate black with elegance.
Yet for others the colour will be more reminiscent of funerals, so will constantly fee morbid.
certain yellows suggest the sun's warmth, or the wealthy glow of gold, whereas red is inextricably linked with life through the colour of blood.
The hue is also associated with bravery and sacrifice through the symbolic red poppy, but change the red's warmth or intensity and it becomes explosive, signalling danger.
Cultural differences
Cultural associations are hard to suppress and continue to influence centuries later.
A woman can still be considered dangerous and exciting by wearing vibrant red clothes; we are all familiar with the term ‘scarlet woman’.
Yet its origin goes back hundreds of years, to the days when the women camp followers of the mighty Persian armies slept in their scarlet silk tents.
What then of diverse cultures; where black is not the colour of mourning but white is!
Where yellow is not linked to wealth, but is the colour of treachery, or bravery?
Clearly, as artists living in a multi-racial society, the colours in our work will be viewed with varying significance and value.
FIGURE 1 In this five by four foot painting I wanted to emphasise the strength of the granite structure, so I decided to counter-balance the sense of its solidity with a diffused and scumbled sky, Figures, walls and railings were initially indicated and loose brush strokes of warm pink applied to the sky area.
Once this was dry a warm blue violet was mixed, without any turpentine or medium to ensure a ‘stiff’ paint.
the side of an ordinary household paint brush was half loaded with paint and quickly moved across the canvas in any direction with a ‘scrubbing’ motion
FIGURE 2 In scumbling, the aim is to create a light and airy surface so it is important not to overload the brush or stay too long in one area.
Heavily loaded brushes precisely placed always leave behind smooth, compacted paint, so here I maintained the ‘breathable’ quality by allowing the first layer of blue to dry, before applying another slightly different hue in the same way
Many people experience blue skies and green meadows, but not everyone  responds alike to clue and green.
The importance attached to each colour varies according to cultural background.
The potency of green, for example, is greater to those who know of constant heat and arid conditions.
It is no coincidence that the powerful words of the Koran are housed within green covers!
Left FIGURE 3 Glazing is the exact opposite to scumbling, so when both the techniques are used side by side the impact is often very exciting.
The area surrounding the main figures will be scumbled, but first I added a number of transparent glazes to the perimeter to enrich the scene
Right FIGURE 4 Over a lightly brushed area of red oxide I hurriedly scumbled cadmium red deep using a flat hog haired brush.
Though the colour is straight from the tube, its strength is modified by the underlying colour which shows through the loose brush work
Left FIGURE 5 Here you can see the visual effects from combining scumbling and glazing techniques, with the surface of the canvas giving a variety of depth and texture
Below FIGURE 6 In the completed work the full impact of the hazy scumbled skyline is evident against the solid tiered structure.
When scumbling on a canvas the surface is lightly agitated, so that the light which falls upon it is scattered.
This is why the method is often applied to soften and diffuse distant objects or hills, as in atmospheric perspective.
The technique of scumbling modifies all previously laid down colour without totally obscuring it
So, with all the emotional implications of colour, should we even try to encourage a specific response to our work?
Trying to please everyone inevitably leads to compromise, and that in turn weakens individual expression.
By all means take into account the influence of a colour.
Remember, too, the theories relating to harmony and complementaries, and always be aware you are dealing with subtractive colour.
But, above all, use colour because it feels right for you, be instinctive in your mixing, allow yourself to be compelled and inspired.
Don't choose a colour for its safety, because it is acceptable, or sells well at the art society exhibition.
Push boundaries, take risks, and interweave unique colour schemes with subtle variations.
Become really involved, so that you experience in full the profound emotional depths of colour.
Adding rhythm through pattern
Of course learning to be guided by your instincts takes time.
Even as you become more familiar with materials and techniques, there is still a tendency to play safe and work in areas you consider to be easier.
The ‘I-only-paint…’ syndrome is a common one.
The patterns of Nature can appear complex and off putting.
However, overlapping leaves, stone walls, stacked bottles, growing wheat and scudding clouds are all merely repeating shapes, which once recognised can be easily transformed into paint marks on canvas.
The secret is to break the pattern down into familiar forms.
By perceiving and using pattern you repeatedly capture the rhythm of Nature.
Never settle for painting a still life with nets and anchor just because you are afraid seascapes are too complex.
If you love the sea tackle your concerns head-on; go down to the shore and study the ocean's moods.
Note the changing patterns of the tides, their rhythmic waves, choppy seas, fast-flowing currents and white crests.
Watch the turbulent clouds overhead and observe their natural repetitive shapes.
Gather and harness Nature through observation so that you can recreate the total experience.
it really isn't as hard as it appears!
Enriching texture
Many people mistake pattern for texture, yet intricate patterns are often found on smooth, tranquil surfaces.
Pattern adds variety, or gives an image rhythm; texture with its enriching fibre and strong forceful structuring gives a painting presence.
Many works give initial impact through colour, but in order to remain substantial they must also have a physical quality and that means texture.
Building up from the surface of a board or canvas adds further dimension and vigour.
Marks appear weighty and assertive if driven on to the canvas with a painting knife.
Paint can be dragged along the surface by coarse brush to intertwine and encrust, or poured to congeal and clot.
whatever the method of application, and there are many ways, in choosing to use texture you show your involvement with the physical progression of the painting.
Van Gogh's work is a good  example of what I mean.
the way he drives expressive colour passionately onto the canvas, the intensity of his brush and knife work leaves the viewer staggered.
He revels in the physical quality of the paint and that sheer primaeval force and energy is there for all to see in the late works.
A painting exercise
In this month's exercise you will need two primed boards, tracing paper, pencil, and a range of oil or acrylic paints.
Compose and draw a simple still life on to one of the primed boards.
When completed use the tracing paper to transfer the same drawing onto the second support.
This should give you two identical studies.
Now, bearing in mind all that has been said regarding the emotional influence of colour, the rhythm of pattern and the energy of texture, create two paintings which are totally opposite in mood and atmosphere.
One work may be despondent and melancholy, whilst the other could be uplifting and joyous.
Whatever approach you decide to take remember to modify your colours — use them emotionally.
Don't paint the red apple as seen, brighten and lighten its mood or subdue and cool its expression.
You may even wish to abandon realistic colour altogether and portray a blue apple; the choice is yours.
Before you start mixing think about the way you intend to apply the paint.
Blending strokes with a soft round brush will compress the paint down into the canvas, give a smooth static finish to the surface and automatically quieten and control the mood.
If you hope to animate and enliven the image you need to be generous with the paint.
But you also need to be quick with your movements to capture a spontaneous quality, so either mix all your colours in advance, so your rhythm isn't slowed, or apply colours straight from the tube a mix on the canvas.
Remember, surface texture always invigorates!
If you find the painting exercise enjoyable then you might like to go on and try collographs.
using the surface textures of everyday items they produce lively images full of expressive pattern and rhythm.
The technique is detailed here.
The scumbling technique is also illustrated for you to try.
Show your work
Over the last four months readers have responded magnificently to the invitation to send in drawings or paintings relating to my series of articles.
Though the office is bursting with images there is still one final opportunity to send in related work from this issue, so why not hurry and post yours today!
I shall be selecting a number of works for discussion in a later issue, but meanwhile should you have any queries or need advice concerning any of the points raised in the series please write in and they too will be answered in a forthcoming edition.
The wonder of painting
The act of viewing is not a passive one.
We delve deeply into the psyche for memories of past experience and sensation to judge any work of art.
Reactions can therefore be highly subjective and we may find ourselves disagreeing strongly with what the artist is saying.
Sometimes it is just simple the way a view is expressed (the technique) which is disliked; after all we all identify with some painter's work yet reject others based on the same theme.
There is frequent intolerance to work which has real relevance and many times I have seen images dismissed with the familiar phrase, ‘I don't know much about art, but I know what I like’.
To the shy, quiet individual, angry statements and aggressively applied paint will feel decidedly unpleasant, but it is possible to understand a work of art, and see its significance, without liking it.
Knowledge of the visual language will help you gain that understanding, give you new, fresh eyes with which to see and appreciate.
All painters use a visual language.
It may be rich in vocabulary, a powerful hypnotic force, of spoken in gentle tones of subtle persuasion.
But it can also be weak and impoverished.
For any image to be fluent and clear, expression and phrasing must be strong.
Line, shape, colour, etc., is there for all, but to express pure feeling you must first of all understand the nature of the marks you are making.
Visual art has a rich and abundant language, and by learning to express and translate its varied vocabulary you gain not only the power to explore personal truths or create unique images, but you have the opportunity to show a rare insight into this diverse and extraordinary world.
COLLOGRAPH DEMONSTRATION
We can find texture in most things.
In the illustration below you can see a number of everyday items that have been inked to show you how they look in print form.
A red string bag (the kind that you buy oranges in) gives a lively black and white pattern; a piece of plastic bubble wrap makes a precise even pattern; the familiar orderly weave of coarse sacking combines with its frayed, undisciplined edging; the sinuous spiral is formed from ordinary string, and finally the animated and random pattern at the top is created from scattered uncooked rice grains.
If you enjoy surprise, like pattern and rhythm, and really get excited by strong textural work, then printing collographs will fire your imagination.
The technique is easy, as you can see in the bottom right-hand corner of the picture.
Simply choose scraps of material, in this case crumpled grease-proof paper and a bird's feather, and stick them to a piece of stout hardboard using PVA glue, as you would in collage.
When the glue has had time to dry take a small inked roller and roll across the items.
The final stage is to cover the inked hardboard with a sheet of paper and press firmly down on to the board to transfer the ink marks to the paper.
Don't worry if you feel the technique is only for people with access to printing presses; the print in the top right of the photograph was achieved by rolling a clean roller across the back of the paper as it lay on the board.
Calligraphy at Christmas
Christmas is a natural time to indulge in the creation of greetings cards.
Richard Middleton, Fellow of the Society of Scribes and Illuminators, explains how he and some of his colleagues take advantage of the festive season to produce personal expressions of goodwill in letterform, free from the constraints of commissioning clients
The number of serious professional calligraphers in the Western world is quite small, and the majority are members, though not necessarily Fellows, of the Society of Scribes and Illuminators, which holds its meetings in London.
Accordingly we tend to be friendly with one another, there being a general recognition that we all benefit rather from mutual support than ferocious competition.
Christmas is a natural time for us to indulge ourselves, free from the constraints of commissioning clients, and as calligraphy lends itself admirably to the creation of ephemera such as greetings cards, most of us have a large collection of those many of our distinguished colleagues.
The single most difficult skill for the calligrapher to acquire is consistently good letterform in a rhythmic, written hand.
Whilst all these cards, by virtue of being made by professionals, do indeed exhibit excellent letterform in the writing, I have selected those whose design down to depend solely on this elusive, hard-won ability to ‘write’.
The stranger to calligraphy may be struck by the fact that none of these cards displays the florid illumination characteristic of the 15th century Books of Hours made so familiar to us by countless commercial reproductions on christmas cards advertised widely in small format ‘gift’ catalogues.
The is partly due to the length of time such illumination takes — there Books of Hours were never conceived as ephemera — and partly because calligraphers today are not seeking to satisfy 15th century tastes.
But whereas most people are aware of the diversity of lettering ‘styles’ and the interest they can create, perhaps only another calligrapher can truly appreciate a plain undecorated piece of black writing on a white background.
Most of us produce a single design each year which we send both to calligraphers and non-calligraphers alike.
Therefore, in some way, often very subtle, these designs all introduce some element other than plan black-on-white writing.
Although hand printing is sometimes used, all these cards have been produced in three ways.
First, the one-off cards (Figures 1 and 2).
This, the most versatile, allows the use of any paper or card of any colour or wright, any kind of ink or pigment, and any shape of size.
It has two obvious drawbacks: first, it is time-consuming, which usually limits the design to a simple one for ease of repetition; and second, every card is itself a unique ‘performance’, allowing no paste-ups and no major blunders in execution.
Minor unevenness is inevitable, but is kept within acceptable limits by the skill of the calligrapher.
Naturally these cards are most treasured by their recipients.
Above left FIGURE 1 Margaret Daubney FSSl, one-off card.
1990 4½×7″ (11.5 × 17.8cm).
Several colours of dilute designers' gouache fed into an Automatic pen, on 120lb Arches NOT paper.
Margaret's hand, holding this pen, is shown on the cover of Peter Halliday's book Calligraphy Masterclass
Left FIGURE 2 Notoriously difficult: white gouache on black paper (Tre Kronor) A one-off by a well-known young Norwegian calligrapher.
1990, A4 (21 × 29.7cm) folded twice along the short axis.
Written without guidelines
Above FIGURE 3 Sally Teague FSSl, 1991, 5¾ × 4 ″ (14.8 × 10.5 cm).
Photocopied onto cream A4 laid paper, folded once in both directions.
The playful ‘hollow squares’ add light even when no colour is used
Right FIGURE 4 Denis Brown FSSl, 1991, 4 × 5¾″ (10.5×14.8cm).
Photocopied onto a heavy red A4 sheet of paper and folded in both directions.
Hand coloured with pencils.
Name overwritten without guidelines using gouache and a steel pen
Second, the photocopied card (Figures 3,4,5,6 and 8).
Today's photocopier is so food that there is often little to choose between a photocopy and a print produced by a conventional printing press.
There are, however, two limitations: the thickness of the paper which can be used, and the fact that if the cost is not to be prohibitive, the only colour ink which can be used is black.
A Christmas card needs to stand up by itself, and even the thicker papers which can sometimes be fed into a photocopier are not as stiff as card.
Once solution is to double-fold the paper afterwards, so that a single A4 sheet of paper becomes an A6 card when folded (Figures, 3,4 and 8).
An advantage is that envelopes — size C6 — are readily obtainable to fit.
Another solution is to make the design substantially smaller than A6, and cut the paper after it has been printed (Figures 5 and 6).
As the thickness of the paper is greater in proportion to the size of the finished card, a single thickness will have adequate strength to stand up (Figure 6).
Ideally the grain direction of the paper runs vertically in a ‘paper’ card: otherwise the card may curl horizontally and fall over.
Left FIGURE 5 Lindsay Castell FSSl, 1991. 2¼ × 4″ (7/4 × 10.4cm).
Photocopied onto lightweight A4 maroon paper which was afterwards cut to size.
Gold leaf applied afterwards to dots of glue on the letters
Right FIGURE 6 Jane Addison, 1988, 5¾ × 2″ (14.8 × 5.1).
Photocopied onto an A4 sheet of paper, afterwards cut to size.
This card is a single thickness.
White gouache dots added later by hand
Colour can be added to a photocopied card in two ways: first, by using coloured paper — black ink even on cream or grey (Figures 3 and 8) looks much less harsh than black on white — and second, by adding colour later by hand.
Very little additional colour can have a dramatically brightening effect: the trick seems to be to reduce the black element to a design of sufficient simplicity to integrate small dabs of colour.
Unfortunately, as is well known, a simple design leaves all elements within it exposed so the simpler the concept, the better the execution required to pull it off successfully.
professional reproductions
The third way of producing a card is to present artwork to a printer and have it professionally reproduced.
Printing in several colours is expensive, but using a single colour ink, not necessarily black, is much less so.
Printing in black tends to be the least  expensive as it does not mean that the machinery needs cleaning of black ink.
The artwork needs to offer the greatest possible contrast to the camera, so it is best to use a very black ink on a very white paper (equally true, of course, for photocopying regardless of what colour paper you want to print on).
A paste-up can be used: the printer can remove any shadows from the cut edges on the negative.
it is possible to write large and use the camera to reduce the size, but I find it better to do all artwork at the finished size because thin lines tend to disappear on reduction.
Even so, I have difficulty in getting the printer to reproduce the very fine hairlines characteristic of the sharp good quills I use for my writing (Figure 9), with the inside upside down and adjacent to the outside.
After a print run of, say 100 A4 sheets, the printed sheets are then turned over on the long axis, and the same print is made on the reverse.
The A4 sheets are then guillotined down the middle, resulting in 200 cards.
However, this process requires great care to get it right and not all printers are infallible — indeed, one printer I used was infallibly fallible and had to make three sets of cards when the first set were turned along the short axis and the second set were guillotined along the fold.
Almost, but not quite, enough to make me go and buy a set of reproduction Book-of-Hours Christmas cards from a small-format ‘gift’ catalogue….
Above FIGURE 7 Sue Hufton FSSl, 1990, printed with brown ink on a brown card.
Rectangle of cloth tipped on afterwards by hand.
Text: ‘heaven Shall Not Wait’, Wild Goose Songs Vol l.
Reproduced by permission.
Copyright permission should be sought if someone else's text is used in a design.
Publishers rarely, if ever, charge for personal things like Christmas cards which are not to be offered for sale
Above FIGURE 8 John Nash FSSl, 1988, 5¾ × 4″. (14.8 × 10.5cm).
Photocopied onto a grey, A4 sheet of laid paper.
Watercolour washes applied by hand.
Where illustration is used with calligraphy, it often works best if it reflects the intrinsic two-dimensional nature of letterforms.
John Nash is a superb draughtsman and this simple, quirky drawing from a 14th century manuscript is deliberately chosen for its non-realistic treatment
Below FIGURE 9 Richard Middleton FSSl, 1991, 5¾ × 4″ (10.5 × 14.8cm) when folded.
Printed on white card with black ink and then reversed and reprinted.
The A4 sheet as it appears after guillotining.
Red gouache applied afterwards by hand.
These personal line drawings of the author's family are now a tradition with this scribe, reflecting his work before he trained as a calligrapher.
Note that the calligraphy does not appear with the drawing, thus avoiding clashes of design
TOP of the TAPES
Oliver Lange highlights his personal selection from the large number of instructional art videos currently available for purchase
Looking through the advertisements in magazines, suppliers' catalogues and the shelves of art shops it is certainly obvious that there is a huge choice of instructional art videos currently available — probably about 200!
Covering a wide variety of subjects and techniques and, of course with equal variety in the quality of their content and production, videos are fast becoming a cheaper, more accessible and very informative and successful learning tool.
Rather surprisingly, the recent The Artist readership survey found that although the cast majority of readers have a video player, not everyone has purchased an instructional art tape.
The reluctance to invest in a few good demonstration videos may stem not only from the fact that there are indeed some very poor, amateurish productions around, but also, compared with most books, videos are still comparatively expensive.
Also, unlike a book, you cannot browse through a video in the shop, so its content remains a mystery until after you have purchased it and taken it home.
However, the great advantage of a good video is that you can actually witness the process of developing a piece of work, stage by stage, and be shown individual techniques, as well as be informed and entertained.
You can freeze a frame, rewind, replay and so on to reinforce a point.
The best videos offer sound, clear advice and demonstrations, and are full of ideas and inspiration.
You may choose a video for the subject matter covered or for the instruction in a particular technique.
If possible, look for an artist whose work you know, perhaps through this magazine.
In addition, details of over 150 art videos are available from The Artist (price £7/50) and back copies will have reviews of many of the recent releases.
As a writer, reviewer and professional artist I have accumulated a collection of over 40 videos.
I hope I can encourage the uninitiated to go out and treat themselves to several for their Christmas stocking as well as see the value of videos as a valid support technique during the long winter evenings ahead.
Having endorsed this as a learning technique, let me make a few recommendations and observations of my own and list my personal ‘top ten’.
John Yardley, watercolour from Sunlight in Watercolour, produced by APV Films
Not unexpectedly, most videos are on watercolour painting.
Often these take the form of specific demonstrations on a selected theme, such as Karen Simmons' excellent tapes on  Flowers in Watercolour and Gardens in Watercolours (APV Films).
Like all good instructional videos these include advice on papers, colour mixing and a range of techniques.
Contrasting with the blushes of colour and delightfully free approach of Karen Simmons is the more controlled and analytical style of Judith Milne's Flowers in Watercolour (Constable Country Video Productions).
Charles Reid also has a tape on painting flowers and in this and his other fine, lively and entertaining videos,Portraits in Watercolour and The Figure in Watercolour (Teaching Art Ltd) he stresses the importance of light.
For the many who love to paint watercolour landscapes I recommend the various videos by Ray Campbell Smith, including The Coastal Scene (Seeba Films);The Magic of Watercolour by James Fletcher-Watson (APV Films); and the exhilarating, inspirational and wonderfully entertaining tapes by David Bellamy, such as Mountain Adventures in Watercolour (APV Films).
Good value too are Adventure into Watercolour by Rex Trayhorne (Diamond Productions).
Frank Webb's Contemporary Watercolour Master (Teaching Art Ltd).
Bryan Thatcher's Wet into Wet Simplified (Bryan Thatcher), and Sunlight in Watercolour by John Yardley (APV Films).
Ron Ranson's Big Brush Watercolour is full of tips, ideas and techniques for all, whilst for the beginner I recommend Ashley Jackson's series of six tapes A Brush with Ashley (£19.99 each from Ashley Jackson Galleries) and, of course, Alwyn Crawshaw's marvellously enthusiastic, instructive and wide-ranging series A Brush with Art (£59.99 for the set of four videos from Teaching Art Ltd).
Alwyn's new series Alwyn Crawshaw Paints Oils (£39.99 for the set of three videos from Teaching Art Ltd) is splendid for those struggling with the particular problems of oil paint and Jonathan Stephenson's An Introduction to Oil Painting (Seeba Films) has plenty of practical advice as well as three short demonstrations.
For the more experienced I commend Still Life in Oils by Paul Millichip (John Hemson Associates) and the various demonstration films by Harley Crossley on palette knife techniques (Rainbow Art Images).
Though in instructional demonstrations in the same vein as the majority, Tom Keating's On Painters series, from the original television series, is absorbing in its coverage of the techniques used by specific artists including Turner, Rembrandt and Degas (Teaching Art Ltd).
There is much here which can in influential and inspirational to our own painting.
‘Drawing is the true test of art,’ said Ingres yet how sadly it is neglected, including so it seems by our video producers!
A sound video for those wishing to develop landscape drawing skills is Ray Campbell Smith's Landscape Drawing (Seeba Films).
This includes techniques using pencil, pen and ink, crayons, charcoal and brush.
For the pastellist, an essential tape is Progressing with Pastel by Barry Watkin (APV Films), whilst his Pastel Landscapes is also a delight, as is Painting with Pastels by Aubrey Phillips (APV Films).
LEFT Charles Reid, watercolour from Charles Reid: Portraits in Watercolour, produced by Teaching Art Ltd
BELOW Tom Keating, from Tom Keating On Painters, available from Teaching Art Ltd
Something different
Sometimes it is good to get away from the particular disciplines of our own medium and techniques and try something else.
Several videos on less obvious techniques have also impressed me this year.
The two videos on Chinese Brush Painting by Jane Evans (John Hemson Associates) are ideal for those wishing to take up this traditional technique.
I thoroughly enjoyed the film on Woodcuts by Rigby Graham (On Board productions, Peterborough PE3 8SB), especially as it underlines the fact that printmaking need not involve a lot of expensive and complicated equipment.
Indeed, printmaking can help to sharpen our sense of design and drawing skills and can give a welcome diversion from other work.
Likewise, Joseph Winkleman's From Idea to Image (Bankside Gallery) gives a fascinating insight into the craft of intaglio printmaking.
And if we all need to keep our observation and drawing crisp and lively so too must we be aware of the importance and impact of colour.
Theory work always sounds a bit boring and unnecessary but I must say that Anne Elsworth's video on Colour Mixing for Painters (Anne Elsworth) is never dull and is full of useful exercises and information.
Although my personal choice, I have no hesitation in recommending the following ‘top ten’ to readers.
All of these videos are of an excellent technical quality, use well-known professional artists, and combine skilful demonstrations and information with real infectious enthusiasm and encouragement.
A good video always leaves me itching to ‘have a go’!
Flower Painting by Karen Simmons, APV Films £27.95,Mountain Adventures in Watercolour by David Bellamy, APV Films £29.95.
Bog Brush Watercolour by Ron Ranson, APV Films £27.95.
Frank Webb: Contemporary Watercolour Master , Teaching Art Ltd £27.
A Brush with Art by Alwyn Crawshaw, Teaching Art Ltd, £59.99 for set of four.
Learn to Paint with a Palette Knife: Porlock Weir by Harley Crossley, Rainbow Art Ltd, £39.99 for set of three.
Progressing with Pastel by Barry Watkin, APV Films £27.95.
From Idea to Image (Intaglio Printmaking Demonstration) by Joseph Winkleman, £17.65.
MATERIALS AND TECHNIQUES by Jonathon Stephenson
A Still Life in Acrylics
The Materials
Winsor & Newton's Artists' Acrylic Colours offer painters an exciting selection of bright and vibrant hues.
They are based on traditional and modern pigments, notable for their colour values.
The colour range incorporates some particularly attractive versions of familiar pigments like cadmium red light and cerulean blue, as well as some intense examples of more recent introductions to the artist's palette, such as dioxazine purple and phthalo green.
Other distinctive colours, like the violet, a deep sea green phthalo turquoise, the sharp citrus green, a charming rose pink quinacridone violet, the warm golden ochre and a curiously attractive light green oxide, confirm the seriousness of Winsor & Newton's commitment to colour in their Artists' Acrylic range.
This interest in colour does not stop at traditional boundaries, because the range also includes a selection of five metallic hues, an iridescent white and six pearlescent colours.
Winsor & Newton's metallic effect acrylic paints create a reasonably convincing impression of the materials they are intended to represent and re-open traditional avenues for the decoration of paintings as well as suggesting new ones.
The pearlescents have an historical precedence in Japanese prints, where ground up mother of pearl was used to catch the light but are otherwise an entirely novel kind of colour that invites experiment and stimulates the imagination.
In all there are 75 colours in Winsor & Newton's Artists' Acrylic Colour range.
Exceptional durability and resistance to yellowing is promised by the combination of lightfast pigments and a highly advanced acrylic emulsion.
The paint is soft, handles well and is easily thinned with water, though of course it is waterproof when dry.
A generous selection of auxiliary products support the range, including Gloss and Matt Mediums, a Gel Medium, an Acrylic Retarder to increase the working time of the colours, Gloss and Matt Acrylic Gesso Primer.
Winsor & Newton's brushes, canvases and painting boards support the range too.
1
The subject matter for my demonstration is a pair for shoes belonging to my four-year-old daughter Sophie, who painted them to suit herself after she decided she didn't like them any more.
The painting is on acrylic primed canvas.
I chose to use a kind of window composition, with the subject viewed through a broad decorative border, as a means of uniting the abstract and realistic elements within the subject.
It would also allow me to experiment as much as I likes with the interesting colours of the Winsor & Newton Artists' Acrylic Colour range and with some of the techniques that are particularly well suited to the acrylic medium.
an exciting selection of bright and vibrant hues
First, a central space on the canvas was measured up.
This was edged around with a framework of masking tape to reserve bands of the white ground that I would later paint gold.
It also conveniently provided me with straight edged divisions of the remaining space.
The shoes were put in as a simple outline drawing in pencil and the background spaces around them were painted with a mixture of cerulean blue and titanium white.
The centre of each side was then painted with light green oxide and the remaining corner squares were filled in with a mixture of ultramarine violet and titanium white.
2
My next move was to mask out the central picture area with a piece of paper, taped at its edges onto the existing strips of masking tape.
This covered up the shoes completely, but left the border areas open to work on.
Then a series of colours that took my fancy were thinned down with water and sprayed, or rather spattered using a mouth diffuser, over the colours I have previously applied.
Accidental differences in the degree to which the colours were thinned turned out to have interesting consequences.
First, a dilute mix of citrus green was applied.
This turned out to be a delightfully acid apple green that interacted with the violet corner pieces quite strikingly.
The I put on  dioxazine purple, a dark blackish purple when used neat.
It broke up into tiny specks as it was blown across the painting and gave a nice granular texture to the whole surface.
The mix for the Renaissance gold was not quite right, an error on my part, and it was too frothy and lumpy to spray properly.
A couple of blobs landed on the canvas as a result and I then had to make use of this fact deliberately in order to get some sort of overall pattern.
I did so by dropping some more blobs of gold onto the edges of the canvas directly from the stem of the diffuser and, whilst these remained wet, I sprayed on the next two colours.
Consequently the cadmium red light and the droplets of gold fused into the Renaissance gold where they fell upon it in rather a pleasing manner.
All this was meant to be experimental, but it would be better to describe it as speculative, as I have an idea that I could arrive at some sort of interesting effect if I kept trying, and the lack of certainty about the end result hardly mattered.
The eventual combination of colour, texture and tone seemed quite pleasing and I was particularly taken by the subtle effect that arose from having a different background colour beneath the corners and sides of the border.
3
As soon as the paint was completely dry, which did not take long at all, the masking tape and the paper covering were very carefully removed.
Ideally the accumulated paint layers should be no thicker than the masking tape itself.
If it is thicker and overlaps the tape, the paint is liable to stretch and tear as the tape is lifted off.
I had to be very careful going through a couple of blobs of the Renaissance gold where the paint was at its thickest, but I was lucky and got a reasonably clean edge all round.
Next, the shoes were painted in.
The colour was thinned with water to the consistency of cream and applied with soft synthetic haired brushes.
I had to alternate between different sizes to get the degree of control I wanted.
The first areas to be painted were the soles of the shoes, the cut edges of the leather and the shoe linings.
This involved mostly shades of grey and tints of pink.
Windsor & Newton's permanent rose and titanium white provided the latter, whilst Mars black and titanium white provided the greys.
For the dull pink flowers on the insides of the shoes, Mars black derived from permanent rose.
white and light green oxide were used for the dabs of pale green on the lining fabric, and a scumble of pure white was used to highlight the grey around the backs of the shoes.
Realism was not a primary concern, but I did not want the painting to look too flat.
Most of these colours were applied wet over dry, but the graduated shadows of the light grey background to the shoe linings were blended out of two tones of grey, worked together wet.
Sometimes it helps to add retarding gel to acrylic paint for this type of manipulation, but on this occasion the area involved was small, and I could work on it easily whilst the colours remained wet.
the paint is soft, handles well and is easily thinned with water
4
The shoes had been painted with bold unmixed colours and the best way of translating the sense of that to the painting was to do the same.
I used Winsor & Newton's cadmium orange, cadmium yellow light, cadmium red light, permanent rose and dioxazine purple to lay on a flat basic pattern of colour over the shoes.
As before, a little water was used to thin the acrylic to the consistency of cream and most of it was gone over twice to get an even coverage of bright intense colour.
This was also necessary in order to obscure all traces of the original pencil drawing.
Acrylic tends to dry less opaque than it look when wet, and it may take repeated overpainting when thin layers of colour are used to cover completely something underneath.
As soon as these foundation colours were dry, they were worked over with finishing detail.
A crucial highlight was added to the toe of each shoe by putting on just a little white with a clean, dry bristle brush.
This was then immediately scrubbed onto a piece of scrap paper until the charge of paint began to run out; at that point a thin scumble was quickly put down by stabbing with the brush tip onto the background colouring.
A dull sheen just on the curve of each shoe's toe instantly made them look solid.
A similar scumble of white was applied to the heel of one shoe where it too was curved and, for good measure, a few coloured highlights were added along the edges of the strap loops, where the leather's surface was uneven.
The straps had been painted in Renaissance fold mixed with cadmium red light to give it a warmer, redder appearance.
They were now highlighted with Winsor & Newton's acrylic gold, put on three times to be sure of a strongly reflective finish.
Fine creases where the colour had flaked off the shoes were painted in with a rich reunite of permanent rose and white, whilst permanent rose was used alone for some minor details like the punchmarks on the orange strap loops and the stitching around the edges of the straps themselves.
The bright green spots were added with light green oxide on a small brush to complete the shoes.
5
All that remained was the unpainted framework between the centre of the painting and its decorated edge.
Before putting on the gold paint.
I underpainted some details in red that I wanted to see through it.
Most importantly I added some text that was to be part of the finished work.
When it was dry, I edged around the unpainted border bands with masking tape very carefully, because now I was applying it onto the painted surface.
My object was to get a straight edge easily, but there was a definite risk of lifting small particles of colour as it was take off and my aim was to minimise the need for retouching.
It took several layers of slightly thinned fold acrylic paint to get the effect I wanted, then, as the final touch, I worked over the parts I have previously painted red, now visible only as a dull tonal value within the fold, using well thinned films of the different pearlescent colours.
Now, when the light catches them, a colourful reflective glow appears.
This means that the painting changes slightly when seen from different angles and the title over the central image flashes up in iridescent colours.
This feature is sponsored by Winsor & Newton and independently produced by The Artist magazine in association with Jonathon Stephenson Dec 1992
A Brush with Acrylix
Pip Seymour test reports Pro Arte's Acrylix brushes, developed especially for artists who paint with acrylics — and find that they are also suitable for other media too…
for all artists working with acrylics, the choice and use of brushes can be very important.
Brushes must give control, be flexible and easy to manipulate, and they must also withstand thorough cleaning without losing their shape.
A new brush, recently launched by British brushmakers Pro Arte, has been produced to meet exactly these demands.
The new ‘Acrylix’ brush has been especially designed for the acrylic painter to give both freedom and precision in use.
The hair used is a special polyester filament that is as firm as a very good quality hog, but with a more sensitive feel.
I certainly found this new brush to be highly responsive, especially when used with acrylic colours, although it is also perfectly suitable for use with oil and is very easy to clean!
The brush has been developed for easel painters; each one has a long, silver-grey handle which makes it ideal for easel painting when you need distance from the canvas.
It has a firm feel to it but also plenty of spring.
I was amazed at how well the hair kept its shape, even when left to stand in my water pot for half an hour or so.
the filament used is also resistant to scrubbing techniques, it bounces back nicely and washes clean very well.
it has a pearly white appearance, so that colour can be easily seen against the hair.
Although the filament did stain with certain acrylic colours, such as phthalo blue, the colour did not stick to the hair, as I have found with hog, or stain quite so badly.
I was able to clean off excess acrylic from the brush hair readily, using first a cold rinse of water, followed by warm water and a little soap as necessary.
Acrylix brushes are offered in short flat, long flat and round formats, in sizes 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 and 12.
They offer very good value for money in comparison to regular hogs/ 
Pip Seymour Toward Pendle Hill acrylic on paper with Acrylix brushes, 10×16″ (25.4×40.6cm)
I used Acrylix brushes to paint the landscape study shown here.
I particularly likes the rounds for their versatility.
They point well for detail (No. 6 is my favourite) but also hold enough thinned colour to facilitate washes.
Because the brushes are so springy I was able to splay the hair, using a little force against the support, to distribute colour — the brush hair still bounced back into shape perfectly in spite of this forceful application.
This also meant that I could scrub against the painting support and even use a wet brush loaded with water to lift out partially dried acrylic colour.
I enjoy painting with acrylics in thinned layers.
The Acrylix brushes helped me to make broad, glazing strokes, slowly building up a depth of colour.
When working wet-in-wet I found the rounds especially useful for adding in detailed lines by carefully dragging the brush quickly across the painting, and for fusing lines by dragging the wet colour more slowly through the painting surface.
Above FIGURE 1 Selection of strokes using Acrylix brushes A—No. 10 long flat B—No. 8 long flat C—No. 12 short flat D—No. 2 long flat
Right FIGURE 3 Colour eye study 2 Using an Acrylic No. 4 round.
Thinly washed colour was applied, then blended with the brush and pushed around until it felt right.
The brush has great control and enables fine details to be painted with thin or thick paint.
I overpainted wet-in-wet with thicker colour, fusing colour in some parts, or putting in dabs of colour as glazes.
I managed to lift out unwanted wet or partially dry colour using the brush loaded with water
The robust nature of the Acrylix brush also means that colour mixing on the palette is easy to do.
The short flats are good for this; they are also useful for blocking in colour and for short strokes.
The long flats, like the rounds, offer versatility: much colour can be loaded on the brush and drawn out over the painting surface, or shorter dabs can easily be applied and manipulated without the brush hairs giving way.
Acrylix brushes are a welcome addition to the range of brushes available to the artist — and not just for acrylic painting.
In addition to oil painting, they can also be used for applying acrylic gesso on smaller panels or boards.
Advice from Mr Sickert
To coincide with the exhibition at the RA (November 20 to February 14, 1993) Bernard Denvir illuminates Sickert's approach to, and views on art teaching, and in doing so highlights some ideas which artists may find useful today
The Miner, 1935–36, oil, 50¼×30¼″ (127.6×76.8 cm).
Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery
Walter Richard Sickert was a most remarkable man.
Endowed with a formidable creative vigour, untrammeled by the insularity which bedevilled the English art of his day, forthright in his opinions, he expressed them in prose of clarity which had not been equalled by any British painter since Hogarth, whose art and whose personality his own so closely resembled.
A pupil of Whistler, he derived from him a characteristic liking for low tones, which he manipulated with great dexterity to produce effects reminiscent of Rembrandt.
A friend of Degas, who was probably the most potent influence on his art, he absorbed many of the doctrines of Impressionism — especially its concern with contemporary life, even at its most squalid.
And as failed actor — he started his career on the stage before going to the Slade to study under Legros — he found in the music hall and its world precisely those sources of inspiration which Degas had found in the corridors of the Opera, and the foetid atmosphere of the Cirque Fernando.
He was, in fact, for the best part of half a century the closest link between English artists and their French contemporaries.
His studio in Camden Town was the centre of both the Camden Town Group and the London Group, and he was an active member of the New English Art Club.
Like Whistler he was a constant irritant in the somewhat comatose English art world, painting hitherto forbidden subjects, using photographs instead of living models, manipulating sheets of newspapers covered with black paint to secure transfers of outlines on canvas, shunning good taste, extracting beauty from the squalid and emotion from the sordid.
But he was also the most articulate of English artists — partly at least no doubt because he was half Irish.
Words flowed from him in effervescent abundance, ranging from lengthy essays, autobiographical fragments and provocative tirades to witty or angry letters to magazines or newspapers.
There were few subjects on which he did not have firm opinions.
He was, above all, concerned with teaching art, and always his views were unexpected and provocative.
In 1913, for instance, the Folkstone Art School decided to dispense with that age-old foundation of art training, the nude model.
A few weeks later there appeared a letter to the then prestigious Pall Mall Gazette from Sickert praising the move because there are more clothed than naked people in the world, they display a greater variety of shapes and colours, drawing or painting them does not require the high temperature ‘which is extremely injurious  to young people, and to women of whom the classes largely consist’ and, most piquantly, because ‘the absence of the nude model will eliminate a certain number of students who are drawn by mere curiosity.’
The Little Tea-Party: Nina Hamnett and Roald Kristian.
1915–16, oil 10×14″ (25.4×35.6cm).
Tate Gallery, London.
Photo: John Webb
An idiosyncratic teacher
This very idiosyncratic approach to a hallowed concept was typical of the man.
So, too, was his teaching, an activity which he found invigorating, and which on both a public and a private place took up a great deal of his life, from 1905 until 1918 at the Westminster Art School, and subsequently at a wide range of other institutions.
Dealing generally with the question of art teaching, when addressing himself to the abortive attempt to found a Fine Art course at Oxford in 1922, he postulated that art schools should, above all else avoid, ‘The temptation to consider the number of students as a test of success, what I may call a kind of moral and social capitation grant.
Secondly the immense mob of idlers, male and female, young and old to whom art schools serve as a kind of day nursery, well in the limelight, with a prospect of promotion to the Café Royal.’
His approach to teaching was irrevocably pragmatic, reminiscent rather of that tradition of apprenticeship, which had dominated art until the 19th century, rather than of the semi-academicised inculcation of self-expression, which had prevailed ever since.
Teaching, he felt, should be carried out by draughtsmen and painters, who actually exhibit, rather than by mere teachers training other teachers.
It should consist of teaching students to paint and draw on the scale of vision ‘not on the uniform scale now present.’
Backgrounds should be drawn or painted inextricably knit with the model, and pictures should be made from studies, not from imaginary sketches.
Indeed he was so far intent on this reference to visual reality that he strenuously advocated, not only in his teaching but in his own practice, a reliance on the camera, tracing a dependence on it back to the use of the camera lucida by Vermeer and Canaletto, as well as by Millett, Degas — and he might have added Monet — in more recent times, and adding the only proviso that, like alcohol, it is only permissible to those who can do without it.
It is difficult now to realise the scandalised horror with which not only the critics, but the general public in the 1920s and 1930s, greeted the fact that he could have used Victorian magazine illustrations fro producing the series of paintings called Echoes , or make portraits from press or publicity portraits of people such as the Prince of Wales, or public events such as Miss Earhart's Arrival of 1932 .
Painting from nature
Shop Front: The Laundry, pencil, ink and wash.
7½×10½″ (19×26.5cm).
Reproduced courtesy of Islington Libraries
Most surprising of all, indeed in his teaching was his insistence that painting a  complete structure picture from nature, so fundamental a tenet not only of most traditionalists, but even more so of the Impressionists, was not only undesirable, but impossible.
Even with them pleine-airsme was not quite what it had been made out to be.
Monet, that most impassioned adherent of the theory, invariable finished off what in effect were initially sketches in his studio, possessed three cameras, and on his death left a mass of photographic prints — several of Rouen cathedral, the subject of one of his most famous ‘series’.
Nature, Sickert insisted, is not going to sit still and wait till you have got what is there — all the most interesting things that happen are of the most momentary description.
His own practice, as recorded in one of a series of articles which appeared in the Manchester Guardian in October and November 1930* by one of the pupils who attended the evening classes he held there once a week between 1925 and 1927, was from a drawing to make a careful sketch in various hades of one colour, obtaining in this way the construction of the picture and the suggestion for various tonal values.
He then allowed this to dry.
When it was he proceeded to colour it, either from memory, or with colour notes made under the same conditions as the original drawing, paying attention most of all to tonal values and local colour.
Like Degas, the heir in this respect of Ingres, he placed great emphasis on drawing.
In drawing he said, ‘You must liken your attempts at it to a visit made to a strange town without a guide.
You take your map in your hand and try to find the most central position — the town hall or post office.
The you walk down one street, and you say, ‘Well I had better get back to my bearings, or I shall lose myself and you go back to the town hall.
Always keep coming back to the point from which you start, and try to select other roads to follow.
Also in commencing to draw, select a part of the picture which is least likely to move position, so that you may have stability in your drawing.
Accustom the eye to perceive the relation of one line to another by the angles by which they intersect each other.
No one can ever transcribe in perfect proportion, and no one should worry because they cannot.
If they make too long a line in one direction, it will be corrected by a shorter line somewhere else, and the result will be some modification of the normal vision, which is a natural error in the vision of the artist, and which constitutes his style.’
Even those who could not, or would not derive any benefit from this advice, must be at least partly seduced by its clarity and persuasiveness.
Emphasising the futility of filling up a large sheet of cartridge paper the size of a drawing board with the object you are drawing, irrespective of its proximity, Sickert insisted on the importance of never sketching the figure and the background separately, and once having gone over the original drawing faintly in outline, to put in the shadows with the side of the point of the pencil.
He never allowed his students to rub out.
he was greatly concerned, too, with getting the correct scale of things, emphasising that the eye can only see at one glance an object which in size is one-third of the distance between the object and that eye; in other words if you are painting a man six feet high you should be 18 feet away from him.
The only satisfactory way of drawing, he said, was to draw to natural size.
Perhaps much of what Sickert taught does not have relevance to all of us today; perhaps many of his doctrines are outworn, his opinions unsystematic, but looking at the smouldering vigour of the painting, and the sinewy strength of the drawing in the works now on view at the Royal Academy, it is difficult not to feel that here is the work of a real artist, of a man who knew what he was doing — and why.
* These are reprinted, along with other of Sickert's writings in the invaluable booklet Walter Sickert; Advice to young Artists so expertly edited by Lynda Morris, and published to coincide with the Norwich School of Art Gallery exhibition of works by Sickert in May 1986, to which I am greatly indebted.
Sickert's other writings were edited by Osbert Sitwell in A Free House (1947).
TALK OF THE TRADE
Product news and reviews
NEW LIQUITEX ACRYLIC SETS Pip Seymour reports
Liquitex are well known throughout the world for their high quality acrylic colours and mediums.
Their recently launched new selection of Liquitex Acrylic Sets will therefore be of great interest to professional artists and beginners alike.
The sets are supplied in smart red boxes and come complete with a variety of paints, brushes, medium and an explanatory booklet, which is particularly suitable for the beginner or artists new to acrylic painting.
Liquitex acrylics are water-thinned, plastic based artists' quality colours.
Acrylic is perhaps the most versatile and permanent material the artist has at his or her disposal — high quality acrylic colours such as Liquitex are permanently flexible and do not yellow with age.
When wet, Liquitex acrylic can be diluted with water (or medium) and brushes are cleaned with water.
Once dry, the paints become insoluble in water — the surface of the thoroughly dry painting can even be washed clean with soap and water, without harm.
I used the contents of the Liquitex Art Case ('34.95 inc VAT) to make the portrait study illustrated.
The Art Case is made of sturdy plastic, complete with carrying handle and contains all the materials you need for acrylic painting.
Twelve 22ml tubes of colour are included, along with a large 59ml tube of titanium white, Gloss Medium for mixing with the paint to give a higher sheen, two Liquitex hog brushes and the introductory booklet.
the case also has a small mixing palette which will be of use in the field.
Pip Seymour Portrait of Carolynn (study).
Liquitex acrylics on 300 gsm Bockingford paper, 16×12″ (40.6×30.5cm)
My portrait study was made on 300gsm Not watercolour paper; the acrylics worked well on this support.
However, other supports such as acrylic primed canvas or board are also perfectly suitable.
Your local Liquitex stockist will be able to advise on such ready prepared painting supports, or you can quite easily prepare your own raw canvas hardboard offcuts, thick plyboard or MDF.
The dried colour is slightly deeper in tone than it appears when first applied.
This is because the acrylic polymer resin binder has a milky colour when wet, although it dries to be crystal clear.
the introductory booklet has handy tips on how to colour mix with acrylic, taking the novice through some straightforward exercises which will help to familiarise the terms used when painting with acrylics and assist understanding of the paint texture and thinning properties.
Because acrylics dry so quickly, overpainting is a simple process and there are none of the danger associated with oil paints in this respect.
I was able to rework passages easily; the colour is string and has excellent covering power, meaning that mistakes can simply be overpainted when required.
The colour dries to a satin-gloss finish.
To obtain a more glossy finish I mixed in some Gloss Medium whilst painting.
You should experiment with the proportion of medium used but this is soon done and it is possible to use the medium to achieve delicate glaze effects.
The medium carries the paint evenly, so that just a touch of colour can be introduced to the medium to make a transparent glaze layer.
Other mediums (for example Matt) are also available — your local Liquitex stockist should keep a stock of these.
You will also find replacement tubes (22ml — 23 colours, 59ml — all 90 colours in the range) and a full supporting programme of primers, varnishes and mediums.
Liquitex tube colours have a gel consistency.
Their larger 237ml jars (63 colours) offer the same excellence of covering power, flexibility, etc., but the paint has a slightly more fluid consistency, making it ideal for large scale and mural painting.
In addition to the Art Case six other new sets are offered, including a Starter Set at £11.75 (six 22ml tubes and booklet).
For further details about all other Liquitex products, please contact your nearest stockist of Liquitex UK.
TRENDSETTERS!
Artcare have been at the forefront in the production of portfolios for the discerning artist since 1938.
Until then cardboard tubes had been the only means of transporting and protecting artwork.
An art shop in the city of London sold four cotton based portfolios in the first week and doubled this in the second.
Now Artcare enjoy brand leader status in the UK and in many countries worldwide.
The current Artcare product range, although diverse still centres on the needs of the artist in every branch of the profession and at whatever level of achievement.
Over the years Artcare have introduced many improvements.
Just a few include a metal plate in the spine of their Professional Presentation Portfolio, giving added strength; and metal corners and a special nylon binding on the edges to resist the toughest student neglect.
Artcare only use quality nylon zips, each of which has been designed especially for a particular portfolio; and only square arch mechanisms are used making presentation much neater.
The Premier Range, make in weather resistant durable PVC with a natural leather look, is available in Al, A2, A3 and A4 and also in an A2, A3 and A4 maxi size giving greater sleeve capacity.
For the portrait and landscape format, there is a square A4 available.
Inclusive prices start at £17.50 for an A4 display portfolio and rise to £48.40 for an A2 maxi display portfolio.
Painting with GOUACHE
Jane Camp is an enthusiast for the medium because it allows her to control wet-into-wet washes and paint out mistakes more easily than when working with watercolours
I first started to think about painting about ten years ago when my two children married and left home and I thought I'd ‘do’ something at the local adult education centre.
I enrolled for ‘Art for Beginners’ and later went down to the centre where the tutor had obtained a model for us from whom to do quick sketches — so I was in at the deep end.
I have tried various media since then, and, being a very quick painter, I found pastel too my liking.
Being able to pick up a colour and press it on coloured paper was all very exciting.
I used pure watercolour at the beginning and although I loved its luminosity, I found that as I usually paint in short stabs rather than broad washes, the thinking time that pure watercolour demands was not ideal for me.
I found that by adding white I could achieve my desired effect.
I then bought some designers' gouache (colourfast) and found I could still paint wet into wet without the whole thing going into a swim as in a watercolour painting.
also, I was able to work at the painting knowing I could obliterate any unwanted areas; this gave me the freedom I needed.
Over the years I have discovered that the subjects I enjoy doing most of all are not far from my home; my garden, conservatory, figures usually doing something, are my favourites and my family and friends are commandeered regularly for this purpose.
Tableware, gouache 12×10″ (30.5×25.4cm).
Reproduced courtesy of the Wykeham Galleries
Procedure
I stand at an easel to paint.
This gives you the freedom to move back and forth and swing your arm — you must feel free!
I use Bockingford 200lb paper, which is lovely and thick and therefore does not need stretching, and Pro Arte brushes — numbers 8, 10 and 12.
I am very heavy on brushes and so a beautiful sable brush would not last too long.
Pro Arte brushes have lovely points which last a long time.
My palette of gouache colours includes: cadmium yellow, yellow ochre, burnt sienna, cerulean blue, cobalt, ultramarine, sap green, olive green, cadmium red (Rembrandt rose and Rembrandt violet — these are pure watercolours as they are permanent) and cadmium orange.
I don't necessarily use all of them in one painting.
When I paint, I tend to see a colour, put that down, then move to something else and put that down, hopefully with a bit of shape as well.
I don't paint from dark to light or light to dark in any special sequence, but as my eyes flit over the paper I add bits of colour here and there.
With gouache the paint dries quite quickly.
It is water-soluble so you can smudge lines together (often with a finger) and I find I can go over and over many times before the painting becomes ‘muddy’.
As with everything, you have to get used to the medium, after which your confidence builds up and you start to improve.
when you want to put in highlights at the end of your painting, the paint will tend to sink in each time you put on a pale colour if the paper is still damp.
I usually wait until the next day when the painting is thoroughly dry, when it will accept the light colour perfectly.
If I am painting a small picture which includes figures, I often start with no preliminary line but go straight in, blocking in the face and body, changing the colour as I go.
In this case I am actually drawing with the brush and the colours will merge quite nicely as they are painted wet into wet.
Any mistakes can be eradicated later.
Being opaque, gouache will cover up one colour with another perfectly satisfactorily.
Demonstration
For this I decided to do a painting looking from my conservatory through the windows into the garden with two white chairs as the focal point.
I waited three days for the sun to come out but to no avail, so on a very grey, cloudy day I set my easel by the French doors, put my paints and brushes on a high stool next to me and started.
I like to have some sort of colour down as an underpainting first to kill the white of the paper — a similar  process to an oil painter, and I start by wetting the paper with an old one and a half inch household painting brush and then quickly slash in some colour which slightly relates to what I see.
As the paper is wet the colour merges and falls and sometimes I end up with quite a nice fusion of colours which I then leave to dry thoroughly.
I picked up a number 8 brush and with bluey brown paint I drew the windows, and used a rough line to tell me where the plant at the front was.
This was a monstrous busy lizzie which started out quite small, but is now rather exaggerated in size.
The can chair was then put in and where the dark plants in the garden met the paler grass.
Following this initial structure I filled in with colour relevant to tones and hue.
During painting, I often look at the picture through a mirror as it progresses, and sometimes even just after I've drawn it, just to see if anything doesn't quite look OK.
Believe me, the mirror will tell you!
FIGURE 1 I nearly always start drawing the ‘bones’ of the picture with a small brush dipped in a light cerulean or cobalt blue — ultramarine is too strong a colour, and I roughly mark out windows, table, plant etc
Above FIGURE 2 I then paint in the bulk of solid colour in carious places, screwing up my eyes, obliterating any detail but getting the tones hopefully right.
Grass light — sky lighter still.
The plant is going to have pink flowers so I paint the foliage quite dark — I can always lighten it
FIGURE 3 I put in a few plants growing outside the window.
The vine growing from the roof must have some substance.
The window frames look rather nice with broken colour — shade and sun — so I don't have them as solid pieces of wood
FIGURE 4 I'm getting somewhere at last and feel quite happy.
I'm really making up bits now, making the picture look how I want it to look — dark on light, light on dark — not forgetting to look in the mirror!
I put a few pink flowers on the plant and remember that I mustn't overdo this
FIGURE 5 I add small slivers of light down the windows to show the sun coming in from the right (when it's out!).
I put in the white chairs — just the basic shapes will do — and add some more light pink to the flowers.
Does it look like a begonia?
It doesn't really matter.
Time to sit down and have a coffee!
I tend to paint very quickly, so the paint is always rather damp as I flit round the paper, putting a colour here and one there, and at first it all looks a bit of a jumble.
As I keep looking and forming shapes, however, something more solid begins to appear.
When my painting was about three-quarters finished I decided to add the white chairs.
They had blue cushions on them, but I thought they'd register better just white, so I glanced round the paper adding carious different coloured touches — light on dark and dark on light — to give the impression of light coming through the leaves.
You can do too much of this if you are not careful and as I tend to paint with sharp stabby strokes it can be a fault with me to look rather bitty.
A look in the mirror tells me what to solidify and what to leave, and gradually it starts to look like something I had in mind.
I keep going round the painting seeing extra bits that need to be emphasised, or perhaps to blend in too start a line.
I like a broken line to look a picture, one in which there are ‘lost and found’ edges and in which the tone of one part is the same as the area behind it so it seems to have no hard edge.
I like to put a pale colour behind a darkish one to make the dark colour stand out more and a dark colour dropped in just at one point behind a light colour to make the paleness improve.
This is especially effective for flower painters.
I read a book by the American painter Charles Reid who said that rather than paint a dark background all round a daisy it is sometimes better to put just one dark drop of colour behind the vase of the petal to get the most impact.
The most difficult thing is to know when to stop and when I feel as though the painting is nearly there I usually stop, make myself a cup of coffee, and contemplate what I have achieved from the comfort of a kitchen stool.
Sometimes you can be exhilarated, believing that the painting is a masterpiece or, alternatively, a look in the mirror may tell you that it is just a jumble and the eye doesn't focus anywhere.
In cases like this it is time to think carefully about which parts need perhaps to be emphasised and which part need to be toned down.
It's amazing what solidifying some areas can do to a fragmented part of your painting.
Putting just one shade of green over several ‘bitty’ shades of green on your tree can improve your painting.
Also, when faced with a large stretch of foreground, the addition of a different harmonious colour sometimes stimulates the eye and can be the answer.
I'm a great one for putting a bit of cerulean blue in my green areas, but other painters add other colours, like red.
I love colour and find great delight in translating what I actually see into different colours.
A Movable Snack
Robin Stemp conveys her impressions during a recent train tour of Europe which, as she hoped, helped to reawaken her numbed artistic faculties
A bridge in Florence by Isobel Stemp.
A quick sketch from her notebook
Day One: Written in a train in France
If you are lucky enough to have lived in Paris as a young man, then wherever you go for the rest of your life, it stays with you, for Paris is a movable feast,Ernest Hemingway to a friend , 1950.
For ‘Paris’ add Prague, London, Venice, anywhere beautiful and foreign and not of the everyday, and for ‘young man’insert ‘or middle aged woman’and for ‘lived’and ‘or visited at a time in your life when you most needed it.’
A movable feast of visual stimulus is a necessary part of being an artist.
In the middle of last winter a friend, Tish Berkley and I decided to take an Over-26 Inter Rail ticket and spend two weeks in the following July, travelling in Europe.
Prague was high on our list, and Paris, as a tonic, to be taken frequently in small doses.
We were invited to stay with friends living in Northern Burgundy, and to visit a painting school at La Buia, in Umbria, with the idea that I might take a class there in May 1993. there was some discussion, earlier in the year, of another in Venice, and we will break our journey there, for breakfast, next week.
Last year, at about this time in the summer, my daughter Isobel, and a friend, Peta Sherwood, made a similar journey by rail, and with the same ideas; to keep a diary and to record, in paint, the passing days.
I cannot speak for Tish, but I am painted out.
Teaching art, thinking about, writing about, looking at art, with very little time for anything else, except the daily round, has meant that my visual faculties are numbed, rubbed down with the hard graft of making art a living.
Tish intends to do some drawing, but is too intent on keeping a diary.
I miss my painting, and hope that by keeping still it will, like some small exotic animal, find its way back tome without my attempting to chase it down the byways of my exhausted creativity.
The girls arrived at the Gare du Nord, as we will do, and then, as we will in a few days' time, they made for the Gare de L'Est and the journey into central Europe.
How distant that sounds and, on a train, it is a full 19 hours, with a few stops in Germany on the way.
Now we are en route to Auxerre and the comforts of an English family living in France.
When the girls waited at the Gare de L'Est, they found a garden surrounding a church, and Peta wrote as Isobel painted.
‘As I watch,’ she wrote, ‘and it gradually gets later, I can begin to understand about different lights and see colours in the scene which I never before would have imagined…’
The colours of the countryside as we pass are English colours, greens, golds, the high washed blue bag sky, but as my eyes become adjusted and my mind learns to relax I can see them change and become, in the blue grey light, more obviously French.
Day Five: Written in an overnight sleeper from Paris to Prague
There are a few seconds before starting a journey on a night train, which are pure theatre.
Doors slam with that  final ring found only in busy stations.
The train oils its way out from between the platforms, and lights on the station become one with lights on bridges, and in buildings, transfigured now, from shapeless concrete lumps into illuminated palaces.
It is a moment before the long hours in cramped quarters, which makes up spending a night in a couchette.
But however horrible the thought of lying sticky and crumpled, sleeping, or trying to, might be, the actual moment of departure is one I would gladly relive time and time again.
We all need windows in our lives, and at the moment we can ask for nothing more than the scenes flicking past the carriage until, at last, we reach open country and the long dark hours ahead we plough on towards the East and the border.
I take out my sketch pad, but the results are not food and I consign it to the ancient lavatory and oblivion on the track.
Ideas are fizzing in my head, but I know, through experience, that they will emerge when ready, and not a moment before.
I am Cambridged out, and it is only by getting away from the familiar that anything good will (I hope) emerge.
We are handed out sheets and make our beds.
The boudoir attendant is full of Czech charm and that languid humour which comes with seeing too much reality at too close quarters.
The train rolls along like a drunk on beer.
The attendant, in physical sympathy with the train, careers past the door.
He smiles, waves, is clearly over-worked, over-stretched, in a hurry, but glad to stop and pass the time of day helped by our Czech phrase book and my appalling German.
Our fellow sleeper is large and silent, a heavy seriousness dictates his majestic arrival in striped pyjamas.
The colours of the train, and this unknown man, are brown and cream brown and black, brown and white.
He exudes brown, from his sombre mood, due possibly, to a diet too rich in Kafka at too early an age, to his dark brown beard and curly hair.
His movements are brown.
A burnt umber man in a raw sienna compartment.
Our jolly attendant makes one more and final round, checking that we are all tucked in for the night.
He hands us a booklet each on Mainz and Brno.
‘Dekuji’, ‘Prosim’.
Day Six: Written in an apartment in Malostranské námečsti, Prague
We walk out this evening and the city is a fathomless well of deep toned reds and browns, golds and a wonderful dusky orange.
All around is an endless interlocking of carvings, on doors and walls, overlooking windows and around anything and everything strong enough to take the gods and shepherds, maidens and old men, curls and whisks of Baroque fancy.
The light falls on the back door of the Italian Embassy, and children's voices pour out of an upstairs window.
The air is dull gold with the past, a sad, melancholic silver gilt which colours the mood of city.
It might be the place where the young of the West come to be seen, but it is the old guard who hold their ground, the poets and writers, pamphleteers and musicians who leave their mark on the atmosphere of this enchanted city.
The Jewish Cemetery, Prague.
From Isobel Stemp's notebook carried with her while Inter Railing with Peta Sherwood
To paint Prague would be to paint a dream, a city of ideas, where the intellect and emotions meet and boogy away the night in a haze of ideology.
St Nicholas Cathedral at the corner of our square is a great deep cavern of dusky toned Baroque, the light upheld by the dark shadows which flow in elegant curliques and whisps around the ornate ceiling, along pillars and walls emblazoned with the richness of colour that only an intensely, at times intellectually, emotional and predominantly Catholic country could produce.
A sense of humour mixed with the weighty seriousness of our companion of the night is shown to the full in this place.
It is Sunday, and at home the day is measured in a steady progression of church and lunch and an outing of some sort in the afternoon.
Here, on holiday, albeit a semi-working one, the hours are interchangeable.
Peta and Isobel fell in love with the place as surely as we have and they, like us, concentrated on the commonplace.
We take it to extremes and wilfully avoid anything which has even a faint tinge of the ‘essential’ viewing of any tourist with cultural pretensions.
Galleries (unless they are in Paris, where the rules are different) and most monuments, unless they are churches, to which we are both addicted, are out.
Instead we, like the girls, walk the streets in search of the everyday.
Looking through windows, sitting in local cafes, as far removed from the tourist beats as possible, shopping at small shops selling local food.
Pretentiously unpretentious, possibly.
Our only nod towards the obvious is a visit to the Jewish cemetery, which Peta described in her diary as ‘Lovely, huge old trees cover the whole of the cemetery and people write a wish on some paper and place it under a rock or one of the stones.
The feeling and atmosphere to (sic) the place is so strong that you can almost breathe it in.’
In the Mala Strana, the secretaries and the artists, the nurses and the busmen return to their apartments, the lights go on in the high windows, the courtyard below us is filling up with the smells of food and voices discussing — what?
Love?
Divorce?
Work?
Money?
The events of the day, trivial and unexciting, or the latest political scandal revealing another name to be added to the black list of those whose lives were made bearable by being well in with the Communists?
Day Ten: Written at la Buia Umbria
One great joy about travelling by train is that places can be viewed at a distance, without the urgent compulsion to visit, in person, every stick and stone of a place systematically  itemising contents and structure.
Tish refers to all those who will ask us ‘have you seen…?’
Then, when faced with the negative answer, ‘Really …?’
From a train window the views are democratically arrayed so that basilica and hedgerow, back street and castle have equal viewing time and space.
Once can, if required, return later, having taken in an overall view.
To travel is to be continually surprised, to keep on the visual qui vive .
We enter Venice in the early morning and the light does a graceful palais glide along the sea, over the marsh lands.
The sun is a chalky milk white, the light a film over pink and yellow and pale creamy stone.
We go on a Vaporetto to view the studio where I might have a class next year.
The light is brighter now, the flicker of silver sun replaced by a mega watt glare.
At the studio it becomes apparent that it will not be appropriate to being a class here, and after an hour we leave.
To visit Venice gives the sensation of viewing an ancient and famous movie, with each bit player a star name.
There are few surprises, few unknown faces, unquoted lines.
An architectural Gone With The Wind with Rhett Butler and Scarlet O'Hara hamming it up across the Grand Canal.
Prague, the much vaunted Sleeping Beauty is in danger of enduring the same fate as Venice, with the Sleeping Beauty being snogged to death by the West.
And yet it is possible, as with all great art, to see the copies and to be enchanted again and again with the original.
Venice.
Colour notes done as an impression by Isobel Stemp.
Neither of the girls was impressed by Venice, finding the views too familiar, the hype too strident.
Neither found that they had anything fresh to say about a city which has been over-painted, over-written about, over-filmed.
Both girls preferred Florence
At La Buia Italy is in its element, and immediately it becomes obvious that this is the place where I should bring my class.
It is not Venice but it has warmth, colour, and views such as could stretch the most infertile imagination.
Over the border from Tuscany, it is just in Umbria, and so has the freshness now lost in its overexposed neighbour.
Over supper we sit down in the low evening sun and watch the hills change from one blue to another, to mauve, to grey, to black.
The moon, a nail clipping on a black cloth, rises and as abruptly sets.
The crickets sing on, their throaty croaking rising and falling a pitch or two, as the evening passes into night.
We are in Piero Della Francesca country, and tomorrow we will visit his Madonna de Parto at Monterchi, and see his uncluttered view of the Mother of God as a local girl, honoured with graceful simplicity by angels.
His colours are everywhere, in the warm pink of the hill towns, in the blue hills, the deep and huskily green oaks which cover them, in the white stones of the small upright churches, in the air around us, deep and rich with the scent of wild herbs.
A mile away two neighbours are talking and their voices, all quick sharp consonants, ring out across the fields.
Then they are quiet, and we are left with the crickets and the soft shifting of birds in the almond trees.
For an artist to travel is to set out on a visual adventure which may or may not end in fulfilment.
Often it is a mistake to hope for too much.
The excitement is in the expectation that, having been around and seen all that you can, the end product will be at least a little more interesting than it might have been if you had stayed at home.
An artist can never have seen too much, read too much, and even if the time is right for a fallow period, then that is exactly when it is also right to go out and see, read, feel, as deeply as possible.
As I sit here in the dark in, what is, after all, an artist's home, writing by the light of the overhead lamp, I can see the shapes and colours and forms and the old excited feelings are returning.
My eyes jaded by having to work for a living, are, after their rest, getting again into focus and my brain, having taken a long sabbatical, has shifted itself, with extreme bad grace, into gear.
It is in this frame of mind and with the ideas chasing each other around in my head that the day now ends.
Opportunities
ART FAIRS/FESTIVALS
Contemporary Art market
Between November 19 and 22, the Towner Art Gallery in the High Street, Eastbourne will host its first contemporary art market to help raise funds in order to purchase contemporary art under the Contemporary Art Society's ‘Collection’ Scheme.
Paintings and sculpture will be on sale, ranging in price from £150 to around £2,500.
For information please contact  
COMPETITIONS
National Schools Collage Competition
This year the National Schools Collage Competition, sponsored by the Woolwich Building Society, takes the theme ‘Streetwise’.
The competition is open to young people throughout the UK aged between 11 and 18 years.
For competition leaflets please contact ‘Streetwise’, or pick up a leaflet from your local Woolwich branch.
The closing date for entries is Monday December 7.
DEMONSTRATIONS
Royal Institute of Oil Painters
The annual exhibition of the Royal Institute of Oil Painters will take place at the Mall Galleries, The Mall, London from December 10 to 22.
On the evening of December 15, starting at 6.30 pm, members of the institute will give demonstrations of their various techniques, and at 7.30 pm a lecture will be given by the head of the Modern British Art Department of Christie's.
For further details of these events or next year's exhibition please contact    
Anthony Eyton, Ladies Showering, oil.
On show at the annual open exhibition of the Royal Institute of Oil Painters at the Mall Galleries, from December 10 to 22
LECTURES
Bankside Gallery lecture Series
On November 25 the Bankside Gallery, London will host the St. Cuthbert's paper Mill lecture entitled —‘Ronald Blythe on John Nash (1893–1977)’.
The lecture costs £5; £4 concessions and £3 to Friends of the RSW and RE.
Tickets are available in advance from  
Modern Masters
To coincide with their major exhibition —‘Modern Masterpieces from the Arts Council Collection’, which continues until January 1993.
Hove Museum & Art Gallery has organised a number of gallery talks and lectures on the Modern Masterpieces exhibition on November 29, December 6 and December 13.
All talks start at 2.30 pm and admission is free.
On Saturday December 5 there will be a workshop which will explore the ideas and techniques of modern artists, with practical and informal discussions on the artists, with practical and informal discussions on the artists concerned.
The workshop will take place from 10.30 am until 4 pm.
Tickets cost £4 and are available from the Hove Museum & Art Gallery.
Tate Gallery Lectures
On Wednesday November 25 Kirk Carnedoe, Director of Painting and Sculpture at the Museum of Modern Art in New York, will give a special lecture on a subject of his choice.
The lecture will start at 6.30 pm in the Auditorium.
Tickets cost £7.50;
On Wednesday December 2, at 6.30 pm in the Auditorium, Tom Phillips will commentate on his slide work ‘20 Sites N years’.
Tickets cost £5 and are available from the Education Department 
On Wednesday December 9, Maurice Davies and Robert Willer will re-enact selected moments from Turner's public lectures on perspective given at the Royal Academy of Arts from 1811–27.
Tickets for ‘Turner's Lectures on Perspective: A Special Performance’ cost £5 and are available from the Education Department.
On Fridays December 4, 11 and 18, there will be a series of three free lectures entitled ‘Beardsley to Comberg: British Drawing and Watercolours’.
The lectures will take place at 1 pm in the Lower Galleries.
SENDING-IN DAYS
Lasting Impressions
Lasting Impressions is an open print exhibition at the Victoria Art Gallery, Bridge Street, Bath, to take place from January 30 to march 13, 1993.
The sending-in days for entries are January 22 and 23 between 10 am and 4.30 pm.
For entry forms and details, send a sae to:
The Society of Women Artists
The 132nd annual open exhibition of the Society of Women Artists will take place at the Westminster Gallery, Westminster Central Hall, Storey's Gate, London SW1 from March 19 to 30, 1993. handing-in day for works: January 19 1993 between 10 am and 5 pm.
Entry forms and details are available on the day or by sending a sae to:
STUDY DAY


Birbeck College and the national Portrait Gallery will be holding an All Ramsay study day at the NPG lecture Room on Saturday November 28, and 10.30 am until 4.30 pm.
The day costs £20 which includes a visit to the exhibition, coffee and tea and lectures on various aspects of Allan Ramsay.
For further details and bookings contact   
11th of a series
The art business
PLANNING AN EXHIBITION
Your first solo exhibition may seem a daunting prospect but it is an event to which every serious artist aspires.
Oliver Lange looks at four different types of exhibitions and points out their advantages and disadvantages
Selling paintings and other creative work is an extremely competitive and volatile business.
From whatever standpoint or philosophy, works of art can never be judged as essential to basic living.
Thus, as a ‘luxury’ commodity, they will always be influenced by the vagaries of economic climate and social change.
Consequently, most professional artists need to exploit a variety of methods for selling their work.
In addition to selling paintings through different galleries and open exhibitions and using various publicity devices to attract private commissions, another good way of selling a quantity of work is by having a solo exhibition.
Although I have to confess that at present, during a time of recession, it is increasingly difficult to attract the backing of galleries for such shows and, indeed, to have the personal confidence to finance and promote them oneself, the solo exhibition remains an important event to which every serious artist occasionally ought to aspire.
Reasons for organising an individual exhibition will vary from artist, as well as being influenced by the different stages of an artist's career.
The first solo show may well be a very daunting experience, for although artists are used to showing work, it is normally in the context of a mixed exhibition or gallery display rather than presenting a large amount of work to an invited audience, including critics!
You could team up with another artist, possibly one who works in a contrasting discipline or technique.
But this is not always the best solution, for inevitably comparisons will be made, however invalid.
An exhibition can be viewed as a means of getting noticed and attracting publicity and contracts: as a rare chance of seeing a good deal of your recent work together and thus creating an opportunity for self-evaluation and an assessment of the way your work is developing; and, by no means least, as a way of selling work.
No doubt a good exhibition will combine all of these aspects.
In planning an exhibition, not only must you be realistic about the amount or work, time and expense that will be involved, but your aims must be clear.
Do you want it to be just a commercial success or do you see it as an opportunity to exhibit large or unusual works, or the sort of work you would like to do more of?
Do you want the exhibition to be a low-key means of getting some experience, or create and attract a lot of local media coverage?
Types of exhibitions
There are four main types of exhibitions: Those organised by a commercial gallery or similar display venue, those sponsored by an organisation, industry or private patron; those arranged by hiring exhibition space; and those at ‘free’ venues, such as home.
Let's look at the advantages and disadvantages of these alternatives in turn.
Inclusion in a national open event such as our Art in Nature open competition and exhibition is useful for attracting the interest and backing of galleries for a future possible solo show.
full details about next year's Art in Nature competition will be published in the January 1993 issue
Not surprisingly, because of the expenses involved commercial galleries are very discriminating in the sort of exhibitions they mount.
Some galleries have display space which is reserved for solo exhibitions, whilst others have occasional individual displays.
Obviously the gallery owner makes a calculated risk by devoting wall space entirely to the work of a single artist.
If work fails to sell, he has lost income on commission and, in addition, he has spent money on promoting the event and the private view.
So you are unlikely to be given an exhibition unless your work is already known by the gallery  or you have an established reputation and proven success.
if the gallery accepts you for a solo exhibition, they will normally organise everything and bear the costs of running and advertising it.
All you have to do is to ensure that you have sufficient work of the agreed type and standard and that it is framed and presented as required.
The gallery will, of course, charge a commission for selling work.
This may appear a distinct disadvantage, but bearing in mind that your costs are minimal and you won't have to man the exhibition this is only fair!
Rates will vary: commission rates for exhibitions may well be higher than a gallery's normal rate.
Sponsorship is an ever-dwindling means for the professional artist to attract the necessary financial backing to enable him or her to organise an exhibition.
However, it remains an avenue to explore.
You may be able to forge a link with a local business (or even a wealthy individual!) who, in return for bearing the basic costs of mounting the exhibition, will be able to attract some publicity for their service or product.
If you hire an exhibition space or organise an exhibition in your own home or a commercial or other space made available to you without charge, you will obviously be meeting all the costs involved yourself.
Additionally, as with any exhibition, you need to assess carefully the implications of having a large amount of your work restricted to a single display venue for a period of time.
And you may have to look after the exhibition yourself, so the ‘invisible’ cost of your time is another factor to consider.
Proper gallery or exhibition space is expensive to hire, prohibitively so for the average professional artist.
Look instead at any self-organising galleries in your area, art and craft co-operatives, societies, guilds, and so on.
Your regional Arts Board office should be able to help with information.
Try also the local council, library, and any community colleges, universities or polytechnics.
These may have foyers, halls or exhibition areas which are available for artists sometimes at very modest rates.
Another advantage of such places is that they often have someone on hand to keep an eye on the exhibitions.
Perhaps you can strike a deal with an estate agent for temporary use of an empty shop space, or find a suitable display area in an hotel, a restaurant or a theatre.
With any venue, do check out the details before making any commitments.
You may find you have a room or rooms in your own house which can easily be converted on a temporary basis for an exhibition.
However, seek the advice of your local planning department first.
There is usually no objection to the occasional exhibition, depending on where you live and whether your exhibition is likely to cause traffic congestion and aggravation to the neighbours!
Like all exhibition venues, it is a question of creating the right atmosphere for your work to be seen at its best advantage.
In some ways your home may be the most suitable place and this is certainly a good way to start and gain some experience.
Getting organised
From the type of work you do, the amount available and the sort of venue you want to use, you will be able to start planning.
Before fixing a date do some research.
Have a look at some other exhibitions, get ideas, do some costings, and estimate the time span you need to be ready.
Cost may well be a big influence on all your decisions, but choose the venue not only with regard to the quantity and type of work you have for display but also the likely customers it will attract, and therefore its location.
When you have found a suitable place, ensure that you understand the terms involved and, if applicable, what commitment of time, money, display screens or whatever, you will have to provide.
The next important decision is the date.
Be sensible about this so that everything will be organised and ready on time.
choose a time of the year which will attract plenty of people; this will depend on the particular gallery or exhibition space you are using.
Some galleries, for example, thrive on holiday trade whilst others have a rather lean time through the summer months.
Draw up a schedule of things to do and estimated costings.
Remember that working for an exhibition will take a lot of time and effort in addition to your normal professional work.
Possible costs will include: renting the venue; publicity, catalogues and the private view; framing and presentation; transport and insurance; and office expenses.
Possible considerations in the planning schedule will include: arranging the printing of publicity material; posting invitations and publicity material, including media contacts; framing; arranging insurance of work and transport to and from the venue; the private view; hanging the exhibition and taking down the exhibition.
The amount of the cost and planning for which you are responsible will, of course, depend on the particular venue.
It is important that every aspect of the exhibition is covered in a thoroughly professional manner.
Invitations, posters and other publicity material must be of a high standard, as must your framing and presentation.
Make the most of the lighting and general ambience of the venue to display the work in an interesting and appealing way.
Exhibitions are not just about selling work, though you will obviously want to seel as much as possible.
Pricing is a key factor; you will want to recoup your expenses and make a profit, yet not overprice your paintings for the sort of audience you will attract.
Yes, exhibitions are hard work!
But, however successful they are financially, they provide a splendid opportunity to give your work exposure and publicity and to take stock of your progress and development, as well as often providing various contacts and leads to follow up.
in view
Bernard Denvir reports
Suave and sinister visions
A new wave in British sculpture set the art world here bussing during the last two decades of the 19th century when the status quo of classically austere, cold, funerary white marble was disturbed by the throbbing emotional statements of talented young men like Alfred Gilbert (who gave us Eros in Piccadilly Circus) George Frampton, Alfred Drury, Hamo Thorneycroft and others.
Through their sculpture they almost emulated painters by expressing moods, yearnings, inward feelings, and trying and succeeding to embody visionary reflections in line with the Symbolist Movement currently so influential in Europe with its ‘erudite fancies, complicated nightmares, suave and sinister visions’, so picturesquely described by J-K Huysmans, one of the movement's literary evangelists.
Fearless in their use of colour and ornament (jewellery played an important role in their imagery) they employed a variety of, for that time, unorthodox material: copper, aluminium, ivory, mother-of-pearl, semi-precious stones, gold and silver, as well as bronze to achieve their desired effects.
In Stoke-on-Trent and Bradford an exhibition called ‘Reverie Myth and Sensuality: Sculpture in Britain 1880–1910’ displays 13 of these sculptors represented by some 30 artefacts from various public collections — a unique opportunity to experience this beguiling and exotic aspect of British sculpture.
Geordie gallimaufry
The Laing Art Gallery.
Newcastle continues to probe the abundant seams of its rich artistic past.
Last year at about this time it produced the admirable Victorian Newcastle painter Ralph Hedley; this winter it is showing in ‘A Romance with the North East’ Rober and Isa (Thompson) Jobling, who lived and worked there until the 1920s producing powerful and poetic images of its countryside coast and people.
Born in 1841, Robert's origins were bona fide proletarian; he worked in a glass factory and as a house painter, taking evening classes in art which proved such a successful venture that he was able to set up a studio by 1869 and had developed a substantial reputation by the 1880s.
Isa, born in 1851, the daughter of a wealthy ship merchant, was higher up the social and educational scale and studied art in Paris in the 1870s, an experience which shows in her competent and professional early paintings depicting the hard-working lives and families of fishing folk.
These gave way later to more graceful and appealing subjects and a feminine sensitivity veering towards sentimentality, once the occupational hazard of womanhood.
Robert exhibited both locally and at the RA.
Both of them took an active part in the artistic life of the community, pioneering clubs and founding exhibition societies.
A new space
The representative collection of 20th century art which Lancaster University has been amassing since the 1960s and 1970s by purchase, gifts and bequests, is to be housed in a worthy new purpose-built annex to the already existing and refurbished Peter Scott Gallery.
Funded by the Museums and Galleries Improvement Fund, the Henry Moore Foundation and the North West Museums Service, the extension will mean, says the director, Mary Gavagan ‘that an important fine art collection will now be on display not only for the university population but also for the general public’, even those with mobility problems for whom ramps and chairlifts will give access to the works of among others Chillida, Derain, Miro, Max Ernst and Terry Frost.
The Peter Scott Gallery will be re-opening in January with works by Paula Rego, the National Gallery's first associate artist in 1990, whose paintings inspired by the Renaissance collections now decorate its restaurant in the Sainsbury Wing, and Nicola Hicks, whose vigorous unsentimental depictions of animals are justly renowned.
BELOW LEFT The Peter Scott Gallery, Lancaster University and BELOW RIGHT Nicola Hicks Fire and Brimstone, whose drawings and sculpture will be on show in one of the opening exhibitions in the new gallery, from January 18 to February 12
A discerning age
A group of works by contemporaries, often friends collected by an enthusiastic and discerning individual is always appealing and ken Powell takes a deserved place in a long line of such patrons.
His particular predilections when he started were for the young artists of his won age who were beginning to reject the immediate traditions of their predecessors and experiment with new formulas of expression and technique in the 1940s and 1950s.
Most of them have since become respected and stalwart pillars of British art with distinguished entries in the relevant art history books.
His collection, appropriately entitled ‘new Beginnings’ and on show in Edinburgh includes the innovative works of among others Victor Pasmore, Adrian heath, Kenneth and Mary martin, the painters associated with St. Ives like Patrick heron and Robert Hilton, as well as sculptors such as Eduardo Paolozzi, William Turnbull and Reg Butler, giving an encapsulated view of this interesting period in British art.
Scottish national Gallery of Modern Art 
Drawing masters
The lucky denizens of East Anglia are being given a rare opportunity to see a magnificent selection of 16th century drawings loaned form the British Museum's great collection, which is only occasionally exhibited to the general public.
These precious and fragile masterpieces in ‘Florentine Drawing in the Age of Michelangelo’, which include works by the master himself as well as Leonardo, Raphael, Pontormo, Bronzino and other top names of the Italian Renaissance, will be shown in the Sainsbury Centre's environmentally controlled exhibition space, its lighting system specially designed to display such sensitive material.
Sainsbury Centre for Visual Arts 
heart in stone
An early 20th century guru, a great English artist-craftsman, typographic designer, engraver, sculptor and deeply influential presence in the cultural life of his time, Eric Gill (1882–1940) was regarded, until Fiona MacCarthy's revealing and controversial biography (1989), as almost a candidate for sainthood.
It was as an innovative designer of letter forms (Gill sans, Perpetua) scribe and letter cutter in stone that his genius lay, nurtured in the traditions of the Arts and Crafts Movement.
Art of a purpose, not for its own sake, was his rubric.
Sculpture, being Fine Art, he did not tackle till he was 27 and well established and then seemingly by way of therapeutic sublimation during a period of enforced sexual abstinence whilst his wife was pregnant.
Pygmalion-like he turned to the penetration of stone with hammer and chisel…
‘So my first erotic drawing was not on the back of an envelope’ he wrote, ‘but a week or so's work on a decent piece of stone…
Lord how exciting! and not merely touching and seeing but actually making her.
I was responsible for her very existence and her every form came straight out of my heart.’
Not for him the method of modelling in clay and translating the result into other materials by mechanical means.
He liked to cut directly into the stone, relishing its firm crisp quality.
Surprisingly, for a progenitor of such masterpieces as the Stations of the Cross in Westminster, Gill has never been given a retrospective of his sculpture, a void which the Barbican Art Gallery is filling with a collection of over 50 works in stone and related drawings, engravings, and contemporary photographs which reveal the paradoxical creativity of this artist, sensually spiritual and ascetically erotic.
The Barbican Art Gallery, until February 7.
Constructing landscape
The experience of landscape in its physical, visual and spiritual dimensions was the obsessive passion of Cornish artist Peter Lanyon, who was killed in a gliding accident in 1964 at the age of 46.
Making constructions from mundane materials: wood, string, glass, wire, plastic and such-like to define and encompass his concepts of space, energy, weight and transparency was for Lanyon a lifelong exercise which both grew out of and was channelled back into his paintings, thus extending the parameters of his vision and adding a further element to his work.
A South Bank Centre touring exhibition at the Camden Arts Centre, ‘Air, Land and Sea’ examines the affiliations between Lanyon's constructions and paintings, and where possible re-unites the related artefacts, thus illuminating his working methods and presenting new perspectives.
The Camden Arts Centre 
ABOVE peter Lanyon Longshore 1962, oil on canvas, 70×48″ (183×122cm).
On show at the Scottish national Gallery of Modern Art, Edinburgh
Printmaking from afar
What have printmakers been up to in what was recently called the USSR?
To find out, visit the Bristol City Museum and Art Gallery where in an exhibition: ‘A Time of Transition: Contemporary printmaking from Russia and the Ukraine’, Bristol artist Peter Ford has gathered together some of the finest work of the practitioners of that region.
The works, as one would expect, show great intensity, vigour and variety, some resonant with traditions of Russian folk art and story, others responding to contemporary events and recent changes in social and political life.
Solaglas Gallery, Bristol City Museum and Art Gallery; until January 10 .
Book reviews
ART IN PRINT
Artists' materials — Which, Why and How
Emma Pearce is well known as an artist who writes and lectures on the methods and materials of painting.
Artists' Materials — Which, Why and How is a valuable attempt to log the suitability of currently available art materials to working in practice through comparative charts which give details such as lightfastness and binding agents used in each particular medium.
In addition the book features Pearce's personal approach to a variety of media, with the accent very much on preparing colour by hand and pointing artists towards the most suitable manufactured materials in each case.
Whilst the detailed charts covering the different brands across selected media give artists a means of comparison between brands, it is a meagre and patchy comparison that is offered.
i would have preferred to have seen different brands compared in the main text, which concentrates instead on a very personal and traditionalist viewpoint.
Newer materials, such as acrylics, which are being used by an increasing number of artists, are virtually passed over in favour of longer selection on preparing gesso.
Pearce states that ‘Acrylic grounds are too fat (too flexible) for oil paint’, without offering a full explanation about what she means.
Such a statement flies in the face of the types of acrylic primers offered to artists who wish to over paint in oils.
Surely manufacturers who offer these products and recommend them of use as a priming support for oils have done their research properly?
Such statements serve only to confuse and prevent artists from being creative.
They also stop artists from trusting any products connected with the term ‘acrylic’ which is crazy as, unlike oils which crack and yellow as they age naturally, synthetic acrylic emulsions are age resistant, therefore forming a stable and reliable support when used in priming.
The most useful section of the book is the detailed and exhaustive list of suppliers, which points artists in the direction of the cheapest yet most reliable materials.
Perhaps if the rest of the writing had had the same approach we would have a worthy materials reference book.
The Artist's Handbook Of Materials And Techniques
Ralph Mayer's huge informative and comprehensive work on the materials used in permanent painting has recently been updated and revised, making it an easier read for professional artists, restorers and amateur painters.
This revision has been undertaken by Steven Sheehan, Director of the Ralph Mayer Centre at Yale University, and includes more detailed sections on newer materials such as acrylics, referred to by their American name, ‘polymer colours’, and a completely reworked pigment section.
It is perhaps the detailed pigment chapter which holds most information that will prove valuable to working artists.
In addition to the listing of pigments and common pigment names used in all painting since antiquity (a useful resource for artists and restorers), there is also a detailed description of all the colours used by the artists' materials industry today, including the new organic synthetic pigments.
Colour index names and numbers are included, along with specification on each pigment's compatibility with differing media (oil, watercolour, etc).
Lightfastness ratings are given and details on each pigment's toxicity are included.
In addition to these resource sections the book is crammed full of practical recipes and information on the properties and behaviour, through ageing, or virtuality every artists' material you could think of.
This is very much a book to read and read again.
It is very thorough but requires the user to be prepared to look in depth at each technical area of painting.
Sketching: A Structured Course in Mastering the Art of Sketching
This is a book much to be admired; it contains exactly the sort of information I would have divulged to my own foundation students once upon a sketchbook project.
It generates a lot of excitement, and is brimming with ideas.
It covers as much ground as must be possible within the covers of a manageable book.
It looks at elements, like movement, approaches, timing and organisation of space.
It looks at subjects like architecture, actions in people and animals, light and landscape.
it faces up to discuss timing and nerving oneself to sketch in public places.
It looks finally at how the material provides nourishing for the finished art or craft object.
The book is, as the title suggests, about using the sketchbook, the emphasis being on information gathering and aesthetic presentation.
It calls attention to the allure of the little sketch, half-finished maybe, and the attractiveness of packing information on a page of little sketches.
it shows how the centrefold effect can be used to embrace wide landscapes; how a minimum of colour can gain maximum effect, and how a few lines of scribble can hold a lot of memory.
Materials are covered from graphite to felt-tips, to pastels — the latter not really suitable for sketchbooks, probably, but ideal for preparation for oils.
There is, as I said, a section on sketching for the applied arts like jewellery, fashion and theatre.
Indeed, taking such notes is the life-blood of the crafts — witness Lucie Rie's ceramics books currently on show at the Crafts Council.
This latter section is called ‘Applied Sketching’, but I feel that all sketching is applied.
It's always reaching ‘towards’.
This is why I would quarrel mildly with the book's title The Art of Sketching .
Surely this is the one area of art activity where ‘artfulness’ need not apply.
After all, when I taught these secrets to my art students, they had one eye on their future interview.
You an me, the artists, we're doing it for no-one's eyes but our own, aren't we? but while fundamental, as far as the book's concerned, this is a minor point.
I thoroughly recommend it as of immense value to students at every level.