

Editorials
Save the normal foreskin
Widespread confusion over what are the medical indications for circumcision
Religious considerations apart, the commonest indications for circumcision in current surgical practice are phimosis, preputial adhesions, ballooning of the foreskin, and balanitis.
Although these indications are widely accepted, consideration of the embryology, development, and pathology of the prepuce suggests that their validity is open to doubt.
The foreskin develops early in intrauterine life as a protuberance of penile epidermis that grows forwards over the glans and adheres to it.
Both glans and prepuce are covered by stratified squamous epithelium, and separation occurs at a variable time from before birth to several years afterwards by desquamation.
The term phimosis (from the Greek word for muzzling) is often incorrectly applied to any foreskin that cannot be retracted.
To discourage unnecessary circumcisions a distinction needs to be made between physiological and pathological non-retractility.
Gairdner, who examined a large number of normal children during their first five years of life, observed that at birth only 4% of children had fully retractile prepuces, while in half the prepuce was partially retractile.
By the age of 5 years slightly more than 90% of boys had retractile foreskins.
Additional information was provided by Øster, who examined almost 2000 schoolchildren between the ages of 6 and 17 in whom no medical or surgical interference had taken place.
In the 6–7 year age group 91% of boys had retractile prepuces (a similar figure to that of Gairdner), and the incidence of spontaneously retractile foreskins increased yearly until by 17 years only 1% remained non-retractile.
Why this 1% of 17 year olds still had a non-retractile foreskin was not stated, but data from a subsequent study suggest that they were probably suffering from balanitis xerotica obliterans.
This curious condition of unknown aetiology is characterised by dermal oedema, lymphocytic infiltration, basal cell degeneration, and atrophy of the stratum malpighi.
Although spontaneous resolution, successful medical treatment, and, recently, laser treatment for balanitis xerotica obliterans have been reported, circumcision remains the mainstay of treatment.
The condition may, however, also involve the glans or urethral meatus, resulting in meatal stenosis.
Other indications for circumcision are less clear cut, but few would dispute that recurrent balanoposthitis warrants surgical treatment.
Despite the clinical impression that balanitis is common in young boys, the only detailed study of this condition reported an incidence of 4% in all boys aged up to 14.
A specific organism was found in only about one third of cases, and the aetiology was uncertain.
The incidence may be higher in uncircumcised children before the age of 8, although morbidity due to balanoposthitis may be offset at least partly by penile problems in children who are circumcised.
Although the inflammation is usually mild, on occasions it causes great distress.
The condition, however, is self limiting, and few children suffer more than one episode.
Plainly a single attack of balanitis, which is sometimes seen in boys with fully retractile foreskins, is not a sufficient indication for circumcision.
One study found penile inflammation in one in seven uncircumcised children, but most problems resolved after a single medical consultation.
The increased number of urinary tract infections seen in uncircumcised young children may be due to‘hospital strains’ of uropathogenic P-fimbriated Escherichia coli acquired in the unnatural environment of modern obstetric units rather than being directly related to the foreskin.
Paraphimosis is rare in children and unlikely to account for a substantial number of circumcisions.
Although ballooning on micturition is a commonly cited indication, the studies of Gairdner and Øster suggest that if this physical sign is ignored the symptoms will resolve as the foreskin becomes spontaneously retractile (unless balanitis xerotica obliterans develops).
Preputial adhesions represent a stage in the normal process of separation of the two epithelial surfaces of the prepuce and glans.
In Øster's study no preputial adhesions were seen in 95 boys aged 17, none of whom had undergone any operative procedure for separation of adhesions — strongly suggesting that adhesions resolve spontaneously without treatment.
These data suggest that overall between 1% and 2% of boys need circumcision for medical indications.
The cumulative national rate of circumcision for boys by the age of 15 is almost 7%.
If findings from Liverpool are representative of the rest of Britain then many unnecessary circumcisions are performed each year at considerable cost to the health service and morbidity for the patients.
In the population served by Oxford Regional Health Authority during the year to September 1990, 978 boys were circumcised out of a total estimated population of 299 600 — a rate of 0.33% a year (statistics unit of Oxford Regional Health Authority).
If this rate operated annually then 5.6% of boys aged 17 would be circumcised — not substantially different from the Mersey figure.
Why then is the rate of circumcision up to six times greater than the incidence of preputial pathology?
Analysis of the clinical findings in children referred for circumcision reported in this week's journal suggests a difference in interpretation of symptoms and clinical signs between surgeons and general practitioners (p 28).
Clearly confusion still exists about what constitutes ‘pathological’ phimosis as distinct from ‘physiological’non-retractile foreskin.
Most cases of pathological phimosis result from balanitis xerotica obliterans, while the remainder may be due to a different, distinct fibrotic disease.
The underlying difficulty is the imprecision of the term phimosis.
An important consideration is that balanitis xerotica obliterans usually develops after the age of 5 years.
The rarity of pathological phimosis under the age of 5 is an important observation since most circumcisions are performed before this age.
Øster wrote in the introduction to his paper that the publication of Gairdner's article nearly 20 years earlier seemed to have made no significant impression on clinical practice.
Regrettably it seems that the same can be said more than 20 years after Øster's paper was published.
A better understanding of the normal physiology, developmental anatomy, and pathology of the prepuce could prevent the removal of thousands of normal foreskins over the next 20 years.
A counsellor in every practice?
Reasons for caution
Since Balint drew attention to the importance of counselling during consultation general practitioners have been increasingly aware of the power of ‘the skilled and principled use of relationships to help the client develop self-knowledge, emotional acceptance and growth, and personal resources.’
As well as its general indications in anxiety, depression, and problems with relationships, counselling has been advocated for smoking cessation, modification of diet, alcohol misuse, postnatal depression, addiction to tranquillisers, and high risk sexual behaviour.
Many attempts to evaluate its effectiveness have shown little or no benefit, possibly due to methodological problems.
When benefits have been claimed they have been small compared with the resources employed.
Unsurprisingly, in the face of this evidence caution has been expressed: ‘Promoting a large counselling service in general practice before establishing what benefits accrue from this service is unwise.’
Nor is it surprising that a discussion paper that extolled counselling while assuming its efficacy was greeted with some hostility.
Despite the lack of convincing evidence of its efficacy many general practitioners believe in the value of counselling and of counsellors in general practice.
As between 10% and 30% of consulting patients have mainly emotional problems the scope for increasing general practitioners' counselling skills or referring patients to an in house counsellor is substantial.
The main reason for general practitioners' enthusiasm for counselling may well be a desire to reduce contact with and responsibility for a very demanding group of patients.
If this is so then increasing the counselling skills of general practitioners may be preferable to widening the primary health care team.
Counselling requires, however, a move away from the authoritarian model of distance, diagnosis, and reassurance towards a model that recognises and promotes a person's autonomy.
Many general practitioners may find this transition difficult.
Since 1990 the general practice contract has allowed reimbursement for the costs of employing counsellors.
But the staffing budget is cash limited, and some practices may have to accept less than 70% reimbursement if their application is successful.
Fundholding practices have more control over staffing, and many consider counsellors, along with physiotherapists and chiropodists, to be their highest priority.
Since the new contract was introduced another possibility has emerged.
Many practices have applied to run health promotion clinics for managing stress, which are thinly disguised counselling sessions.
The clinic fee is almost sufficient to cover a counsellor's sessional fee, thus costing the practice a minimal amount.
The recently announced moratorium on new health promotion clinics has put a temporary brake on applications, but it seems probable that the new regulations from next April will encompass stress clinics, although within a cash limited total.
The stage therefore seems set for an explosion of counselling.
Practices would be wise, however, not to appoint unqualified people just because they seem to have good listening skills.
However well intentioned an amateur counsellor might be, there are profound professional, ethical, and clinical issues (not least confidentiality) that must be considered.
In this issue Sibbald and colleagues show that fewer than half of counsellors have received specialist training in counselling.
Counsellors should be accredited by the ‘Rugby conference’ of the British Association for Counselling or be chartered psychotherapists recognised by the British Psychological Society.
They should concentrate on non-directive counselling, being careful to avoid dictating solutions.
They must keep accurate records, but the requirements of confidentiality may necessitate keeping some disclosures from the patients' doctors.
(Some patients are not convinced that  practice records remain confidential, while others fear that personal revelations may affect future relationships with their doctors.)
They should have debriefing sessions with their own counsellor at least monthly and should have a commitment to audit and reaccreditation.
Some practices may balk at this degree of rigour, especially given the relative scarcity of trained counsellors.
We would be wise, however, to move slowly.
Every family health services authority should enter into discussions with its general practitioners to establish guidelines for the employment of counsellors.
It is important that the current demand for counsellors does not lead to a lowering of standards and that all counsellors in primary care are properly trained, supervised, and supported.
Auditing 4BMJ decision making
We are setting targets and publishing how often we meet them
This is the age of accountability, and editors of medical journals must be as accountable as anybody else.
When institutions as diverse as hospitals, railways, schools, and refuse services are having to publish data demonstrating their performance, medical journals need to join in.
Editors might argue that because we live in a highly competitive world in which authors, readers, and advertisers can all go elsewhere with ease we are already sufficiently accountable.
But we can do better: we can set ourselves targets and then let readers know if we reach them.
We are setting ourselves targets for the time we take to make decisions on papers submitted to us and then to publish the papers.
We aim to make a decision within eight weeks on papers that go through our full peer review process and within two weeks for the papers that we reject in house.
Most papers should then be published within eight weeks of acceptance, although short reports, drug points, and lessons of the week may sometimes take longer.
Starting in July, every six months we will publish our median time to make a decision and publish original papers and the proportion of cases in which we have met our targets.
To the many BMJ readers who never submit a paper this may seem to be limited accountability, but the time that editors take to make decisions on publication is critical to authors.
Borrowing an idea from the editors of the Annals of Internal Medicine , we have, in addition to setting targets for decision making and publication, developed what we call the ‘vital signs’ of the BMJ .
These signs include data on circulation; the number of papers and letters submitted for publication, pages published, and advertisements placed; data from readers on which papers they read and what they like and dislike; citation data; ‘influence data’(like mentions of the BMJ in parliament or the New York Times ); and financial data.
These data matter much more to us than they do to readers or authors, and so we don't plan to publish them regularly — unless readers tell us that they want them.
For now we will restrict ourselves to data on decision making and publication times.
By the end of 1992 the BMJ had received about 4350 papers and 3500 letters for publication during the year (exact data are not available because this editorial was written before Christmas).
About half of the letters are published, usually without external peer review as we publish as letters only those that relate to matters raised in the journal within the past six weeks.
‘Out of the blue’ letters are considered as papers and submitted to full peer review.
About half of the papers are rejected after being read by two editors without being sent for external peer review.
Papers are rejected at this stage because they are insufficiently original for the BMJ , carry no useful message for a general medical audience, or are seriously flawed scientifically or completely incomprehensible.
If we think we see even the glimmering of an original, important, and scientifically sound message then we will give authors the benefit of the doubt and send the paper to an external referee.
We don't send more papers out to external referees because we don't want to exhaust  this valuable resource (even though we have about 2500 referees on our database) and because we are the best judge of issues like whether the paper belongs in the BMJ or another sort of journal.
Our target is to reject the papers not sent to external referees within two weeks, and we hope that this information may lead more authors who have scientifically sound papers but are worried that they may be too specialist for a general audience to let us see them.
They will have lost little time if we do decide that they are too specialist.
The 2500 or so papers that are sent out go to one or more referees, and we ask the referees to return the papers within two weeks.
Most of our referees are extremely busy, and they don't always manage to return the papers in time, although most of them do.
This is the weakest link in the chain, and we have a system for chasing referees and eventually going elsewhere.
One factor here is that we are increasing the number of referees we use outside Britain, and this may sometimes increase delay, although electronic communication is shrinking the globe fast.
Once returned the papers are considered by an internal editorial committee, and the 800 or so that may merit publication are passed on to one of our two ‘hanging committees’(named after the committee at the Royal Academy that decides which pictures to hang in the summer exhibition).
Both hanging committees comprise two practising clinicians, a statistician, and two medically qualified editors; for the ‘general practice hanging committee’ both clinicians are general practitioners.
These committees make the final decision on publication, although we ask for almost every paper to be revised before publication.
About 13% of papers submitted to us are published, and we aim to make this decision within eight weeks.
We expect that our median time to this decision will be less than eight weeks, and we have, in exceptional circumstances, peer reviewed papers and published them within a fortnight of submission.
But just as all doctors have patients who consume disproportionate amounts of time so we have papers that slow us down.
Sometimes we have problems finding a referee, or the perfect referee has gone to sea for a month, or the referee loses the figures and takes three weeks to ask for copies, or we have a furious debate over a paper at the hanging committee and decide that we need another specialist opinion.
Authors can imagine for themselves how our process may stall, and we obviously have to balance the quality of the decision making against its speed.
The time to publication depends partly on how many papers we accept.
All editors live between the Scylla of having insufficient papers in the system to allow efficient publication and the Charybdis of taking too long to publish.
We must balance how many papers we accept and how many pages we have available.
Our target is to publish original papers within eight weeks of final acceptance.
If targets are to have any meaning then they must be neither too easy nor too hard.
The data we have at the moment suggest that we should reach our targets about 80% of the time, but our aim over the years will be not only to reach the targets in a higher proportion of cases but also to make the targets more difficult.
Laser treatment of portwine stains
Newer lasers bring better treatments
A decade ago the argon laser was hailed as a ‘new ray of hope for portwine stains.’
Was this optimism justified, and what of more recent rays of hope?
Portwine stains are composed of networks of ectatic vessels in the outer dermis under a normal epidermis.
These birthmarks do not fade but mature and darken with age, with the relatively normal vessels of a juvenile mark undergoing degeneration with dilatation and stasis.
About three per thousand children are born with a portwine stain.
Regarded as untreatable before the advent of the argon laser, these stains almost always have a devastating effect on the person's quality of life.
Many different argon laser techniques have been described, but after analysis these are essentially the same, with laser-tissue interaction times that exceed the ideal (see below) by at least one order of magnitude.
Success rates of 60–85% (subjectively assessed) have been reported for the treatment of mature portwine stains on the face in older patients.
The results in children, particularly younger than 10, are much less favourable.
Severe atrophic or hypertrophic scarring occurs in at least 2% of adults and up to half of children.
Minor changes in the texture of the stain occur in half.
Histologically, the skin heals with a dermal scar due to the non-specific accumulation of heat.
Various computer assisted scanning devices have improved the results, and the European Community Haemangioma Working Party has stated that an argon laser should not be used without one of these devices or to treat children.
Ideal treatment, by selective photothermolysis, requires a wavelength that is minimally attenuated by epidermis and dermis and strongly absorbed by blood.
Wavelengths of 577–590 nm are predicted as optimal, depending on the dermal blood content, and 585 nm is a good compromise.
Pulse durations of 0.5–5 ms produce only transmural injury to the vessel wall, by heat conduction from the hot red cells, and hence prevent non-specific dermal injury.
The spot size should be at least 3 mm and energy density 5–8 J/cm to ensure deep injury of ectatic vessels.
The argon laser cannot produce these ideal parameters, and neither can any of the recently introduced lasers such as the copper vapour, the continuous dye, and the frequency doubled neodymium yttrium aluminium garnet lasers.
Despite a limited, well documented depth of vascular injury the argon laser in combination with automated scanning devices is often still considered the treatment of choice in mature portwine stain.
So far only the pulsed dye laser produces parameters that approach the theoretical ideal, and even then it is at the lower limit of the ideal pulse duration; Tan et al have shown that this laser can successfully treat children of any age with a negligible chance of scarring, and our experiences confirm their findings.
Although the pulsed dye laser is often considered of limited value in mature portwine stain, Tan has recently reported excellent results.
Although the argon laser offered the best available treatment for a time, newer lasers have now superseded it.
With output parameters within the ideal boundaries, the pulsed dye  laser provides far better results, particularly in children.
In view of its clear advantages over the other lasers, whose rate of energy delivery does not match the predicted physical behaviour of the blood vessels, we suggest that the pulsed dye laser should be offered as the first line treatment for portwine stains whenever possible.
Treating persistent glue ear in children
More patience, less surgery
Glue ear, or more precisely otitis media with effusion, is the major cause of hearing problems in children.
How should it be managed?
Currently, about one child in 200 in England is treated surgically for the condition each year, making it the commonest reason for elective surgery in children.
On the basis of a literature review the most recent Effective Health Care bulletin questions such frequent intervention.
Its authors recommend a period of ‘watchful waiting’ before proceeding to surgery.
They also recommend large trials to examine the effectiveness of a range of interventions, which should look at broader outcome measures than just hearing loss.
They base their recommendations on an analysis of 19 randomised controlled trials that examined the effectiveness of surgical interventions for glue ear.
Most attention was given to the three trials that used hearing level as an outcome measure.
The authors recognise the many methodological problems in studying disabilities that may result from hearing impairment.
Social functioning, speech, language, learning, and behaviour may all be affected.
They quote the comprehensive review by Haggard and Hughes, which states that glue ear probably causes considerable disability only if it results in persistent impaired hearing starting at an early age.
In the Dunedin study children with persistent effusions from a young age had problems with learning, language, and development at least until they were aged 7 to 9.
Whether these problems are temporary or not is still unclear.
Other crucial questions — for example, does surgical intervention prevent problems at school and of language — are still unanswered.
The bulletin suggests that grommets and adenoidectomy, either alone or in combination, reduce mean hearing impairment by less than 12 dB at six months, and that this improvement falls with time.
Myringotomy and tonsillectomy, either alone or in combination, are ineffective.
Despite these unpromising results and the fact that most episodes of glue ear are of short duration and resolve spontaneously (50% within three months; 95% within a year) the ‘epidemic’ of surgery for glue ear continues.
To reduce surgical activity for glue ear the authors recommend a period of continued observation and testing in children with bilateral hearing impairment of 25 dB or more.
This guidance should exclude from surgery most children whose effusions will resolve quickly.
Children on waiting lists should be reassessed to ensure that intervention is still required.
This presupposes the existence of good audiological services.
The bulletin lists the side effects of grommets: tympanosclerosis, increased incidence of chronic perforation, and possibly cholesteatoma.
A cohort of children, originally seen aged 2 to 4 with severe effusions and mostly treated with grommets, had structural damage of the eardrum (87% of cases), abnormal tympanograms (45%), and a mean hearing loss of 13 dB when followed up at the age of 8.
Whether such substantial damage resulted from surgery or the disease itself is not known: what is certain is that a very restrictive policy regarding the insertion of grommets is necessary.
Unlike grommets, adenoidectomy seems to modify the underlying pathophysiology of chronic otitis media with effusion — making it our initial surgical procedure of choice in cases of severe, persistent effusion.
Whether antibiotics could be a satisfactory alternative to surgery in the long term is unclear; some studies show possible short term benefits.
Ideas about the pathophysiology of glue ear are changing, with attention shifting from obstruction of the eustachian tube to dysfunction of the tube and immunological mechanisms.
In some — perhaps most — cases effusion may be a normal reaction to an upper respiratory tract infection.
Surgical intervention would therefore be unjustified.
Upper respiratory tract infections, especially acute otitis media, are the most important determinants for the development of an effusion.
Acute otitis media and otitis media with effusion are associated — they may be different aspects of the same condition.
Prognostic factors, such as age less than 2 and  recurrent acute otitis media, may help to identify a subgroup of children prone to effusions who require closer follow up.
General practitioners are well placed to diagnose effusion and carry out the necessary surveillance.
Microtympanometry, a sensitive method of diagnosing effusions of the middle ear, could help them in this.
Doctors should be able to reassure the parents of most affected children that the effusions will resolve without any further action or adverse sequelae.
Academic medicine: plenty of room at the top
Too many barriers to getting well trained
Contrary to conventional wisdom, there is a shortage of doctors to fill senior research posts.
‘High quality clinical researchers are like gold dust,’ said Diana Dunstan of the Medical Research Council at a meeting on opportunities in clinical research held at the Royal College of Physicians just before Christmas.
The council has difficulty filling its senior training fellowships and professorships, and so, other speakers confirmed, do the major medical charities.
‘If you want a career in research and you are able then you have absolutely no need to worry,’ Peter Lachmann, president of the Royal College of Pathologists, told the young doctors at the conference.
‘Clinical research,’ he said, ‘is a shortage specialty.’
A great many young doctors do enter research, but few are reaching the stage where they are qualified for the senior jobs.
What is the block?
The first problem is that many young doctors do not get an adequate training.
Speakers like Sir David Weatherall from Oxford and Keith Peters from Cambridge all agreed that a proper training means at least three years doing nothing but research.
Furthermore, the training must be in a good centre and must be well supervised.
In effect this means doing a PhD rather than an MD, and the message from the conference was that an MD is a devalued degree.
Yet the reality for most doctors is that their research time is undermined by clinical commitments (‘Research can wait but patients can't’) and training and supervision are poor.
‘Too much time is spent on ill considered, ill conceived research,’ said Mike Peckham, director of research and development in the NHS.
Another problem is the need to get accredited.
The several presidents of colleges present at the meeting kept insisting that ‘accreditation is dead’ and not a problem: there is plenty of flexibility in the system, they said.
yet it didn't feel that way to the young doctors.
‘We are made to do things that are a waste of time in order to get accredited,’ said one.
‘The colleges want their pound of flesh,’ said another.
The only spontaneous applause during the day was for Sir Christopher Booth, who said: ‘The colleges ought to realise that accreditation is for NHS consultants working alone and that a quite different form of accreditation is needed for research academics working in teams.’
The deeper problem for doctors going into research is the antiscience culture that runs deeper in medicine than many would care to admit.
For example, Professor Peckham quoted a director of public health who said that people did not ask about research evidence even when making difficult decisions.
Doctors who want to devote much of their time to research are undervalued.
Inevitably they have more restricted clinical skills than those who practise full time.
Particularly in the macho world of surgery, the researchers' clinical limitations may raise eyebrows while their abilities in molecular biology are more likely to be seen as a threat than an achievement.
(An irony of the conference was that not one shred of evidence was produced for the central assertion that three years' full time training in research was essential.)
Money is another factor diverting doctors from a career in  research , although it was not discussed much at the conference.
The sad truth is that doctors who spend careers in research may forgo huge incomes from private practice.
This is especially true in surgery and cardiology, two of the specialties that have the greatest difficulty in producing adequately trained academics.
The group who face the most difficulty getting adequately trained are women doctors, and they made their voices heard at the conference despite the organisers admitting with startling candour that they had not anticipated that this issue would arise.
The women wanted more opportunities for part time training in research, but the male establishment was doubtful — arguing that ‘triple accreditation’ as a clinician, scientist, and mother was too much.
The women pointed out that many of the most able graduates were women and that it was shortsighted of the establishment simultaneously to be moaning about the lack of people at the top and disenfranchising half of medical graduates.
Indeed, the one thing that spoilt this lively conference was the patronising references to women, district general hospitals, and general practice.
The conference illustrated why so few doctors manage to reach a position where they can apply for the senior fellowships and professorships, but answers were less forthcoming.
The Medical Research Council is about to review its training structure, and the colleges clearly need to clarify the message on accreditation.
But real developments may demand financial and cultural changes which may be difficult to achieve.
My final message is to repeat that I think that Britain needs an organisation of researchers under 40 like those that exist in the United States and Australia.
Such an organisation can campaign for better conditions for researchers, provide mutual support and advice, and talk up the importance of medical research with the public, schoolchildren, the government — and other doctors.
PAPERS
Ethnic differences in mortality from sudden infant death syndrome in New Zealand
Abstract
Objectives —
To examine the factors which might explain the higher mortality from sudden infant death syndrome in Maori infants (7.4/1000 live births in 1986 compared with 3.6 in non-Maori children).
Design —
A large nationwide case control study.
Setting —
New Zealand.
485 infants who died of sudden infant death syndrome were compared with 1800 control infants.
There were 229 Maori and 240 non-Maori cases of sudden infant death syndrome (16 cases unassigned) and 353 Maori and 1410 non-Maori controls (37 unassigned).
Results —
Maori infants had 3.81 times the risk (95% confidence interval 3.06 to 4.76) of sudden infant death syndrome compared with non-Maori infants.
The risk factors for sudden infant death syndrome within groups were remarkably similar.
When Maori and non-Maori controls were compared the prevalence of many of the known risk factors was higher in Maori infants.
In particular, mothers were socioeconomically disadvantaged, younger, and more likely to smoke and their infants were of lower birth weight and more likely to share a bed with another person.
Multivariate analysis controlling for potential confounders found that simply being Maori increased the risk of sudden infant death syndrome by only 1.37 (95% CI=0.95 to 2.01), not statistically significantly different from 1.
Population attributable risk was calculated for prone sleeping position, maternal smoking, not breast feeding, and infants sharing a bed with another person.
In total these four risk factors accounted for 89% of deaths from sudden infant death syndrome in Maori infants and 79% in non-Maori infants.
Conclusion —
The high rate of sudden infant death syndrome among Maori infants is based largely on the high prevalence in the Maori population of the major risk factors.
Other risk factors, not related to ethnicity, probably explain remaining differences between Maori and non-Maori children.
Introduction
Postneonatal mortality in New Zealand is high for a developed country (6.2/1000 live births in 1986).
In recent years over 60% of postneonatal deaths have been due to the sudden infant death syndrome, giving New Zealand probably the highest death rate from sudden infant death syndrome in the developed world (4.0/1000 live births).
Furthermore, within New Zealand the death rate from sudden death infant syndrome differs between ethnic groups, with Maori rates substantially higher than those in non-Maori children (7.4 and 3.6/1000 live births respectively in 1986).
This ethnic difference has not been explained.
We therefore used data from a large case-control study to look at differences between Maori and non-Maori children and examine factors that might explain the higher mortality from sudden death infant syndrome among Maori children.
Methods
The New Zealand cot death study has been reported in detail.
It was a large nationwide case-control study that covered 78% of all live births in New Zealand over three years (1 November 1987 to 31 October 1990).
Among the 716 postneonatal deaths there were 485 cases of sudden infant death syndrome in which the diagnosis was agreed by the regional pathologist and the paediatrician.
The pathology protocol has been described previously.
Necropsies were carried out in 474 (98%) of the 485 cases attributed to sudden infant death syndrome.
The cases were compared with 1800 control infants, who were randomly selected from all births in the study regions, except home births (less than 1%).
The following method was used:(a ) a date of interview (nominated date) was randomly selected from all 1096 days in the study period,(b ) the control was then randomly allocated an age at which to be interviewed,(c ) the date of birth was calculated from age and date of interview,(d ) an obstetric hospital was randomly chosen in proportion to the number of births in 1986, and (e ) random numbers were used to select a particular infant from those born on the date of birth in the nominated obstetric hospital.
Information was collected by examining obstetric records and from interviews with the parents.
The questions relating to ethnic group in the interview were: ‘To which group do you (mother) belong?’ and ‘To which group do you (father) belong?’
The choices were that of European, Maori, Pacific Islander, and other (in which case they were asked to specify their race).
This information was also obtained from the obstetric records for the mother.
There was close agreement between the obstetric records and the interviews.
The infant was classified as Maori if either the mother or the father considered themselves to be Maori.
Other variables examined related to the selection process (infant's age, region, and nominated time of day/time of death), sociodemography (occupation, marital status, age mother left school, age of mother), pregnancy (age of mother at first pregnancy, number of previous pregnancies, months pregnant when first attended antenatal clinic, attended antenatal classes), and postnatal factors (infant's sex, birth weight, gestation, admission to special care baby unit, breast feeding only at discharge from obstetric hospital, maternal smoking in last two weeks, season, infant's sleeping position, and infant sharing a bed with  another person).
The definition of these variables has been described.
The χ 2 values are from 2×n contingency tables comparing the Maori and non-Maori controls.
The confidence intervals for the odds ratios were calculated using the method of Cornfield, and the multivariate odds ratio and its confidence interval were obtained from unconditional logistic regression.
Population attributable risks, not adjusted for other factors, estimate the proportion of deaths explained by exposure to the risk factor, and the relative attributable risks estimate the percentage of the excess risk in Maori, compared with non-Maori, which could be attributed to a higher exposure to the risk factor in Maori children.
The methods of calculation for the Cornfield confidence intervals and the population and relative attributable risks are given by Breslow and Day.
Results
Obstetric records were examined in 465 (96%) cases and 1762 (98%) controls.
Parental interviews were completed in 393 (81%) cases and 1592 (88%) controls.
Infants dying of sudden infant death syndrome included 229 Maoris, 240 non-Maoris, and 16 children who could not be assigned to an ethnic group.
There were 353 Maori and 1410 non-Maori controls, with 37 children unassigned.
This gave a univariate odds ratio for the risk of sudden infant death syndrome for Maori children of 3.81 (95% confidence interval 3.06 to 4.76) compared with non-Maori children.
Maori and non-Maori controls were compared in terms of sociodemography, pregnancy, and infant and postnatal factors (tables I-IV).
Maori children were significantly more likely to live in the North Island,(χ 2 =100, df=4, p<0.001), have lower socioeconomic status (χ 2 =133, df=2, p<0.001), have an unmarried mother (χ 2 =247, df=1, p<0.001), have a mother who had left school young (χ 2 =78, df=2, p<0.001), and have a mother young at the birth of the infant (χ 2 =130, df=3, p<0.001)(table I).
Mothers of Maori infants were also significantly younger at their first pregnancy (χ 2 =216, df=2, p<0.001), had had more previous pregnancies (χ 2 =19, df=3, p<0.001), attended antenatal clinic later (χ 2 =48, df=1, p<0.001), and were less likely to have attended antenatal classes (χ 2 =74, df=1, p<0.001)(table II).
Maori infants had significantly lower birth weight (χ 2 =11.4, df=3, p<0.010)(table III).
After birth they were more likely to have shared a bed with another person than non-Maori infants (χ 2 =42, df=1, p<0.001).
Maori mothers were significantly more likely to have smoked in the previous two weeks than non-Maori mothers (χ 2 =201, df=3, p<0.001)(table IV).
There were, however, no differences between the two groups in the sex of infant, gestation, breast feeding, season of nominated date for interview, or sleep position.
Risk factors for sudden infant death syndrome were calculated separately for Maori and non-Maori children.
Tables I-IV show the numbers and univariate odds ratios of variables related to the sociodemographic (table I), pregnancy (table II), infant (table III), and postnatal factors (table IV).
Risk factors for sudden infant death syndrome were remarkably consistent for both Maori and non-Maori populations within New Zealand.
Multivariate analysis controlling for all the above variables found that being Maori increased the risk of sudden infant death syndrome 1.37 fold (95% confidence interval 0.95 to 2.01), which was not significantly different from 1.
The presence of a significant interaction (p=0.007) between Maori and non-Maori children was found for bed sharing, indicating that bed sharing was a risk only in the Maori population.
The multivariate analysis included all subjects in the study with full data on all the variables.
The Maori children comprised 43% of those without full data but only 23% of those with full data.
The proportion of cases among those with missing data was disproportionately higher in the Maori group, leading to a greater odds ratio when compared with the non-Maori children (univariate odds ratio of those with full data was 3.42 and for those without full data 4.60).
Population attributable risk was calculated for maternal smoking during the past two weeks, not exclusively breast feeding on discharge from the  obstetric hospital, sleeping prone, and the infant sharing a bed with another person (table V).
In total these four risk factors accounted for 89% of Maori and 79% of non-Maori sudden infant deaths.
The relative attributable risks for Maori children compared with non-Maori children were 57% for the higher rate of maternal smoking and 22% for the higher rate of bed sharing.
This was not calculated for sleep position and breast feeding because of the similar exposure distribution of these two variables among Maori children and their controls (table IV).
Discussion
Mortality from sudden infant death syndrome varies between countries.
Although infant care practices, such as infants' sleeping position, vary between countries, comparisons are difficult as socioeconomic, cultural, and environmental factors and temperature also vary greatly.
Comparisons between ethnic groups in the same country are, however, more meaningful as broad environmental factors are eliminated.
Ethnic differences in mortality from sudden infant death syndrome have been reported from several countries.
In the United States high mortality from sudden infant death syndrome among black infants has been attributed only in part to lower birth weight and socioeconomic disadvantage.
In Birmingham, England, Asian infants had a lower mortality from sudden infant death syndrome than white children, even after crowding, birth weight, maternal age, social class, and infant sex were controlled for.
In New Zealand mortality from sudden infant death syndrome has been known to be higher in Maori children for some time, but the reason has been unclear.
Although this study relates to ethnic differences in New Zealand, the findings may apply in other countries where there are ethnic differences in mortality rates from sudden infant death syndrome.
We calculated the risk factors for sudden infant death syndrome separately for Maori and non-Maori children, and the striking feature was the similarity of the risk factors, with the exception of infants sharing the bed with another person.
The failure to identify bed sharing as a risk factor in non-Maori children was probably due to the very small proportion of infants in this group who both shared a bed and were exposed to maternal smoking.
Further analyses suggest that exposure to both factors is required for bed sharing to be associated with a raised risk of sudden infant death syndrome (unpublished results).
Despite the similarity of risk factors, the prevalence of many of these risk factors was higher in Maori children than in non-Maori children.
Logistic regression analysis showed that ethnic group was not a significant risk factor for sudden infant death syndrome when region, socioeconomic status, the age the mother left school, the age of the mother at the birth of the infant, the age of the mother at first pregnancy, the number of previous pregnancies, antenatal clinic attendance, antenatal class attendance, infant sex, birth weight, gestation, admission to neonatal unit, breast feeding, season, the age of the infant, maternal smoking, sleep position, and sharing a bed with another person were controlled for.
The addition of subjects with missing data could, however, have changed the picture and made ethnicity a significant variable.
If being Maori were a significant variable this might arise because of an inherent effect of being Maori or because there are other confounding variables that have not been considered that could explain the difference between Maori and non-Maori children.
Our calculations of relative attributable risk suggest that increased smoking by Maori mothers explained about half (57%) of the excess risk of sudden infant death syndrome among Maori children.
The same calculation for sharing a bed (22%) should be viewed with caution since the ethnically specific relative risks associated with this factor do not appear to be homogeneous.
Population attributable risk provides an indication of the impact that controlling a causal factor might have on the incidence of sudden infant death syndrome.
The national cot death prevention programme is attempting to reduce the prevalence of four modifiable risk factors — namely, maternal smoking, lack of breast feeding, prone sleep position, and infant sharing a bed with another person.
In total these four risk factors may account for 89% of deaths from sudden infant death syndrome in Maori infants and 79% in non-Maori infants.
This, of course, assumes that these variables are causally related to sudden infant death syndrome and are independent.
If these four risk factors were eliminated then mortality from sudden infant death syndrome could be reduced to 0.8/1000 for both Maori and non-Maori infants.
We conclude that the high rate of sudden infant death syndrome among Maori infants has much of its foundation in the high prevalence in the Maori population of the major risk factors, and other risk factors, not related to ethnicity, probably explain remaining differences between Maori and non-Maori children.
This study was funded by the Health Research Council of New Zealand (HRCNZ) and the Hawkes Bay Medical Research Foundation.
Mrs C Everard coordinated the study.
Mrs Everard, Mr Thompson, and Mr Stewart were funded by HRCNZ.
Sudden infant death syndrome: links with infant care practices
Abstract
Objectives —
To investigate infant care practices in a small ethnic minority population within Britain that might suggest possible factors contributing to the low incidence of the sudden infant death syndrome in Asian populations.
Design —
Ethnographic interviewing, a qualitative comparative method drawn from social anthropology.
Setting —
Central Cardiff.
Subjects —
Non-random sample of 60 mothers of Bangladeshi or Welsh ethnic origin and working or middle class occupational status, who had infants under one year old.
None of the families interviewed had experienced a sudden infant death.
Results —
Broad cultural contrasts emerged as a series of themes from the interview data: living patterns, family networks, sleeping patterns, and concepts of time and dependence.
Conclusion —
Bangladeshi infants were cared for in a consistently rich sensory environment; Welsh infants, in contrast, were more likely to experience alternating periods of high and low sensory input.
Long periods of lone quiet sleep may be one factor that contributes to a higher rate of sudden deaths in white than in Asian infants.
Introduction
Sudden infant death syndrome — the sudden, unexpected, and unexplained death of an apparently healthy baby — remains the single most important cause of death in the United Kingdom of children aged between 1 and 12 months.
Research on its aetiology has focused, at one end of the spectrum, on causal mechanisms — for example, inherited metabolic diseases — and, at the other end, on infant care practices that may be potentially protective or harmful, such as sleeping position.
There is now increasing evidence of both national and regional variation in incidence.
The syndrome is, for example, very rare in Hong Kong.
Within Great Britain, data from the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys for the years 1982–5 (classified by mother's country of birth) indicate significantly lower rates among babies of mothers born in Africa or Asia (India, Pakistan, or Bangladesh) than in those of mothers born in the United Kingdom or the Republic of Ireland.
In Birmingham, for 1981–3, with ethnicity classified by mother's own report, incidence of deaths from the syndrome was found to be lowest among Asian babies and highest among Afro-Caribbeans, with white infants falling in between.
In east London between 1987 and 1990 the largest ethnic minority population, Bangladeshis, had rates approximately half those of the white majority (L Hilder, unpublished data).
Among Asian populations in the United States (Asian in this case referring to Chinese, Japanese, Vietnamese, or Philippino, defined by mother's own report), the incidence of the sudden infant death syndrome increased with period of residence.
British research also provides information on neonatal deaths for Asian and white infants.
OPCS data show higher neonatal deaths among Bangladeshi babies in 1981–3, but comparable rates in 1984–8.
In Birmingham the rate of sudden infant deaths was low in Asian infants but there were high rates of congenital malformations resulting in perinatal mortality.
In east London neonatal mortality among white and Asian groups was broadly similar.
This evidence is not sufficient to suggest that low rates of sudden deaths in Bangladeshi infants are achieved at the expense of high neonatal mortality.
It does reinforce the need for detailed local statistics, with ethnicity recorded by personal report rather than by country of birth.
The relatively low incidence of the sudden infant death syndrome among Bangladeshi babies in Britain represents something of a paradox, since many of these babies grow up in conditions that would predict a relatively higher incidence of the syndrome.
These include poorer socioeconomic conditions, apparently crowded housing, and young mothers often with many children.
This paradox has prompted research on the potential contribution of varying infant care practices to the prevention of deaths from this syndrome.
Rather than retrospective studies of infants who have died or epidemiological analyses of the sudden infant death syndrome in specific population groups, our research offers a complementary perspective.
Recognising that the apparently low incidence of the sudden infant death syndrome was difficult to explain wholly in terms of currently recognised risk factors, we sought to identify other differences in infant care practices that may contribute to the lower incidence of such deaths in Bangladeshi babies.
For this reason we did not work with families who had lost an infant: instead we investigated the ordinary patterns of beliefs about infants and their care in two different populations, mothers of Welsh and Bangladeshi infants in Cardiff.
theoretical background: an anthropological perspective
In 1991 the Lancet carried a series of articles on medical anthropology arguing that ‘medical anthropology has now emerged as a potential focus for those interested in explaining disease in terms of the patient's cultural context.’
This paper is part of the emergent contribution of medical anthropology, and presents an  account of the theoretical background (drawn from biological anthropology) and the method (drawn from social anthropology) of a study of culturally varying infant care practices.
Medical anthropology occupies a middle ground between biological and social anthropology, biological anthropology specialising in human adaptation to specific environments and social anthropology in the associated cultural systems of belief (ideologies).
Anthropology adopts a broad comparative perspective, drawing on both historical and cross cultural evidence: parts of medical anthropology narrow the focus to beliefs about the nature, cause, and treatment of illness within specific cultures.
Biological anthropology in the present context considers infants and their care within an evolutionary perspective, arguing that over the millions of years it has taken for humans to evolve, infant-parent contact was likely to have been virtually constant for at least the first year of life.
McKenna, recognising the species specific nature of the sudden infant death syndrome and the relatively narrow time range of the majority of deaths, drew attention to both the relatively long period of physical dependence of the human infant and the ways in which caring practices vary with historical and cultural contexts.
He described human infants as being likely to experience problems in the regulation of breathing, such as those associated with the sudden infant death syndrome, because their anatomical and neurological immaturity coincides with a period of change that is specific to humans, that of the acquisition and use of language.
Thus development of intentional crying and later of speech requiring sophisticated, learned control of breathing — characterised as ‘speech breathing’— poses a challenge that is unique to human infants.
The second part of McKenna's thesis posits that during this period of respiratory instability the infant's ‘evolutionary past’ should not be forgotten.
In other words, the practice of placing infants to sleep on their own, for relatively long periods of time, which is widespread in Western industrialised societies, is not only historically and culturally unique but also evolutionarily recent.
McKenna suggests that infants sleeping alone lose the external sensory stimulation that may stabilise breathing.
The mechanisms through which this stimulation occurs include rocking, chest movement, touch, and noise, all of which are concomitants of close proximity to other people and affect levels of arousal; mothers sleeping close to infants also contribute to the monitoring and control of temperature and chemical microenvironment (particularly carbon dioxide levels).
Current experimental work with mothers and infants sleeping together in sleep laboratories is tracing the interaction of their patterns of breathing, and has found that in such conditions infants spend less time in deep stages of sleep.
We understand an important pathophysiological mechanism underlying the sudden infant death syndrome to be a failure of respiratory control at a vulnerable stage of development.
Disturbance to this delicate equilibrium by a number of different risk factors coinciding in a particular vulnerable baby may upset the regulation of breathing, leading sometimes to death.
Epidemiological risk factors are somehow linked with destabilising influences on breathing, and it is through their avoidance or modulation — for instance through a change in the sensory environment of sleep — that risk of death can be reduced.
Method
As Janes and Stall have explained: ‘qualitative and quantitative measurement may inform the other at different stages of the research process.’
We used a qualitative social anthropological approach to explore the quantitative, epidemiological evidence of international and intranational variations in the incidence of sudden infant deaths.
Social anthropology addresses cultural ideologies by using a variety of methods, including community observation and ethnographic interviewing.
Ethnography — literally, textual description of particular cultures — also describes the techniques used to achieve an understanding of the beliefs and practices of specific groups, be they medical students or ethnic groups within Britain.
Thus ethnographic interviewing describes an open ended unstructured approach designed to encourage informants not only to describe individual infant care practices but also to locate them within a broader ideology.
The interviewer sets the framework for the interview — in this case mothers were asked to describe ‘a day in the life’ of their infant — but allows the informant to determine the pace and order of the conversation, to select topics considered important.
The interviewer uses a checklist to ensure that specific areas are covered, requesting explanations or introducing new topics as necessary.
Sixty such interviews have been completed — with an interpreter where necessary — with mothers of babies under 1 year old and living in Cardiff, south Wales (population 279 055).
Each interview lasted about an hour and was audiotaped and transcribed.
The sample comprised 20 Bangladeshi and 20 Welsh working class mothers and 20 middle class mothers (although we recognise Alam's argument that urban versus rural origin is a more appropriate distinction within the Bangladeshi population in Britain).
A middle class group of 13 Welsh and seven Bangladeshi mothers was included to reflect class based variations in infant care practices.
Four of the Bangladeshi mothers had been educated in Britain; all continued to live in extended households.
Bangladeshi identity remained strong, only one mother preferring to describe herself as ‘British Asian.’
In terms of both household size and number of children per family ethnicity seemed more important than class, with 3.6 and 3.7 people in Welsh working class and middle class households respectively, and 6.7 and 7.1 in Bangladeshi working class and middle class households respectively; Welsh middle and working class families had 1.5 children on average, while Bangladeshi working class averaged 3.4 and middle class 2.1.
Such figures do not of course reflect variation in household constitution: Bangladeshi households were typically extended either longitudinally (over three generations) or laterally (two or more brothers living with their wives and children).
These groups should not be regarded as representative of the Cardiff population: the 1991 census data records a Bangladeshi population of 1663, some 0.6% of the total.
Our sample was non-random, Bangladeshi mothers being recruited first in view of their relatively small numbers.
Mothers of Welsh infants of similar age were then recruited from the same areas of the city; they were thus living in similar accommodation and served by the same health professionals.
Bangladeshi mothers were chosen as a relatively recently arrived group of suitable demographic structure who had had comparatively little exposure to the infant care practices of the city in which they now live.
The definition ‘Bangladeshi’ refers to infants whose mothers were born in Bangladesh, and the few mothers who were born or grew up in Britain.
‘Welsh’ is used to describe the ethnic origin of babies of parents who described themselves as either Welsh or English, but their infants as Welsh.
ethnic monitoring
It should be noted that data on the ethnic origin of babies who died of the sudden infant death syndrome  are collected only in certain areas, and the definitions used are inconsistent, being based either on mother's country of birth or her own report of her ethnicity.
Classifying by mother's country of birth results in babies of, for instance, Pakistani mothers born in Britain appearing as British rather than Pakistani.
Although such an attribution is important in terms of nationality, it loses information where health beliefs or possible variations in cultural practices are concerned.
Consistent ethnic monitoring of both births and deaths is needed to provide accurate information on the local variations in the incidence of sudden infant deaths.
This in turn will allow the recognition of high and low risk groups, and so the possibility of identifying high and low risk practices.
If British born people of minority ethnic extraction are invisible in statistics on sudden infant deaths (or any other areas) we lose the chance to identify accurately both health trends and the health practices that may be associated with specific morbidity or mortality.
The availability of the 1991 census data on local populations by ethnic origin offers a timely opportunity for ethnicity — like occupational class — to be systematically recorded.
Results
This paper reports broad cultural contrasts between Bangladeshi and Welsh mothers' beliefs and infant care practices.
The evidence is presented as a series of themes which emerged from the interview data.
The analytical procedure is to use each theme as an axis around which different elements of empirical data are grouped.
They provide a context within which to understand the beliefs and practices of the Bangladeshi and Welsh mothers: this in turn allows practices — potential risk factors or protective factors — to be identified.
living patterns
Bangladeshis in Cardiff live in relatively large groups in small unheated Victorian terraced houses, adapting the pattern of extended family living to the accommodation available.
A typical pattern is two or three brothers living together, each with a wife and several children.
It presents a sharp contrast to similar houses occupied by their Welsh or English neighbours, divided into flats for nuclear units of mother-father-child or mother-child.
The pattern of extended family living persists with the few Bangladeshis who have grown up in Cardiff or elsewhere in Britain.
Bangladeshi infants are constantly in a busy social and tactile environment, whereas Welsh babies grow up in smaller households in which independence is encouraged.
It is rare to leave a Bangladeshi baby to cry, or to play alone.
Childcare is relatively public in Bangladeshi households, involving all the members of the extended family.
In Welsh families, childcare is the prime responsibility of one or both parents, with occasional help from family, friends, and health professionals.
Welsh parents attach considerable importance to privacy and to time away from the work of child care, for either work outside the home or leisure activities.
family networks
Adult Bangladeshis in Cardiff are children of large families and thus have extensive networks of cousins.
Each of these is regarded as part of the family, as are people who originated in the same village.
Family membership is highly valued, and new arrivals will be incorporated into groups resident in Britain, receiving practical and financial help if necessary.
Bangladeshi grandparents in Cardiff live as part of the extended family, either sharing a house or living close by, and are closely involved in childrearing.
The involvement of Welsh grandparents takes a different form: contact may be less frequent and based on invitations to visit or regular arrangements for contributing to childcare one day or one evening a week.
Bangladeshis in Cardiff continue to have large numbers of children, compared with Welsh and English families.
The relatively large number of babies provides the opportunity for a more general familiarity with infants, and the arrival of a baby involves fairly small changes to family life.
Thus very few preparations are made before birth.
For the Welsh mothers, in contrast, the arrival of a baby often marks a series of dramatic changes associated with loss of income and employment, and the relatively low status, and often isolation, of motherhood.
Most Bangladeshi mothers breastfed their babies for the first few weeks, switching to either combination or bottle feeding after this period.
Bottle feeding was regarded as both more ‘Western’ and ‘modern’and had the advantage that other family members could deal with feeding the infant.
It is very rare for Bangladeshi women to smoke; some men do so.
Smoking was more common among Welsh parents, accompanied by an attempt not to smoke while close to the baby.
Oil is used to massage Bangladeshi babies after bathing, increasing their tactile stimulation; this task is often undertaken by grandmothers.
Welsh mothers, in contrast, were more likely to use talcum powder.
times and dates
Most Welsh households included husbands working outside the home during the day.
Most of the Bangladeshi men worked in restaurants, so their working hours were more variable.
They left the home between 4 pm and 5 pm and returned in the early hours of the morning, often coinciding with the feeding time for a young baby.
The household timetable revolves around restaurant work, with children often being late for school, and visitors being least welcome (and this is a very hospitable culture) early in the morning.
The notion of a routine, of a particular time for meals, baths, bed for young children — to fit in with the other interests and commitments of parents working outside the home — is not especially important.
If Bangladeshi mothers' idea of time emphasises fluidity and flexibility, then Welsh mothers' notions emphasise regularity and routine.
sleeping patterns
Bangladeshi babies are thought to be vulnerable, and they sleep close to other people both day and night; at night they are either in the mother's bed or in a cot next to it, a practice also reported by Farooqi et al .
They are put to sleep on their backs, being turned at times on to their sides in the belief that this will promote a culturally valued ‘rounded’ head.
Older children also sleep in their parents' room, a pattern which continued in the middle class Bangladeshi families in this sample and those in which the parents had grown up in Britain.
It is not simply a question of availability of space, but of a belief that, as one mother put it, ‘I like to wake up in the night and see all my family around me.’
The babies born to Welsh and English parents were, in contrast, sometimes placed in cots in their parents' rooms for a period of two to three months, and then encouraged (close to the peak age for the sudden infant death syndrome) to ‘get used’ to sleeping alone, where possible in their own rooms.
For daytime sleep Welsh babies were consistently said to need quiet, and to be placed in as peaceful a spot as possible, sometimes in another room, sometimes upstairs.
In contrast, Bangladeshi babies sleeping during the day were always in the same room as other family members, in a relatively noisy, busy environment.
There is less pressure in Bangladeshi families for babies to ‘sleep through the night.’
For Welsh parents, the demands of either or both working outside the home resulted in considerable emphasis on the infant's sleeping time.
Bangladeshi mothers expressed concern at the possibility of infant overheating, and this was one of the explanations given for the practice of shaving babies' heads.
Welsh mothers were in general more concerned to keep an infant warm, although during the research period the publicity concerning the link between sudden infant death and temperature increased awareness of temperature, some mothers using room thermometers.
interdependence or independence
All the mothers interviewed recognised that babies need looking after.
In contrast to the notion of vulnerability in infants expressed by Bangladeshi families, there was among Welsh and English mothers a clearer push towards encouraging babies to be independent.
This was motivated by the need for the mother to return to work or the wish for the parents to have time to themselves.
Among the Bangladeshis, the notion of interdependence of family members — both within and between generations — was clearer, underpinning the practices of parents and children sleeping in the same room and the extended family living together.
Where Bangladeshi belief systems emphasise group membership and close informal proximity, Welsh belief systems emphasise individuality, independence, and self reliance.
Discussion
In the context of a varying incidence of the sudden infant death syndrome in different ethnic groups, and the possible contribution of infant care practices to this variation, this paper has described the beliefs and practices concerning infant care among two groups of carers in populations that have been shown to have significant differences in the likelihood of the syndrome.
The themes presented describe the broad sociocultural context of the specific practices we identified.
Some may protect against sudden infant deaths; others may add to risk.
Some relate to factors that are already recognised (sleeping position, environmental temperature, smoking) and others offer new avenues for research.
During the fieldwork period, sudden infant deaths received enormous publicity in the national media.
Both the Department of Health and the Foundation for the Study of Infant Deaths published leaflets describing the new advice that babies should be placed to sleep on their backs or sides rather than on their fronts.
We considered the practical implications of our findings, and the potential contradictions faced by both parents and health professionals.
The research process highlighted the difficulty of going from research to recommendations, and the effect of changing health advice on both health professionals providing advice and on mothers receiving it.
Inherent in this type of research is the potential to generate new categories or variables and to reconsider existing analytic categories in a fashion that also addresses their validity.
An example arising from this study is the notion of infants being alone.
Asking mothers to discuss whether or not their babies notice being on their own generated unfamiliar varieties of parental attitudes to children being left alone (for instance, to sleep in the day) or a report of the amount of time infants are likely to spend alone.
One mother commented, while the baby was upstairs asleep, ‘she's never alone, someone's always here.’
Closer scrutiny of the precise meaning of ‘alone,’ as well as verification of the length of time infants would spend alone in a day, is needed if drawing conclusions that sudden infant deaths are not more common in babies whose periods of sleep are taken ‘on their own.’
Reflecting on the rarity of the sudden infant death syndrome in crowded Hong Kong in 1985, Davies commented that ‘there might be some benefit to such high-density living.
Babies are left alone much less.
Sleep patterns might be different, effecting subtle modulations to physiological responses concerned with ventilatory control.
The question ‘When can I put baby into his own room?’ is virtually never raised.
Might closer overall contact with the sleeping baby somehow lessen the risks of sudden death?’
The environment in which Bangladeshi babies in Cardiff are brought up has similarities with that of Hong Kong, both being richer in sensory experiences than that experienced by Welsh babies.
We are not suggesting that to adopt all the practices evident among Bangladeshis in Cardiff, or Hong Kong residents, will prevent sudden infant deaths.
In the words of Bergman, however, the sudden infant death syndrome ‘is like a nuclear explosion where a critical mass must be obtained before the event is to occur.’
This type of research represents a midpoint between the epidemiological linking of incidence in particular populations with particular infant care practices and the investigation of possible physiological mechanisms.
It stands alone as a study of infant care practices, but we hope that it contributes to a discussion of those factors which form Bergman's ‘critical mass.’
We acknowledge the generous financial support of the Foundation for the Study of Infant Deaths and the cooperation of the parents, health professionals, and interpreters who contributed towards this research.
Investigation of inheritance of chronic inflammatory bowel diseases by complex segregation analysis
Abstract
Objective —
To investigate the mode of inheritance of ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease by complex segregation analysis.
Design —
Cross sectional population based survey of familial occurrence of chronic inflammatory bowel disease.
Setting —
Population of the Copenhagen county in 1987.
Subjects —
662 patients in whom inflammatory bowel disease had been diagnosed before 1979, of whom 637 (96%) provided adequate information.
Of 504 patients with ulcerative colitis, 54 had 77 relatives with ulcerative colitis and of 133 patients with Crohn's disease, five had seven relatives with Crohn's disease.
Main outcome measures —
Patterns of segregation of either disease as assessed by complex segregation analysis performed with the computer program POINTER.
Results —
The analysis suggested that a major dominant gene with a penetrance of 0.20–0.26 is present in 9–13% of adult patients with ulcerative colitis.
The analysis did not allow for other components in the familial aggregation.
For Crohn's disease the best fitting model included a major recessive gene with complete penetrance, for which 7% of the patients are homozygous.
However, this model was not significantly different from a multifactorial model.
Conclusions —
The segregation pattern indicates that a major dominant gene has a role in ulcerative colitis, and suggests that a major recessive gene has a role in Crohn's disease.
Introduction
Familial occurrence of chronic inflammatory bowel disease has been reported in several studies during the past decades.
The prevalence reported among first degree relatives seems to be much higher than expected from the prevalence in the background populations.
Familial aggregation may be due to shared genes as well as to shared environments — for example common customs, dietary habits, or exposures to viruses, toxins, or chemicals.
In a regional study including about 10% of the Danish population we found the population relative risk of ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease among first degree relatives of patients with either disease to be about 10, which strongly suggests that these disorders have a genetic cause.
To explore the mode of inheritance further we performed a complex segregation analysis.
This allows testing of hypotheses of inheritance of a major dominant, additive, or recessive gene and multifactorial genetic or environmental inheritance.
Patients and methods
The county of Copenhagen has about 500 000 inhabitants, about 10% of the total Danish population.
The annual incidence of ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease in this region was estimated for the years 1962 to 1978 and the prevalences on 31 December 1978 were calculated.
Of the 694 patients with prevalent disease in 1978, 662 were alive on 1 January 1987.
These patients served as probands in the present study.
The diagnostic criteria for ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease in the probands have been described.
Briefly, the diagnosis of ulcerative colitis was based on the presence of at least three of the following four criteria: a typical history of diarrhoea; stools containing blood and pus, or both, for more than one week or in repeated episodes; a typical sigmoidoscopic appearance, with granulated friable mucosa or ulcerations, or both; histological or cytological signs of inflammation; and radiological or colonoscopic signs of ulcerations with or without spiculation or granulation of the inner surface of the colon proximal to the rectum.
The diagnosis of Crohn's disease was based on the presence of at least two of the following four criteria: a history of diarrhoea lasting more than three months; radiological findings of typical stenoses and prestenotic dilatation in the small bowel or segments with a cobblestone appearance in the large bowel; histological findings of transmural lymphocytic infiltration or occurrence of epithelial granulomas with giant cells of Langhans' type, or both; and the occurrence of fistulas or abscesses, or both, in a region of intestinal disease.
Before either ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease was diagnosed infectious and neoplastic diseases had to be ruled out.
In 10 patients who had met the criteria for ulcerative colitis in 1978 the diagnosis was later changed to Crohn's disease; the diagnosis was changed to ulcerative colitis in three patients who had originally had Crohn's disease diagnosed.
The diagnoses presented in this study were those made in 1987 — that is, the conclusion reached after a median 15 (9–49) years of observation.
We sent a questionnaire requesting complete family history to each patient.
Adequate information was  obtained from 637 of the 662 patients (96%): 504 patients with ulcerative colitis and 133 patients with Crohn's disease.
We telephoned all patients who stated that actual or possible inflammatory bowel disease was present in one or more family members and obtained the names and dates of birth of the affected family members.
The diagnosis was confirmed or excluded by applying the criteria mentioned above to the relatives' medical records from hospitals or private physicians.
Fifty four probands with ulcerative colitis had 77 relatives with the same disease (46 first degree relatives, 22 second degree, nine third or fourth degree).
Two of these 54 probands had two relatives with Crohn's disease, and another five probands had seven relatives with Crohn's disease.
Five probands with Crohn's disease had seven relatives with that disease (four first degree, three second degree), and four Crohn's disease probands had six relatives with ulcerative colitis.
All first degree relatives of the affected family members were characterised with regard to sex and year of birth (and death).
The occurrence of multiple probands in the families has been described.
Patients who refused to participate, who did not answer the letters or telephone calls, or who were adopted or unable to give information about bowel disease in their relatives were not included in the segregation analysis, nor were children younger than 8 years of age.
statistical analysis
The complex segregation analysis is based on the distribution of the disease in nuclear families (parents and their offspring).
Each pedigree ascertained on the basis of the probands can contain one or more nuclear families.
The 504 ulcerative colitis probands belonged to 495 pedigrees, which were split into 872 nuclear families with 2414 children; the 133 Crohn's disease probands belonged to 133 pedigrees, which were split into 209 nuclear families with 549 children.
The analysis required that any relative with Crohn's disease in the ulcerative colitis group was considered to be normal and vice versa in the Crohn's disease group.
In the Crohn's disease group any person dying before 1940 was coded as ‘unknown’ since Crohn's disease was not described until 1932.
Table I gives the combinations of phenotypes among the parents — the mating types.
We used a segregation analysis based on the so called mixed model, which incorporates Mendelian inheritance of a single major gene locus, non-Mendelian polygenic inheritance, and transmissible or non-transmissible environmental factors.
The model assumes that the liability to the disease can be described by an underlying continuous liability scale (y).
The liability of each person is assumed to be determined by the independent contribution of a major locus (g)(a locus that causes a displacement of more than one phenotypic standard deviation between normal and abnormal genotypes on the liability scale); a multifactorial component (c), attributable in theory to a large number of genetic or environmental influences, or both, acting additively and transmitted from parents to their children; and a random, non-transmitted environmental factor (e).
The individual liability to disease in this model is then y=g+c+e.
The variance (V) of y is similarly divided into three components: V=G+C+E, where G, C, and E are the variances of g, c, and e respectively.
The relative contribution of multifactorial transmission is defined by H, the heritability (in the narrow sense), which reflects genetic transmission not ascribed to a major gene and cultural transmission: H=C/V.
If Z is a parameter that takes intergenerational differences in heritability into account then HZ denotes the parental heritability.
The major locus, which is assumed to have two alleles — A and A' producing three genotypes AA, AA', A'A' — is defined by three parameters: q, the frequency of the major gene A'; t, the displacement — that is, the distance measured in standard deviations on the liability scale between the two homozygous genotype class means; and d, the degree of dominance, expressed as the position of the heterozygous class mean in relation to the homozygous class mean (d=0 corresponds to a recessive gene, d=1 to a dominant gene, and d=0.5 to an additive gene).
The affected state is defined by a threshold (T) on the liability scale, which is determined from the morbid risk of disease.
For inflammatory bowel disease the morbid risk varies with age.
Hence each person was assigned to a liability class based on age.
The program used allowed for only nine different liability classes.
Six classes were used for ulcerative colitis (table II).
For Crohn's disease, which has increased in frequency during the past 20–30 years, an additional three classes were defined for dead subjects based on their age and year of death (table II).
For the living patients and for those in the Crohn's disease group who died after 1980 the morbid risks were based on age specific prevalences obtained by concurrent epidemiological studies.
For those in the Crohn's disease group who died before 1981 the morbid risks were derived from approximate prevalences obtained in the study conducted by Binder et al in 1962–78.
Further details of the analysis are given in the appendix.
Results
ulcerative colitis
Table III gives the results of the complex segregation analyses for ulcerative colitis.
The sporadic model — that is, the model not including any family resemblance (H=q=0)— gave a poor fit compared with the multifactorial model (H>0)(χ 2 =60.52 —(-30.81) = 91.33; p<0.001).
There was no evidence of an intergenerational difference (Z=0.67) for multifactorial heritability (χ 2 =-30.81 —(-31.67) =0.86).
Among the three models that incorporated a major locus (q>0) the recessive model (d=0) did not explain the observed segregation pattern as well as the dominant model (χ 2 =2.42 for the recessive model, χ 2 =15.21, p<0.005  for the dominant model).
The additive model (d=0.5) yielded an equivalent likelihood to that of the dominant model (d=1) with corresponding estimated parameters (same q, and t of the dominant model equals t×d of the additive model).
This was due to the low frequency of the susceptibility allele (43×10 -5 ) and the resulting low probability that any of the affected patients were homozygous.
In fact, no families had both parents affected (table I).
There was no evidence for an additional transmissible multifactorial component since H always went to zero when iterating all parameters.
Table IV gives the characteristics of the major dominant locus for ulcerative colitis by liability class.
The penetrance (probability of having the disease for given genotype expressed as P (disease/genotype)) of the abnormal allele A' was almost the same for the liability classes above class 1, being 0.26 in the heterozygote or homozygote for the highest incidence groups.
This means that by age 30–59 a heterozygote or homozygote has a 26% risk of having ulcerative colitis.
Conversely, the frequency with which disease can be attributed to the abnormal allele (P(genotype/disease)) decreased with age.
Before the age of 20, 32% of the patients with ulcerative colitis were heterozygous or homozygous carriers of the major gene.
In the higher liability classes the probability of an affected individual being heterozygous or homozygous for the major allele was about 0.10.
This means that about 90% of the adult patients with ulcerative colitis have a normal genotype.
crohn's disease
Table V shows the results of the segregation analysis for Crohn's disease.
The sporadic model was definitely ruled out when compared with the multifactorial model (χ 2 =17.05).
The multifactorial model tended to fit better when an intergenerational difference was included (Z estimated at 0.05, corresponding to a much lower heritability among parents (ZH) than among offspring (H)), but it was not significantly better (χ 2 =3.28, p=0.075).
The model including a recessive major locus gave a better fit than the model including an additive or a dominant locus, but the fit was not significantly better than for the multifactorial model with or without a generational difference.
The difficulty in distinguishing between hypotheses was not surprising since only 209 families with Crohn's disease were available for analysis.
If the recessive major locus model is accepted the gene frequency would be 59×10 -4 .
Under the major gene models, H always went to zero so no additional transmissible multifactorial component was evident.
Table VI shows the penetrance of the major gene locus in affected subjects with various genotypes by liability class derived from the model including a major recessive gene.
The overall probability for a patient with Crohn's disease being homozygous for the major locus for Crohn's disease was 0.07.
Before age 20, 28% of the patients were homozygous.
Penetrance was almost complete for the recessive homozygote in all liability classes.
Discussion
In a previous paper we estimated that the sex and age standardised population relative risk for ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease was about 10 among first degree relatives of probands with ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease.
The size of the relative risk strongly suggests a genetic contribution.
Assuming genetic influences, the mode of inheritance can be investigated by segregation analysis of pedigree data.
The results of our complex segregation analysis suggest that a major dominant gene is present in about 10% of patients with ulcerative colitis.
The penetrance of the dominant gene in adults was estimated at 0.26 hence the risk of disease in an adult offspring of a patient with ulcerative colitis induced by this gene may be 13%.
Although the result was not significant, segregation analysis of the families with Crohn's disease suggested that a major recessive gene is present in about 7% of patients with this disease.
Since the penetrance of this recessive susceptibility gene for Crohn's disease in the homozygote was almost complete, the risk of disease in a child with one parent with Crohn's disease induced by this gene and one unaffected parent is about 30×10 -4 — namely, half the estimated gene frequency in the background population.
Thus a considerable number of cases of both ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease are sporadic or non-genetic.
This is, however, compatible with a population relative risk of 10 for family members  because the population relative risk reflects the familial occurrence relative to the population occurrence.
results of other studies
Only a few studies have included segregation analysis of family data on chronic inflammatory bowel disease.
Comparison of these studies is difficult because of different patient populations.
Selection bias is specially important in family studies of diseases in which only a minority of the cases have a genetic origin.
We studied an unselected, regionally defined, relatively large group of thoroughly characterised patients over at least nine years.
During these years the diagnosis had been corrected in 13 patients.
We did not obtain data on the families of patients with inflammatory bowel disease who died between 1978 and 1987.
We believe that this was valid because the mortality rate of patients with inflammatory bowel disease did not differ from that expected in the background