

APPLE ‘TO OFFER MAC COMPATIBILITY MODULE FOR POWERPC TO NICHE FIRMS’
Apple Computer Inc has always jealously guarded its Macintosh environment, but it made a striking gesture when it allowed IBM to build machines that would run the PowerPC version of Macintosh System when the chip is ready.
A further relaxation of its previously rigid stand is suggested by Computer Reseller News, which hears that Apple is negotiating with other third parties — including Radius Inc and DayStar Digital Inc — to develop PowerPC versions of the Macintosh for specific niche markets.
It says third parties will use the Macintosh Compatibility Module, which enables shrink-wrapped Mac applications to run on the Apple-IBM Corp-Motorola Inc PowerOpen-PowerPC system under development.
Radius, the paper says, would likely use its RocketShare software to develop a multiprocessing PowerPC Mac, while DayStar might develop a Macintosh designed for image processing.
MEMOREX TELEX OFFERS 5100 TAPE LIBRARY FOR THE IBM AS/400
Memorex Telex NV's Peripherals Group in Milpitas, California has made good on its promise to offer a version of its 5100 Automated Tape Library for IBM Corp AS/400 9406 processors, and claims that it is the first such library in the AS/400 market.
The 5100 Automated Tape Library is designed to provide complete half-inch cartridge tape automation; cartridges are housed in the robotic unit and accessed via software control in an average of nine seconds.
It consists of a 315-cartridge carousel, robotics, two 3490 equivalent tape transports and library management control software to automate the data management support.
It offers from 63Gb to 283Gb of unattended capacity, and up to 756Gb with the 36-track upgrade and ECart support, using the Memorex Telex 5450 cartridge tape drive and controller.
It is out now, but no price was given.
Memorex promises to offer its higher capacity libraries to AS/400 users soon.
DIALOGIC OFFERS SIGNAL COMPUTING SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE SPEC
Dialogic Corp, making multimedia products in Parsippany, New Jersey, has unveiled an ambitious development that it calls Signal Computing System Architecture.
Dialogic describes this as a comprehensive multilayered open architecture for building distributed communications systems from multiple technologies.
It is claimed to enable open development of scalable communications systems encompassing voice, data and image technologies, providing a clear migration path to  accommodate advances in hardware and software technology.
By Signal Computing the company means technologies for converting various signals into useful information such as speech store and forward, recognition and synthesis, and facsimile.
Specifications for Signal Computing System Architecture are documented in a manual, available licence-free at $125 including a year's updates.
ADAPTIVE ADDS PARALLEL NEURAL CNAPS/64 AT $35,000
With the overriding need to introduce their systems to a wider market, massively parallel systems builders are having to come out with ever smaller configurations of their machines to get the entry price down, and Beaverton, Oregon-based Adaptive Solutions Inc has cut its CNAPS pattern recognition system down to 64  processors to create the CNAPS/64.
The new model of the system, originally launched just two years ago (CI No 1,626), brings the entry price down to $35,000 from $55,000.
CNAPS stands for Connected Network of Adaptive ProcessorS, pointing to the fact that the system applies neural network technology, although as neural networks are less fashionable than parallel systems at the moment, the company is describing it as the lowest priced massively parallel system on the market.
The CNAPS/64 is designed for computational-intensive pattern recognition applications such as image and speech recognition, forecasting, signal processing, and neural network training.
The building block processor is a chip the company calls the N64000, which includes multiplier, adder-accumulator, shift logic and on-chip memory, and the machine implements single-instruction, multiple data architecture.
It comes with 8Mb of external memory, and can be upgraded to the full 512-node configuration.
It is designed to be used as a server to a Unix workstation, and is claimed to execute 1G multiply-accumulates per second.
On the software front, the company added the BuildNet and CNAPS-C software tools.
BuildNet includes pre-written versions of the two most popular neural network algorithms, Back-Propagation and Learning Vector Quantization 2, and an X Window-Motif-based graphical user interface designed to enable users to run the algorithms on the CNAPS computer and display test results graphically, even if they have no programming experience.
CNAPS-C, an extension of the C language, is conceived for creating new algorithms and applications, and both run on the Unix workstation.
CNAPS-C programs can be launched with either the BuildNet or CodeNet command-line interface.
The CNAPS-C compiler provides two compilation paths, one producing ANSI C code that is compiled into host executable code for debugging on the host workstation with standard ANSI C development tools, the other producing CNAPS Programming Language assembly code that is assembled into CNAPS executable code.
For optimum performance in key sections of code, in-line CPL assembly code statements can be incorporated into the C program; BuildNet costs $3,000, a development kit with CNAPS-C and CodeNet costs $4,500.
HITACHI DATA HAS ENHANCED 7490E TAPE SYSTEM FOR ESCON
Hitachi Data Systems claims that its 7490E Cartridge Tape Subsystem, now shipping, makes it the first IBMulator to deliver 36-track, bi-directional tape units with improved control units that provide higher performance and direct Escon channel attachment.
The 7490E supports the new double-length cartridges, and each functional control unit includes an 8Mb buffer and faster compactors to increase subsystem performance when compared to 18-track products.
The 7490E can support transfer rates of 9M-bytes per second, up to 128 logical paths and can be up to 14 miles from the CPU via Escon channels.
No prices.
INDEPENDENT MICROSOFT INSTITUTE IS KEEN TO WORK MORE CLOSELY WITH ITS MENTOR…
The Microsoft Institute in Madrid, while not actually owned by Microsoft Corp, is keen to work more closely with the company on large accounts in a ‘shoot to kill’ policy.
Microsoft asked computer distributor, Keydata SA to set up the Institute four years ago.
Keydata was also experienced in running training courses.
The aim was to provide users with information on Microsoft Corp products and to run graduate and Masters courses in Microsoft technology.
The graduate courses are targeted at students in their first years at university, and the Masters at post-graduates or professionals with experience.
Standard courses are provided for companies or individuals that want training.
When consultancy Sena BPA bought shares in Keydata last September, it made Jacobo Garcia Duran managing director of the Institute.
He intends to introduce new Masters courses, including one in communication networks; improve publicity for and the quality of current courses; and impose tighter controls on internal management.
The Institute shares the philosophy and aims of the Microsoft University in Seattle and a lot of its work involves adapting English language information for educational purposes in Spain.
Customers include government, private companies, universities and colleges.
Duran reckons that the Institute adds value to Microsoft's business because it receives its products first and understands its philosophy and strategy best.
…
AS MICROSOFT FOLLOWS APPLE IN OFFERING CATALAN LANGUAGE SOFTWARE
Two months after Apple Computer Inc released a Catalan version of its System 7, Microsoft Corp has jumped on the  bandwagon and announced Catalan editions of MS-DOS 5.0, Windows 3.1, and a spell-checker and dictionary for Word for Windows 2.0.
Madrid-based Microsoft Iberica SRL generates 28% of its turnover in Catalonia, and managing director Joao Teixeira believes the move will increase this figure still more.
As a result, he has taken on more staff in the region.
The translation project was supported by the University of Barcelona, the Autonomous Government of Catalonia, and Microsoft's European translation centre in Ireland.
Staff at the development centres of Compagnie des Machines Bull SA, Fujitsu Ltd and Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA also contributed to the work.
TELEFONICA, GREATER BARCELONA COUNCIL TEAM ON LOCAL AUTHORITY SERVICES
Telefonica de Espana SA and Diputacion de Barcelona — Barcelona Provincial Council — have signed an agreement to improve telecommunications in small towns, according to Computerworld Espana.
The project, referred to as the Telal, Telecoms and Local Administrations, programme, aims to improve telecommunications services for the local administrations of towns of fewer than 20,000 inhabitants.
The first phase is planned to continue to the end of 1994, and will include assessment of the current services with a view to broadening them, before moving on to the setting up of pilot networks.
DIGITAL SYSTEMS DENIES ANY INTEREST IN NT, SAYS UNIX HAS THE CLEAR ADVANTAGE
Digital Systems Development SA denied rumours of a deal with Microsoft Corp to distribute Windows NT and reaffirmed its commitment to Unix.
In fact managing director Almerino Furlan warned Microsoft that it could go the same way as IBM Corp because, like Big Blue, it is trying to spread itself too thin.
He added ‘The way we see the client-server and distributed data processing market leads us to believe that Unix has a clear advantage over any other operating system.’
Sales and marketing manager Mariano Romero affirmed that the Madrid company would continue to sell communications software and services, which enable the integration of multivendor host computers.
According to Furlan, it plans to focus on systems integration, providing turnkey systems to financial institutions and government — the two markets, which have shown most interest in Unix.
Digital Systems is also expanding its end-user training courses to cover Informix Corp, Santa Cruz Operation Inc and Uniplex Ltd environments.
METROLOGIE FOLLOWS AMSTRAD, PUTS ITS OWN NAME ON INTEL's OEM MACHINES
Metrologie International SA's Madrid-based subsidiary, Metrologia Iberica, distributes only Intel Corp's products, but, taking a leaf out of Amstrad Plc's book, will now sell them under its own name rather than Intel's.
The company has supplied Intel products to European customers since 1988, and will continue to sell the same range as before.
The only change is that Metrologia will now market them as MI486 boxes, based on Intel technology.
The first product to be sold under the new brand-name is the X-Press MI486, a desktop or tower system with a 80486 processor.
This can be upgraded to the Pentium chip when it becomes available in the second quarter this year.
TELEFONICA TAKES FLAK FOR INADEQUATE PROMOTION OF IBERTEX VIEWDATA SERVICE
Spain is way behind France in providing viewdata services because of lack of government support.
And, more specifically, the situation of the Madrid-based Documentation Service for Education, DOCE, hasn't been helped by lack of funding and poor publicity from supplier Telefonica Ibertex, according to director Maria Jesus Roderiguez.
The DOCE was set up five years ago to provide up-to-date information for both teachers and pupils in secondary education, and originally sent data out on floppy.
In January 1991, it set up a server centre, the smallest in Spain, to take advantage of Telefonica de Espana SA's viewdata service.
But Ms Roderiguez is dissatisfied with the level of funding provided by Telefonica — while other centres received approximately $14,000, the DOCE got only $2,125.
She also said that Spaniards' general ignorance of the benefits of such a service wasn't helped by poor advertising from Telefonica.
In her view, past promotions should have focussed on individual sections of the population instead of trying to interest everyone at once.
The result, she said, was that information on such matters as new curriculae, AIDS and prevention of drug abuse reached only about 250 users.
Ms Roderiguez is particularly concerned because there are 32,000 education centres in Spain, each with 24 potential users.
APPLE READY TO TAKE BIG STEP FORWARD IN MULTIMEDIA WITH PLANNED TEMPEST, CYCLONE MACINTOSHES
For several weeks, Apple Computer Inc has been showing to developers prototypes of those two new high-end computers that according to US PC Week could create a breakthrough in performance and multimedia capabilities.
The machines, as reported, are code-named Tempest and Cyclone and are expected to be launched in the late summer or early autumn.
The two machines will include speech synthesis and recognition as a standard feature, and are differentiated by the fact that the smaller model will use Motorola Inc's 25MHz 68LC040 and the larger the 40MHz 68040.
As reported, they are the first machines from Apple to include the long-promised signal processor — Apple is using AT&T Co's AT&T 32-bit 3210, which will be built into the system's motherboard and will drive such tasks as real-time data processing, speech recognition, audio compression, high-speed data communications, three-dimensional rendering, video image processing and 16-bit stereo sound.
Key to Apple's signal processing implementation is the Apple Real Time Architecture, an adaptation of the operating system used in the 3210 chip, the paper says.
A signal processing manager based on the new architecture will aggregate all the routines and resources to enable the chip to perform audio and telecommunication input-output functions and enable Macintosh applications to take advantage of those functions.
A Speech Manager will also enable applications to generate synthesised speech from text strings.
The machines are expected to come with sample voices, a pronunciation dictionary and a speech synthesiser called QuickTalk as part of planned extensions to Macintosh System 7.1.
FAST PRINTING FROM WINDOWS WITH CHIPS & TECH UNIVERSAL CONTROLLER
San Jose-based Chips & Technologies Inc has come out with a universal input-output controller with a parallel port to accelerate printing under Microsoft Corp Windows and other graphic user interfaces: called the 82C735, the controller looks after the printing with Printgine, an enhanced bi-directional parallel port interface that can transfer data at a rate claimed to be 100 times faster than existing systems, sending up to 2M-bytes per second of data to printers, scanners, local area networks, tape back-up systems and other peripherals connected to a parallel port.
It does this by implementing protocol commands in hardware and significantly reducing the number of CPU instructions needed to send one byte to the printer.
AT, EISA and Micro Channel bus-compatible, it integrates Printgine parallel port, floppy disk interface, Intelligent Disk Interface control logic, two industry-standard universal asynchronous receiver-transmitters and a PS/2 mouse port.
With Fast Centronics, it runs at 200K-bytes per second, and the full speed is achieved with Microsoft Enhanced Capabilities Protocol and Enhanced Parallel Port.
Samples will be available in April with volumes set for summer, it is under $11 in OEM quantities.
COMMAND TECHNOLOGY SPF/PC LINKS WITH MICRO FOCUS COBOL WORKBENCH
Command Technology Corp, Alameda, California says it is now shipping SPF/PC Version 3.0, an upgrade to its programmer's editor.
The product is a file manager and full-screen text editor that emulates IBM Corp's ISPF/PDF on the mainframe, and the new release includes complete ISPF/PDF emulation, integration with Micro Focus Plc's Cobol Workbench, and compatibility with all micro Cobol compilers so as to bring the ISPF mainframe programming environment to personal computers running MS-DOS or OS/2.
The new release includes Isredit macros via REXX in OS/2 and MS-DOS, instant loading of large files, fully mappable keyboard and mouse, keyboard macros and complete integration with the Micro Focus Cobol Workbench.
It requires an 80386 machine with 2Mb memory and costs $300, $200 until May 31, and a local network version is also available.
AT&T REPORTS PROGRESS ON CRAMMING 100 TIMES MORE CALLS DOWN ONE OPTICAL FIBRE WITH SOLITON WAVES
The prospect of increasing the carrying capacity of under sea fibre optic cables 100-fold is held out by work being done at AT&T Co's Bell Laboratories.
According to the Wall Street Journal, scientists at the Murray Hill, New Jersey lab are using a new filtering technique to achieve the large gains in capacity, and say they have succeeded in transmitting signals error-free over 8,125 miles at 20 Gbps, double the previous record for long-distance transmission.
The transmissions use those soliton waves we told you about way back in summer 1990 (CI No 1,459), which are electronically induced and never lose their shape as they whiz through optical glass fibre, so that signalling errors are all but non-existent, obviating the need for costly error-correction equipment, which also slows down transmission.
The highest-capacity undersea system now in use is capable of carrying 80,000 concurrent phone conversations where a 20Gbps system could carry 8m concurrent calls.
The test was done using a 16-mile loop of glass fibre, lasers, amplifiers and filters to prove that solitons can provide the key to future ultra-high capacity transmission.
The team started with an existing 2.5Gbps and used time-division multiplexing to up the capacity of 10Gbps, and then used wavelength division multiplexing to double capacity again to the full 20Gbps speed.
The system uses a sliding frequency guiding filter to regulate the speed of the soliton waves.
Bell Labs acknowledges that it is in competition with the likes of British Telecommunications Plc and Nippon Telegraph & Telephone Corp to perfect the technology.
PIONEER OPEN DATABASE CONNECTIVITY FOR DEVELOPERS
Pioneer Software Corp, Raleigh, North Carolina, has launched the Q+E Open DataBase Connectivity Developer Programme to enable developers to create and test applications compliant with the Microsoft Corp standard.
Developers will get early access to Pioneer Software's complete suite of ODBC drivers, which support over 20 personal computer and SQL databases — Oracle, SQL Server, Sybase, dBase Ingres, Paradox, DB2, SQL/400, Btrieve, OS/2 Data Base Manager, Informix, NetWare SQL, Excel, Progress, SQLBase, XDB, SQL/DS, Tandem Computers Inc NonStop SQL, Teradata, text files, HP Allbase/SQL and HP Image/SQL and gateways to IBM's DDCS/2, Micro Decisionware, and Sybase NetGateway.
The Developer Programme costs $1,500 and will be available March 15.
DUCKING BULLETS, ICL APPLIES TO OPEN IN SLOVENIA
ICL Plc has applied to register a subsidiary in Slovenia, a formality that should be completed in the next few weeks, and despite renewed conflict in Croatia, the company says it is still ‘business as usual’.
Croatian country manager Huw Jenkins attested that contracts are still being signed and cash is still being paid, while moves towards privatisation are freeing up budgets that were previously frozen.
Jenkins is also cautiously optimistic that ICL will win a ‘major strategic bid’ for a contract worth £500,000 from the Croatian government.
He could provide no further details, however, because the deal is still being contested by a competitor, which, according to Jenkins, has better political connections than ICL.
In spite of renewed trouble in the country, he said the group still intended to recruit more staff and was inviting bids from local firms not only to translate OfficePower into local languages, but also to become ICL's number one supplier to the retail sector.
But the threat of sanctions imposed by the United Nations is at the back of his mind, ‘We have discussed it and it is of great personal interest to me as I wouldn't have a job.
But we are not planning on sanctions.
If I did I wouldn't have much motivation to get out of bed in the morning or to motivate others’.
SOFTWARE ALLIANCE DUMPS ON CZECH TEENAGERS
The Czech arm of the Business Software Alliance is prosecuting its first case under the country's software piracy laws.
A group of Czech teenagers allegedly made a few hundred copies of locally-produced computer software packages and sold them for $10 a piece, after advertising them via direct mail-shots.
The Alliance, set up last month, comprises local software companies such as Software602, APP Systems, AutoDesk Inc and the Czech branch of Microsoft Corp.
Under existing legislation, the youths could be sentenced to a maximum of two years in prison or fined up to $10,000, if found guilty.
Local lawyers, police and judiciary have been primed for the test case by a series of seminars organised in conjunction with BSA Europe.
Software602 sales manager Jan Muhlfeit said that the teenagers, all aged between 16 and 18, had written a letter to the Alliance apologising for their actions — they claimed they did not know that they were doing anything wrong.
He conceded many Czechs still do not realise that copying and selling software is illegal, and appeared slightly uncomfortable about the decision to prosecute.
But he denied the organisation was being heavy-handed in making an example of the teenagers, saying he had to prove a point, although the Alliance does not want them imprisoned.
The case will be quickly followed by a second action taken against a large electronic bulletin board company.
The firm will be accused of distributing software illegally as part of its service to subscribers.
Court proceedings against end-users are not expected until the end of the year.
The Alliance is confident that existing Czech software legislation will be amended in June, with new laws being based on the recommendations of European Community directives.
Current laws say that copyright, in all cases, belongs to the programmer and is not  transferable .
This anomaly means local software firms must sign ‘exclusive distribution’ contracts with the programmers they employ.
As a result, foreign software firms that wish to produce local language versions are forced to adapt their applications abroad to retain full ownership rights.
Software602 is negotiating with Microsoft Corp's Prague subsidiary at the moment to translate its software, and has play-ed a leading role in pressing for legislative changes.
Microsoft currently adapts its local language packages by drafting Czech programmers to its base in Ireland.
INTERNATIONAL DATA CORP MOVES UNIT TO PRAGUE FROM FRANKFURT
International Data Corp is relocating its East European Expertise Centre to Prague from Frankfurt because the only viable method of gathering market data in local markets is by face-to-face interviews.
According to IDC's Steve Frantzen, staff spent most of their time ‘running around’ the former Czechoslovakia.
The move follows the establishment of a branch office in Sofia earlier this month, and Frantzen will remain as head of local operations.
The relocation is expected to take two weeks.
IDC, the Framingham, Massachusetts information technology market research company, is expanding its activities in all former communist countries, and is recruiting additional staff, especially in Budapest.
It moved to Eastern Europe in 1989, and is regarded by local commentators as the most influential research group in the region.
PENS: AMERICAN TECHNOLOGIES DOES DEAL WITH TANDY GRID FOR THE POLISH MARKET
Warsaw-based distributor American Technologies has signed an exclusive agreement with Tandy Corp's GRiD Systems Corp to bring pen-based computing to the Polish market.
American Technologies will supply the hardware pre-loaded with Microsoft Corp's MS-Windows for Pen Computing and handwriting recognition tools.
It will also provide local warehouses, and service, support and training facilities.
While the group will primarily market the machines with the help of specialised resellers, it is also trying to negotiate deals with ‘one or two’ Polish distributors.
The most likely candidates are local firm MSP Sp zoo, and DHI, which is majority owned by Munich-based Computer 2000 GmBH — although this was not confirmed by American Technologies' executive vice-president Alex Barkaloff.
MSP is currently working with Microsoft Poland to develop local language versions of pen-based applications.
Both Microsoft and American Technologies will unveil the results at the end of April.
Barkaloff said that a Polish government agency is also thinking of developing pen-based applications, and may act as a reseller of the GRiDs to the public sector.
American Technologies set up shop in Warsaw in 1990, and is best known as one of two local distributors of printers from IBM Corp spin-out Lexmark International Inc.
It will also distribute Tandy's Victor Technologies personal computer line.
HUNGARY SEEKS BIDS FOR INTEGRATED MEDICAL ATTENDANCE AND FINANCE SYSTEM
The Hungarian government is seeking bids for a contract to supply an integrated medical attendance and financial administration system to the University Medical School of  Debrecan .
The deal will be funded by a $150m loan from the European Bank for Reconstruction & Development, earmarked for the Catching up with European Higher Education Project.
The opening procedure will be a two stage bid, with the deadline for technical bids being March 30.
Bidding documents, available from the University, cost $200 and all first stage bids must be backed by $10,000 in security.
The tender for vendors to supply several hundred personal computers and related equipment to regional higher education centres at  Debrecen , Pecs and Szekesfehervar closed on February 18 and was also funded by a loan from the European Bank.
Ministry of Labour spokesman Avar Arpad said evaluation would take two weeks and that no information would be given in the interim.
He did say that 30 bids were being reviewed, all from foreign firms or Western-backed joint ventures.
JEOFF SAMSON TO BECOME AMSTRAD's FIRST NON-EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
The long quest by Amstrad Plc, Brentwood, Essex to find some non-executive directors has culminated in the appointment of Jeoff Samson, and the search continues for more names to strengthen the board further.
Samson has had a wide experience in the electronics industry, working with Plessey Co Plc, Standard Telephones and Cables Plc and GEC Plc, where he was managing director of GEC Consumer Products Group until 1989.
He was managing director of Yale & Valor Plc until 1991 when it was acquired by Williams Holdings Plc.
After shareholders voted to reject his 30 pence a share offer to take the company private in December, Alan Sugar has some fence-mending to do: Amstrad insists that the personal communicator to be launched next week is not the kind of blockbuster product that will restore the company's fortunes on its own, but the unexpected first half profit has caused some to feel that Sugar overdid the gloom.
BICC PROFITS SLIP 5% TO £77m
Its been another less than startling year for London-based cables and construction group BICC Plc with pre-tax profits down 4.9% at £77m on turnover that fell 3.8% to £3,647m.
The low pre-tax figures reflect £43m extraordinary charges which resulted from a £35m write down of the company's UK property portfolio, and £8m provision in respect of its 10% interest in Trans-Manche Link, the Channel Tunnel construction consortium.
As before, said chairman Robin Biggam, the recession was blame.
However BICC's cash performance had been ‘excellent’ and this, with the proceeds from the rights issue launched last May (CI No 1,921) had enabled the company to develop its business.
Massachusetts-based Andover Controls did well, reporting profits up 33% to £5m.
UK-based electronics packaging firm Vero Electronics also earned a small profit.
BICC Cables, which is primarily European-based, saw a 14% downturn in profits which came in at £78m.
During the year the division increased its stake in Spanish concern Grupo General Cable SA (CI No 1,996) also and also acquired KWO in Germany (CI No 1,874) where it reckons the ‘medium term’ growth prospects are strong.
The Group's North American cabling operations, which acquired Reynolds Metals Electrical Division in September, reduced losses to £2m from £3m last time.
Australasian operations fared better too, the disposal of a loss-making construction business boosting profits 27% to £33m.
BICC's core construction business scraped home with a 5% increase in operating profits while the company's UK property arm saw £12m operating losses.
The group's short term future remains uncertain owing to the worldwide recession according to Mr Biggam.
But he says that BICC's businesses are well positioned strategically and financially to take advantage of any economic upturn.
CONCENTRATION ON SOFTWARE BEGINS TO PAY OFF FOR RADIUS, UP 236% AT £1.2m FOR THE YEAR
Radius Plc's strategy of refocussing on software and services for vertical markets rather than on low-margin hardware sales has produced dividends in terms of profits for the year ending November 30.
Pre-tax profits rose 236.3% to £1.2m, although turnover fell 14.6% to £24m due to the disposal of non-profitable activities.
These included a Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire-based training business, a Peterborough-based firm selling a motor trading package, and the company's subsidiary in Ireland, which was a ‘cash drain'.
The board is maintaining its final dividend at 1.8 pence per share, which makes a total of 2.7 pence for the year.
Net cash fell slightly to £2.2m this time from £2.3m last.
The Hull-based group spent £220,000 on acquiring the business and assets of £600,000 turnover computer maintenance company, Novar, in September for £220,000.
Other cash went on restructuring.
Over the past two years, headcount has dropped to 510 from 750, mainly due to redundancies.
According to company secretary Lawrence Bland, the aim was to get rid of excess capacity.
Radius has four main areas of activity.
First, it sells software packages, which generate 20% of revenues.
While the company writes most of these itself, it also sells Unix financial and business management applications from Prophecy UK Ltd, a subsidiary of Adelaide, South Australia-based Computer Software Packages Pty Ltd.
Second, it supplies hardware from most of the major vendors, including IBM Corp, Digital Equipment Corp and Hewlett-Packard Co.
This brings in 16% of turnover.
Third, it offers software services, including consultancy and installation, which comprises 25% of income.
And finally, it offers hardware and software maintenance, which makes up the remaining 39%, and which Bland said the company is keen to develop as it provides a ‘predictable cash flow and profits’— customers tend to renew their contracts year-on-year.
According to Bland, the group now generates a total £8.5m in recurring revenues, providing it with a steady underpinning for growth.
Consider buying an Oracle specialist
The remaining income came from new customers.
Radius has grown as a company by acquiring firms in specific vertical markets, and Bland said, spends a lot of time looking for suitable purchases.
It would even, he added, be interested in the odd competitor to increase its customer base.
As a result of customer demand and acquisitions, it now focusses its skills on Ingres Corp, Informix Corp, and Progress Software Corp software, plus a little Oracle-related business, although Bland said that Radius would definitely consider buying an Oracle Corp specialist.
Vertical markets comprise professional accounting — although the small accountancy practices to which the group sells have been hard-hit by recession, it has managed to maintain stable revenues by selling upgrades of existing accountancy software ranges; retail — while Radius started selling to this sector only about two years ago, it ‘performed above expectations’, having won a new £500,000 contract from Dixons Group Plc, a £400,000 contract from Southern Electric Plc and a £25,000 contract from Ing C Olivetti SpA; the public sector — the company has built on its traditional strength in local government to move into health and central government; fuel distribution — another new area of activity which Bland said is ‘growing’, although he could provide no figures; and finally, the printing industry — while Radius has in the past concentrated on big customers such as Bowater and Smurfitt, it has now released a ‘stripped-down’ version of its management software to attract smaller users.
Bland said that up till now, there had been a gap in this market.
While Radius is continuing to invest in developing new software and enhancements to remain competitive, it is also aware of the need to keep tight control on capital expenditure and improve its operational efficiency.
Over the past two years, the company has placed a lot of emphasis on debtor management, and has reduced payment to 72 days from 100.
It keeps a careful eye on stock control to make sure that inventories are maintained at ‘sensible levels’.
And it has installed control software to ensure that engineers can be on site in four hours if necessary.
As a result, Bland said the company could now sell more software without increasing its cost base.
Finally, it says that it intends to seek a full listing on the Stock Exchange as soon as possible, following the Stock Exchange's recommendation to discontinue the Unlisted Securities Market by 1995, which, Bland notes, is not very liquid anyway.
LINX PRINTING OPENS ITS PUBLIC ACCOUNT WITH INTERIMS UP 2.3% AT £763,000
Linx Printing Technologies Plc, the Huntingdon, Cambridgeshire-based company that went public last October has reported interim pre-tax profits up 2.3% to £763,000 —‘a satisfactory result in comparison with an exceptional first half year in 1991’— and turnover up 16.9% at £5.7m.
Earnings per share fell 4.6% to 3.7 pence reflecting the increased number of shares issued following the flotation.
Business has been particularly brisk in the Pacific Rim according to chairman Derek Harris, with the Japanese market now the second largest export market after Germany.
Demand is expected to continue during 1993 and the company says it is now planning to supplement its Hong Kong sales office with engineering support.
In all, non-European and non-American revenues rose 116.5% to around £1.2m.
Fortunes have been mixed in Europe, with falling demand from the northern markets — particularly the UK and Germany — being more than compensated for by those of southern Europe.
European revenues in total increased 3.9% to £4m.
Sales in the ultra-competitive North American market have also been slower than hoped generating £612,000 — a 9.3% increase.
However, the company is hoping that its 6000 series printers, launched last Spring, together with recovery in the US economy will boost its market share.
Sales of the higher margin 6000 Series are expected generate an increasingly higher proportion of the company's revenues in fact.
This should be supplemented by sales of Linx ink from the company's new ink manufacturing facility at St Ives in Cornwall and a planned drive to cut production costs.
In the mean time, the company says it will continue to invest in product development — research costs amounted to 8% of its half year turnover — and is looking to branch out into what it calls new ‘product identification’ technologies.
SHARE & BOND ISSUES
Bell Atlantic Corp's Bell Telephone Co of Pennsylvania issued $225m of 7.375% debentures due March 15 2033 and callable after 10 years, at $99.047%, through First Boston Corp as the lead manager.
Boca Research Inc, doing graphics, communications, memory and other boards for personal computers in Boca Raton, Florida has gone public with an initial offer of 3m shares, 1.25m of them new, at $10 a share.
It plans to use the $12m or so net proceeds to expand manufacturing operations and for possible strategic acquisitions.
Hambrecht & Quist Inc and Raymond James & Associates Inc were underwriters.
Intel Corp, Santa Clara has filed with the Securities & Exchange Commission for a public offering of five-year 1998 step-up warrants for 10m shares at a target $30 to $32 each.
For the first year, the warrants will be exercisable at a price about 20% above the share price at the time of the offering.
Annually thereafter, the exercise price will rise at a compounded rate of about 4% a year.
Intel also filed a universal shelf registration of $3,000m, covering the sale of step-up warrants and the 10m shares of common issuable on exercise of the Warrants.
After the warrants are issued, about $1,100m of the registration should be left for future securities offerings.
The joint managers are Lehman Brothers and Morgan Stanley & Co Inc.
MCI Communications Corp, Washington says it intends to redeem its $616m in liquid yield option notes due 2004 using short-term and long-term borrowings.
Mitel Corp, Kanata, Ontario is to offer 21.95m common shares at the equivalent of $1.60 a share in Canada Four entities advised by Schroder Ventures, the international venture capital and buyout affiliate of Schroders Plc, intend to buy 4.88m of the shares.
The share issue is being handled by ScotiaMcLeod Inc, Midland Walwyn Capital Inc and Wood Gundy Inc.
COMPANY RESULTS
Analog Devices Inc has turned in first quarter net profit of $8.1m against losses of $972,000 last time, on turnover that rose by 15.2% to $151.3m.
Net earnings per share amounted to $0.16.
CACI International Inc has reported second quarter net losses of $176,586, after $1.3m charges from the settlement of a lease and litigation, against profits of $1m last time, on turnover up 4.3% at $37.3m; mid-term net fell 56.8% to $869,020, on turnover that rose by 4.7% at $72.2m.
Net earnings per share fell by 57.9% to $0.08 in the half.
Datapoint Corp has reported second quarter net profit of $1.9m, after a $722,000 tax credit, up from just $136,000 last time, on sales that fell 14.3% at $54.3m; mid-term net profit rose 278% at $2.0m after tax credits of $1.2m this time, $861,000 last, on sales down 4.5% at $114.8m.
Net earnings per share after deferred preference dividends, were $0.11 in the quarter, $0.08 in the half.
Intersolv Inc saw third quarter net losses of $8.8m, after $13.2m pre-tax charges from the write-off of certain costs, against profits of $2m last time, on turnover down 7.5% at $20m; net losses for the nine months stood at $6.8m against profits of $3.6m, on turnover that rose by 7.3% to $59.2m.
Moscom Corp has reported fourth quarter net profits down 64.7% at $294,110, on turnover down 38.2% at $3.8m; net profit for the year to December 31 was down 96.5% at $70,992, on turnover that fell 20.2% to $12.6m.
Net earnings per share fell 66.7% to $0.04 in the quarter, 96.7% to $0.01 in the year.
Pay-Fone Systems Inc has reported second quarter net profits stood at $16,050 against losses of $43,533, on turnover up 14.7% at $1.1m; mid-term net amounted to $61,265 against losses of $244,703 last time, on turnover down 12% at $2.2m.
Net per share was $0.01 in the quarter, $0.04 in the half.
System Software Inc saw first quarter net profit down 88.3% at $900,00, on sales up 6.2% to $48.6m.
Net, adjusted for a three-for-two stock split paid in December 1992, per share fell 89.7% to $0.03.
BICC Plc has reported net profits for the year to December 31 up 333.3% at £13m, on turnover down 3.8% to £3,647m.
Pre-tax profits were down 4.9% at £77m, reflecting £43m extraordinary charges.
Earnings per share fell 35.9% to 6.6 pence.
Linx Printing Technologies Plc has reported net profits for the six months to 31 December up 2.7% at £496,000 on turnover up 16.9% to £5.8m.
At the pre-tax level, profits were up 2.3% at £763,000.
Earnings per share fell 4.6 % to 3.7 pence.
Pacer Systems Inc, quoted on the Unlisted Securities Market in London, reported a net profit for the year to December 31 of $322,000 against a loss last time of $685,000, on sales up 9.6% at $27.6m.
Radius Plc saw net for the year to November 30 up 255.6% at £800,000, after £576,000 restructuring charges items last time, on turnover down 14.6% to £24m.
Pre-tax profits rose 236.3% to £1.2m.
Earnings per share were up by 262.5% to 2.9 pence.
QUATRRO PRO/PARADOX BUNDLE FOR $200
Borland International Inc says it will bundle its two Windows-based products, Quattro Pro and Paradox, into a single package at a promotional price of $200 from next week.
OLIVETTI AND BT UNVEIL PC VIDEOCONFERENCING SYSTEM
Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA and British Telecommunications Plc decided to unveil their jointly-developed personal computer videoconferencing system, the multi-media Personal Computer Communication system first in Milan rather than London: the system enables pictures, speech, text and data to be transmitted from one workstation to another.
TALIGENT CONSOLATION FOR JACK KUEHLER
As a consolation prize for losing the post of president at IBM Corp, Jack Kuehler has been drafted onto the board of Taligent Inc, IBM's object-oriented operating system joint venture with Apple Computer Inc, replacing Bernard Puckett.
ROLFE & NOLAN TO COMPLETE BROKERAGE SYSTEMS ACQUISITION
Rolfe & Nolan Computer Services Plc is to pay $1.675m — $465,000 in cash, the balance in 327,027 new shares — for the 80.1% of Brokerage Systems Inc, Chicago that it does not already own, and says it wants the company to meet the needs of the US operations of its European customers: it says it has already created automated links between its own system and the RISC system of Brokerage Systems Inc, and that the links are to be developed further.
SCO PUBLIC OFFERING HAS BEGUN
Ending months of speculation, Santa Cruz Operation Inc says ‘the process to do an initial public offering has begun’: the Unix-on-iAPX-86 software house reported revenues of $160m to September last year and is still digesting last week's acquisition of Cambridge firm, IXI Ltd; Santa Cruz has appointed an  unnamed investment banker to handle the US flotation, but no further details were available as went to press.
INAUGURATION OF COMPAQ EUROPEAN DISTRIBUTION CENTRE
Compaq Computer Corp formally inaugurated its new European distribution centre in Gorinchem, Netherlands, yesterday: it will be a focal point for distribution of Compaq products in Europe; total investment in the centre is $77m.
RACAL ELECTRONICS LINKS SMITHS AND OUR PRICE
Racal Electronics Plc reports a £750,000 contract to link 300 branches of W.H. Smith Group Plc's Our Price Music record and video stores in the UK via its managed network services: the initial contract runs for 30 months, and the system will poll every Our Price store nightly, transferring current stock, sales and other business information to and from the Smith host computers.
MANCHESTER UNI BOASTS UK's LARGEST COMPUTATIONAL NODE
Manchester University's Computing Centre will soon boast the largest single computational node in the UK when it replaces its VP1200 supercomputer with a VPX240/10 machine from Fujitsu Systems Business (Europe): it is the first Fujitsu VPX machine to be sold in the UK since launch last year's launch and features one scalar processor, one 2.5GFLOPS vector processor, 1Gb main memory, 1Gb of secondary memory; it is four times faster than the five-year-old system it is replacing and will be used for computational fluid dynamics and engineering research; delivery is planned for July; no price was given.
DATAPOINT DECLINE ATTRIBUTED TO CURRENCY TRANSLATIONS
Commenting on its figures (see page seven), Datapoint Corp says that the decline in revenue as of January 30 was down mainly to unfavourable foreign currency translations and an interruption of the French subsidiary's operations following a fire in its leased warehouse — but there are some bulls of the shares around these days: analyst Howard Harlow of New York's Whale Securities sees a major turnaround and a doubling in value of the shares over the next 12 months; he sees earnings of $0.60 a share in 1993 followed by $1.20 a share in 1994.
AST MARGINS LINKED TO PRICING STRATEGY
Irvine, California-based AST Research Inc warns that it expects third quarter after-tax margins to be in the range of 3% to 4% as it follows pricing strategies intended to lead to increased unit sales while it reduces operating expenses as a percentage of sales — its strategy for pricing and market share expansion is expected to hurt its near-term earnings it said, noting that the new Premmia line, launched in the UK yesterday, is priced 10% to 20% below rival models; it also said it was evaluating its pricing, especially in Europe.
COMPUTER 2000 SALES RISE 50%
Computer 2000 AG, Munich said its group sales rose 50% to the equivalent of $660m in the first five months of its current fiscal to September 30: for the full year it is going for 45% growth to $1,600m.
IBM SEMICONDUCTOR AGREEMENT WITH LEYBOLD
IBM Corp has licensed Leybold AG to manufacture and market new process and related equipment for producing semiconductor devices: Leybold will produce and market equipment for making devices with IBM's low-temperature ultra high-vacuum chemical vapour deposition process; terms of the deal have not been disclosed.
SYNOPTICS COMMUNICATIONS UNVEILS LATTISCELL SWITCHES
SynOptics Communications Inc has unveiled the first products based on its six-chip Asynchronous Transfer Moder chip set announced last October (CI No 2,035): the per-port price of the LattisCell switches ranges from under £1,500 to £2,000, a half to a third of its competitors' prices, says the company; the Santa Clara company also has a technology partnership agreement with Sun Microsystems Inc to develop a 155Mbps asynchronous transfer mode SBus adaptor board that will be made and sold by SynOptics, enabling the LattisCell switches to be directly connected to Sparc systems running the Solaris Unix.
BT TO INSTALL SHELL PAYPHONES
Royal Dutch Shell Plc has given its contract for payphones at 660 UK petrol stations to British Telecommunications Plc after Mercury Communications Ltd to give up the private site end of the business to concentrate on high street sites; British Telecom will install up to 840 more pay telephones for Shell under the £10 five-year contract.
APPLE AMAZED BY US ITC RULING
Not surprisingly, Apple Computer Inc doesn't think too much of that absurd ruling by the US International Trade Commission that Japanese vendors are dumping active matrix displays in the US: it says the ruling made no sense but vowed that the battle was not yet over —‘This was an ‘Alice in Wonderland’ decision, it defies logic,’Apple's director of government law Jim Burger told Reuter, noting that the only company actually making the things in the US wants the tariff lifted.
PARTIAL BAN FOR IN-FLIGHT COMPUTER GAMES
The Safety Commission of the International Air Transport Association, IATA, has recommended a partial ban aboard aircraft on electronic devices such as computer games made by Nintendo Co Ltd, to avoid interference with aircraft systems: it calls for a ban on the use of all passenger-carried electronic devices during taxi, takeoff, initial climb approach and landing in a confidential letter written by the committee and obtained by Reuters.
TI TO RAISE INTEGRATED CIRCUIT PRODUCTION
Texas Instruments Japan Ltd plans to raise production of integrated circuits for use in liquid crystal diode display drivers to 450,000 a year from the present 100,000; it is looking for $500m a year in the things by 1996, for 15-fold growth.
DELTA BUY EMC SYMMETRIX STORAGE DEVICES
EMC Corp, Hopkinton, Massachusetts has sold more than $10m-worth of 4800 Symmetrix Integrated Cached Disk Array storage devices to Delta Air Lines, Atlanta, Georgia: Delta previously used IBM Corp kit exclusively, namely 3380s, 3880s, 3090s and 3990s, but has been replacing them with Symmetrix 4400 and 4800 systems since November 1991; EMC claims that 15,000 square feet of floor space has been saved as a result; it also attests to a 50% performance improvement over cached 3380s for reservation systems running on IBM's 3090 Model 400, a performance increase of between 30% and 50% with Airline Control Program and a performance boost of 30% to 40% with MVS, running off Hitachi Ltd EX 100s.
BOOZ, ALLEN & HAMILTON BUY THINKING MACHINE
Cambridge, Massachusetts-based Thinking Machines Corp has sold one of its new massively parallel CM-5 Scale 3 computers to US management and technology consultants Booz, Allen & Hamilton, McLean, Virginia: the machine will be used as a ‘computing powerhouse’ in the firm's System Resource Center; Booz Allen specialises in data analysis, scheduling and database applications for government and industry and is currently developing massively parallel applications for identifying fraud by analysing transaction data, and applications that analyse credit card sales to track customers' purchasing behaviour.
OSF RETHINKS LICENCE PRICE
Sources say Novell Inc has already sent scouts to call on David Tory at the Open Software Foundation with the message that it could not possibly sell Unix with Motif at the kind of price the Foundation charges for a licence: it says the Foundation is now redoing its sums.
CONVERTS TO THE GALILEO CAUSE
The Galileo group of end users and system integrators pushing for a common graphical front-end on different types of computers are to meet during UniForum in San Francisco this month: a couple of the Baby Bells and Mitre Corp are said to be latest converts to the cause.
COMMON ENVIRONMENT FOR DESKTOP INTERFACES
A common application environment for a range of desktop interfaces, including Open Look, Motif, X.desktop, Hewlett-Packard Co VUE and OS/2 is due at UniForum this month: at the very least it will include specifications enabling independent software vendors to develop applications with features — such as install procedures — that are recognised and handled accordingly by each of the graphical front-ends.
MAXIM NETWORKS ANNOUNCE FRAME RELAY ACCESS WAN SWITCHES
Maxim Networks Ltd, based in Weston-Super-Mare, Somerset has announced the introduction of Frame Relay access on its Ecom IS-24 and 72 wide area network switches: implemented on existing switches as a software upgrade, this capability enables the switch to support line transmission speeds of up to 512Kbps; no word on pricing for it.
SIEMENS NIXDORF SIGN COMPUTER 100 AS VAR
Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG has signed up Reading, Berkshire-based Computer 100 Ltd as a value-added reseller: Computer 100 will supply Siemens Nixdorf's Beetle electronic point-of-sale terminals and personal computers bundled with its bespoke ‘news management’ software applications for confectioners, tobacconists and newsagents; the software deals with everything from the automation of newspaper and magazine orders to customer billing and the management of newspaper rounds; the agreement is part of Siemens Nixdorf's current strategy of targeting niche markets, and Computer 100 claims to have over 80% of the total installed newsagents market in Europe.
TWO NEW CONTRACTS FOR SIMBASE SOFTWARE
CGI Informatique SA announced the signing of two new contracts for its stock and share management software, Simbase, with Banque de Neuflize Schlumberger Mallet and Paribas Suisse: the Banque NSM, a subsidiary of ABN Amro Bank, Europe's sixth largest banking group, chose Simbase to remake its stock and share processing system; Paribas Suisse, a subsidiary of Groupe Paribas, purchased the Simbase modules Share Operations and Portfolio Coupons and Movements.
ANSWERS PROMISED AT NOVELL BRAINSHARE
Novell Inc's BrainShare ‘93 get-together in Utah, March 22 to 26, is promising to come up with answers to questions like ‘Can Microsoft Corp NT and NetWare co-exist?’
‘What exactly is Novell's Unix strategy?’ and ‘What is Novell's vision of distributed computing?’
John Landry of Lotus Development Corp, Philippe Kahn of Borland International Inc and John Sculley of Apple Computer Inc have also been booked to speak at the event.
‘HOW TO MAKE MONEY WITH…’
We have always said that it is not for nothing that the Unix prompts are dollar and percentage signs and at last somebody out there has the common sense to recognise that fact too: the new Unix Reseller Show, set for May 4 to 6 in Dallas, is blatantly promoting itself with the slogan ‘How To Make Money With Unix’; if that doesn't bring the punters piling in, nothing will.
X/OPEN LICENCE DIGITAL's REMOTE TASK INVOCATION
Reading-based standards organisation X/Open Co Ltd has picked one of Digital Equipment Corp's key transaction processing technologies as part of its standard for distributed transaction processing: X/Open has licensed the company's Remote Task Invocation technology, a protocol for implementing remote procedure calls developed for the Multivendor Integration Architecture consortium; it is the basis of the Transactional Remote Procedure Call X/Open just released and unites OSI/TP and Software Foundation's Distributed Computing Environment.
DINERS CLUB FRANCE CHOOSE CARDPAC
Funny how with all their computers and name-matching, these people never seem to come up with offers of anything one actually wants: Diners Club France has chosen Cardpac, Sema Group Plc's software package for managing credit cards, to support a ‘new commercial strategy and to develop its financial and non-financial services’ in a contract said to be worth between $1.45m and $1.8m: ‘We will use Cardpac to follow our clients’activity and to construct a database segmented by expenses, in order to understand client profiles better and to adapt our offers to their needs,’said Rolf Harff, managing director of Diners Club France.
HYPERSOFT ADD ICL COBOL TO APPLICATION BROWSER
Hassocks, West Sussex-based distributor Hypersoft Ltd has added ICL Plc Cobol support, to its ‘mainframe to micro’ analysis tool, Application Browser: it's a move designed to fill the gap in the market for analysis tools, which tend to be written for IBM Corp mainframes; the combined use of ICL Cobol and embedded languages like IDMS removes the threat of syntax errors, so easing re-engineering and maintenance processes; Application Browser runs under MS-DOS and costs £4,000, the company said.
RACAL-TRANSCOM TO SUPPLY SAUDI TERMINALS
Under a joint project with the Saudi Arabian Banking Industry, Salisbury, Wiltshire-based Racal-Transcom Ltd is to supply the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia with a credit-debit card payment system based on its TCL200 terminals; the specially customised terminals can print receipts in Arabic, English or a mix of the two and will also use personal identification codes for added security; over 1,000 terminals will be installed in shops this year with a target of 10,000 terminals aimed for by the end of 1995; no value for the order was disclosed.
PHILOSOPHICAL DIFFERENCES AT APPLIX
After 10 months as Applix Inc vice-president of marketing, D J Long up and quit last week citing philosophical differences with management.
XOREN ANNOUNCE MULTI-POLL VERSION 2
Xoren Computing Ltd, based in London, has announced version 2 of its Multi-Poll polling software package for a central host VAX computer: the software enables personal computers, Unix systems and VAXes at multiple remote branches to be telephone-polled by the central host, and is being targeted at vertical markets including retailing, distribution and banking; new enhancements include procedures for setting up site details, lists of files to be transferred, modem details and re-try procedures, and reports and performance statistics; no word yet on any prices for it.
UNIX EXPO ATTENDEES REPRESENT HEFTY PURCHASING POWER
Unix Expo had an independent survey taken and found that its 1992 attendees represent a hefty $10,000m in purchasing power for Unix and open systems: networking is the strategic focus at the exhibition.
IBM BOASTS AMAZING MTBF FIGURES
Amazing, isn't it — despite all those contamination problems that have hit various recent models of IBM Corp's mainframe disk drives, according to Electronic News, the things still boast a mean time between failures of two to three million hours — they're must be a lot of irked users wondering just who it is that is happily storing and retrieving data on their hours.