

APPLE SHOWS MAC APPLICATION SERVICES FOR POWERPC…
Apple Computer Inc previewed its forthcoming Macintosh Application Services software for the PowerPC RISC chip in Paris yesterday, at the launch of the new PowerPC supporters club Power Open Association Inc.
The software, which includes a native implementation of the Macintosh Toolkit for the PowerPC architecture, enables well-behaved Macintosh applications to run within an X Window on PowerPC and IBM Rios-based systems.
The demonstration, using an IBM RS/6000 Model 560 — said to be the equivalent of a PowerPC system — was shown running WordPerfect for Macintosh ‘faster than the fastest Quadra’, according to PowerOpen's new president, Domenic LaCava.
Macintosh Application Services includes the Macintosh System 7 Finder, a Motorola 68040 emulator, the native toolkit, and Macintosh System Services for memory management and input-output to files and devices.
Many Macintosh applications spend up to 90% of processing time within the Toolbox, according to Apple, which is why a native implementation was developed.
A multi-mode code switcher will enable 68000 and new PowerPC applications code to run side by side.
It will be available to PowerPC users as the first systems start emerging over the next two quarters.
Hewlett-Packard Co Precision Architecture RISC and Sun Microsystems Inc Sparc versions may follow as part of Apple's Cat in the Hat project (CI No 2,090).
…
AS THE POWEROPEN ASSOCIATION IS BORN IN PARIS
Meanwhile the PowerOpen Association Inc unveiled itself with five sponsor members — Apple Computer Inc, Compagnie des Machines Bull SA, IBM Corp, Motorola Inc and Thomson-CSF SA — spending an initial $750,000 and annual $250,000 to fund the Billerica, Massachusetts-based outfit.
Harris Corp and Tadpole Technology Plc are Principal members, spending a lesser $150,000 per annum.
DEC veteran Dominic LaCava is president, and a further eight to 12 staff should come on board this year.
Sponsor members get a vote on the board and on all committees and working groups, principal members get representation on the board and committees, with one vote on all working groups.
Associate membership costs $100, and is mainly aimed at software developers, 40 of which endorsed the effort.
PowerOpen will publish an Application Binary Interface — based on IBM's AIX — this summer, along with test and verification software for both system vendors and application developers.
The aim is to create a single binary standard for software running on PowerPC systems.
At least one ‘multi-million unit company’ is said to have signed up for PowerPC, and should reveal itself within two months, PowerOpen said.
AST PLANS EUROPEAN PLANT
AST Research Inc, Irvine says it will open a manufacturing plant in Europe by the end of the year, but has not yet chosen a location.
It has added shifts at Irvine and is expanding its Taiwan and Hong Kong factories to meet rapacious demand.
FAULT-TOLERANT 80486 SYSTEM FIRM SENTINEL GOES TO HELIONETICS
Irvine, California-based technology holding company Helionetics Inc has signed a binding letter of intent to acquire Sentinel Systems Inc, which is designing the Sentry-E fault-tolerant computer in Horsham, Pennsylvania and has a ‘major telecommunications company’ lined up as its first customer.
Terms of the letter call for Helionetics to provide $750,000 in working capital for the rest of this year, and to pay up to 1.4m in new Helionetics shares, issue of these being tied to Sentinel achieving pre-set performance goals between now and the end of next year.
The Sentry-E machine, built around 50MHz 80486 chips, is due to ship in the fourth quarter.
The system is hardware compatible with any Intel iAPX-86-based computer and uses the EISA bus; it is designed to run under the Unix, OS/2 and Pick operating systems.
Designed as a superserver or mid-range multi-tasking system it has a 400Mb drive, 16Mb memory, SCSI adaptor, and serial parallel port.
An entry-level system is $49,500; extra memory and processors are available.
Sentinel has been working on the concept of the machine for eight years and says it will be supplying the systems to five major customers, for use in insurance as well as telecommunications applications, in the third quarter.
It is expected to see initial revenues from the Sentry-E as in the fourth quarter, with first-year sales put at about $25m.
COMPAQ MOVES TO STREET PRICING WITH ITS NEW PRODUCT BLITZ
Compaq Computer Corp accompanied its new product blitz yesterday with the news that it will no longer publish suggested list prices for its machines in the US — but unlike IBM Corp with its mainframes, it's not tearing up the price list.
Instead it will take a stab at forecasting the street price for its machines, giving the price it reckons that resellers will typically ask.
The company's first entry for the embryonic multimedia computer market is the ProLinea CDS, which comes with a CD-ROM drive, 16-bit sound board, modem, external speakers and four CD-ROM titles at $1,700.
The price cuts are 9% on notebooks, including the Contura 3/25 at $1,500, the 3/25c at $2,000 and the colour Lite/25c at $3,000; 15% on desktops, so that the cheapest 80386 desktop model without a screen is now $750 and the Deskpro 486 is $1,400; the Pagemarq printer is now $2,600.
The company unveiled 33 new desktop models, including an 80486-based Prolinea PC with the company's proprietary local bus graphics at $1,100, and a ProLinea 4/66 at $2,000.
There are new 80486-based Contura notebooks, starting with a 4/25 with a black and white display that is $2,000, a 4/CX model weighing 6.7 lbs with 8.4’ colour display at $3,300m, and a 4/25C, same weight, with a 9.5’colour display and trackball at $2,700.
The new mid-range DeskPro/i models, starting at $1,850, are preconfigured with a 16-bit Ethernet network interface controller.
Higher-end models of the 80486 DeskPro/M now have 8Mb standard at from $2,400.
New 340Mb hard disk models of its desktops and a new colour 151FS Full Square flatter monitor complete the line-up.
MAJOR COLLABORATIVE EFFORT ON APPLICATIONS OF NEURAL NETWORKS SPONSORED BY THE UK
The UK's Department of Trade and Industry is investing £5.75m in a three year initiative aimed at promoting awareness of neural computing techniques among British companies.
The programme, which is being managed by consultants Touche Ross, will combine a series of promotional activities — workshops, exhibitions, production of a range of reference literature and a hotline service — with the setting up of six special user and supplier clubs that will develop pilot neural network applications.
The research is to be jointly funded by the club members, who have so far allocated £2m, and which has been matched by government funds.
Work will be carried out on applications for the following areas: automatic identification; financial forecasting; industrial information processing; process control and monitoring; condition monitoring and sound assessment; and neurodata, which is concerned with data exploration or mining.
It is hoped that some 6,000 organisations could eventually benefit from involvement with the project.
Closing the perceived gap between the UK and the US and Japan, which are believed to be three years ahead, is another aim — though that is not to say that the UK is trailing in all areas.
Les Wray of Stockport-based Recognition Research Ltd reckons the UK has the lead in video monitoring, for example.
Emulation
Although some of the participants develop hardware — Hampshire-based Neural Technologies Ltd and Gloucester-based Micro Circuit Engineering Ltd have collaborated to develop a Neural Instruction Set Processor — the project clubs will mostly concentrate on software development.
This reflects what several of the vendors argue is a more-cost effective approach to neural computing, involving the emulation of neural nodes in software.
Recognition Research for example has a Windows-based package, Autonets, which can run on a personal computer.
Under the government scheme, Recognition Research will jointly head the ‘neurodata’ club with software consultancy Logica Cambridge Ltd.
The two are aiming to develop three demonstrators for advanced pattern recognition systems that could be used for data analysis.
The systems will involve the processing of database records through a neural network, which can then reveal patterns and relationships between data.
These will then be combined with other statistical and advanced graphics techniques that will enable users to visualise the model generated by the network.
It is anticipated that the systems could be useful for a variety of applications including fleet management, customer credit control, plant loading, targeting direct mail campaigns, fraud detection, retail and materials analysis.
One important use for the last is the use of ‘multi-phase flow analysis’ for the oil industry.
This technique involves the use of a sensor which is attached to the oil pipes.
The sensor feeds the network with data about the flow of material through the pipes, which is then be analysed to determine the proportions of oil to water and sand.
Membership fees for the club are £5,000.
Meantime, a consortium of developers headed by AEA Technology, the trading name of the UK Atomic Energy Authority, is working on the use of neural networks for noise measuring, condition monitoring of rotating machinery, alarm detection and fault diagnosis.
This is crucial for the construction of aircraft cabins and trains where high levels of noise and vibration are unacceptable, and similarly for motor vehicle design, where noise management is key for competitiveness.
The bulk of the technical work involved in the project will be carried out by the Motor Industry Research Association, Southampton University's Institute of Sound and Vibration Research and Oxford University.
Club membership is £12,000.
Research into the use of neural networks for engineering processes including fault detection and diagnosis is being headed by Surrey-based EDS-Scicon Ltd in conjunction with Newcastle University's Department of Chemical and Process Engineering.
Neural networks are useful for process control because they can interpret so-called soft sensor readings — the inferred measurements from groups of sensors; can cope with complex, variable systems; and can be used to build statistical models.
EDS-Scicon and Newcastle University will use the networks in oil, chemical, bio-chemical, pharmaceutical, water, power, food, beverage, metal producing and processing, paper and glass industrial processing systems like distillation, fermentation and melting.
Interested parties have the choice of full club membership for £10,000 or associate membership for £2,500.
Combined talents from Leatherhead, Surrey-based ERA Technology Ltd and Kings College, London are working on neural information processing systems, in particular for monitoring, sensory, control and image analysis.
Membership is open to those with a general interest in using neural techniques, those wanting more detailed involvement, and to hardware and software developers.
Financial forecasting is the focus for the neural systems to be co-developed by London Business School and University College in London.
They will be researching systems for predicting fluctuations in the foreign exchanges, for stock and bond  valuation , for commodity price prediction, for tactical asset allocation and for risk and liability management.
Such systems require expertise in both financial  engineering — the choice of economic variables, correlation and use of multi-parameter data sets — as well as network engineering.
Proven
Still, they have proven themselves to be extremely effective, when compared with conventional methods particularly because of their speed.
As a result, they have attracted vast government investment in the US, Japan and Europe too.
Club members, which are likely to be drawn from banks, insurance companies, securities houses — and indeed any large company with extensive overseas dealings — will be able to second staff to the London Business School during development work to gain hands-on experience.
Finally, there is the Axon club, jointly managed by Keele University, Micro Circuit Engineering Ltd, Neural Technologies Ltd and the UK Trade Association for Automatic Identification Manufacturers.
Their aim is to develop three demonstrator systems for small to medium sized businesses.
These include real time data analysis which can be used for speech, vibration and signal analysis; pattern recognition for finger print, face and signature recognition; and intelligent data management for control systems, for instance multiple sensor analysis, fault and trend detection, management statistics and transaction processing.
Membership costs £5,000.
SUN's SCOTT McNEALY TELLS IT HOW IT IS ABOUT CHIPS IN VAPOUR, WINDOWS SUPPORT AND SPARC SUPPLIES
Sun Microsystems Inc chief executive Scott McNealy is never at a loss for something to say, and has been sounding off about some of the current bees in his bonnet.
He says he's sick and tired of the press Intel Corp's getting about chips it can't deliver.
Sun too has chips in development, he says — seven of them in fact.
So McNealy says he's going to put his people on a road show to compare vapourchips to vapourchips.’
Among the ones they're likely to tout are the MicroSparc 2, 3 and 4 that they are working on.
The current Tsunami run meanwhile is said to be exceeding expectations in speed and yield.
On the software side, SunSoft Inc has been secretly working on writing a Microsoft Corp Windows application programming interface in a clean room so as to avoid the possibility of copyright infringement lawsuits, so that Solaris will be able to run a copy of Excel, let's say, bought from high street software shop.
Being a man of a few select words, Scott McNealy claims it ‘works good and runs fast.’
Logically, it's called WAPI.
McNealy told Wall Street analysts last week that Sun has more 50MHz Vikings than it knows what to do with and that Texas Instruments Inc ‘could bury’ Sun in the chips if Sun would let it.
Actual quantities, which exceed internal expectations of only a month ago, boil down to between 100,000 and 200,000 units a quarter, which in turn means that by the end of the current quarter Sun expects to be able to fill all the back orders it has for Model 41 Sparcstation 10s plus the orders it receives in the intervening weeks.
McNealy also said that the hard-won 45MHz and 50MHz versions of the Viking, also known as SuperSparc, would be abundant by the end of the second quarter, thanks to a third iteration of the masks.
Silicon availability has McNealy bragging that Sun will have more multiprocessing servers out with customers by the end of this year than all the rest of the industry combined in the history of the world.
On Microsoft's Windows New Technology, the Sun chief told Wall Street last week that he reckoned ‘it'll be a long time before information managers start drinking that Kool-Aid.’
MADGE NETWORKS ENHANCES SMART HUB FOR UNSHIELDED CABLE, SNMP
Madge Networks Ltd, Chalfont St Giles, Buckinghamshire has announced that its intelligent hub, the SmartCAU, has been enhanced to support unshielded twisted pair cabling and Simple Network Management Protocol network management.
It is set for April release, and the list price is to be £1,300 while existing users qualify for a free upgrade.
Madge has also added SNMP support to its Smart Ringbridge stand-alone Token Ring bridge-router, as well as a Windows-based graphical management application, the TrueView Bridge Manager.
This replaces the existing MS-DOS-based control program which enables network administrators to manage the bridge from a personal computer workstation connected to the Token Ring network.
Shipping at the end of March, the new version is to cost £3,500, while again existing users can get a free upgrade.
VISUAL EDGE HAS NEW RELEASE OF ITS UIM/X GRAPHICAL USER INTERFACE
The Montreal, Canada-based Visual Edge Software Ltd will introduce version 2.5 of its UIM/X Motif graphical user interface builder in May, at from $5,000.
Enhancements to the new release include the ability to build graphical interface object classes that comply with the Object  Management Group's Common Object Request Broker Architecture C application programming interface specification.
The tool, which now supports Motif 2.1, will also generate C++ graphical interface objects.
UIM/X OEM customers include Control Data Systems Inc, Digital Equipment Corp, IBM Corp, Silicon Graphics Inc, Data General Corp, Hewlett-Packard Co and Motorola Inc — distributors are It Connexions Pty Ltd, Australia; Patzschke and Rasp GmbH, Germany; Uniras SA, Europe; Metavision SA, France; Protek Inc, Europe; Choreo Systems Inc, Canada; and Bluestone Consulting Inc and Black & White Software Inc in the US.
NOVELL ADOPTS GRADIENT TECHNOLOGIES' LICENCE MANAGEMENT SOFTWARE FOR USE IN NETWARE
Novell Inc and Gradient Technologies Inc have cut a strategic deal that will put Gradient's software licensing technology into NetWare.
Besides an Electronic Software Licensing NetWare Loadable Module, the partners will deliver tools providing access to licensing services that licence-enabled NetWare applications can be built on.
They expect to co-develop a significantly enhanced version of Gradient's NetLS licence server technology, part of its iFor/LS suite, in a NetWare Loadable Module optimised for NetWare 3.
X and 4.
X.
It will be transport-independent to support emerging comms protocols.
Availability is expected later this year.
NetLS software developer kits are due in the third quarter.
Pricing has not been set.
NEWBRIDGE NETWORKS ACKNOWLEDGES THAT LINE OF ASYNCHRONOUS TRANSFER MODE PRODUCTS ARE COMING
Newbridge Networks Inc, Ottawa, Ontario is dressing up three Asynchronous Transfer Mode hubs for launch this month, according to a report in Communications Week International.
They will make up Newbridge's Vivid line of Asynchronous Transfer Mode products, and the report says that the range is to include a 10Base-T Ethernet hub with an Asynchronous Transfer Mode interface, another 10Base-T hub with local Asynchronous Transfer Mode switching capabilities, and a high-end Asynchronous Transfer Mode local network hub which incorporates integral routing.
Newbridge confirms that it is preparing a range of such products, but will not confirm exactly what these are.
GETRONICS BIDS FOR SECOND DUTCH DIGITAL CELLULAR LICENCE, TEAMED WITH RABOBANK, BACK IN THE FRAY
Rabobank NV and Amsterdam-based Getronics NV have teamed up to bid for the second Dutch Groupe Speciale Mobile digital cellular licence.
The duo face competition from at least five bank-led consortia, all vying to operate the network, which should be up and running by 1995, with the licence award expected this autumn.
The move is an about-face for Rabobank, which recently announced that it had dropped out of the race for the licence.
But now it says that telecommunications is a strategically important market.
Rabo owns an independent facilities management firm, Facet, which will run the network should it win the bid.
IMI's UNIPLEX OUTLINES ITS PLANS TO DOMINATE THE GROUPWARE MARKET
Uniplex Ltd, the Hemel Hempstead-based Unix office automation stalwart, has begun to re-fashion itself as a groupware house, an effort that will take another 10 to 12 months to realise.
The first pieces of Jason, once also called Medley, its long-awaited graphical object-oriented next-generation product for client-server environments, is being rolled out as the tip of an overall strategy it has dubbed Nouveau.
Jason, now officially styled onGO, initially consists of two modular components: onGO Office, an X400-based mail transport system with built-in diary and scheduling co-developed with Hewlett-Packard Co, and onGO Write/Paint/Draw, a WYSIWYG document publisher whose titling alone suggests competitor Island Graphics is next on Uniplex's hit list (CI No 2,109).
OnGO Office is the core element behind Uniplex's client-server architecture, providing enterprise-wide network and mail communications, X500 routings and gateways, TCP/IP and open systems interconnect support and a set of object libraries.
It is also the interface to Novell Inc NetWare, facsimile and telex.
Office is the transport mechanism that down the road will enable Uniplex to break into mail-enabled process automation, the true definition of groupware.
Before it gets to the groupware level Uniplex says it will have to license or acquire pieces of technology.
Already it has a licence arrangement with object maven Hyperdesk Corp and apparently intends to use the Object Management Group's Object Request Broker.
IMI Consulting
In essence Groupware requires customisation since business processes differ office to office, industry to industry.
Uniplex is putting itself in a position to do that internally with the acquisition three weeks ago of IMI Consulting, a $2.3m Connecticut-based subsidiary of Uniplex's $1,500m parent company IMI Plc specialised in downsizing, gateways, SNA and big computing environments.
It is now a part of Uniplex US and will be selling onGO.
Uniplex says it will provide application programming interfaces and gateways between onGO and its existing software to ensure migration and coexistence.
Data General Corp, which will be co-developing subsequent releases, has built its office strategy around onGO and so onGO will appear first in April on its AViiON boxes and IBM Corp RS/6000s.
HP9000s, Santa Cruz and Solaris 2.
X machines will be added in the summer with Alpha/OSF and UnixWare for both Intel and MIPS coming in the fall.
It will start with X Window and Motif clients, adding Windows, character-based, NT, OS/2 and Macs over the course of the year.
Uniplex probably rightly foresees Windows predominating at the client and Unix at the server.
OnGO's next enhancement should include multi-level security, X500 standardised directories, database links, Object Linking and Embedding support and intelligent filter capabilities.
Graphically oriented programming tools, application programming interfaces and cross-application macro  facilities will also be offered.
Office's price is $70 a user for 100 users; Write/Paint/Draw is $300 a user for 100 users.
APPLIX SETS ARCADE RAPID APPLICATIONS DEVELOPMENT PACK FOR UNIFORUM
Applix Inc, the Westborough, Massachusetts-based office software company, is ready to launch a new rapid applications development environment at the UniForum trade show next month.
Arcade, expected to include an applications builder, object editor and browser and SQL links to the Big Four databases, will share the stage with Asterix 3.0, the latest version of the company's integrated office automation suite, currently out on beta test at a number of customer sites.
The product includes a major extension to the scripting language capabilities of Asterix that enable the product to be customised for specific customer needs.
Asterix has been put up under UnixWare, and will also announce full support for Hewlett-Packard's OpenMail at UniForum.
Richard Davis, Applix executive vice-president, said that the company had a separate development team working on Microsoft NT, but would not release anything until customers started a king for it.
Applix has now established offices in the UK at Reading in Berkshire, and a French office in Paris.
A German office, in Frankfurt or Munich, is also planned.
The firm, which is challenging the dominance of Uniplex in the Unix office package market, is looking for European value-added resellers and is expanding its staff.
PARSYTEC APPLIES PARALLEL PROCESSING TO OPTICAL CHARACTER RECOGNITION
Aachen-based supercomputing company Parsytec GmbH has demonstrated a new high-speed parallel processing-based optical character recognition system that is not foxed by variations in type font or size.
The company says this is a major advantage over many existing systems that are either too slow — or even incapable — of providing reliable character recognition.
Prosar, which is shorthand for Professional Scan and Recognition, has a 10,000 page per day output.
Parsytec reckons it is ideal for bank, insurance, legal, database and government operations where it can be used to automate the keying in of information for processing, archival and retrieval.
The system comprises a floor standing tower of vector parallel processors that work with a Fujitsu flat-bed scanner and output to a personal computer or departmental minicomputer.
Parsytec plans to release an entire family of character recognition systems with prices starting at £15,000.
SUNSOFT CHIEF CALLS FOR A UNIX INTERNATIONAL ALLIANCE AGAINST NT
SunSoft Inc president Ed Zander, speaking at the recent Unix International members meeting in New Orleans that was closed to the press, issued a call to arms against Microsoft Corp, making a strong plea for the industry to come together and adopt common interface specifications and common marketing programmes.
Apparently he suggested that the common Unix brand and the common interface specification be owned by the industry as represented by Unix International Inc.
Of course that would have to mean Open Software Foundation founders Hewlett-Packard Co, Digital  Equipment Corp and IBM Corp taking part.
Our spies tell us Hewlett-Packard and DEC would have come to the Unix International meeting if they weren't so afraid to being found out.
IBM unfortunately didn't respond to the invitation.
BREATHING FIRE, UNGERMANN BASS UNLEASHES ITS DRAGONSWITCH FOR VIRTUAL LOCAL AREA NETWORKS
Tandem Computers Inc's San Jose-based Ungermann Bass Inc has revealed details of its  Virtual Network Architecture, with a promise that the first products will appear in June.
The company's approach is intended to enable network managers simply to define and re-define virtual local networks so that teams within a company can be brought together electronically and then disbanded, irrespective of geographic location.
It is an idea that the fans of Asynchronous Transport Mode technology have been touting for some time, but Ungermann is shying away from Asynchronous Transfer Mode to the desktop at the moment.
Instead, the initial implementation will appear as an Ethernet switch called the DragonSwitch, which fits into its existing Access/One hubs.
Ethernet switches are nothing new: both Kalpana Inc and 3Com Corp have implementations.
These jettison the shared medium of Ethernet in favour of a star-shaped configuration in which each networked device sits at the end of its own private Ethernet segment, where it gets the benefit of the whole 10Mbps.
However Ungermann is the first seriously to use the architecture as a means to provide virtual networks.
A switch by itself is not enough, so key to Virtual Network Architecture is a new version of its network management, NetDirector/VNA.
This is a new module that runs on top of the existing NetDirector system.
Using it, network managers can define virtual networks by simply dragging users or resources into workgroups.
The software will also work across multiple domains, so that network managers in different parts of the organisation can simultaneously tweak the network; this is achieved by giving them simultaneous access to the central management database.
Initially Virtual Network Architecture will be limited to the local area network: each DragonSwitch module supports 16 Ethernet ports and up to five modules can be slotted into each Access/One chassis.
Inter-module traffic is passed over the chassis' internal PlusBus.
The switch's processing power is furnished by four Intel 80960 RISC processors, one of which handles communication with the bus, while the others act as the switching and routing engines.
Fighting talk
Given Ungermann's fighting talk about Asynchronous Transfer Mode to the desktop, the Dragonswitch seems something of an anti-climax, despite the company's claims that, combined with Virtual Network Architecture it ‘provides many of the benefits of Asynchronous Transfer Mode technology on today's Ethernet networks’.
Ungermann now says that Asynchronous Transfer Mode to the desktop will follow sometime next year.
On the other hand, Virtual Network Architecture is nicely positioned to be scalable to the wide area.
The company hopes to extend the architecture by getting router manufacturers to lend their support.
Existing partners Wellfleet Communications Inc and Advanced Computer Communications Inc jumped in last week to give their blessings, although neither could say exactly what supporting the technology will require of them.
Nonetheless Ungermann says it is confident that it will have the wide area support ready by the end of the year.
During the first quarter of 1994 it says that, it will add support for Asynchronous Transfer Mode across the wide area, which will presumably require a wide area Asynchronous Transfer Mode board for the Access/One.
Ungermann says that all of its future products will support Virtual Network Architecture, and that the DragonSwitch is just the first product in a family named after the mythical reptile.
BRS RECASTS ITS MAINFRAME TEXT RETRIEVAL SYSTEM FOR UNIX
The London-based UK arm of document retrieval specialist BRS Software Products Inc — a division of InfoPro Technologies Inc, McLean, Virginia — has introduced BRS/Search 6.1, an enhanced version of its document retrieval system for client-server Unix environments.
The software, which was first introduced as long as 12 years ago for mainframe environments, is designed to enable multiple users to search and retrieve specific documents, on the basis of their content, rather than on indexed component labels.
BRS/Search can handle large volumes of unstructured textual information by recording the position of every word.
In comparison, traditional document management systems developed on top of relational database management systems rely on a pre-defined indexing system, which sub-divides a document by title and paragraph, not on its content as such.
This restricts text retrieval, BRS says.
The client-server version of BRS/Search can store text, images, graphics, audio and video documents.
It comes with BRS/Word, a WordPerfect filter that imports and exports WordPerfect 5.1 documents to and from BRS/Search.
It includes Ally, a document analysis module that details statistics on word  occurrences .
The BRS/Thesaurus is a library of  hierarchical word lists.
The system also includes BRS/Demon, a data entry editor; BRS/Native Mode, graphical toolkit for command level user interfaces; and BRS/Views, a character-based interface toolkit.
BRS/Search also includes BRS/Vision, a Windows-style interface.
It provides object-linking and graphical displays of  hierarchical structures like the  thesaurus and tool boxes.
BRS is currently developing Win32 application programming interface extensions for Windows NT which will be available by the end of the year.
BRS users are predominantly found in the legal, government, security and publishing sectors.
The system can search up to 16 databases simultaneously and works with a variety of relational database systems, including Oracle, Informix, Ingres and Sybase.
Available now, the system is priced from £2,000, depending on the number of users and system.
The company, which has four US and four European offices, has branched out further and has now established an Asia-Pacific operation for which it chose Singapore.
CHEYENNE SOFTWARE OFFERS DATA SECURITY BUNDLE FOR NETWARE
Camberley, Surrey-based Cheyenne Software Inc has a Data Security Bundle, which provides server-based integrated network data management and virus protection for NetWare networks.
Including ARCserver 4.0, Cheyenne's automated back-up, restore and data management suite, the Bundle also includes InocuLAN virus prevention and detection; no price given.
NOVELL FORMS A DEDICATED SYSTEMS BUSINESS UNIT
Novell Inc has formed a new business unit at the old Digital Research base in Monterey, California to focus on helping customers use commodity hardware and Novell's client operating systems to build low-cost turnkey systems for manufacturing and service industry applications such as manufacturing process control, industrial automation and support of point-of-sale terminals — where it claims the Digital Research FlexOS has become the standard.
The company says the Dedicated Systems Business Unit was formed in response to customer demand for additional networking functionality in dedicated systems, which it conceives of as dedicated systems with low system overhead, fast performance, built-in networking, real time response and graphics capabilities.
The Dedicated Systems Business Unit will aim to ease the integration of dedicated systems into enterprise networks by marketing Novell's client operating systems — FlexOS, PalmDOS, DR DOS and Personal NetWare to manufacturers and value-added resellers that specialise in the development of such systems.
Developer kits for these are available and the Dedicated Systems Business Unit offers training and consulting services.
SHARE & BOND ISSUES
McCaw Cellular Communications Inc, Kirkland, Washington plans to redeem all its outstanding 8% convertible senior subordinated debentures due June 15 2008 and all outstanding 11.50% convertible senior subordinated discount debentures due June 15 2008.
The redemption price on 8% debentures will be 104.8% of the principal amount, the price of the 11.50% debentures will be 100% of the principal amount, plus accrued interest in each case.
The current conversion price for the $114m 8% debentures outstanding is $29.75 per share of class A common stock, for the $285m 11.50% debentures is 23.25 shares of class A stock per $1,000 principal.
Wind River Systems Inc, Alameda, California developer of the VxWorks real-time operating system kernel, has filed to go public with an initial offer of 1.9m shares, 1.7m of them new, at a target price of between $8 and $10 per share.
The $13m or so net proceeds will be used for product development and working capital.
Co-managers are by Hambrecht & Quist and Wessels, Arnold & Henderson.
COMPANY RESULTS
Aydin Corp has reported fourth quarter net profits down 54.4% at $1.3m, on turnover down 10.6% at $34.9m; net profit for the year to December 31 was down 34.5% at $7.1m, on turnover that fell 8.4% to $145.2m.
Net earnings per share fell 53.7% to $0.25 in the quarter, 34.3% to $1.40 in the year.
Cimco Inc has turned in third quarter net down 36% at $93,312, on turnover up 4.8% at $17.3m; net profit for the nine months was up 44.8% at $742,360, on turnover that rose 55.2% to $55.2m.
Net earnings per share fell 40% to $0.03 in the quarter, rose 47.1% to $0.25 in the nine months.
Computer Language Research Inc has turned in fourth quarter net profits up 3,244.3% at $3.5m, after $1.1m gains from payment of debt this time and $1m restructuring charges last time, on turnover that fell by 1.4% at $31.2m; net profit for the year to December 31 was up 219.2% at $12.3m, after $5.7m gains from the cumulative effect of an accounting change, on turnover that fell by 4.1% to $111m.
Net earnings per share rose by 2,500% to $0.26 in the quarter, and by 217.9% to $0.89 in the year.
Continuum Co Inc has turned in third quarter net down 30.2% at $1.6m, on turnover down 6.8% at $30.2m; net profit for the nine months was up 10.8% at $4.8m, on turnover that fell 0.5% to $91.1m.
Net earnings per share fell 31.8% to $0.15 in the quarter, rose 9.8% to $0.45 in the nine months.
First Data Corp has reported fourth quarter net profits up 17.8% at $43.4m, on turnover up 8.6% at $323.4m; net profit for the year to December 31 was up 19.8% at $141.4m, on turnover that rose 17.5% to $1,205.3m.
Net earnings per share rose 11.4% to $0.39 in the quarter, and 15% to $1.30 in the year.
Designatronics Inc has reported first quarter net profit of $259,000 against losses of $10,000 last time, after $100,000 tax credits this time and $48,000 losses from discontinued operations last time, on turnover up 6.7% to $5.7m.
Net earnings per share stood at $0.09.
Comparisons with restated figures to reflect discontinued operations.
Impact Systems Inc saw third quarter net up 93.5% at $120,000, on turnover down 13.7% at $3.4m; net profit for the nine months stood at $302,000 against losses of $8m last time, after $6.8m charges related to the write-off of assets and restructuring, on turnover that fell 13.4% to $11.3m.
Net earnings per share remained at $0.01 in the quarter, amounted to $0.03 in the nine months.
Inmac Corp saw second quarter net losses of $17.7m, after $14.9m restructuring charges, up from losses of $1.7m last time, on turnover up 5.9% at $82.8m; mid-term net losses were $17.4m up from losses of $1.6m last time, on sales up 10.1% at $164.5m.
Microcom Inc saw third quarter net down 65.5% at $385,000, after $1.3m charges from the write-down of inventory and $1.5m restructuring gains, on turnover down 14.5% at $16.6m; net losses for the nine months stood at $7.1m, after $2.5m charges from the write-down of inventory and $4.3m restructuring gains, against profits of $2.4m last time, on turnover that fell 2.3% to $53.4m.
Net per share fell 63.6% to $0.04 in the quarter.
Mobile Telecommunications Technologies Inc has reported fourth quarter net profits of $1.3m against losses of $5m last time, on turnover up 16.3% at $28.8m; net losses for the year to December 31 amounted to $2.9m down from losses of $11.1m last time, on turnover that fell 87.6% to $112.6m.
Net per share amounted to $0.04 in the quarter.
Software Spectrum Inc has reported third quarter net profits up 41.9% at $1.9m, on turnover up 37.8% at $60.3m; net profit for the nine months was up 64.5% at $4.3m, on turnover that rose 39% to $159.7m.
Net earnings per share rose 20% to $0.48 in the quarter, 34.4% to $1.21 in the nine months.
Star Technologies Inc saw second quarter net losses of $283,000 against profits of $233,000 last time, on turnover down 47.2% at $4.9m; mid-term net losses amounted to $491,000 against profits of $571,000 last time, on turnover down by 38.2% at $11.6m.
Systems & Computer Technology Inc has reported first quarter net profit down 17.4% at $1.2m, after $384,000 tax credits this time and $399,000 last time, on turnover that rose 36.1% to $26.9m.
Net earnings per share fell by 16.7% to $0.10.
Televideo Systems Inc has reported a first quarter net loss of $49,000 after an investment gain of $853,000 from an affiliate, against a profit last time of $50,000, on turnover down 25.7% at $4.0m.
Tenera Ltd Partnership saw fourth quarter net profits of $592,000 against losses of $1.3m last time, after $1.3m non-recurring charges last time, on turnover down 13.2% at $9m; net profit for the year to December 31 were $795,000 against losses of $6.4m last time, after $7.5m non-recurring charges last time, on sales down 17% to $36.6m.
Net per share was $0.06 in the quarter, $0.08 in the year.
US Robotics Inc has reported first quarter net profit up 41% at $3.3m, on turnover up 32.6% to $33.1m.
Net per share rose by 36.4% to $0.30.
V Band Corp has turned in first quarter net losses of $442,000 up from losses of $281,000 last time, on turnover that dropped by 13.5% to $5.3m.
Vertex Communications Inc saw first quarter net profit up 29.2% at $793,000, on turnover up 13.6% to $12.5m.
Net per share rose by 27.8% to $0.23.
Wallace Computer Services Inc saw second quarter net profits up 6.1% at $11.6m, on turnover up 4.4% at $138.1m; mid-term net rose 7.3% to $21.6m, on turnover up 5.6% at $272m.
Net per share rose 6.1% to $0.52 in the quarter, 6.7% to $0.96 in the half.
Zitel Corp saw in first quarter net losses of $3.1m against $61,000 profits last time, on sales down 43.7% to $6.3m.
Comparisons made with restated figures to include results of CHI Systems Inc, acquired in October 1992 by pooling of interests.
ECHO LOGIC PROVIDE MAC APPLICATION SERVICES TECHNOLOGY
Nothing was mentioned at the PowerOpen event yesterday (see front), but it turns out that some of the enabling technology for Apple Computer Inc's Macintosh Application Services software for the PowerPC came from AT&T Co-backed start-up firm Echo Logic Inc (CI No 1,926).
ORACLE SUPPORT NOW INCLUDED IN MANMAN/X
Ask Computer Systems Inc has expanded its Manman/X business information system to include support for the Oracle database and says it has signed a worldwide pact with Oracle Systems Corp to become an Oracle Business Alliance Partner: the two will continue to offer their respective products directly to mutual customers, and maintain separate but co-ordinated support staffs.
SPRINT-BULGARIA JOINT VENTURE
Bulgaria is to set up a joint venture with the Sprint International division of Sprint Corp, Reuter reports from Sofia: Sprint-Bulgaria will build a public packet-switched data network for Bulgarian Telecommunications Co; Bulgaria has also invited foreign companies to submit tenders for a $230m project to upgrade the present telephone system.
IBM TO ANNOUNCE UNIX VERSION DB/2
IBM Corp is expected to to announce the Unix version of its DB/2 successor to OS/2 Database Manager next Tuesday, although the company will preview it in Paris on Friday.
ASK GET $8m CONTRACT FROM BARCLAYS
Barclays Bank Plc has given Ask Computer Systems Inc an $8m contract for Ingres relational database licences: the agreement covers licences for further deployment of existing Ingres applications worldwide, and their deployment in its UK branches; the applications, developed using Ingres/Windows4GL, will be accessed from X-terminals connected to Ingres databases on Unix servers — the bank is using RS/6000s — linked back to the central corporate data held in DB2 databases on IBM Corp mainframes.
HP GET UNIX SERVER CONTRACT FROM BOEING
Hewlett-Packard Co has a two-year contract with a one-year further option from Boeing Co's Boeing Computer Services unit to supply the Boeing Commercial Airplane Group's line-of-business application servers: the Unix servers will be distributed throughout the unit's office and manufacturing locations; terms were not disclosed.
NCR PRICE CUTS
NCR Corp cut prices by 11% to 19% on its NCR System 3000 model 3170 Notebook, and added a three-year extended warranty: end-user pricing is now from about $2,532 to $3,345.
BT APPLY TO FCC FOR LICENCE TO RESELL
British Telecommunications Plc confirmed plans to apply this week to the US Federal Communications Commission for a licence to resell international private lines and to offer switched services that will enable it to provide international virtual networks to large firms — but approval depends on further negotiation between the US and UK.
DELL RESPOND TO COMPAQ
Dell Computer Corp responded to Compaq Computer Corp's multimedia machine (see front) with two new multimedia personal computers of its own, the Valuestation 386 and 486, priced at $1,500 and $2,000: the smaller one is based on the Dell System 333s/L, while the Valuestation 486 is based on the Dell snap-together personal computer; they a factory installed Sound Blaster Pro or Sound Blaster 16 audio board, a CD-ROM drive, speakers, a microphone, applications installed on the hard drive, and CD-based software applications.
TSL HOLDINGS FILES FOR CHAPTER 11
Personal computer manufacturer TSL Holdings Inc has filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in US Bankruptcy Court in Santa Barbara.
IBM SHORTLIST VARIATIONS
IBM Corp's quest for a new chief executive appears to be narrowing, but you pays your money and you takes your choice when it comes to drawing up a list of front-runners — US PC Week reckons that the company will go for a chairman from outside and suggests Paul Stern and Perot Systems Corp chairman Morton Meyerson as the front-runners, with an internal chief executive, putting its money on Ellen Hancock and Bernard Puckett, but the Reuter shortlist is quite different, and has Lawrence Bossidy, chairman of Allied-Signal Corp out front, saying he has visited Armonk at least three or four times, Paul Stern is in there again, and John Sculley is back in the picture, with one source quoted as saying ‘The rumour is that Sculley is acting quite disinterested, but his travel plans include going to the East Coast quite a bit;’ Reuter's other possible contender is Michael Armstrong, who left only last year.
CLARISWORKS 2.0 TO SHIP LATER THIS MONTH
Apple Computer Inc's Claris Corp says it will ship ClarisWorks 2.0 in the US later this month at the same $300 price as the original version, saying the new version adds three new capabilities and over 300 productivity enhancements.
TI RESOLVES PC PATENTS
Texas Instruments Inc says it has resolved all outstanding litigation over its personal computer system patents, winning agreement with Daewoo Electronics Co, Daewoo Telecom Co and Dell Computer Corp for patent cross-licensing agreements.
PERCEPTION TECHNOLOGY AGREES TO BRITE VOICE MERGER
Canton, Massachusetts-based Perception Technology Corp has agreed to be acquired by Brite Voice Systems Inc of Wichita, Kansas for about 3.35m new Brite Voice shares giving an indicated value of about $15.9m; the combined companies would have had revenues in excess of $35m on a pro forma basis for fiscal 1992.
UNISYS ADDS FIVE MORE TO PW2 ADVANTAGE LINE
Unisys Corp added five models to its PW2 Advantage line of personal computers: they incorporate a local bus, combined with an integrated Enhanced VGA graphics accelerator and cost from $1,200 to $2,250.
MATSUSHITA TO BUILD NEW MEMORY CHIP PLANT
Matsushita Electric Industrial Co Ltd is to build a plant in the city of Tonami in northern Japan to produce 16M-bit memory chips: the new factory is expected to start operating in two or three years, and is expected to cost $260m and have capacity of 15,000 a month.
EXCUSES FOR THE PENTIUM DELAY
Compaq Computer Corp and its 80486 interests, not any technical or manufacturing woes, are behind Intel Corp's decision to delay the Pentium until May, BusinessWeek claims: well, schucks, that's not what we hear — our sources, who are cooling their heels waiting for chips, continue to think that Intel is having problems making the parts in quantity; given the new timetable, it still says samples should be more available than they are.
ELONEX SHIPS OUT 17 NEW PC MODELS
After two months of production delays due to‘unprecedented demand’ and a shortage of chips, Elonex Plc has churned out 17 new models of personal computers from its factory in North London: these comprise eight types of upgradable Intel Corp 80486-based desktops with local video bus — price ranges from £1,100 to £1,750; two higher entry-level desktops based on Intel's 80486SX-25 chip — the PC-425XM Entry Level and the PC-425XB Entry Level start at £1,100 and will replace the former 20MHz PC-420X Entry Level models; four types of WS-400  upgradeable LAN workstations based on processors ranging from 25MHz 80486SX to 66MHz 80486DX2 with Ethernet modules based on Advanced Micro Devices Inc PCnet AT chip set; a Token Ring module will be released in due course using the IBM Corp Tropic chip set; prices start at £950; and three fault-tolerant mirrored file server systems based on Novell Inc NetWare SFT III v3.11 are planned; Elonex also intends to ship modular notebook personal computers this month.
A LITTLE STING FROM DEC
Digital Equipment Corp buried a little zinger in its ‘Unified Unix’ briefing papers last month: ‘Given the recent plans for Novell Inc to acquire Unix System Laboratories Inc,’it writes, ‘Digital believes OSF/1 is the only true open Unix technology in existence’— well, but it would say that, wouldn't it.
ISDN PROGRESS?
Walking into the ISDN User Show at Wembley, North London the other day, the first four stands belonged to communications magazines: cynics might see this as evidence that the technology is still at the hype and talk stage, but most exhibitors seemed pleased by the degree to which visitors' questions had progressed past the ‘what is ISDN anyway’ stage to the ‘how much does this box cost’phase; some 900 visitors attended on the first day, the second seemed rather busier and at some of the conference sessions, notably British Telecommunications Plc's ‘where are we now’presentation, it was standing room only…
OSF DIRECTOR LOSES POSITION IN RESHUFFLE
Marie Burch, who back in the old days jumped ship from the forerunner of Unix System Laboratories Inc to join the then-enemy Open Software Foundation as director, business area management, was one of those that lost their jobs in the Foundation's recent reshuffle.
THE SPREAD OF WINDOWS
The Windows interface looks to be as prolific as a Star Trek tribble: we hear Microsoft Corp is working with phone companies to embed Windows engines in data phones.
SUN DENY SPARC IMPLEMENTATION OF NT
Sun Microsystems Inc has denied that it has plans to develop a Sparc implementation of Microsoft Corp's NT operating system, as reported last week in the US paper Open Systems Today: the paper quoted Sun president Scott McNealy as saying ‘NT needs to be ported to Sparc — if they [Microsoft]don't do it, they are missing the boat’; despite the denials, observers hint darkly that some sort of effort involving Sparc and Microsoft is under way, and will come to the surface over the next few months.
PRICE ESTIMATES FOR LONG-AWAITED PENTIUM
The thinking in some quarters is that Intel Corp's Pentium, if and when it does finally arrive, will be priced at $795 for the 60MHz species and $995 for the 66MHz.
KOKUSAI DENSHIN DENWA RESUMES LINK TO IRAQ
Kokusai Denshin Denwa Co Ltd has resumed its international phone service to Iraq, discontinued since the Gulf War: the company has also added calling line identification facilities to its international ISDN links with British Telecommunications Plc and has begun offering its Auto-credit service in Holland and Sweden, which enables its subscribers to make calls to Japan and charge them to their credit cards.
NO PLANS FOR HP TO USE ALLIANCE ARCHITECTURE
Does Hewlett-Packard Co have any plans to use the Network Printing Alliance's new printing architecture?
No.
At least not until there is customer demand, says the firm.
NETWARE PRODUCT MANAGER POACHED FROM DEC
Novell UK Ltd has poached Lalit Nathwani from Digital Equipment UK Ltd to become its NetWare product manager with special responsibility for launching NetWare 4.0; he was DEC's Pathworks product manager.
FIBRONICS ANNOUNCE SNMP SUPPORT FOR KNET LINE
Basingstoke-based Fibronics (UK) Ltd has announced SNMP support for its KNET line of TCP/IP-based mainframe connectivity hardware and software: operating under MVS, the new KNET version 5.0 will be available this month with prices starting at £21,720; existing users with a Fibronics service and support plan qualify for a free upgrade.
TELECEL UTILISE OCTEL's SIERRA VOICE PROCESSING
Octel Communications Corp has announced that Telecel Comunicacoes Pessoais SA, the privately-owned Groupe Speciale Mobile cellular operator in Portugal, is offering call completion services to its subscribers using Octel's Sierra voice processing system: if the Telecel customer is not available or the telephone is engaged, the system will answer the call and store the caller's message; the value of the order was not given.
OSF TRYING TO IMPORT OBJECT ORIENTATION INTO DCE
The Open Software Foundation is trying to figure out how to import object orientation into its Distributed Computing Environment, but is having trouble getting a handle on it, although part of its problem is thought to be attitudinal: it  desperately needs an architectural and communications model and has been doing a lot of talking with the Object Management Group but it's reportedly still just that, talk.
WINDOWS NT FOR MAY
Microsoft Corp's chief hatchet man Steve Ballmer has been telling people that Windows NT will be available in May: meanwhile object-oriented Cairo is now apparently being referred to as NT Version 2.
STARLIGHT NETWORKS TO SUPPORT DRAGONSWITCH
Mountain View, California-based Starlight Networks Inc has announced it is to support the new Ungermann-Bass Inc DragonSwitch on its StarWorks video networking software: the software runs on an 80486 EISA computer, giving it video application server capabilities, and supports up to 20 users.
NOVEL MOTIVATION SCHEME
The Australian & Oversees Telecommunications Corp has come up with a novel scheme to motivate its staff: alongside an immediate pay award of 3% and the prospect of a 5% over the next 18 months the company has promised $340 for each of 70,000 of its workers, the payment of which depends on customers' rating of the service which they receive; surveys will determine what proportion of customers are satisfied with billing, connections and fault-finding.
JSB LAUNCH MULTIVIEW DESKTOP
JSB Computer Systems Ltd last week announced from its Scotts Valley, California base that it has launched MultiView Desktop for Microsoft Corp's Windows NT with a view to helping the Microsoft challenger co-exist with Unix: the Macclesfield company says the product removes the potential for conflict by enabling users to run their existing Unix applications integrated with NT's presentation capabilities, all the while  preserving Unix as the central server system.
12% OF SPANISH HOMES CAN RECEIVE SATELLITE TELEVISION
Spain's National Association of Electronic Industries reckons that approximately 12% or 1.5m Spanish homes have the necessary equipment to receive satellite television: out of the existing 285,000 satellite installations, 88% belong to individuals, the rest are either collective or use cable networks.
TELECOM EIREANN SEEKS £200m EC FUNDING
Telecom Eireann is seeking more than £200m from European Community structural funds to re-build its telecommunications network: it is also ensconced in discussions with the Irish government over tariff re-balancing; the state phone company's financial difficulties have been exacerbated by the 10% currency devaluation which has added £50m to its debts of some £1,000m; and is likely to halve and worse its profits this year to some £40m.
LITTLE FEAR OF MICHELANGELO
The computer industry equivalent of ‘Small earthquake in Chile’…
‘The Michelangelo computer virus that received worldwide attention last year is expected to cause even fewer problems this Saturday than it did when it struck last year, a team of IBM researchers said’.