

SUNSOFT's SOLARIS UNIX TO GO UP ON POWERPC RISC AS WELL AS iAPX-86
Earlier this month SunSoft Inc president Ed Zander, told us to expect a version of its Unix operating system to feature on the PowerPC RISC (CI No 2,124).
Yesterday Sun Microsystems Inc's software unit made good the promise and announced it would be working with Motorola Inc's Semiconductor Products Sector to get Solaris 2.1 up and running on the IBM Corp-Motorola developed RISC.
PowerPC is the second implementation of Sun Unix outside the Sparc CPU base.
Solaris 2.1 was expected to make its official debut on Intel Corp iAPX-86 boxes at this week's SunSoft Software Developers Conference being held in San Jose as we went to press.
The way is now open for SunSoft to join the PowerOpen group vendors supporting PowerPC.
IBM AIX Unix and Macintosh System are already destined for the architecture.
SunSoft presumably believes it can win PowerPC customers for more standard Unix System V.4-compatible system software: Tadpole Technology Plc already integrates Solaris on its Sparc-based laptops.
NATSEMI FUZZY LOGIC GENERATOR USES NEURAL NETWORK
Combining two emerging technologies, National Semiconductor Corp yesterday launched what it claims is the industry's first software product that uses neural network learning to generate fuzzy logic rules and membership functions for embedded microcontroller applications.
Called NeuFuz4, it runs under Windows and is claimed to reduce the cost and time needed to implement fuzzy logic because it automatically create a fuzzy system based on desired system inputs and outputs — it enables up to four inputs to create one output, then verifies and codes it for use with NatSemi's COP8 family of embedded microcontrollers.
Conventional heuristic-based fuzzy logic systems cannot learn and fail to work with many complex applications, the company says, noting that NeuFuz4 gets round the problem by using proprietary new defuzzification, rule inferencing and antecedent processing algorithms based on a modified back propagation algorithm.
It uses a neural network to learn system behaviour based on system input-output data and generates fuzzy rules and membership functions based what it has learned.
NeuFuz4 users provide system input-output data through the Windows interface and the neural network takes over; the modified back propagation method passes the error generated in the neural network system back to the input layer and hidden layers in a step-by-step process that helps adjust the neural network's weights in a non-linear real world fashion.
The NeuFuz4 Development System includes the Windows software, COP8 development tools, documentation, consulting and technical support for $10,000.
A NeuFuz4 Development Kit with software, documentation and introductory set of COP8 development tools and support is $3,975.
A Learning Kit with a limited version of the development software and documentation is $200.
ICL PREPARES CHIP MIX-AND-MATCH LINE OF DRS 6000s
ICL Plc is expected to unveil a range of new DRS 6000 Unix boxes on April 14.
It is understood the systems have been designed to allow enable Texas Instruments Inc SuperSparc and Cypress Semiconductor Corp HyperSparc RISCs to be configured together in mix-and-match arrangements.
ICL currently offers the Level 200 series consisting of the desktop model 240, the 400 series of slim-line models, and the 700 series of deskside SuperSparc models.
In the past, ICL has expressed an interest in taking on Cypress's SuperSparc-compatible part.
ICL's current SuperSparc desktop — designed by Fujitsu Ltd — uses a single 40MHz chip, and the high-end 700 series servers use up to four of the parts.
NYNEX WOOS EUROPEAN RAILWAY OPERATORS TO TEAM ON NETWORK
Nynex Corp is in negotiations with Hitrail, the consortium of 11 European railway operators, to create a joint venture company and for a contract to upgrade its X25 packet-switched data network, according to a source close to the negotiations.
The negotiations follow the disbanding of the Hermes project several months ago: Hermes has the network upgrade as one of its objectives.
‘For the railway monopolies, it has always been that they wanted the data network modernised.
Other members of the group had differing objectives and decided to drop out for various reasons,’ the source said.
‘Hitrail came back to us because they still needed the upgrade.’
The source says the New York and New England phone company will provide ‘the latest technology and the software packages to manage it.’
The source would not specify exactly which technologies Nynex proposes to use, but noted that ‘it is likely that the 11 railways could end up with a digital backbone, which is very interesting given what's going on in Brussels right now.
It could become the basis for offering leased lines.’
In the case that telecommunications deregulation really does get forced through by Brussels, the source said, ‘Nynex would want to become ‘a carriers’ carrier’’.
‘We wouldn't necessarily be a big network to compete with the PTTs, but we'd probably go to the PTTs and say, ‘Hey, we have this big network, do you want to use it?’’
The Nynex-Hitrail joint venture company would likely be called Hermes, said the source, and its capital opened up to other European partners.
Choice of location for the joint venture company is still up for grabs, the source said, although Hitrail, which is based outside Amsterdam, is lobbying for the Netherlands, while Nynex would like to have it in its own continental back yard in Brussels.
KEWILL TAKES BATH ON GERMAN UNIT
Kewill Systems Plc has decided its 1991 acquisition of still loss-making Weigang MCS GmbH of Stuttgart was a mistake, and is to sell the manufacturing software company to Seitz Industrie Lsungen GmbH.
It paid £400,000 upfront for Weigang (CI No 1,671), but getting out will cost rather more: it retains £2.3m of bank and trade liabilities but will be relieved of other trade liabilities of £1m — but grants Seitz a £208,000 interest-free loan repayable in 18 months.
Seitz will pay Kewill 4% of sales for four years from 1994 to a maximum of £625,000.
AN INDUSTRY OUTSIDER FOR IBM?
A VERY COURAGEOUS DECISION, MR NOMINATING CHAIRMAN
The appointment of Louis Gerstner as IBM Corp's new chairman and chief executive is a very courageous decision, Mr Burke, as that archetypal civil servant Sir Humphrey would tell his minister whenever the hapless Hacker suggested he might follow a particular course of action.
‘Courageous’ is of course civil service shorthand for describing any policy decision that is certain to generate a storming and long-lasting row and is unlikely to do anything to advance the minister's career.
Courageous decisions are nevertheless sometimes called for, so is this the right time to appoint a computer industry outsider to te top job at IBM?
The omens are not propitious.
It takes a diligent computer journalist with a technical education two years of intense effort just to begin to feel confident of expressing an opinion on anything material about the industry, and thereafter the next four or five years will be dogged by mistakes that are intensely embarrassing to recall.
Explosive
Apple Computer Inc chief John Sculley reckons it is essential for the head of a computer company to have a clear grasp of technological directions and  acknowledged that it took him several years before he felt confident to take strategic decisions.
Moreover on a single decision — do we license this environment to the rest of the industry or do we keep it to ourselves — can depend the entire future of a computer company, with the wrong decision spelling oblivion.
A dozen years ago, Zilog Corp with the Z80, Micropro International Corp with WordStar, Digital Research Inc with CP/M, Software Arts Inc with VisiCalc, Wang Laboratories Inc with its office systems, ruled the low end of the industry — the end that was poised for explosive growth over the next decade: where are they now?
The daunting difficulty is underlined again by one of our front pages of last week: there were people from IBM's labs discussing this holographic polymer they had developed, which promised unimaginably high capacity and low cost data storage: right, well if that's coming along, there's not much point in putting much more investment into rotating magnetic memory systems — disks to you and me, DASD to IBMers — is there: better put AdStar onto a care-and-maintenance basis, perhaps even sell it.
But what about the story immediately above the IBM polymer story?
There's Sony Corp saying that by simply engraving a spiral groove on the surface of the platter, it reckons it can store 1.5Gb in a 2.5″ disk drive.
Long experience suggests that magnetic disks have seen off a long series of challenges over the past 15 years — but a review of the survival and thriving of the technology gives a very partial and inadequate view.
Apart from IBM itself, what were the big names in disk drives 10 years ago?
Control Data Corp, Memorex Corp, Storage Technology Corp, and those thrusting newcomers Seagate Technology Inc and Tandon Corp, which had seen off such old-timers as Shugart Corp and Pertec Computer Corp.
Today only Seagate is still up there among the leaders, IBM is still striving to build a serious OEM business, and the big names alongside Seagate are Conner Peripherals Inc, Quantum Corp and Maxtor Corp, with Hewlett-Packard Co becoming a bigger presence.
Elusive
In the meantime, we have seen the rise and fall of Computer Memories Inc, MiniScribe Corp, Priam Corp, PrairieTek Corp and Rodime Plc, each a hot property at one stage in its career.
And while it is easy enough for an experienced journalist to write that synopsis from memory (checking for the elusive name of Software Arts and making sure that it really was PrairieTek that vanished last year), it would take a deal of research and above all deep thought to put together a dissertation on why things panned out the way they did, the fatal mistakes, the good decisions that each company made to achieve triumph or disaster, or both in quick succession.
Can a manager feel happy making strategic decisions simply on the basis of what his  lieutenants tell him, without satisfying himself that they are not simply spouting the IBM conventional wisdom that has got the company into the mess it is in today?
Even blindingly obvious and crucial insights don't usually come instantly — it took us 24 hours to realise that the part-concealed agenda behind IBM's December closures was that the company was signalling the death of the mainframe, a couple of months to realise that the executive search committee of IBM non-executive directors hadn't a clue what it should be looking for in a new chief executive for IBM — because they themselves didn't have the computer industry background they needed to recognise how vital such a background would be to the person assuming the post.
Instead, it was just one of 11 qualifications they sought, with the ability to listen to and act on what customers were saying one of the ones highlighted.
But to what extent to customers really tell a computer company all it needs to know?
One of the most striking features of IBM's lamentable personal computer business is that there is not a single reason embedded in the hardware why IBM mainframe and AS/400 users should buy their personal computers from IBM rather than from its army of tormentors led by Compaq Computer Corp: presumably few customers have actually asked IBM for 3270 and 5250 emulation in ROM on the motherboard at no extra charge in its PS/2s — or perhaps IBM thought that would kill off its dumb tube business and resisted until it was too late — now it makes no money on personal computers and sells few dumb tubes.
The most daunting problem facing Louis Gerstner is that as yet he has absolutely no idea just how much he doesn't know — and he will be Superman if in six months he has more than scratched the surface on that problem.
Burdensome
Gerstner is praised for his achievement in cutting debt in half at RJR Nabisco Corp, a collection of mature low and medium technology businesses — but cutting the debt of the burdensomely leveraged company was the job of whoever became chief executive at RJR Nabisco: it's much harder to define exactly what the job is at IBM.
The one indication that Gerstner recognises the problem will be his approach to the top jobs at each of IBM's most important businesses.
His first act needs to be to get the corporate search people straight back into action looking for outsiders to run the AS/400 business — someone from Hewlett-Packard perhaps, the disk business, the chip business, the software and services business.
That too might be characterised as a courageous move — but nothing like as courageous as that of James Burke and his cohorts in deciding that the right man to dig IBM out of its hole was outsider Louis V Gerstner Jr.
J LANGUAGE INTERPRETER DESIGNED TO RESOLVE THE DRAWBACKS OF THE APL  LANGUAGE 
A new portable interpreter for the J notation of the APL language, J, has been developed by Roger Hui, a lecturer at the US Association for Computing Machinery, who works for Morgan Stanley & Co in New York.
J was written by Kenneth Iverson, the original author of APL, to eradicate the various anomalies inherent in the old language.
It was released in 1990, and is written in C. Secretary of the British APL Association, Anthony Camacho, claims that J is less complicated as it uses fewer symbols than APL — its syntax analyser takes up only one page of C, while other versions take up enormous amounts.
J is also said to be more powerful because it can list arrays.
Hui says that because the source code is written under the assumption that the user knows both J and C, someone that knows APL and C will find J much easier to use than someone who knows only C. Another advantage is that J can run on a range of boxes, including the RS/6000, Digital Equipment Corp VAX, Apple Computer Inc's Macintosh and iAPX-86 personal computers.
It provides access to host or native files, can be used for functional programming, and can call functions that use the C calling convention.
Because J uses standard ASCII symbols, it does not require special keyboards, displays, printers or editors as previous APLs did.
It is available now and costs £16 for a starter kit, including a manual and Hui's interpreter.
Programs are free, but each customer will need to buy a manual, costing £12.
INOVATEC OPTICAL CHARACTER SOFTWARE USES NEURAL TECHNOLOGY
Inovatic International SA, based in Chatenay-Malabry, near Paris, claims its new EasyReader 1.2 software is the first optical character recognition package for Windows to incorporate neural network technology.
This gives it the ability to read and analyse difficult forms such as facsimile copies and folded or smudged paper, and to learn.
It does not have to re-analyse characters once they have been identified, which helps to speed up the processing of long documents.
The system works by first analysing a page to identify column numbers and to mark out graphics and images that cannot be processed.
An integrated dictionary is also supplied to help increase recognition speed.
Once the text has been analysed it can be edited and spell-checked, as required, and then exported to Word, Word for Windows, WordPerfect and WordStar word processors.
It identifies various types of fonts and page layouts and can cope with imperfections like smudges and fractures.
It can also differentiate between similar characters such as the digit 0 and letter O. It is available in English, French, German, Spanish and Italian.
It runs on 80386 personal computers under Windows 3.0, on Apple Computer Inc Macintoshes and on Sun Microsystems Inc workstations and needs 4Mb RAM.
It costs around £500 and is available direct from Inovatic.
CGI LAUNCHES DEDIAL CLIENT-SERVER INTERFACE BETWEEN MAC AND HOSTS
CGI Informatique SA, France's 10th largest software and systems integration house, announced Dedial, a client-server interface between Macintoshes and central hosts, including IBM Corp, Compagnie des Machines Bull SA, and Digital Equipment Corp machines.
Conforming to Apple Computer Inc's Communication Toolbox, Dedial comprises two complementary modules, Systeme Dedial and Dedial Revamp.
The first automates the exchange of data between central site and office automation applications.
The Dedial Revamp development tool enables the user to customise the graphical interface.
CGI announced further that its Pacbase and PacLAN/X software engineering tools are available in versions compatible with DEC's OpenVMS and Ultrix, under its Alpha AXP architecture.
The products will be available for DEC OSF/1 AXP in the fourth quarter, the company said.
BRITISH TELECOM USES GEC PLESSEY, SIEMENS KIT TO BUILD FIRST METROPOLITAN AREA NETWORK IN THE UK
British Telecommunications Plc is now implementing the first Metropolitan Area Network in the UK.
To be used initially by SuperJANET, the Joint Academic Network, it will carry speech and data between university local area networks.
According to British Telecom, no other customers are yet signed up.
The network has been under trial since July last year and although the switching equipment for the trial was supplied by Alcatel NV, the final order, worth £3m, went to GEC Plessey Telecommunications Ltd in conjunction with Siemens AG, against bids from AT&T Co, Alcatel and others.
GEC Plessey was chosen for several reasons, according to Glenn Walley, a systems design engineer with British Telecom Laboratories; in particular, he said, for financial reasons.
While the GEC Plessey-Siemens kit was manufactured in Germany, Alcatel's was developed in Australia by QPSX Pty Ltd — the company behind both technologies.
As a result, the import duties for the GEC Plessey equipment were lower than those for Alcatel's.
The Switched Multi-Megabit Data Services network will link local networks in academic institutions across the UK, and is the largest of its kind in Europe.
It will initially have 65 customer access points, with bandwidth-on-demand transmission rates of up to 2Mbps.
Neither GEC Plessey nor British Telecom would disclose the number of switches involved.
Walley commented, ‘As long as the service agreements are being met, I don't think it's important to talk about the topology’— although SuperJANET's Dr Geoff Manning says that so far only three switches are in operation.
The network conforms to the European 802.6 standard.
According to Bob Moberly, GEC Plessey's manager of broadband networks, ‘The network is based on the [US]SMDS standard, but will work at European data rates.
The physical layer is different, but otherwise it's identical to US Metropolitan Networks’.
The network will include an Asynchronous Transfer Mode interface by the end of the year.
According to Dr Ludwig Hoffman, Siemens' executive director and head of data networks for the Public Networks Division, ‘Asynchronous Transfer Mode and Metropolitan Area Networks have the same cell structure — 48 plus 5 bytes.
I think both have a place in the world, but I see Metropolitan Area technology used for connecting different types of data network, with Asynchronous Transfer Mode for internetworking of broadband networks.’
The system is based around Siemens' Vision Optimised Network Evolution programme, although GEC Plessey says that it has been the developer of the services to be offered and will manage the planned Asynchronous Transfer Mode evolution.
IBM TO TAKE OVER DISTRIBUTED MANAGEMENT ENVIRONMENT INTEGRATION FOR SOFTWARE FOUNDATION?
IBM Corp is said to be going to relieve the Open Software Foundation of one of its heaviest burdens and take over integration responsibilities for the Distributed Management Environment.
The Software Foundation had originally planned to do the work internally, after none of its members or founders volunteered, scared off by IBM's experience of integrating the Management Environment's companion piece DCE, the Distributed Computing Environment.
The Software Foundation and Tivoli Systems Inc, source of the Distributed Management framework, are said to have appealed to IBM and Hewlett-Packard Co after sensing a loss of interest in the Management Environment due to the slow progress.
Tivoli Systems will remain what it always was, a sub-integrator of the systems management piece.
All of the parties are interested in making the Distributed Management Environment more compliant with the Object Management Group's Corba  Common Object Request Broker Architecture specification.
Hewlett-Packard is understood to be contributing parts of its DOMF Distributed Object Management Facility and IBM parts of its SOM to the object core layer.
It will be interesting to see whether Unix International follows suit.
STRING OF COMPANIES STEP FORWARD TO SUPPORT DESKTOP TASK FORCE's DESTOP MANAGEMENT INTERFACE
IBM Corp and Microsoft Corp are among the companies planning to incorporate the Desktop Management Task Force's Desktop Management Interface into their operating systems.
IBM is investigating the possibility of incorporating the technology into its AIX, OS/2 and PC-DOS operating systems, while Microsoft intends to implement it within Windows.
The news came as the Task Force announced its members' implementation plans, and the list includes an impressive series of hardware and software vendors.
Other companies that are to use the technology include Asante Technologies Inc, Digital Equipment Corp, Intel Corp, NCR Corp, Standard Microsystems Corp, NetLabs Inc, Sun Microsystems Inc's SunConnect unit and SynOptics Communications Corp.
The Desktop Management Interface is a common management interface for the management of applications which access and control desktop systems and their components, regardless of the protocol used.
It includes a component interface intended to give hardware and software vendors a simple way of providing component management.
Over the next few months, vendors of hardware, software and operating systems will evaluate beta code and provide comments on Desktop Management Interface.
Following an integration and final testing phase, the Desktop Management Task Force says it expects to provide a reference implementation of the specification and make a free prototype available later this year.
The Task Force is also releasing information for vendors on product compliance, along with the latest version of the specification for review by participating members.
TIVOLI RELEASES NEW VERSION OF ITS MANAGEMENT SOFTWARE
Austin, Texas-based Tivoli Systems Inc used the UniForum show in San Francisco last week to announce a new version of its systems management software.
The Tivoli Management Environment Release 1.6 adds configuration and change management services to the software, and is claimed to simplify and automate the process of setting up, maintaining and changing large-scale client-server networks, a task that often takes up over half of a system manager's time, according to the company.
The new services have three components: a configuration definition database component, where templates of key configuration information can be stored; a change automation component for making changes to large numbers of networks automatically; and a scheduling services component to control the timing of the changes.
The first application to use the services is Tivoli/FSM, which manages Unix client-server file sharing mechanisms from a central control point.
Release 1.6 can also incorporate existing Tivoli applications covering software distribution and remote systems monitoring, and application extension and development tools are also available.
The software will be available on Hewlett-Packard Co and Sun Microsystems Inc workstations from the third quarter of the year, the company says, but it gave no indication of the price for it.
SONIX COMMUNICATIONS DECIDES TO BUNDLE V.32TERBO WITH ITS VOLANTE MODEM AT NO EXTRA CHARGE
Undeterred by the opposition to V.32terbo being adopted as a CCITT modem standard, Sonix Communications Ltd, Cirencester, Gloucestershire has announced its first product conforming to the high-speed technology.
It has incorporated the 19.2Kbps modulation scheme on its high-end V.32bis Volante modem at no extra cost, and is giving a free upgrade to existing users.
The product is available immediately, and has a list price of £800.
Bob Jones, managing director of Sonix, sees the product launch as dispelling one of the main criticisms of V.32terbo — that by the time products got to market, the V.fast CCITT standard would be fully defined, and conformant products would be available.
Similarly, he feels that by offering it as a no-cost option, the company invalidates the criticism that users will tie themselves into a non-standard technology: since V.32terbo is downwardly compatible with V.32bis, he points out that users are not losing anything by giving themselves the option of faster transmission with V.32terbo.
For its part, AT&T Microelectronics is also trying to boost V.32terbo take-up, and has announced a data-pump chip set based on its V.32/V.32bis data-pump technology, which incorporates the enhancements.
Consisting of the T7525 codec, the V32INTFC data pump interface chip, and the DSP16A coded for V.32 modulation, the set goes into sample production this month, with volume scheduled for May.
VERBEX GIVES VOICE TO UNIX
Verbex Voice Systems Inc, Edison, New Jersey has a speech system for Unix System V.4.2 and Solaris 1.
X.
The Speech Commander Desktop co-processor with signal processing includes a developers toolkit for creating speech interfaces under Unix and interfaces to workstations and personal computers over RS232 connections: prices go from $2,800.
BORLAND AND EPSON SALES FORMALISE INTERBASE AGREEMENT
Borland International Inc has formalised its agreement with Epson Sales, the marketing subsidiary of Seiko Epson Co, for the sale and technology licensing of a Japanese version of InterBase 3.2 — at Borland's Tokyo announcement of InterBase last December, Epson was already demonstrating InterBase and the first release of InterBase JA3.2 is on Sun Microsystems Inc Sparcsystems, available from April 12; Borland plans to put the Japanese version of the database up on other machines; the Japanese version supports a number of new functions including distributed databases, active data processing — functions such as triggers and event alerters — language support (including support for both JIS and EUC codes sets) and binary large objects; Borland in conjunction with Epson Sales and its systems integration subsidiary Trans Abel, is to set up a Borland Authorised Support Centre for education and training.
USL BEGINS MARKETING VERITAS SOFTWARE IN PACIFIC
Unix System Laboratories Pacific Ltd has begun marketing of Veritas software in the Asia Pacific region: the Veritas products include the Veritas volume manager, Veritas File System, Veritas Visual Administrator and the Veritas Journalling File System; technical support will be provided by Unix Labs.
NEC AND FUJITSU ASSIST R-SERIES AND SPARC DEVELOPMENT
The R-series and Sparc versions of Unix System V.4.2 announced last week (CI No 2,131) were developed with the respective help of NEC Corp and Fujitsu Ltd: the R-series version was implemented on the NEC EWS 4800/210 workstation to create the reference version, while the Sparc version was developed in conjunction with Fujitsu, using the DS/90 7000 series and the ICL Plc DRS 6000 as reference systems; shipments of the two new versions are due to begin from March 31.
MITSUBISHI SEEKS SECOND SOURCE AGREEMENT WITH DEC
Mitsubishi Electric Corp is said to be looking to the second source agreement with Digital Equipment Corp on the Alpha RISC to build a new base for its semiconductor business: the company gave up manufacturing its own mainframe and mid-range computers several years ago, in favour of selling IBM Corp and Hewlett-Packard Co machines on an OEM basis, and focusing its strategy on client-server systems, where it was assisted by its purchase of the Apricot  Computers Ltd hardware division — but Apricot insists that it is 100% wedded to the Intel Corp iAPX-86 architecture and has no plans to build Alpha machines, although if the instruction comes in from Tokyo, it won't have much option; there is an element of two-timing in Mitsubishi Electric signing up with DEC because it is already a member of the Hewlett-Packard Precision RISC Organisation.
ENHANCED DYNABOOK LAPTOP FROM TOSHIBA
Toshiba Corp has come out with a low-price, high performance version of the Dynabook laptop, the Dynabook 486E J-3100VS, which uses an 80486SX and has a 9.6″ 16 grey-scale monochrome display on the $2,390 version, with a colour thin-film transistor screen available for an additional $2,133; the unit weighs 5 lbs and takes up to 16Mb memory; a desktop version, the J-3100S/VX, based on the Intel 80486DX2, at $3,440 was launched at the same time.
MITSUBISHI EXCLUSIVE SALES RIGHTS TO SNA ps5520 PACKAGE
Trading giant Mitsubishi Corp has gained exclusive sales rights for Japan to the SNA ps5520 software package that connects the IBM Corp AS/400 used as a host with the Apple Computer Inc Macintosh as a client: the company already sells a similar package which connects IBM mainframes and Macs; the software, as reported, was developed jointly by IBM and Apple, and has been localised by a Mitsubishi-related software house and the package will be sold through IBM Japan office systems dealers, Mac dealers and systems integrators; the SNA ps3270 emulator is already installed on a trial basis at some 10 large companies, Mitsubishi says; it looks to sell around 5,000 copies over the next year.
NIKKO SYSTEMS CENTER PURCHASES NCR 3600
Nikko Systems Center, subsidiary of Nikko Securities Ltd, has bought a large NCR 3600 parallel processor from NCR Japan, for trading system purposes: the value of the order is $2.15m and the new system is to run a system based on the Sybase database, supporting a network of Sun Microsystems Inc stations.
NEC SX-3 MODEL 24 FULFILLS REQUIREMENTS
The Japanese Ministry of Education's National Institute of Fusion Science says that its NEC Corp SX-3 Model 24 supercomputer successfully fulfilled all the requirements specified in the initial contract bid: the contract was concluded last June, and was the subject of a challenge by Cray Research Inc late last year, and Cray was permitted to observe the operation of the new computer; according to the Nikkei Industrial News, Cray complained that it was unable to obtain sufficient data on hardware issues such as NEC magneto-optical installed with the SX-3, which NEC claims are the fastest in the world, and on the ultra high-speed HIPPI channel linked to them; on the software side, Cray said that it was not able to obtain information on the efficiency of the automatic parallelising function; for its part, NEC announced simply that the supercomputer was in full operation.
NEW TOOL FROM HITACHI
Hitachi Ltd has a new tool for use in building diagnostic and consulting expert systems: called ES-Pormote2/W-DIAG, it is designed to enable the input of knowledge in a tree structure, and it has been available from the beginning of the month at $6,000; it runs on the Hitachi 3050 series of Unix workstations and can be used to generate a source code program for Hitachi's ES/Kernel series of general purpose expert system development tools; ES-Promote runs under Hitachi's implementation of Motif and the X Window system.
TOSHIBA SHOWS OFF ROBOTICS WORK
Toshiba Corp has been showing off the robotics work it is engaged on at its research centre, where it has a number of projects that are or have grown out of government-sponsored projects: it is developing eyes 2mm to 3mm in diameter for a micromachine for use in inspecting pipes in nuclear power stations, and also a software-controlled self-mobile robot for use in space where not all astronauts can be expected to be robot experts.
LUCAS INDUSTRIES GAINS ON THE EXCHANGE RATE, BUT RECESSION GRINDS ON
Lucas Industries Plc has seen some improvement in interim performance due to cost-cutting measures, attempts to reduce working capital expenditure, and better sales levels from its automotive businesses.
Lower  reorganisation and redundancy charges, down from £15.4m in 1992 to £3.5m this year, and reduced research and development costs, down £2.6m to £47.7m, also helped to offset pressure on pricing and higher depreciation charges.
Pre-tax profits were down 94.2% at £5.2m, but last year's figures did benefit from a distribution from the UK pension fund, worth £90m — actual profits in 1992 were £200,000.
Although turnover rose 11.5% to £1,287m, the chairman said that most of the increase was due to more favourable exchange rates.
Trading conditions, he said, were disappointing.
While the UK and US showed ‘hesitant recoveries’— these countries generate 35% and 21% of total revenues respectively — continental Europe, which makes up 36% of overall sales, moved deeper into recession.
He, therefore, continues ‘to anticipate flat — and frustrating — general market conditions’.
Despite this, he is confident that the outlook for the Solihull, West Midlands-based group is good.
He believes plans to reduce costs, restore profits, and improve cash generation are on target, and as a result, the board is recommending that the interim dividend be maintained at 2.1 pence.
A scrip dividend alternative is also being offered, as before.
The company now comprises three divisions: the first is Applied Technology, which generates 13% of group turnover.
Figures from this business now include Lucas Electronics, which was set up in January 1993, and comprises the combined Lucas aerospace and  automotive electronic operations.
While the electronics companies and Lucas Fluid Power saw sales increase, this was offset by falling demand at Lucas Control Systems Products.
Although overall revenues here were up 11% to £172.3m, after adjustment for exchange rates, they remained virtually unchanged.
Operating profits showed a £600,000 improvement to £4.5m because, the chairman said, restructuring and the resultant cost savings more than offset the effect of a weaker sales mix.
The second is the automotive business, which saw operating profits increase from £2.7m to £13.2m, on turnover up 15.2% to £792.1m.
However, at constant exchange rates, sales rose only 4%.
The automotive arm makes up 62% of overall group sales.
The third division is aerospace, where operating profits fell from £10.5m in 1992 to £7.2m this time.
Revenues here were up 3.6% to £323.6m, although at constant exchange rates, sales actually fell 8% due to production cut-backs at the major airframe manufacturers and softer defence markets.
This business makes up the remaining 25% of group sales.
The chairman now believes the recovery in Lucas's profitability is gathering pace, even though‘delayed world economic recovery must inevitably dampen sales prospects for this year’.
GTI SEES CONTINUED POSITIVE RESULTS
San Diego-based GTI Corp, majority owned by Telemetrix Plc, responded to a $1.50 fall in its share price to $21.75 on Friday by saying it saw no fundamental reason for it, adding that it expects to report ‘continuing positive results’ this quarter after four quarters of increases of 100% or more.
COMPUTER PEOPLE BLAMES STALLED MARKET AFTER DEVALUATION FOR PROFITS PLUNGE
Computer People Group Plc saw lower profits for the year ending December 31 than were expected at the interim stage due to a drop in recruitment revenues in the UK and lower volume sales of consultancy services in the US.
Pre-tax profits fell 85.6% to £145,000, on turnover down 7.3% to £62.7m.
Although the board paid an interim dividend of 0.65 pence, it has decided at this stage to invest its funds in the business — the amount available, says chairman Rupert Bayfield, would have been negligible anyway.
While Bayfield said he was disappointed with the results, he was pleased to see the London W company returning to profit after a small loss in the first half.
The turning point came in the second quarter, he said, but loss of confidence as a result of the exchange rate crisis hit UK recruitment in the fourth quarter, although it is now starting to grow again.
Although revenues from consulting in the UK declined during 1991, he said that there was steady growth throughout 1992, and sales remained at 1991 levels overall.
Despite a reduction in overheads, however, profits were hit by intense competition putting pressure on margins.
Turnover from the US consulting business was also down, but improved margins combined with lower overheads to achieve higher operating profits in both sterling and US dollar terms than in 1991.
Bayfield says the US business can remain profitable at lower volumes because it now has a reduced cost base.
Although he is cautious about predicting how rapidly or how strongly profits will grow in 1993, he believes the UK business has made a good start to the year, with revenues from both consulting and recruitment ahead of budget.
Overheads will continue to be reduced in the US, he promised.
COMPANY RESULTS
Computer Research Inc has reported first quarter net losses of $320,391 up from $250,069 losses last time, after $136,866 losses from discontinued operations last time, on turnover from continuing operations down 8.9% to $1.1m.
Comparisons with restated figures to reflect discontinued operations.
Micron Technology Inc has reported that second quarter net profits soared 518% at $9.0m on turnover that rose 37.6% at $176.4m; mid-term net profits climbed 462% at $11.7m on turnover that rose 28.1% at $307.4m; net earnings per share rose 450% to $0.22 in the quarter, 480% to 0.29 in the half.
Trident Microsystems Inc saw second quarter net profits up 22% at $4.2m, on sales up 44.3% at $25.6m; mid-term net rose 16.9% to $7.3m, on turnover up 38.1% at $44.5m.
Net per share rose 31% to $0.38 in the quarter, 18.9% to $0.63 in the half.
Computer People Group Plc has reported net losses of £135,000 for the year to December 31 against profits of £1.4m last time, after £646,000 gains related to the release of taxation provisions on the roll-over of previous capital gains last time, on turnover that fell 7.3% to £62.7m.
At the pre-tax level, profits were down 85.6% at £145,000.
Lucas Industries Plc saw net losses for the six months to January 31 stood at £4.9m against profits of $77.4m, after £3.5m redundancy and reorganisation costs this time and £15.4m last time, on turnover that rose 11.5% to £1,287m.
Pre-tax profits were down 94.2% at £5.2m, after £90m gains from the distribution of a pension fund surplus last time.
Earnings per share fell by 99.7% to 0.3 pence.
WINDOWS/NT ANNOUNCEMENT SET FOR MAY 24
Microsoft Corp is now saying that Windows/NT will be announced on May 24 and that the target is to deliver it before the end of the second quarter, although US PC Week doesn't expect ships to start until July; there's no exact date, says the company, since it will not ship until the product it is spot-on.
SATELLITE BROADCAST TO ANNOUNCE MS-DOS 6
Microsoft Corp chairman Bill Gates is to introduce MS-DOS 6 at a US-wide satellite broadcast to personal computer users this evening, but according to Reuter, the company has had record orders for it already: Microsoft plans a $7 promotion to entice customers to buy discounted versions of MS-DOS 6 and its other products, and says that orders for it are incredible, already exceeding the record-setting pace of MS-DOS 5, which was launched in the late spring 1991.
MS-DOS 6 FEATURES AND PRICES
Microsoft Corp's MS-DOS 6, which will be available on Wednesday, will be offered at $50 for the first 60 days, and $130 thereafter, the company said: the two most compelling new features, the company says, are data compression to double hard disk space, and improved memory management; it also includes the capability to back up files, protect against viruses and reorganize files on the hard disk — the back-up technology was licensed from Symantec Corp's Peter Norton group, and the anti-viral technology from Central Point Software Inc — but unlike Symantec's Norton Back-Up, the back-up feature in MS-DOS 6 isn't automatic and doesn't support tape drives, and is also slower — and about 300 new viruses have been discovered since Central Point's virus detection technology was frozen in MS-DOS 6 code; both companies hope to sell enhancements to the built-in products to users.
LOWER-PRICED NEWTONS FOR THE SUMMER
Apple Computer Inc said at CeBIT it plans to start shipping Newtons in the summer at a price ‘significantly lower’ than $1,000, aiming initially at business users: features will include handwriting recognition, diaries and notepads, paperless facsimile messaging and wireless message transfer, Apple says.
EARTH AND SPACE SCIENCES RESEARCH THROUGH CRAY
Cray Research Inc reports that the Space Data and Computing Division of the NASA Goddard Space Flight Center has ordered a Cray C98 system: C98s start at around $12m and the new one will be installed in the second half of this year and will be used for Earth and space sciences research, the firm said.
NICK TEMPLE CALLS FOR PAY REDUCTIONS
Rather than eliminate any further jobs on top of the 1,000 that the company has budgeted to shed this year, IBM UK Ltd chief executive Nick Temple is expected to ask senior staffers to bear some of the pain and accept pay reductions — and it could happen: Temple has been telling anyone who will listen that if IBM UK makes a penny profit this year, it will be the most amazing turnround in  corporate history.
PACHE MAY BE SAFE AT ‘HOPELESS’ BULL
What are the prospects for mining specialist Bernard Pache hanging on to the top job at state-owned Compagnie des Machines Bull SA now that France is to have a new administration?
Electronics industry consultant Bob Heikes reckons he's likely to hang on to the job, but for all the wrong reasons: ‘Bull is hopeless,’ he told the International Herald Tribune —‘a new guy isn't going to make any difference.’
15 FIRMS FORM EUROPEAN SOFTWARE INSTITUTE
A group of 15 European firms in a range of businesses have come together to create the European Software Institute to improve skills in developing computer software: the Institute, to be based in Bilbao, Spain, will work with customers on software processes and methodology, according to Compagnie des Machines Bull SA vice-president Georges Grunberg, who is the acting chairman; the other founders are Bilbao Bizkaia Kutxa SA, GMD SA, Eritel SA, Finsiel SA and Iberdrola SA from Spain, British Aerospace Plc, the Electricity Supply Board, Lloyd's Register and Logica Plc, Sema Group Plc, Cap Gemini Sogeti SA, Telecom Ireland, Siemens-Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG and Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA; each of the founders will pay $118,000 a year for three to five years to fund the Institute, which will have a staff of about 50; it hopes to build its membership up to between 100 and 300 companies in the medium term.
EIT GROUP CLOSE TO REFINANCING PACKAGE
We seem to have heard it all before, but EIT Group Plc, trading in whose shares has been suspended at 9.5 pence since February, told the Sunday Telegraph that it was close to an agreement with its bankers that would enable it to put together a refinancing package; it says its relations with its own bank, Midland Bank Plc, are good, but that Barclays Bank Plc, which had a £2.8m loan out to Sintrom Plc when EIT bought the firm for £1.7m, reckons it has prior claim on a part of any new money coming into EIT.
GAME GENIE — A BRITISH PRODUCT
Turns out that that Game Genie sold by Lewis Galoob Toys Inc in the US that enables players to alter the parameters of games, and which Nintendo Co failed to persuade the US Supreme Court to declare illegal (CI No 2,135), is a British product: according to the Mail on Sunday, the thing comes from Codemasters Software Ltd of Leamington Spa, whose share of the $15m award to Lewis Galoob came to $3.4m; Codemasters now has sights on Japan.
ERICSSON AND INTEL DEMONSTRATE WINDOWS LINK TO PABXs
At CeBIT Fair in Hannover Ericsson Business Networks and Intel Corp have been showing an emulation of a jointly-developed personal computer board designed to enable Windows machines to be linked to PABXs: the personal computer is linked to the switch through a standard ISDN-type connection so the micro can receive facsimile messages, voice-mail, video communications and the like — the thing is expected to appear as a product late this year.
ALCATEL INCREASE OPTICAL FIBRE PRODUCTION
Alcatel Cable SA, Douvrin, France is increasing its optical fibre production to meet demand — when two new plants come on full stream in the middle of next year, annual output will grow to 930,000 miles from the 590,000 miles it did last year, bringing it close to the current number two, AT&T Co, but still way behind the 1.25m miles produced annually by Corning Inc.
AMERICAN STOCK EXCHANGE CHANGES MIND OVER WANG SHARES
The American Stock Exchange has changed its mind and decided not to suspend trading in the Class B and Class C common shares stocks of Wang Laboratories Inc at the close of business on March 31, as had previously been announced: it says the decision reflects its view that investors will best be served by a continuation of the orderly trading provided by its auction market system, but warns brokers and prospective investors to review Wang's public disclosures on its reorganisation plan thoroughly before leaping in, and to consider carefully the many uncertainties over the value — if any — of its present classes of common shares outstanding.
GENERAL CABLE ACQUIRES SOUTH YORKSHIRE CABLEVISION
Compagnie Generale des Eaux SA said on Friday that its wholly-owned General Cable Ltd unit has acquired South Yorkshire Cablevision Ltd from Pacific Telesis Group Inc's Pactel Cable UK Ltd for an undisclosed sum: South Yorkshire Cablevision holds cable TV franchises in Doncaster and Rotherham, passing 192,000 homes and General Cable already has 100,000 cable TV and telephone subscribers in a number of franchises in Britain; it is very active in Bradford and plans to start work by the end of the year linking Sheffield subscribers.
ROCHESTER TELEPHONE AGREEMENT TO BUY BUDGET CALL LONG DISTANCE
Rochester, New York-based Rochester Telephone Corp's RCI Long Distance has signed a definitive agreement to buy Budget Call Long Distance Inc, a long distance service provider with operations in Pennsylvania that currently does $2m a month.
COMPUTERVISION EXPECT CONTINUED GROWTH
Bedford, Massachusetts-based ComputerVision Corp's chief financial officer said the company expects sales will continue to grow in an increasingly competitive environment, while service will provide a ‘predictable and solid cash flow.’
ENERGIS — NATIONAL GRID COMPANY TELEPHONE SERVICE
Energis is the name chosen by the UK's National Grid Company for the telephone service it plans to launch next year, delivered along fibre optic lines that will run along its 4,200 miles of overhead power lines and 360 miles of underground cable: the company — owned by the 12 regional UK electricity distributors, hopes to get the go-ahead for its planned service in a few weeks, and has heavyweights Gordon Owen, formerly of Mercury Communications Ltd, and David Dey, formerly British Telecommunications Plc on board to run the business.
IBM UK WIN CONTRACT TO OPERATE WHAT THEY OUTSOURCE
With IBM UK Ltd now outsourcing that sort of ancillary operation, it is a little surprising that the company bid for the contract to run the UK government's Citizen's Charter national help-line, a phone service intended to provide advice on how to go about complaining about the performance of 1,400 government services — but it did bid, and it has won the contract.
WORDPERFECT AND JURISOFT PLAN PRODUCT LINK
WordPerfect Corp and the Jurisoft Inc Chicago-based subsidiary of Mead Corp plan to develop links between WordPerfect word processing software and Jurisoft's Legal Toolbox software for legal professionals: the links will be designed to give users seamless access to the full power of the CompareRite, CheckCite, CiteRite II and FullAuthority products via WordPerfect.
CORELDRAW OFFERED THROUGH COMPAQ DIRECTPLUS
Ottawa-based Corel Corp has an OEM agreement with Compaq Computer Corp under which it will offer its CorelDraw graphics package through the new Compaq DirectPlus direct response marketing service: it will be sold separately to start with, but may be offered pre-installed later.
AT&T TO SUPPLY PERSONAL TELECOM PRODUCTS TO CHINA
AT&T Co has signed an agreement with the People's Republic of China allowing it to supply personal telecommunications products with manufacturing partner S Megga International Holdings Ltd's S Megga Telecommunications Ltd unit: the two have a memorandum of understanding with the China National Posts & Telecommunications Industry Corp to market and distribute AT&T-brand telephones, facsimile machines and other consumer items through hundreds of mainland outlets; consumer products account for an estimated 20% of a total Chinese telecommunications market of $7,000m a year.
VERDIX AGREEMENTS BENEFIT ADA DEVELOPMENT SYSTEM
Verdix Corp's Verdix Ada Development System is to go up on Hewlett-Packard Co's HP Apollo 9000 Series 700 workstations under an agreement between the two, and Verdix said an Ada code generator for the Oracle CASE Architecture is now available following a 1992 joint product development agreement it has with its unit Meridian Software Systems and Oracle Corp's Oracle Federal Systems subsidiary.
LAN NETWORK MANAGER AND NETWORK CONTROL SERIES INTEGRATE
IBM Corp and ProTools Inc say they have ‘strategically integrated’ LAN Network Manager from IBM and the Network Control Series from ProTools — the latter consists of Foundation Manager, $9,000 and Cornerstone Agent, $1,300 now; LAN Network Manager sells for $5,240.
ZENITH ANNOUNCE EIGHT NEW Z-STATION DESKTOPS
Zenith Data Systems Europe, Compagnie des Machines Bull SA's microcomputer subsidiary, announced eight new models of its Z-Station desktops, five ‘network-ready’ Z-Note and the Z-Lite 320L, which it calls a ‘subnotebook’computer: the Z-Stations are based on the Intel 80486DX/2 66MHz and 50MHz and the 33MHz 80486SX processors; three of the new Z-Note models are based on the Intel 80486SL chip, and two on the 25MHz 80386SL, and also feature a passive matrix colour display; the Z-Lite 320L weighs 4 lbs and uses the 3.3V 80386 SL chip, which provides for between three and six hours of working between charges.
PROGRESS/400 4GL NOW AVAILABLE TO AS/400 USERS
Progress Software Corp says that Progress/400 4GL for the IBM Corp AS/400 is now available, and is designed to enable users to develop applications for deployment on the AS/400 using 5250 block mode terminals; applications can be developed on a personal computer or direct on the AS/400 and deployed as client-server or native AS/400 systems.
APPLE SYSTEM 7 PROMOTION
Apple Computer Inc introduced a system software promotion called ‘Take Off With System 7’ which will give end users in the US rebates of $5 to $20 when they buy System 7 software and one of 55 participating third-party software products: the programme runs out on June 30.
CLARIFICATION OF AT&T TELECONFERENCING SYSTEM
Clarifying the details of AT&T Co's Personal Video System Model 70 Windows-based teleconferencing system (CI No 2,034), the system transmits information over standard digital phone lines using the Px64’ international video standard at a rate of 10 to 15 frames per second, and the $7,000 price requires you to bring your own computer; the control unit, to be available in the US in the fourth quarter of this year for between $60,000 and $200,000 will enable up to 24 users to be linked in a video conference.
SYSECA WINS LUCRATIVE TURNKEY CONTRACT
Thomson-CSF SA says its Syseca unit won a contract worth several million dollars to provide a turnkey system to send messages between 29 European civil aviation agencies: the contract, awarded by Eurocontrol, which oversees air traffic control across Europe, calls for installing the system by end-1993, and the contract is part of a vast programme to link up Europe's air traffic control systems — the present fragmentation is one of the key causes of the air travel delays; the Central Flow Management Unit system will be based on Syseca's Aermac product, and will collect flight plans from the World Civil Aviation Network, the SITA airline network SITA and from air traffic control centres; it will be installed at two central sites, at Haren, Belgium and Bretigny-sur-Orge, France, using Stratus Computer Inc fault-tolerant systems connected via an X25 packet-switched network.
MICROCOM GRANTED PATENT FOR MNP CLASS 10 FEATURE
Norwood, Massachusetts-based Microcom Inc reports that it has been granted a patent for the Microcom Networking Protocol Class 10 feature, called Aggressive Adaptive Packet Assembly: the feature improves data link transmission performance by pro-actively adapting the size of data packets to line conditions — MNP 10 enables modems to connect, stay connected and have the highest transmission possible, regardless of the line conditions.
CRAY OFFER UNICHEM MOLECULAR MODELLING TO WORKSTATION USERS
Cray Research Inc, Eagan, Minnesota says that it is now offering a workstation version of its UniChem molecular modelling program written for its supercomputers: the new version is available on Silicon Graphics Inc workstations and a version for other Unix workstations will be offered later this year; prices start at $45,000, compared with $130,000 on a supercomputer.
WORDPERFECT TO USE VOCALTEC CAT COMPACT AUDIO DEVICE
Northvale, New Jersey-based VocalTec Inc is to supply Wordperfect Corp with its CAT compact audio device for use by Wordperfect's sales force worldwide to demonstrate Wordperfect 6.0, which supports multimedia audio capabilities: the VocalTec CAT attaches to a standard printer port and runs under MS-DOS and Windows 3.1, and will soon be available for OS/2, and works with microphones, speakers, headsets and phone handsets.
IBM LEADERLESS
Immediate matters arising from the appointment of Louis Gerstner as the next chairman and chief executive of IBM Corp: Gerstner says he made three IBM executive decisions — all of them undisclosed — during the five-block walk from the Midtown Manhattan Hilton where the announcement of his appointment was made and IBM's Madison Avenue offices; and while many say that it has looked to be that way for most of this year, it seems that for a couple of days, IBM really will be leaderless, because John Akers says he will resign at today's board meeting, and Gerstner is not due to take up his posts until Thursday.