

NEW FRENCH GOVERNMENT ‘WANTS TO GET SHOT OF BULL’
The new French minister of industry, Gerard Longuet, seems anxious to hurry along the privatisation of Compagnie des Machines Bull SA, which has cost the French government some $2,500m over the last 10 years, according to Les Echos.
‘The [Bull]case figures among the most urgent, even before that of Thomson SA,’ the article says, citing a source at the Ministry of Industry close to the minister.
‘Fundamental questions are being posed at the same time about the company itself and about the strategic character of the industry.’
A Bull spokesman said the company had no official statement and had ‘perceived no new movement in this area.’
The ministry source noted several possible scenarios, from the sale of individual divisions of Bull, which would enable it to eliminate unprofitable activities, to the taking on board of new investors, to the complete dismantling of the French computer maker.
‘The taking of a 5% stake by IBM has resolved nothing,’ the source said.
It is unclear what attitude the new administration takes to Japanese investment, but if it were politically acceptable, sale of a large part, if not all, the company to 4.7% shareholder NEC Corp would make the most sense, although it is not clear that NEC would now be interested.
On the positive side, it would secure the only international outlet for its mainframes, and with Zenith Data Systems and Bull Micral, would finally be able to shed its also-ran image in the world personal computer market; on the negative, there would be the threat of re-nationalisation under a new administration.
AT&T ACQUIRES UK CT-2 TELEPHONE MANUFACTURER SHAYE
AT&T Co has acquired Shaye Communications Ltd, the Winchester, Hampshire company originally created by Sir Clive Sinclair, which manufactures digital cordless telephones to the CT2 standard.
Terms were not disclosed.
The CT2 standard is used in some 20 countries, but AT&T says it has no immediate plans to market the telephones in the US, because the Federal Communications Commission has not approved CT2 phones for use in the US.
NEC HOBBIT TERMINAL FOR SEPTEMBER
NEC Corp plans to have a wireless digital terminal based on AT&T Co's Hobbit chip on the Japanese market in September.
The unit — aimed at travelling salesmen in insurance and other industries, will send data and electronic mail to a home base from locations within the Tokyo area, the firm said.
AMDAHL OFFERS UPTIME CONSULTANCY
Amdahl Corp is offering a new availability management service to customers that need 99% or better uptime from their mainframes.
Under the new service, Amdahl's consultants analyse a customer's information services organisational structure, environment, critical business functions, and key applications that require high availability or continuous operation.
They then examine four months of outage reports, seeking trends, strengths and weaknesses, and conduct a component-failure impact-analysis audit to identify single points of failure, ascertain the effect of particular types of failures, and decide methods and costs of mitigating them.
Costing $50,000 to $75,000, it takes seven to eight weeks to complete.
HEWLETT-PACKARD, DATA GENERAL, DELL ALL SIGN UP FOR NEXTSTEP 486
Lending the lie to the sceptics that saw no hope of NeXT Computer Inc winning any significant licensees for its object-oriented NeXTstep environment now that the company has abandoned its hardware side, the company yesterday announced that three blue chip names, Hewlett-Packard Co, Dell Computer Corp and Data General Corp had signed up for the NeXTstep 486 version.
Many had assumed that with the emergence of the Common Open Software Environment, those reports of negotiations between Hewlett and NeXT were wide of the mark (CI No 2,080) but not so: Hewlett-Packard says it will offer iAPX-86-based personal computers certified to run the software.
Data General, which offered NeXT workstations for use with its AViiON servers for a time, says it is working with NeXT to make NeXTstep available on its line of Dasher II 486 personal computers.
And Dell plans to pre-install NeXTstep on some models.
Further details of the deals were not released.
Separately, NeXT denied reports that the agreement to sell its hardware design centre and some technologies to 17.9% shareholder Canon Inc had run into trouble.
NeXT told Electronic News that Canon was still interested in the design centre as part of a larger package involving licensing, marketing and distribution rights to the NeXTstep environment.
SILICON GRAPHICS ‘IN TALKS WITH TIME WARNER ON TV’
Silicon Graphics Inc, Mountain View, is not commenting on a report in the New York Times that it is considering teaming up with Time Warner Inc to develop hardware for interactive television.
The paper said the companies were discussing building an inexpensive computer derived from the three-dimensional Silicon Graphics R4000 64-bit RISC-based Iris machines used by movie studios to create special effects, which would attach to television sets and make possible a variety of interactive games and other applications.
The talks are also said to involve video servers at the transmission end.
The cable television industry is said to be leery of handing over a standard to a third party such as Microsoft Corp, which has teamed up with Intel Corp to develop a set-top control box based on the 80386 and Windows; the 80386 is also regarded as underpowered for graphics work.
TOSHIBA TO PUMP $90m MORE INTO IBM DISPLAY VENTURE
Toshiba Corp is to raise its capital investment in plant and equipment at its Display Technologies Inc 50-50 joint venture with IBM Japan Ltd to triple its output of thin-film transistor liquid crystal colour displays.
Toshiba will invest some $90m this fiscal year to raise output to 100,000 a month from the present 30,000 and raise yields to 80% from the present 60%.
No word on whether IBM will have to make a matching contribution.
FUJITSU-AMD SEMICONDUCTOR LTD FLASH VENTURE BORN
Advanced Micro Devices Inc and Fujitsu Ltd have now completed preparations for their Fujitsu-AMD Semiconductor Ltd joint venture on Flash memories, and groundbreaking for a $700m wafer fabrication facility in Aizu-Wakamatsu, Japan, is set for June with operations set to begin in the fourth quarter of this year.
SQL ACCESS GROUP SQUABBLES SET TO HAND IBM DISTRIBUTED DATABASE STANDARD BY DEFAULT
The rise of complex, enterprise-wide client-server computing strategies has inevitably lead to demands for a single mechanism that will enable users to access information which resides on databases that may be distributed across a range of hardware systems.
Two rival mechanisms, IBM Corp's Distributed Relational Architecture and the SQL Access Group's SQL specifications, have locked horns in an attempt to resolve the issue and win over the database industry to their respective solutions.
The problem of accessing information on database architectures developed and marketed different suppliers — or, more simply, interoperability — has arisen because there is no standard topology upon which databases are built.
IBM has its own proprietary relational and hierarchical databases.
Unix database vendors such as Oracle Corp, Informix Inc, Ingres and Sybase Inc offer more open relational database architectures.
The ubiquity of Unix means they run on a wide range of systems, but there is still only a minimal amount of interoperability between them.
The most common method of both accessing information in relational databases is the SQL Structured Query Language.
IBM developed SQL, a non-procedural data definition language, and launched it with the original SQL/DS under DOS/VSE back in 1980.
It was adopted by the American National Standards Institute, becoming a simple data access method for all databases — a common language which  provides users with the ability to interrogate relational databases from a variety of vendors.
However, the ANSI SQL standard is limited.
Most vendors adhere to parts of the ANSI standard but their implementations aren't identical.
Each database developer tailors its own SQL products to increase the functionality it is able to offer, and therefore gain a competitive edge over rival suppliers.
For example, there are different types of triggers that edit data, perform calculations and enforce security in all databases.
Semantic differences
These semantic differences have established similar, but distinct SQL dialects.
To try and solve some of these problems, database developers — plus third party independent software vendors — have produced gateway products.
A gateway acts as an interpreter, translating SQL dialects from one database environment to another.
These are normally limited to relational databases.
Some independent software vendors have gone further.
Metaphor Computer Systems Inc, Red Brick Systems Inc, Information Builders Inc and Seachange Ltd have added relational and non-relational database access to the gateway.
Information Builders Inc's EDA/SQL product enables both IBM SQL-based databases and IBM hierarchical databases to exchange information.
These solutions have been successful in providing users with the ability to fire off queries to multiple databases.
For users, they are still expensive add-on features and come with their own set of integration problems.
For this reason, the database community is looking for a standard means that'll enable users to access and exchange data across different database schemas.
The problem is that different vendors are proposing a variety of opposing solutions.
One contender is the product that the SQL Access Group was formed to produce: the group was set up by database vendors to standardise on one SQL dialect.
Members include Sybase Inc, Oracle Systems Corp, Borland International Inc, Cincom Systems Inc and Informix Software Inc.
The SQL Access Group bases its dialect on ANSI's RDA Remote Data Access specification, which defines the formats and protocols which enable different databases and related tools to interoperate.
So far, the SQL Access Group has begun development on definition access control and authentication; networking extensions; code types for SQL data types and definitions for SQL objects, which include things such as database schemas and tables.
One achievement has been the establishment of a Call Level Interface mechanism, on which Microsoft Corp and Borland International have based their respective Open Data Base Connectivity and IDAPI application programming interfaces.
Although the SQL Access Group has taken the technical issues of SQL interoperability a stage further, the organisation hasn't had much success in getting the specifications out of the copy book and into vendors' products.
According to UK database analyst Martin Butler, disagreement among the SQL Access Group members over common development goals, and the establishment of labyrinthine committee structure has laden the organisation with bureaucracy.
He says ‘SAG efforts are frozen, it can't decide which way to go and doesn't look as if it will ever get its act together.’
Database watchers believe the SQL Access Group's time is running out and its continued existence depends on its ability to deliver specifications this summer.
If, as some database vendors believe, the SQL Access Group doesn't fulfill its promises, then suppliers are likely to turn IBM's alternative DRDA Distributed Relational Database Architecture.
IBM introduced DRDA in 1990 to provide data access and information exchange between its own databases including DB/2, OS/2, OS/400, SQL/DS and DB2/6000.
It says it will extend the mechanism to support other database systems in future.
Distributed Relational Database Architecture is based on the DB/2 SQL dialect.
It supports each database as a client, translating other SQL dialects into DB/2 SQL.
In effect, Distributed Relational Database Architecture neutralises different SQL dialects and enables each client to access data from other IBM databases.
Distributed Relational Database Architecture also makes information access, data modification and application development more manageable, the company claims.
For example, tables located in multiple DB/2 databases on different systems can be modified through update, delete or insert SQL statements, without issuing multiple requests to each remote system.
Distributed Relational Database Architecture also supports two-phase commit to ensure data integrity.
The database where the request originates is responsible for co-ordinating the transaction among its different participants.
It checks calls and recovers them in case of a failure and passes the information back to the initiating program.
Distributed Relational Database Architecture also includes Unix support via IBM's recently introduced AIX relational database, DB2/600 for the RS/6000.
DB2/6000 is claimed to offer all the functions of an autonomous relational server, supporting AIX, OS/2, MS-DOS and Windows systems as clients, and provides the missing Unix link in the Distributed Relational Database Architecture equation.
The database can also be integrated with Information Warehouse and the CICS/6000 transaction processing monitor, and supports X/Open Co Ltd's XA transaction processing application programming interface.
DB2/6000 operates as a Distributed Relational Database Architecture client — remote units of work can be issued against any DRDA database that includes similar support.
Distributed Relational Database Architecture integrates with IBM's connection service, DDCS/6000, software that provides RS/6000 applications with access to enterprise-wide systems.
Despite its proprietary stigma, Distributed Relational Database Architecture is winning acolytes in the Unix database community.
More than 20 suppliers, including Sybase, Oracle, Informix and Cincom have licensed DRDA.
Informix is the first with a DRDA product: it introduced Informix-Gateway for Distributed Relational Database Architecture last month.
The gateway is Unix-based and provides links to IBM databases.
Oracle will launch a Distributed Relational Database Architecture SQL-to-Oracle SQL dialect converter — SQL/Connect — later this year and Sybase will provide DRDA support via its SQL Server System 10.
These suppliers — all SQL Access Group members — say that IBM's point blank refusal to join the SQL Access Group will ensure that Distributed Relational Database Architecture becomes a de facto standard.
The SQL Access Group, as yet, has failed to deliver its interoperability solution, while IBM promises to support third party databases on non-IBM systems.
Much better
According to Butler, the SQL Access Group specifications are technically much better because its SQL uses a common subset of the language.
The client controls the translation of the request and can directly query data from the server.
This cuts down processing and response time of calls where in a Distributed Relational Database Architecture environment, client requests have to be translated at the server, which increases system overhead and makes database access less flexible.
DRDA is also slower at processing multiple calls because it uses IBM's own synchronous networking protocol, LU6.2.
Each call sent out by a client has to wait for a response before another is sent.
The SQL Access Group incorporates asynchronous protocols, which enables users to send multiple calls to different databases simultaneously.
The integration of Distributed Relational Database Architecture into third party products will also be problematic, according to Informix UK market manager, Tony Lacy-Thompson.
DRDA application programming interfaces are more complex to write to than the SQL Access Group interfaces, he says.
IBM DB/2 SQL dialects are difficult to link into Unix-based databases, and each vendor has to adapt its respective database and gateway products to talk to DB/2 protocols.
Although the SQL Access Group gets top marks for technical merit — it is also an independent standards organisation — it doesn't have a complete solution and there is no documentation yet available on what it has put together.
If Distributed Relational Database Architecture lacks technical finesse, it has fulfilled IBM's own development goals, and it is already available for third parties to implement.
Industry watchers say that if the SQL Access Group survives and successfully markets completed specifications by the summer, then the two products can co-exist.
IBM and the SQL Access Group would most likely develop interoperability between their respective mechanisms.
But the more likely scenario is that support for the SQL Access Group will wane, funding from members will dry up and Distributed Relational Database Architecture will become the standard by default.
SUN's NEW SPARC TECHNOLOGY BUSINESS UNIT WILL OFFER EARLY ACCESS TO SUN's NEW CHIP AND SYSTEM DESIGNS
Sun Microsystems Inc last week officially launched its Sparc Technology Business unit to peddle licences to Sun's own silicon and system designs.
The new profit and loss centre is aimed at driving Sun into areas it hasn't been before, such as the embedded arena, and seeking customers that can create a string of derivative products.
The unit, whose vice-president of technology sales is Chet Silvestri, a recent emigre from MIPS Technologies Inc, is setting up an infrastructure that will eventually be able to offer customers early access to Sun's future microprocessor technology: the specifications, chip development and first tape-outs.
Immediately, however, early access is not an issue, since the only silicon products Sparc Technology has in its price book are existing products: the MicroSparc chip and something called the Sparc 811, the Sparcstation 2 integer unit.
If a customer wants to build a Sparc  derivative for internal use, it will cost $1m up-front and a royalty fee of $5 to $10 depending on the application.
If instead it wants to sell a standard part on the open market, it will be $1.75m up-front plus 10% of the chips' average selling price.
If, on the other hand, the customer wants rights to both the standard Sun chip and a derivative to sell on the open market, the price tag is $2.5m up-front and 10%.
For the money and, knowing Sun, these list prices will be negotiable, the customer gets the core design database and the key development tools Sun uses internally.
No customers yet
Sparc 811 has no customers yet, but both Xerox Palo Alto Research Center and SMILE, the Sparc Macrocell and Interface Library Elements project inside Europe's Esprit III programme, have taken licences to create Tsunami derivatives.
SMILE intends developing a family of Sparc-based library cells as the basis for a next-generation family of embedded microcontrollers, with the aim of giving subscribers such as the Philips Semiconductor arm of Philips Electronics NV and the French firm Matra MHS SA a leg-up.
Sparc Technology will also sell Sun system designs, hoping to expand indirectly into the portable, X terminal and embedded markets.
For $375,000 up-front plus a $75 royalty on every system, it will sell the motherboard plans to the Tsunami-based LX and its Classic subset, and for $500,000 up-front plus $200 per unit, it will sell the plans to the high-end Viking-based Sparcstation 10.
Embedded house Force Computers Inc, Campbell, California, which previously worked with the Sparcstation 1 and 2, has signed for the 10.
Solaris 1.1 and 2.1 will be implemented on the embedded architecture along with real-time operating systems.
Themis Computer Systems Inc, on the other hand, is using the Classic to create the SparcLXE with VMEbus for embedded applications, priced at $4,000 in lots of 100 with 8Mb DRAM.
It runs both Solaris 1.1 and 2.1 and is expected to be the first of a family of products.
Sparc Technology is also responsible for operating system-independent systems so third parties can sell Sun hardware with Novell Inc NetWare, real-time or perhaps competing software such as Microsoft Corp Windows NT.
Sparc Technology anticipates moving both the hardware and software through distributors and master resellers who will integrate them before moving them on to resellers.
Six-months worth of engineering support (50 hours on the phone) and training is bundled with the products.
For those requiring more, there is an addition a 12-month contract available for $150,000 to silicon customers and $75,000 to systems customers.
Design services will also be performed on a time and materials basis by Sparc Technology engineering consultants.
Sparc Technology currently employs 30 to 40 people and is aiming for between 50 and 60 by the end of the year.
THE FUTURE OF 88OPEN IS NOW HANGING BY A THREAD
Motorola Inc has put its two cents in the unfolding downsizing saga over at 88open.
According to 88open chairman Chuck Corley, Motorola's man, the consortium's budget is being ‘adjusted’ because the test suites that are its raison d'etre are done and members have no requirements for more — despite talk of Unix System V.4 ES/MP.
Corley says a ‘base level of services may continue for a long time’ although 88open's staff has shrunk to four persons, five if you count European director Steve Heath, who is thought to be employed directly by Motorola.
Corley says that the 88open board is now amenable to an 88open spin-off such as president Tom Mace has been contemplating to salvage the consortium's prized testing techniques — provided 88open's name is not connected with it.
Should the spin-out be attempted (and the new PowerOpen is a likely next customer), some of the 19 people eliminated from 88open could be rehired.
Corley says the powers that be are assessing the situation to see how many would still be needed.
Others might continue with 88open itself, their continued employment being dependent on the level of support 88open members will actually continue to need.
Members have to make that determination themselves, based on their strategic planning, an estimate 88open has been hard pressed to get from them even by the beginning of its new fiscal year.
Certainly however ‘an incremental menu of services’ will be provided to principal members as committed to its the 1994 fiscal funding.
The organisation's long-term viability, Corley allowed, depends on the continuing level of interest.
IBM PREPARES TO ACT TO DISPEL CRITICISMS OF ITS ADVANCED PEER-TO-PEER NETWORKING PROTOCOL
In an attempt to overcome the criticisms that its Advanced Peer-to-Peer Networking technology is too proprietary, IBM Corp has been making moves to increase its appeal.
According to Computerworld, it has said that at the next APPN Implementors' Workshop, set for this week, it will seek input from other vendors on how to set priorities for future enhancements, and it has set the price for reverse engineering the code at $25,000, a lower figure than many had predicted.
While the company has still not announced how much vendors will have to pay in royalties on top of the $400,000 licence fee for buying the 135,000 lines of code, it did say that royalties had been reduced significantly, and the second release of the code will be free to those companies that buy the first.
HUNGARY's KONTRAX COMPUTER CONGLOMERATE HITS CASH-FLOW PROBLEMS BUT SAYS IT's NORMAL IN HUNGARY
Kontrax Group, the large Hungarian telecommunications and computer concern, announced plans to restructure three of its key majority-owned companies after admitting cash-flow difficulties.
Kontrax Holdings Ltd, Kontrax Telecom Plc and Kontrax Office Systems Plc have accumulated short term debts totalling $53m and have called in the financial consultants Banker RT to manage discussions with their two main creditors, the Hungarian Credit Bank and Postabank.
The company claims to have reached an agreement in principle either to  lengthen the terms of its loans, or swap for debt for equity, and until detailed plans are presented on April 6, the firm announced that it will suspend capital repayments on its loans.
Kontrax also aims to sell and lease back its main office building in Budapest which it values at $13m.
Negotiations have yet to take place with 10 minor creditors.
Until now, the six year-old Kontrax Group had been regarded as a Hungarian success story.
Since its humble beginnings as a photocopier distributor working out of a garage, the company expanded rapidly and diversified into computers and telecommunications, accumulating 16 subsidiaries and spawning foreign subsidiaries in Poland, Bulgaria and the Czech and Slovak Republics in the process.
Last year the group turned over $81m and posted a net profit of $1.1m.
Nearly 10% of the company's revenues were earned outside Hungary through its East European subsidiaries, and nearly half its revenues and a third of its profits came from its office automation subsidiary — which recently concluded a dealer agreement with Compaq Computer Corp.
Pool-playing
Kontrax Holding Rt majority shareholder Gabor Disco, a member of the highly influential informal club of pool-playing Hungarian businessmen dubbed the ‘Centrum 10’, claimed that the group was not insolvent and argued that ‘nine out of 10’ Hungarian companies were facing similar problems with short term loans in the absence of long term credit facilities.
Indeed, while the restructuring plan casts doubt on the firm's ability to come up with the capital to finance an ambitious plan to expand its telecommunications operation, the extent of the Kontrax Group's difficulties are hard to assess as it financed its expansion by means of a maze of inter-company loans.
Kontrax Office Automation Plc and Kontrax Telecom Plc are 30% owned by the notorious Maxwell Group whose stake is currently being administered by Arthur Andersen — but Kontrax also seems to have borrowed some accounting techniques from Robert Maxwell.
In the computer distribution sector, Kontrax Office Automation Plc aims to take on the distribution of more products and launch a franchised dealer network while continuing to service large accounts direct.
The office automation company forecasts no increase in turnover in Hungary in 1993 in this sector, despite a 12% revenue increase last year, but has acted to reduce its domestic stock levels as a consequence and sees growth elsewhere in Eastern Europe.
COMPUTER 2000's FLEDGLING HUNGARIAN UNIT SHOWS PROMISE
While Computer 2000 AG fumes over the potential implications of the Polish government's decision to waive duty on the imports of local assemblers (CI No 2,140), indications are emerging that the company's six-month-old operation in Hungary is beginning to perform after a troubled start.
Business development manager Laszlo Szilvessy forecasts that the company will turn over $1.5m in the first quarter of 1993, after a disappointing $740,000 in the last three months of 1992.
Computer 2000 lost its Hungarian managing director a month after opening in August 1992 and experienced difficulties with suppliers, according to Szilvassy.
However, the company turned over $430,000 in January, $480,000 in February, is on course to turn over $609,000 in March, and is now hitting its sales targets, Szilvassy announced.
ROSTER OF BIDDERS FOR BIG HUNGARIAN TAX CONTRACT NOW RUNS TO 19 COMPANIES
Nineteen companies have indicated their intention to bid for the contract to computerise Hungary's tax system, with three more companies expected to join the fray in the next few days.
The project is to be paid for with a tailor-made $29m World Bank loan, which is scheduled to be approved by the Hungarian government later this month, before being signed off by the bank.
Agnes Huszti, the project manager at the Hungarian Tax Authority, APEH, who is responsible for appointing experts to evaluate the technical parts of the bids, reported that all the major companies were participating in the bidding process.
Huszti said that while the APEH did require an ‘open system’, but he claimed that this did not necessitate a Unix system, indicating that conformance to the X/Open Co Ltd XPG/3 branding standard might not be obligatory — even though the Hungarian government decreed that X/Open branding should be used in all government tenders back in August last year.
Huszti also noted that bidders would be permitted to sub-contract work if they were unable to meet any particular requirements of the tender.
A conference will be held in Budapest for all bidders this month, before the technical bids are evaluated in May.
Some companies may be disqualified at this stage, and the remaining companies will then have three weeks to cost their bid.
 INADVERTENT LEAK REVEALS FIGURES FOR DEC's HUNGARIAN BUSINESS; IBM STILL A MYSTERY
Digital Equipment Corp's Hungarian subsidiary reported sales of $30m in its financial year to October 1992, up from $16m in the same period of 1991.
The information, which DEC had previously treated as confidential, came to light after DEC Hungary executives accidentally handed an internal company newsletter to a local Canadian freelance journalist.
DEC is widely held to be the largest foreign computer company in the country, although IBM Corp's turnover is unknown.
Hewlett-Packard Co's 1992 revenues stood at $16m, ICL Plc's at $12m, and Compagnie des Machines Bull SA's figures, while not disclosed, are believed to be in the region of $12m to $15m.
During the 1980s, the domestic industry opted almost exclusively to clone the DEC VAX, and when the company set up a subsidiary in Hungary in 1990, it held off suing the key clone supplier, KFKI, in return for the firm handing over its customer lists.
This has given DEC a considerable advantage in picking up small and medium-sized accounts.
DIMENSION INTERNATIONAL IS INTO THIRD ITERATION OF ITS VIRTUAL WORLD CREATION, VISUALISATION SOFTWARE
Aldermaston, Berkshire-based Dimension International Ltd launched version three of its Superscape VRT virtual world creation and visualisation software at the Virtual Reality ‘93 Conference in London.
VRT 3, as it is called, has over 100 new features, making it easier to use but more powerful than its predecessor, according to Dimension.
It now provides texture editing, whereby bitmapped images can be imported as 256 colour PCX files, rescaled and recoloured.
There are new integrated editors for digitised sound play and editing — sound can be imported from Windows or AdLib files.
And the C-based virtual object command language has been enlarged to over 500 commands, making the system more accessible to non-programmers.
The library of Virtual Clip Art — a supply of ready made objects, many of them with  intelligence , textures, sound and dynamics — has also been doubled to over 200 objects.
Also integrated into the system are the Superscape Visualiser, which supervises real time visualisation of the virtual world; world editor, enabling users to build virtual worlds; shape editor for constructing building block shapes for manipulation by the world editor; screen layout editor; keyboard editor; dialoguebox editor; DXF file import and export.
It runs on 80386-based personal computers, though 80486's are recommended.
Superscape supports networked virtual worlds created with its networks option.
It costs £3,500 and will be available in May.
Upgrades are available for existing customers.
BIOSIGNAL PROCESSING, LINKING MUSCULAR, EYE MOVEMENT SIGNALS TO COMPUTERS, DRAWS THE CROWDS
Biocontrol Systems Inc of Palo Alto, California attracted great interest at the Olympia show with its biosignal processing technology.
This translates bioelectric signals from muscles and eye movements, and even the brain, for interfacing with a range of output devices.
Biocontrol reckons this to be much cheaper than current eye-tracking and visualisation systems and to be suitable for a host of applications ranging from medical research through computer games to lie detectors.
It has been known for some time that eyes give out bioelectric signals — the retina has a positive charge, the cornea is negative.
Thinking, and the effects of emotions like stress, also trigger signals from the brain, in the same way that movements affect muscles.
Biocontrol's system uses special sensors situated on lightweight armbands and the so-called EyeCon headband, which detects eye movement and depth of field.
The signals are then transmitted via a standard RS-232 link, game port or similar electronic interface — Biocontrol plans to offer radio signal transmission soon — to a special signal processing box.
This contains a software interface for personal computers and can also link to devices such as synthesisers or video recorders.
Research and development licences for a system comprising the eight channel BioMuse computer and software development kit, headband and armbands are available from Biotronics for $10,000.
Recent subscribers include Honeywell Inc in Minneapolis, the Naval Research Laboratory in Washington DC, Volvo Research in Sweden, Loma Linda University Hospital, California, the University of Barcelona and RTZ Technologies in Spain and Pigreco SpA, an Italian real time animation company.
And there are already a wide range of applications under way in the US where the system been available since October.
Medical applications include the development of two- and three-dimensional eye controllers that could help surgeons using endoscopic cameras, real time mother-foetal heart monitors, eye and muscle controllers for the disabled and physiotherapy aids for rehabilitation.
Industrial applications include two- and three-dimensional eye controllers for virtual reality applications and video games using head-mounted displays, biosignal pattern recognition for teleoperator robotics, two- and three-dimensional eye controlled computer mice; stress management systems for cars or work environments and audio pattern recognition.
Others innovations include monitoring systems for athletes, educational aids and biosignals-to-music system for arty stage performances.
This last use was demonstrated on the stand at the Olympia show by a video recording of an avant garde Japanese artist who gave a synthesiser-dance concert using the system.
He wore Biocontrol armbands, which monitored his movements, and these were then translated by the system for output by the various keyboards — interpreted as music.
PRIMARY IMAGE PREVIEWS NEW VERSION OF ITS STRIDE GRAPHICS SYSTEM
Primary Image Ltd from Kingston-upon-Thames says it is working on a new version of its Stride multichannel graphics system that will enable users to scan photographic images on personal computers.
It reckons the new version will be particularly attractive to its core military and flight simulation markets.
Stride is a high performance computer-generated imaging system comprising a single AT bus board and the StrideGen database generator based on the AutoCAD drawing system; StrideView database viewing and exploration package and scenario builder; and runtime system comprising Stridehost — the personal computer-resident elements and StrideRun — the Stride-resident real time system.
The bus board, which can be customised with a range of optional modules, includes a number of high performance processors and co-processors designed to place a minimum load on the host personal computer processor.
Minimum requirements for run-time systems are a standard Stride board and renderer hosted by at least an 80386 machine with co-processor.
The software requires a personal computer capable of running AutoCAD Release 11 with a 40Mb hard disk.
High resolution graphics and a mouse are also essential.
The hardware costs £8,000; the toolkit sells for £3,000.
TRANSFORMATION INTRODUCES LOW-END MODELGEN DATABASE MODELLING SYSTEM
Thame, Oxfordshire-based distributor Transformation Software Ltd has announced a number of new extensions to its high end MultiGen virtual reality database modelling system, as well as a new, cheaper but less advanced derivative, ModelGen.
MultiGen, has been the leading database modelling tool for the military simulation industry for some years, according to Transformation.
Its San Jose, California-based developer, Software Systems Inc, has now decided that the time is right to provide a lower cost version, which runs on Silicon Graphics Inc workstations.
The resulting ModelGen system costs between £13,300 and £21,300 and offers texture tools and virtual reality options and is aimed at the virtual reality, architectural, computer-aided design walkthrough, computer-aided design visualisation and entertainment markets.
MultiGen, meantime, has been made more powerful through a number of virtual reality options.
These include the ability for users to define articulation and constraints such as degrees of rotation; the ability to test the behaviour of three-dimensional objects within the system interactively; and inclusion of source code for immersive real-time applications based on Silicon Graphics's tools.
Further enhancements will include a linkage editor that enables users to define the relationships between entities in a scene — such as a light switch and light — including sound.
The ability to define characteristics such as mass, velocity, inertia and elasticity is also planned.
Both MultiGen and ModelGen support the Flight database format version 12.0 that is used by real-time packages such as Gemini Technology Inc's GVS, and Silicon Graphics's Performer.
IS THE ALPHA CHIP GOING TO SAVE DEC FROM DECLINE?
THE JURY IS STILL OUT
We have to wait patiently a little while longer yet to determine whether the new generation Alpha RISC machines have turned Digital Equipment Corp around or whether the company is pursuing the same downward curve as IBM Corp, because the company has still scarcely started shipping the machines in real numbers — but it does not make it clear whether that is a function of supply or demand.
Sales for the fiscal third quarter were up 6% — but that is down mainly to favourable currency translations, and while the loss of $30m is a big step in the right direction, it was still slightly worse than Wall Street estimates, and analysts were particularly disappointed with the low turnover growth.
Analysts also worry that only 4,000 people were taken off the payroll in the quarter, bringing the total at the company down to 98,100 — they had been expecting that more would leave the company.
Total employment has declined by nearly 16,000 since the beginning of the fiscal year.
Analysts were encouraged by the company's lower operating expenses — research and engineering spending declined by 19%, and sales, general and  administrative expenses fell 8%.
DEC says turnover would have been essentially flat without the favourable impact of foreign exchange.
DEC said that for the first time in six quarters it generated positive cash flow from operations and investments, even with restructuring activities.
The personal computer business doubled year over year, as it expanded its presence in desktop machines, and service revenues grew by 12%.
The company said its balance sheet remains strong with a low debt ratio and cash balance of $1,600m.
On the Alpha, DEC said that roll-out of Alpha-based systems continues on schedule but that because it is a major programme, it will continue to take several quarters to implement fully — and rather than talk numbers of machines or orders, the company chose to focus on the people writing for the thing, saying that more than 500 Alpha AXP applications from partners and 50 software products are available today.
In total, more than 1,000 vendors are moving more than 200 applications to the Alpha environment.
‘We are meeting the goals we have set for ourselves in returning Digital to profitability and growth,’ said president and chief executive Robert Palmer.
‘We are encouraged by our transformation to a market-driven, customer-focused company.
We are confident that our strategy — to provide customers with the best solutions and to provide the best technology in core areas of competence — is the right strategy for our customers, partners, shareholders, and employees,’ he said.
CHIP BOOK-TO-BILL RATIO IS DOWN TO A STILL BUBBLING 1.17 IN MARCH
The US Semiconductor Industry Association's book-to-bill ratio for March fell to 1.17 from the revised 1.19 figure for February — a figure of 1.18 was reported at the time.
Average orders for the three months to March in the US market rose 5.4% at $2,194m compared with the figure for the three months to February, and were 46.5% higher than the figure compiled a year ago.
Shipments for the three months to March on the same basis rose 7% to $1,872m, up 33.9% on the March 1992 figure.
Actual semiconductor shipments during the month of March were 26.5% up on the February figure at $2,256m.
SHARE & BOND ISSUES
Tele-Communications Inc, Denver, is going to need a great deal of cash to finance its ambitious fibre optic installation programme (CI No 2,147), and the company has filed a shelf registration with the US Securities & Exchange Commission for up to $3,000m of debt securities, class A common stock warrants and class A common shares.
Net proceeds, plus internally generated funds, may be used to repay, redeem or buy back debt and for general operations, including acquisitions, capital expenditures, working capital and to buy back common and preferred stock.
Underwriters may include Goldman Sachs & Co, Merrill Lynch & Co, Morgan Stanley & Co Inc, PaineWebber Inc, Salomon Brothers Inc, Shearson Lehman and First Boston Corp, the company noted.
COMPANY RESULTS
Cambex Corp has reported second quarter net profits down 50.6% at $1.5m, on turnover up 1.8% at $12m; mid-term net fell 30.1% to $3.4m, on turnover up 13.9% at $26.5m.
Net per share fell 51.4% to $0.17 in the quarter, and 29.8% to $0.40 in the half.
Digital Equipment Corp has reported a third quarter net loss of $30.1m, down from a loss last time of $311.3m, on turnover that rose 6.2% at $3,454m; net loss for the nine months was $364.5m, down from a loss last time of $940.4m, which included a $485.5m charge for the retired employee benefits accounting change, on turnover that rose 4.3% at $10,457m.
Infodata Systems Inc has reported fourth quarter net losses of $741,000 up from losses of $192,000 last time, after $41,000 tax charges last time, on turnover down 23.1% at $2.1m; net losses for the year to December 31 stood at $2.8m against profits of $38,000 last time, after $1.2m charges related to write-offs this time and $9,000 tax credits last time, on turnover that fell by 24.4% to $9m.
Nashua Corp has reported fourth quarter net profits of $2.2m, after $900,000 pre-tax gains related to the  settlement of litigation and $1.2m gains from the sale of stock, against losses of $2.8m last time, on turnover up 16.5% at $145.2m; net losses for the year to December 31 stood at $4.8m against profits of $552,000 last time, after $10.1m losses from the cumulative effect of an accounting change, on turnover that rose by 5% to $552.5m.
Net earnings per share amounted to $0.35 in the quarter.
Peoples Telephone Co has reported fourth quarter net profits up 48.7% at $944,000, after $450,000 charges from the settlement of a dispute, on turnover up 55.7% at $22.8m; net profit for the year to December 31 was up 72.9% at $3.3m, on turnover that rose 34% to $74.9m.
Net per share rose 10% to $0.11 in the quarter, 27.3% to $0.42 in the year.
Spinnaker Software Corp has turned in second quarter net profits down 8.1% at $614,603, on turnover that fell 9.5% to $8.2m; mid-term net fell 96% to $314,422, on turnover that fell 3.6% at $14.7m.
Net earnings per share remained at $0.05 in the quarter, and fell 50% to $0.03 in the half.
Corel Corp saw first quarter net profit down 5% at $1.2m, after $304,313 losses from discontinued operations last time, on turnover that rose 55.7% to $16.6m.
Net per share fell 21.4% to $0.09.
Amounts converted at $0.80 to the Canadian dollar.
Creative Technologies Inc has reported fourth quarter net losses of $304,000 against profits of $99,000 last time, on turnover that rose by 62.8% at $3.3m; net losses for the year to December 31 stood at $298,000 against profits of $172,000 last time, on turnover that rose by 23.8% to $6.7m.
The Singapore company reports figures in US dollars.
US FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION REVIEWS STAFF REPORT ON ANTI-TRUST ALLEGATIONS
The US Federal Trade Commission is reviewing a new staff report on the anti-trust allegations against Microsoft Corp, but a decision on the matter probably is still weeks away, lawyers familiar with the case told the Wall Street Journal: with a two-to-two vote in February, the commission didn't accept staff recommendations to seek an injunction preventing the company from using its market power to engage in allegedly unfair competitive practices; after the tied vote, the commissioners asked for more information in an effort to resolve the deadlock; the status report, which was delivered to commissioners last week, provides additional support for the staff's call for action.
COMPAQ RESTRUCTURES FIELD AND RESELLER SUPPORT OPERATIONS
Compaq Computer Corp has restructured its field and reseller support operations in the US to increase interaction with its customer base and to improve support for Compaq resellers: it will reorganise field resources to five from eight regional areas across the US, centralise major support resources for resellers in Houston, and eliminate surplus field employees, although the number to go was not announced.
MAI SYSTEMS LISTS ASSETS AT $26.1M
MAI Systems Corp, the Irvine, California maker of small business computers that just filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection (CI No 2,147), listed $26.1m in assets and $145.0m in liabilities; Brooke Group Ltd, which is controlled by MAI chairman Bennett LeBow, owns 82.3% of MAI's voting securities; the largest unsecured creditor listed in the filing was Chemical Trust Co. of California, trustee for $40m of 11.75% senior subordinated debentures; the obligations listed for most of the other creditors were mostly for $4m or less.
PEERLOGIC BECOMES MEMBER OF OBJECT MANAGEMENT GROUP
PeerLogic Inc, San Francisco developer of Pipes Platform for distributed computing has become a member of the Object Management Group.
ADOBE SYSTEMS LICENCES POSTSCRIPT SOFTWARE TO SONY
Adobe Systems Inc has licensed its PostScript software to Sony Corp so that it can offer a new software Raster Image Processor based on the Configurable PostScript Interpreter to be integrated into its existing News Unix workstations that drive output devices and are targeted for the Japanese market.
LOTUS DEVELOPMENT'S JAPANESE SUBSIDIARY TO CUT PRICES
Lotus Development Corp's Japanese subsidiary is to slash prices on 10,000 copies of its 1-2-3 for Windows, Freelance for Windows and Ami Pro by around 70% from Friday.
MOTOROLA DISCUSSES ENLARGING BRAZIL'S MOBILE CELLULAR TELEPHONE NETWORK
Motorola Inc president George Fisher met with Brazil's President Itamar Franco to discuss enlarging the nation's mobile cellular telephone network, Agencia Brasil reports: the state news agency said that Fisher proposed installation of a satellite network that would enable international calls to be made from Brazil without going through the state telephone company Embratel; no price or date for starting the project was mentioned.
NISUS SOFTWARE ACQUIRES ESSENTIAL SOFTWARE INC
Nisus Software Inc, Solana Beach, California reports that it has acquired Essential Software Inc, Staatsburg, New York: Essential is the developer and publisher of Easy Alarms, a personal information management program for the Macintosh, and a distributor of the bX-10 Home Control Interface package, software and hardware for home and office automation; terms were not given.
DIGITAL WIN $3M CONTRACT FROM CHINA
Digital Equipment Corp has won a $3m contract from China's Baoshan Steel to link the mill's computers into the largest network DEC has sold in Asia, regional president Edmund Reilly said: a 40-mile optical fibre system will link all of Baoshan's existing and future computers into a single, integrated enterprise network, Reilly told Reuter, and will provide videoconferencing services for the plant outside Shanghai; DEC was chosen because of its well-established Chinese sales and service network that includes licenced local partners and offices in Shanghai, Peking and Guangzhou, Reilly said.
NYNEX DOES DEAL WITH NEWBRIDGE NETWORKS FOR EQUIPMENT
Nynex Corp's New York Telephone has done a deal with Newbridge Networks Inc for equipment to enable it to offer Nynex Enterprise Services, which provides business customers with private line services whereby with a single telephone call, they can reroute transmissions, add new circuits and raise available bandwidth to set up videoconferences: Newbridge is supplying its 4602 MainStreet Intelligent NetworkStation, 3645 MainStreet High Capacity Bandwidth Manager, and 3624 MainStreet Intelligent Channel Bank.
BELLSOUTH SEEKS ALLIANCE TO PROMOTE ISDN
BellSouth Corp, Atlanta says it is forming a strategic marketing alliance in major metropolitan areas in an effort to promote ISDN: the alliance will cover all facets of Integrated Services Digital Network, including customer premises equipment hardware and software.
MOVING TARGETS?
That's the sort of thing we like to hear — NOT!
A Microsoft Corp staffer is reported to have told Sun Microsystems Inc that Microsoft would make Windows such a moving target that Sun, with its WABI Windows Application Binary Interface, could not keep up (CI No 2,147): if the tale is true and Microsoft means it, it means that the company has learned a little too well from its long cohabitation with IBM, and that the seeds of its own destruction are now being sown — for years, IBM added features and tweaked its mainframes with no thought of improving them from the user's point of view, but simply to trip up competitors, and once a dominant company starts resorting to such tactics, it fatally injures the regard with which it is held by the outside world, and is embarking on the slippery slope that leads to the debacle IBM finds itself in today.
SANDERSON SPONSORSHIP PAYS OFF
It's not often that sponsorship pays off so handsomely, and Pick-popper Sanderson Electronics Plc must be feeling pretty pleased with itself, getting to both cup finals: its local team, Sheffield Wednesday, whose players bear the Sanderson name on their breasts, will be contesting the League Cup this weekend and the FA Cup in May — against Arsenal on both occasions.
CINCINNATI BELL WIN $41M CONTRACT
Cincinnati Bell Inc reports that the Federal arm of its Cincinnati Bell Information Systems won a systems management contract that could run for five years and be worth up to $41m to support the Federal  Transportation Computer Center in Washington DC: the centre supports Federal Highway Administration, US Coast Guard, Federal Transit Administration, Research & Special Programs Administration, the Federal Aviation Administration, and the Federal Maritime Administration.
O2 TECHNOLOGY AND OVERSEAS BECHTEL SIGN DISTRIBUTION AGREEMENT
O2 Technology SA, the Versailles-based object-oriented database system developer, and Overseas Bechtel Inc have signed a distribution agreement whereby Bechtel will market a Japanese version of 02, the company announced: Yoshie Hashima, director general of Overseas Bechtel in Tokyo, said in a statement, ‘O2 responds to the needs of the Japanese market for object-oriented database systems, that is very promising — the collaboration with O2 will enable Bechtel to attain a leadership position in the distribution of tools for open systems;’ the alliance with Bechtel ‘is for the long term,’said Francois Bancilhon, the managing director of O2.
MICROGRAFX BACKS OFF DEVELOPING OS/2 APPLICATIONS
Micrografx Inc, one of the first and most prominent companies to endorse IBM Corp's OS/2 2.0 operating system, is backing off developing OS/2 applications, US PC Week reports: ‘There's no demand for OS/2 applications,’ said Paul Grayson, chief executive of the Richardson, Texas, company —‘We don't see the rationale for making additional investments in OS/2 applications when there's no apparent demand for the ones on the market.’
IBM HIRE 30 OUTSIDE EXECUTIVES
Louis Gerstner was by no means the first, and IBM Corp has been actively hiring executives from outside the company since the beginning of the year, Associated Press reports: it says that IBM has hired about 30 outside executives in the past two years and is searching for 50 more; incomers include Robert Howe, 48, general manager, IBM Consulting Group, former head of worldwide financial services practice at consulting firm Booz-Allen & Hamilton; Michael Cannon, 40, vice-president, personal systems storage devices, Adstar, former senior vice-president, worldwide operations at Syquest Technology Inc; John Osborne, 39, sales director, Personal Software Products, former vice-president of sales and marketing at Zenith Data Systems Inc; Jon Cornell, 53, assistant general manager, original equipment manufacturers sales and marketing, IBM Technology Products, former president, Harris Corp; John Singleton, 56, general manager, business development, Integrated Systems Solution Corp, former chief executive, Security Pacific Automation Co; and Clare Thain, 43, advertising and promotion director, IBM US, who was formerly the managing partner at Ronald James Direct.
GRID SYSTEMS UNVEIL NEW 80486SL BASED NOTEBOOK COMPUTER
Tandy Corp's GRiD Systems Corp, soon to depart with the divestment of the TE Electronics Inc unit, has unveiled new light-weight, modular 80486SL-based notebook computers, the GRiD 4025 line at from $2,100; it simultaneously began GRiD Direct direct selling of its machines via a toll-free 800 number in the US and also cut prices on its GRiD Convertible pen-enabled notebook and said Slate Corp's GRiD Convertible Pen Essentials applications will be bundled with the Convertible notebook for $2,500; the lower price is good only until May 31.
WESTCOTT COMMUNICATIONS TO ACQUIRE SOME ASSETS OF TI-IN NETWORK
Carrollton, Texas-based Westcott Communications Inc is to acquire some assets of TI-IN Network Inc, San Antonio, Texas, for 350,000 new Westcott shares worth about $11m, plus assumption of some liabilities; TI-IN had audited revenues of some $7.3m and made a net loss of $697,000 for its fiscal year ended September 30 last; it provides live interactive courses with two-way communication for school pupils in Grades K to 12; Westcott Communications says it pioneered satellite delivery of workplace training.
COMPAQ COMPUTER SIGNS DISTRIBUTION AGREEMENT WITH BEIJING STONE GROUP
Compaq Computer Corp has signed a distribution agreement with Beijing Stone Group Co Ltd, China's largest private computer distributor, giving it  access to Stone's 100-plus sales outlets: it already has agreements with five other distributors for the vast Chinese market.
WINDOWS USERS EXCEED 25M
Microsoft Corp says that the number of users of its Windows software now exceeds 25m and sales are still rising at over 1m copies a month, emphasising that the figure does not double-count users that have upgraded their to Windows 3.1.
MINNESOTA SUPERCOMPUTER CENTER BUYS NEW TAPE SYSTEM FROM STORAGE TECHNOLOGY
Minnesota Supercomputer Center Inc has bought an early model of ‘the most advanced tape cartridge robotic system ever produced by Storage Technology Corp’, Louisville, Colorado for inclusion in an enhanced mass storage environment being developed by the centre: the newly-designed robotic mechanism, which is incorporated into StorageTek's planned PowderHorn Automated Cartridge System, operates at more than twice the speed of previous models in automatically mounting and dismounting the tape cartridges; the centre also plans to add a Cray Y-MP C90 system to its configuration.
HUGHES NETWORK SYSTEMS HAS CONTRACT TO BUILD DIGITAL NETWORK IN CHENGDU
General Motors Corp's Hughes Network Systems Inc has a contract to build a digital network for fixed telephone and  cellular phones in Chengdu, the capital Sichuan Province in the People's Republic of China: the initial contract, which is worth $15m, will serve more than 20,000 subscribers and expansions of the network will eventually serve 100,000 subscribers; the entire Chengdu network is set to go on line in November; Hughes is also building a  similar network in Tatarstan, in the Russian Republic.
AT&T EXTENDS REACH OF ITS VIRTUAL NETWORK SERVICE
AT&T Co says it has further extended the global reach of its virtual network service, Global Software Defined Network Service by connecting four more countries: New Zealand, Korea, Taiwan and Switzerland.
NOKIA WIN $7M ORDER
Nokia Oy's Nokia Telecommunications has Nokia Oy, won an order for a trunked mobile radio system for the island of Java, Indonesia from PT Mobilkom Telekomindo: it is worth about $7m with an option for equipment worth another $7m; the network is expected to have 40,000 subscribers in five years, and all the major islands of the archipelago will be included in later phases.
 HUNGARIAN TELEPHONE & CABLE PLAN $300M INVESTMENT
The New York-based Hungarian Telephone & Cable Corp plans to invest up to $300m in the development of local Hungarian telephone companies, installing up to 200,000 new telephone lines, and it also plans to invest the money it raised in long-distance telephone ventures.
COMMUNICATION INTELLIGENCE SIGNS JOINT DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT WITH IBM
Redwood Shores, California-based Communication Intelligence Corp says it has signed a joint development agreement with IBM Corp to develop a version of its multilingual Handwriter Recognition System software for the OS/2 Pen operating system extension from IBM's Personal Software Products Division.
HONG KONG TELECOMMUNICATIONS TO BUILD NEW OPTICAL FIBRE SUBMARINE CABLE
Hong Kong Telecommunications Ltd says that a memorandum of understanding has been signed between the Communications Authority of Thailand, the Directorate General of Posts and Telecommunications of Vietnam and OTC International of Australia to build a new optical fibre submarine cable system linking Thailand, Vietnam and Hong Kong; the planned cable will also link to other cable systems and give direct connections to the rest of the world, and is set to come into service by the end of 1995.
SYMANTEC PRESIDENT MOVES COMPANIES
Symantec Corp's executive vice-president Rod Turner, 36, has quit to become president and chief executive of Knowledge Adventure Inc, a La Crescenta, California-based developer of educational software.
DIVISION LTD LAUNCHES NEW VERSION OF ITS DVS SOFTWARE
Almondsbury, Bristol-based virtual reality developer Division Ltd is looking to expand into the mainstream by launching a new version of its dVS software for Silicon Graphics Inc workstations: prices start at £5,000 for basic networkable two-dimensional virtual modelling systems that run on Indigo machines; virtual reality helmets can be added to larger host machines for fully immersive virtual reality applications; Division is expecting to announce dVS for the RS/6000 soon, paving the way for an open systems Unix System V version.
COMPAQ LOWERS PRICE OF PRINTER
Compaq Computer Corp, Houston lowered the price on its Pagemarq 20 network printer by 16% to $3,600; prices on key printer options, like memory modules and network interface boards were cut by up to 33%.
GUPTA SIGNS DISTRIBUTION AGREEMENT WITH AZLAN
Some 18 months after terminating a distribution agreement with Wokingham, Berkshire-based Azlan Ltd, Gupta Corp has signed up the distributor once more: the agreement replaces the one Gupta has had with Frontline Distribution Ltd in the meantime, and covers the distribution of the company's SQL System range of client-server databases, tools and end-user reporting products; Gupta also signed a distribution deal with Qudis Networks Ltd.
CABLE & WIRELESS CONSIDERS ADDING SOME OF ITS OTHER ASIAN ASSETS TO ITS HONG KONG AFFILIATE
Cable & Wireless Plc is said to be considering adding some of its other Asian assets to its Hong Kong Telecom Ltd affiliate, in which it holds 58%: this could mean some of C&W's existing assets in Hong Kong, China, Thailand and the Philippines being acquired by Hong Kong Telecom; up to now, group investments in the region have been made and held by Cable & Wireless itself.
TO THE MOON AND BACK
So much for the paperless office: Microsoft Corp claims that, stacked up, the manuals for the 100m copies of MD-DOS it has sold would reach to the moon and back — 10 times.