

CAT OUT OF THE HAT: APPLE MAC-UNDER-UNIX THIS WEEK
This week the same group of companies that are backing the Sun Microsystems Inc WABI Windows Application Binary Interface for Unix are expected to lend their support to what might as well be called MABI, Apple Computer Inc's Mac-on-Unix defence against the forces of Microsoft Corp, today's issue of our sister paper Unigram.X reports.
Actually, Apple has been converting its ToolBox, the source of the Mac interface, the crown jewels it has guarded so long, for the IBM Corp RS/6000, Hewlett-Packard Co HP 9000 and Sun Microsystems Inc Sparc machines under a project that it calls Cat in the Hat (CI No 2,090).
At this week's Software Developers' Conference in California Apple will gather with its new partners and collaborators IBM, Hewlett-Packard, Sun and Unix System Laboratories Inc to announce that Mac programs will be able to run unmodified and unrecompiled on their Unix servers and workstations.
Apple also intends to provide them with application programming interfaces and other technologies and services to ensure Mac integration and interoperability in the multi-system client-server environment.
The move is more or less an insurance policy that Apple will at least have a place as a client in the enterprise.
Apple is expected to provide its desktop manager, window manager, Finder, QuickTime, QuickDraw GX, TrueType and WorldScript as well as AppleShare, Data Access Language and AppleSearch and access to AppleTalk and the Apple Open Collaborative Environment.
KALIEDA LABS SUBMITS ITS SCRIPTX TO INTERACTIVE MULTIMEDIA BODY
Meantime the Kaleida Labs Inc joint venture between IBM Corp and Apple Computer Inc in Mountain View, California has submitted its ScriptX specifications to the Interactive Multimedia Association in response to the trade group's Multimedia Scripting Language Request for Technology.
ScriptX is described as a fully-functional object-oriented scripting language and set of data specifications designed to enable the development and playback of a single multimedia title on a variety of personal computers and workstations, personal digital assistants and consumer electronics products.
Kaleida has not given a release date for ScriptX.
PENRIL BUYS LOCAL NETWORK BOARDS AND SERVERS MAKER DATABILITY
Gaithersburg, Maryland-based Penril DataCommunications Network Inc bought privately held Datability Inc of Carlstadt, New Jersey for about 1m new Penril shares, and assumption of some Datability debts.
Datability, does some $22m a year making multiprotocol local network interconnect products and terminal and communications servers.
IBM BUYS WINDOWS NT SOURCE CODE LICENCE TO PUT IT UP ON POWERPC
The fierce public rivalry between IBM Corp and Microsoft Corp begins to look like the posturing of all-in wrestlers that do it all for show: according to Computer Reseller News, IBM is quietly working with the Redmond dominator to put Windows NT up on the PowerPC RISC.
It says Microsoft supplied the source code under a new standard contractual OEM pact with IBM, which is doing the work in Yorktown Heights, New York.
HEWLETT-PACKARD CREATES INTEGRATED OPENWAREHOUSE
Late last week, Hewlett-Packard Co released HP OpenWarehouse, claiming it to be the first fully scalable open system for data warehousing and contrasting it with mainframe-based and proprietary data-warehousing offerings, and saying that the open systems approach enables it to offer data warehousing at a small fraction of the cost of proprietary systems.
All Hewlett-Packard and third-party components that make up the OpenWarehouse are evaluated, lab-tested and integrated to reduce the time it takes to implement it and ensure robust, supportable installations, Hewlett-Packard claims.
The first set of products integrated into OpenWarehouse are Red Brick Warehouse from Red Brick Systems Inc, Prism Warehouse Manager from Prism Solutions Inc, Extract from Evolutionary Technologies Inc, Enterprise Data Access/SQL from Information Builders Inc, Open Development Environment from Open Environment Corp and Hewlett-Packard's own Information Access.
Later releases will expand the portfolio of software vendors and the company plans in due course to support business modelling through use of its OpenODB object-oriented database, enabling Open Warehouse users to store, retrieve and use data in a consistent manner through out their enterprise.
The firm offers single-source support on all the products, so customers can pick components that best suit their needs, without having to worry about the logistics of supporting products from multifarious vendors.
SYMANTEC TO BUY CONTACT SOFTWARE FOR $48m IN SHARES
Cupertino, California-based Symantec Corp is to buy Contact Software International Inc, Carrollton, Texas in a pooling of interests for 3m new shares worth $48m.
Contact is the developer and marketer of ACT! contact management software for sales and service staff, which runs under MS-DOS, Windows, Macintosh and on palmtop HP 95LX computers.
ICL REJUVENATES LOW END SERIES 39 MAINFRAME LINE
ICL Plc has now added new models to the bottom end of its Series 39 mainframe line with launch of a complete new DX series that are available later this month.
The line ranges from the DX 135 Model 10, which is rated at 1.9 MIPS, comes with 16Mb to 64Mb memory and starts at £30,000, to the four-processor DX 345-40.
ICL says that hardware price-performance has been improved by about 20%, and main memory prices are halved.
Total cost of ownership with hardware, software and maintenance is cut 15%.
A fully-configured entry level 135-10, capable of supporting 100 users, costs about £100,000; there are two more uniprocessors, the 175-10 and 185-10, two duals, the 195-20 and 235-30, a three-CPU 275-30 and a top-of-the-line four processor 345-40, rated at 11.9 MIPS, with 64Mb to 256Mb memory at from £500,000.
RE-INVIGORATED ADVANCED MICRO TAKES ITS SPRING COLLECTION OF NEW CHIPS ON THE ROAD
Sunnyvale, California-based chip maker Advanced Micro Devices Inc, boosted by its recent court success against Intel Corp (CI No 2,151), has been out meeting its customers on a world tour.
Not only has it showcased its product offerings including the new high end range of Macro Array CMOS High performance and density, or Mach, devices and recent high-speed programmable logic devices — but has offered its third party Fusion partners a platform and conducted straw polls to assess the demand for new 3V devices among its customers.
The new high speed devices are the PALCE 16V8H-5, 20V8H-5 and 22V10H-7 family which has just been released.
The family is designed to replace Advanced Micro's bipolar equivalents and offers customers the important advantage of power savings.
CMOS devices are also re-programmable using electrically erasable circuitry, and can pack more circuitry on board than bipolar chips — hence the ‘CE’ in the name which stands for CMOS-Erasable.
The 16V8 is functionally compatible with all 20-pin generic array logic devices.
It has an external frequency of 125MHz and runs on 115mA — half the supply current of a bipolar device and offers  5ns input-output.
It serves as a direct plug-in replacement for Advanced Micro's PAL 16R8, and most of its PAL 10H8 series, and offers designers the advantage of individually programmable outputs.
Reduce board noise
The 20V8 shares the same architecture but has more input pins.
It is functionally compatible with 24-pin generic array logic devices and functions at the same speed as the 16V8 above.
The CMOS PALCE22V10, is a more complex device offering greater flexibility, inputs and terms.
It uses Advanced Micro's patented programmable macrocell technology and offers up to 16 product terms per output.
Presently it offers  7ns input-output, 5ns set up time, 6ns clock-to-output delay, 91MHz maximum external frequency and operates at 120mA.
A faster version is promised soon.
AMD says it has been working hard to improve the robustness of its chip designs.
For instance, it has eliminated the need for external resistors, by using active pull-ups on inputs and  input-output pins.
This enables designers to leave unconnected pins floating and reduces the number of components on the circuit board.
Efforts have also been made to reduce board noise through improved clamping circuitry and the use of overshoot filters on programming pins.
And on its fastest devices, Advanced Micro is now using split power supply.
This helps eliminate the noise that results from the speedy switching on CMOS devices.
For applications where low power consumption is the prime concern, AMD offers its speciality zero-power or ‘ZPAL’.
This has transition detectors on its input-output pins enabling it to power down when the supply current drops below 15 micro-amps.
When no inputs are detected for  50ns it then enters ‘sleep mode’.
Advanced Micro offers two ZPALs — the 16V8Z and more complex 22V10Z which are suitable for battery powered applications such as meters and cellular phones.
The ‘Mach’ family represents what AMD describes as its ‘mid density’product range.
It is geared at designers needing non volatile, higher density logic than the standard Programmable Array Logic devices and comprise a number of programmable array logic blocks interconnected by a switch matrix.
The smallest device in the range is the Mach 1 family's 44-pin MACH110 with 32 input-outputs and 32 macrocells.
The next level up is the Mach 2, which builds on the Mach 1 by doubling the basic amount of logic with the same pin-count, and with an additional buried macrocell added for each output.
Hence the Mach 210 has 32 input-outputs, 64 macrocells and 32 buried macrocells.
According to Advanced Micro, the 210 has proven such a popular architecture that it has been chosen for the first speed and power upgrades.
A  10ns version is said to be imminent as is a slower, low power version — where the current will be cut to nearly a quarter of the full power version.
A 3.3V version is also being designed — either for power-saving or  compatibility with high speed, high density 3.3V memories and processors.
While on tour, the company has been circulating questionnaires in order to assess customer demand for 3V devices.
This has uncovered some interesting findings — for instance the hitherto unknown demand for 3.3V chips from desktop system designers.
Apart from power concerns, consistency seems also to be an issue here, with designers preferring not to have to construct composite 5V and 3V boards.
Another version of the Mach 210 has also been introduced for asynchronous applications.
It essentially the same as the 210 with a modified output macrocell and buried  macrocell converted into an input macrocell.
And it has been followed by two other families with the  synchronous/asynchronous Mach three and four families.
These have over 84 leads and 5V on-board programming, which has been implemented with a JTAG circuit.
This makes it possible to link the Machs with other JTAG devices for easier board testing.
There are two Mach 3 devices — the Mach355 which has 96 input-output pins and 96 macrocells and the Mach 365 which has 128 input-output pins and 128 macrocells.
The newly announced Mach 4 family is the same as the Mach 3 but with twice as many output/buried macrocells and an additional input cell for each input-output pin.
The 435 features 5,000 gates, has eight PAL33V16 logic blocks controlled by a high speed central switch matrix, 128 synchronous or asynchronous configurable macrocells and  15ns pin to pin delays.
The multi-tiered switch matrices give 100% routability with over 80% logic utilisation, enabling logic to be changed while retaining old pin-outs and performance.
The enhanced logic allocator gives up to 20 product terms per macrocell and a more flexible synchronous and asynchronous macrocell structure.
The macrocells can be driven by up to 20 product terms in synchronous mode, 18 in asynchronous with both types of design integrated within the same device.
Each of the eight programmable array logic blocks has a 2:1 input to macrocell ratio giving the ability to handle up to 33 input functions.
This makes it suited to 32-its microprocessor and address decoding applications.
It can be used for a range of high speed control and logic functions, in workstations, RISC microprocessor motherboards, networking, graphics, industrial controllers.
Design tools
It is available from AMD's distribution network, in an 84-pin PLCC package for £31.50.
Advanced Micro is also offering an entry level design tool, MachXL, for £235.
Third party design tool support includes Colorado-based Minc Inc's PLDesigner-XL and Data I/O's ABELsoftware — available in the UK from Direct Insight Ltd of Lutterworth, Leicestershire.
Development for third party environments such as Mentor Graphics, Cadence Design Systems, Viewlogic Systems, Logical Devices and OrCAD is expected this summer.
Programming support is available from AMD's FusionPLD partners including Houston-based BP Microsystems Inc.
The Fusion scheme has been set up by AMD to provide designers with the broadest range of tools possible for each device.
AMD offers only an entry level design tool — a personal computer-based system called Palasm — preferring to concentrate its efforts on chip design.
Suppliers of design tools include Capilano Computing and IsData GmbH, and Synopsys Inc is among the computer aided design software suppliers.
Simulation and modelling systems tools are available from Aldec Co, Logic Modelling Corp, Productivity Through Automation and Teradyne Systems.
Advin Systems, Micropross, SMS North America, Stag Microsystems and Systems General supply programming software while Acugen Software, Computer Integrated Network Analysis and iNt GmbH provide testing software.
Finally, Exatron Automatic Test Equipment supply test hardware.
NQUE JOINS THE WINDOWS UNDER UNIX FRAY BUT TAKES A NEW TACK BY HOSTING UNIX AS A WINDOWS APPLICATION
NQue Technologies Corp, a Santa Clara County start-up, has mapped out a wholly different approach to the Windows-on-Unix issue so wily and obvious it's amazing it's taken the industry this long to come up with it.
Rather than converting Windows applications for Unix in the current fashion, nQue is doing a version for Unix that will run atop Windows.
It is taking System V.4.2 and putting it on top of Windows 3.
X as a Windows application.
It says the two complete kernels will be able to sit side-by-side on Windows systems and run their respective applications.
Its technology is the first integration of both the Unix and Windows operating systems on a single machine.
NQue fancies itself a non-threatening bridge to migrate Windows users painlessly to Unix and snatch them, in the process, from the jaws of Microsoft Corp's Windows NT.
(It believes that's where Microsoft ultimately intends pushing all its Windows clients).
NQue, however, is using Microsoft's own technology to create a low-cost shrink-wrapped retail package called OpenAgent that adventuresome users can install on their Intel Corp iAPX-86 machines without hazard to explore the potentials of Unix: its standards, maturity, 32-bit architecture, communications, multi-tasking, distributed computing strengths and application base, which nQue believes will be stronger than NT's for some time.
The company calls OpenAgent ‘Unix with training wheels’.
Unlike UnixWare, Solaris-on-Intel or even NT, OpenAgent won't require users to wipe their disks and then replace their applications, an inhibiting thought for most people according to nQue founder William Thompson.
Thompson says OpenAgent can be a 30-minute install from a CD-ROM and everything already on the machine is protected.
NQue believes its approach, which harnesses the full potential of Enhanced-Mode Windows using its Virtual Machine capabilities, yields performance and compatibility far superior to any Windows emulator.
It claims 100% compatibility with Windows 3.
X (as it is now and as it may become to ward off emulators) and no degradation in the performance of any Windows application.
NQue also claims native-mode Unix applications will run at 94% of their potential performance.
The company is currently raising $1m in seed financing from private sources and will seek a final $8m round, perhaps in part from key OEM customers.
It expects to beta test the initial pieces of OpenAgent early third quarter and ship to OEM customers late in the fourth.
The initial pieces of nQue Technology's Unix-on-Windows OpenAgent software include the two-user Destination, the Unix System V.4.2 binary execution system, the utilities and the graphical desktop interface, and Connection, the networking and multi-user sets.
NQue intends that these first two pieces appear simultaneously on retail shelves at under $300 each and distributed on CD-ROM.
Follow-on products
Follow-on products include Generation, a development set, Transaction, with Tuxedo and an auditing set, and Projection, with the Open Software Foundation's Distributed Computing and Distributed Management Environments.
NQue's distribution strategy puts OEM customers first and retail channels such as CompUSA Inc six months after.
Unix System Laboratories Inc, whose System V.4.2 nQue licensed as its Unix system, is said to have right of first refusal as an OEM channel.
NQue says Unix Labs is waiting to see how the system shapes up.
NQue sees Unix Labs making OpenAgent technology available to its OEM customers, such as Univel, as an installation option for System V.4.2.
To run, OpenAgent needs a 33MHz 80386 box with 16Mb or better a 33MHz 80486 with at least 8Mb.
The hard disk should be an 80Mb IDE or larger with a network install option, a 200Mb SCSI is optimal.
OpenAgent Destination needs Windows 3.
X and MS-DOS 5.0.
OpenAgent Connection may require Windows for Workgroups to take advantage of its management interface or Windows 3.1's follow-on Windows 3.2.
William Thompson, nQue's founder and an old Unix soldier, developed the key technologies in Lachman Associates Inc's Streams-based Network File System and TCP/IP while at Convergent Technologies Inc and later joined Lachman.
Lachman president Ron Lachman was of course the force behind the creation of WABI, Sun Microsystems Inc's Windows-on-Unix system.
David Van Daele, a Lotus alumnus, who was once vice-president, sales and marketing at Digital  Research Inc and chief architect of the DR-DOS' retail strategy is a member of nQue's board.
He believes the product would give Univel a competitive advantage and be a ‘no brainer’ for Windows users.
— Maureen O'Gara
BRITISH TELECOM TRIES OUT VIDEO ON DEMAND SERVICES
British Telecommunications Plc is looking into offering video-on-demand services, but confusion surrounding the precise definitions of the technology means that it is unclear whether current law would permit it to do so.
While it has made no formal application to offer video-on-demand to customers — the official line is that it is merely looking at the technology's potential — it is already clear that it faces a tough task convincing regulatory bodies that it has the right to do so.
Heart of the problem is that video-on-demand technology has evolved in advance of legislation covering its use.
Indeed much of the controversy centres on exactly which pieces of legislation cover such a service: both the Office of Telecommunications and the Independent Television Commission agree that the precise situation will require legal clarification before the matter can be decided.
Oftel does say that it believes video on demand comes under the auspices of the Broadcasting Act, rather than BT's Public Telecommunications Operator licence, and while the ITC agrees, it also says that the question of whether it constitutes a broadcasting service has still to be decided.
The relevant section in the 1990 Broadcasting Act defines the criteria for deciding what is a licensable programme service.
Duopoly Review
The definition includes simultaneous reception at more than one location, and also distinguishes between programming provided for business purposes and that provided for entertainment.
Whether video-on-demand can be classified in this way has yet to be established.
Even if BT gets over the hurdle of proving it does not need a licence, it will still face restrictions on the types of service it can offer.
It was laid down in the 1991 Duopoly Review that it should not be allowed to offer entertainment until at least 1997, when the situation will again be reviewed, and possibly for another three years after that.
Perhaps for this reason, BT is playing down the entertainment side, instead stressing other applications such as video databases for such sectors as estate agents.
Even if it restricts itself to these, it is certain to face opposition from the Cable Television Authority, many of whose members are investigating the technology.
YEAR-OLD LOCAL NETWORK SERVICES COMPANY MADDOX IS ON ITS WAY WITH £1.1m PRE-TAX
Personal computer network service company Maddox Group Plc, set up as recently as February 1992, is already making profits, claims a 4% share of the corporate market, and intends to keep on growing by acquisition.
For the year to December 31, the London-based group saw pre-tax profits of £1.1m, on turnover of £24.2m.
These figures include the trading performance of electrical wire and cable distributors, Cables and Flexibles Ltd and Seacoast Electric Co Inc, from March to September 1992 — up until the time Maddox decided to sell them — and the Wakebourne Group from September to December 1992.
Wakebourne was acquired in August of that year (CI No 2,080).
No direct comparison can be made with last year's figures, as chairman Hugo Biermann reversed his company into a quoted shell company called Pathfinder Plc, and then changed its name to Maddox — because it was based in Maddox Street in London.
Pathfinder made pre-tax losses of £311,000, on turnover of £223,000 for the nine months to December 31 1991.
Because it had negative assets of £1m, and Cables and Flexibles and Seacoast turned in below-par results, Biermann said there were insufficient distributable reserves to pay a final dividend.
Greenford, Middlesex-based Cable & Flexible suffered from a building industry in the doldrums, he said, while Seacoast in the US performed below expectations because two large contracts expected in 1992 were deferred to 1993.
Too lumpy
Furthermore, he decided that not only was the distribution market too lumpy in terms of orders, but also margins were too low.
Even if a business was very efficient, he said, it was difficult to generate gross margins of more than 28%, whereas an efficient company in the fast-growing network market could do much better than that.
Following shareholder approval on May 24, the two businesses should go in a management buy-out worth $29.6m.
Some 250 staff will leave Maddox as a result, leaving a total of approximately 200.
Of the remaining companies, Feltham-based Wakebourne Group Holdings Ltd is the largest and made an operating profit of £906,000.
It specialises in the consultancy, design, installation, maintenance and support of personal computer networks for IBM Corp and Compaq Computer Corp kit.
Computer Profiles, acquired in February 1993 (CI No 2,106), complements these activities, but specialises in IBM RS/6000 Unix-based systems.
Biermann said that this business had now been completely integrated into the company.
Both businesses have regional operations as well as on-site engineers, but work exclusively with large corporate customers because, Biermann said ‘their level of spend is much higher’ than small companies or local government.
Also they ‘continuously expand their networks’, which generates additional business on the back of existing contracts.
Maddox reversed into a quoted company as soon as it was formed in February 1992, Biermann stated, because he wanted to take advantage of the public market for acquisition purposes — it could issue new shares rather than having to find cash.
He sees growth — about 25% year on year, he reckons — coming mainly from ‘small add-on acquisitions’, but only in the UK for the time being.
Brokers are already forecasting the 1993 pre-tax profits to be between £3.3m and £3.5m.
SGS-THOMSON DEAL WITH MITSUBISHI ON FLASH MEMORY EXPECTED TOMORROW
The French press was bubbling with stories last week about the Franco-Italian semiconductor maker SGS-Thomson Microelectronics NV, with one report saying it was planning an increase by a third the capacity at its test and assembly plant in Muar, Malaysia, and another promising an accord on tomorrow with Mitsubishi Electric Corp on Flash memories.
A spokeswoman for SGS-Thomson said the company discusses investment only on a global, company-wide basis, and has said nothing specific about investing in Malaysia.
The plant in Malaysia handles test and assembly for ‘all types of semiconductors,’ she said.
The article's speculation may have been prompted by SGS-Thomson's disclosure that its first-quarter orders in Asia registered an increase of 30%.
Overall, armed with $500m in new capital from its state-owned shareholders this year and with the renewed growth in the market, SGS-Thomson expects its growth to surpass 20%, said the report in La Tribune.
Despite the rosy predictions, it should be noted that SGS-Thomson still carries a debt of approximately $800m.
As for any impending agreement with Mitsubishi, she said, ‘We are in the middle of negotiations, but nothing has been concluded yet.’
La Tribune speculates that an agreement between the two would be for production and to share the cost of development, which continues to mushroom.
Daily newspaper Le Monde said the accord would cover co-operation in developing 16M-bit Flash memories rather than the current generation 4Ms.
A week ago SGS-Thomson said it was starting production of 1M-bit Flash memories and would be fabricating samples with higher capacities.
Although the French newspapers said the accord could be signed next Tuesday, the SGS-Thomson spokeswoman told Reuter that the company had no announcement planned for this week.
Mitsubishi confirmed in February it was talking to SGS, and the SGS spokeswoman said on Friday that talks were continuing.SGS-Thomson calculates the world Flash memory market at $300m last year, and expects it to grow to $500m this year and, fuelled by demand for small, light portable storage, to soar to $2,500m by 1996.
INTELLIGENT NETWORK SERVICES TO BE PART OF THE SCENERY BY 2000 — OVUM
A report from consultancy Ovum Ltd forecasts that by the end of the decade nearly a third of telecommunications companies' revenues will come from intelligent network services.
It says the intelligent network market in the US and Europe will reach $107,000m by then — a six-fold increase on today's figure, and will have become a standard part of the phone service.
According to Eirwen Nichols, one of the authors of the report, ‘It's going to be technically so easy to offer them.
We're already seeing a trend towards pay-for-use, rather than subscription.
But I'm sure the operators will continue to charge’.
There are currently two sets of standards for intelligent network: Bell Communications Research's Advanced Intelligent Networks Releases and the CCITT's Q.1200 series of draft recommendations.
But the report calls for acceleration of standardisation work.
Although Bellcore says it expects to finalise Release 1 by 1995, Ovum reckons it will not be available until 1997.
Similarly, the report suggests that the CCITT and ETSI must address the requirements of Service Creation and Management Environment by the end of the current study period in 1996.
The report also calls for convergence between Bellcore's specifications and the CCITT Capability Sets under development.
SHARE & BOND ISSUES
Apple Computer Inc filed a shelf registration with the Securities & Exchange Commission for up to $500m of debt securities, common stock and warrants and net proceeds will be used to increase working capital and possible financing of capital expenditures.
No underwriters were listed in the filing.
Concurrent Computer Corp, Oceanport, New Jersey says it intends to file a registration statement soon for a public offer of shares sufficient to raise about $60m.
All the shares will be offered by the company as part of a comprehensive refinancing plan to reduce debt, strengthen the capital structure, increase financial flexibility and improve profitability by reducing interest costs and increase the market liquidity of the common stock — most of the shares are currently still held by former parent Perkin-Elmer Corp, which would no doubt like to see a better price before it sells.
Concurrent wants to apply proceeds from the sale to redemption in full of its senior subordinated debt — 12.08% senior subordinated notes due 1997, with $66m face amount plus accrued interest out there.
Honeywell Inc, Minneapolis has filed a shelf registration with the Securities & Exchange Commission for up to $500m of debt securities and plans to use net proceeds for working capital, repayment or repurchase of outstanding debt and and other securities of the company, possible acquisitions and capital expenditures.
No underwriters were listed.
PeopleSoft Inc, Walnut Creek, California says it intends to file with the US Securities & Exchange Commission to offer about 350,000 new shares and about 1.2m to be sold by existing shareholders.The proceeds will be used for working capital.
Hutchison Whampoa Ltd raised the equivalent of $580m in a placing to finance its expansion in China and its telecommunications operations here in the UK.
The placing was underwritten by Peregrine Brokerage, Sun Hung Kai International, Wardley Corporate Finance, CEF Capital and Paribas Asia.
COMPANY RESULTS
Centennial Cellular Inc saw third quarter net losses of $5.7m down from losses of $7.4m last time, on turnover up 34.3% at $11.1m; net losses for the nine months stood at $19.1m down from losses of $23m last time, on turnover up 38.6% to $31.1m.
CompuCom Systems Inc has reported first quarter net profit up 72% at $1.9m, on turnover that rose 26.4% to $200.9m.
Net per share rose by 66.7% to $0.05.
Cray Computer Corp has reported a first quarter net loss of $11.5m, down from a loss last time of $13.9m, on turnover that was unchanged at $83,000.
Cyberoptics Corp has reported first quarter net profit up 0.8% at $134,000, on turnover up 23.3% to $2.6m.
Net earnings per share remained at $0.03.
Data Transmission Network Inc saw first quarter net profit down 30.9% at $243,700, on turnover up 25.9% to $7.9m.
Net per share fell by 27.3% to $0.08.
Jack Henry & Associates Inc saw third quarter net up 29.6% at $1.3m, after $25,000 gains from discontinued operations this time and $28,000 gains last time, on turnover up 24.1% at $6.7m; net profit for the nine months was up 63.9% at $4.7m, after $74,000 gains from discontinued operations and $886,000 extraordinary credits this time, on turnover that rose 36.7% to $23.1m.
Net earnings per share, adjusted last time for a three-for-two stock split paid in March 1993, rose 25% to $0.15 in the quarter, and 54.3% to $0.54 in the nine months.
Logic Devices Inc has reported fourth quarter net profits of $55,000 against losses of $381,000 last time, on turnover down 31.4% at $3.2m; net profit for the year to December 31 was down 81.3% at $85,000, on turnover that fell 34.1% to $12.3m.
Net earnings per share amounted to $0.01 in the quarter, and fell by 80% to $0.02 in the year.
Media Vision Technology Inc has reported first quarter net profit of $3.3m against losses of $525,000 last time, on turnover that rose 463.6% to $37m.
Net earnings per share amounted to $0.26.
Mitek Systems Inc saw second quarter net up 9.4% at $140,000, on sales down 17.1% at $4.3m; mid-term net fell 99.4% to $2,000, on sales up 29% at $7.9m.
Net per share remained at $0.02 in the quarter.
Novellus Systems Inc has reported first quarter net profit up 48.7% at $2.1m, on turnover down 2.9% to $21m.
Net earnings per share fell 46.4% to $0.15.
Powersoft Corp saw first quarter net profit of $1.4m, after $113,00 gains from discontinued operations, against losses of $211,000 last time, on sales up 219.7% to $8.6m.
Net per share was $0.04.
Sungard Data Systems Inc saw first quarter net up 75.5% at $10.1m, after $4.1m non-recurring gains from the sale of a product line, on sales up 18.4% to $87.5m.
Net per share rose by 63.9% to $0.59.
Symbol Technologies Inc has reported first quarter net profit down 84.7% at $727,000, after $744,000 charges due to the cumulative effect of an accounting change last time, on turnover that fell by 6% to $83.7m.
Net per share fell by 84.2% to $0.03.
Telebit Corp has turned in first quarter net losses of $888,000 up from losses of $782,000 last time, on turnover that fell by 1.6% to $12.1m.
Tricord Systems Inc has turned in first quarter net profit of $846,000 against losses of $1.4m last time, on turnover that rose by 110.7% to $13.7m.
Net earnings per share amounted to $0.08.
Viewlogic Systems Inc has reported first quarter net profit down 3% at $1.5m, after $200,000 gains from the cumulative effect of an accounting change last time, on turnover that rose by 26.7% to $19.3m.
Net earnings per share remained at $0.10.
Vitesse Semiconductor Inc has reported second quarter net losses of $5.1m against profits of $851,000 last time, on turnover down 36.9% at $6.1m; mid-term net losses amounted to $11.6m against profits of $1.1m last time, after $202,000 extraordinary credits last time, on sales down 35.8% at $11.4m.
VMX Inc saw third quarter net up 5% at $1.3m, on turnover up 17.8% at $21.9m; net profit for the nine months was up 48.2% at $4.5m, on turnover that rose 20.6% to $65.4m.
Net earnings per share remained at $0.05 in the quarter, 54.5% to $0.17 in the nine months.
Comparisons are with restated figures to reflect the acquisition of Rhetorex on March 12 1993 on a pooling-of-interests basis.
Maddox Group Plc has reported net profits of £1m for the year to December 31 against losses of £982,000 last time, after £491,000 exceptional gains this time due to the disposal of Seacoast Electric Co Inc and Cables and Flexibles Ltd, and £110,000 exceptional losses and £640,000 extraordinary losses last time, on turnover that rose 10,739% to £24.2m.
Pre-tax profits stood at £1.1m against losses of £311,000.
Earnings per share amounted to 0.38 pence.
Comparisons are made with figures for the nine months to December 31 1991.
VIRGIN PLANS FOR PC MARKET
Virgin Group Plc is planning to enter the mass-market UK personal computer business via a computer supplies company, Virgin Euromagnetics Ltd that it has owned for two years, the Financial Times reports: £12m-a-year Virgin Euromagnetics packages supplies such as floppy disks, which are sold in Virgin stores, and has designed an 80486 machine that is to be built under contract for Virgin in the UK, initially at a rate of around 3,000 a month; the paper says that the machine may be bundled with a laser printer for about £1,200, and the plan is to launch in September.
TALKS URGED ON PRIVATISATION OF DEUTSCHE BUNDESPOST TELEKOM
The head of the Deutsche Bundespost Telekom, Helmut Ricke, urged the government and opposition to strike a deal in crucial talks next week on the privatisation of the state-owned concern, Reuter reports from Bonn: the talks between the government and the Social Democratic opposition are due to resume May 14: politicians on both sides of the debate, which resumed last month, agree a decision must be reached before the Bundestag's summer recess on July 3 or there won't be enough time in the legislative calendar to pass the bill before next year's parliamentary elections; TeleKom finance director Joachim Kroeske complained to the Wall Street Jorunal that ‘We have an organisation more like a bureaucracy than a real company — we have civil servants with lifetime employment, high pensions and salaries that correspond to the length of service and how many children they have.’
SIX NEW 9570 DISK ARRAY  SUBSYSTEMS FROM ADSTAR
IBM Corp's AdStar Corp in San Jose says that six new models of the IBM 9570 Disk Array Subsystem are now available: the new models use RAID-5 architecture and support sustained data rates in excess of 60M-bytes per second over a HIPPI High Performance Parallel Interface: the 9570 stores up to 232Gb of data and can be installed on some ES/9000s and 3090s, the RS/6000 and a multitude of non-IBM machines; the new models — 020, 040, 120, 140, 220 and 240 — provide both RAID-1 mirrored data and RAID-5 distributed parity capability, ‘while preserving RAID-3-like performance for large block transfers’; no prices.
BAeSEMA WIN MOD CONTRACT
The BAeSema Ltd joint venture of British Aerospace Plc and Sema Group Plc won a UK Ministry of Defence contract to equip five frigates with command systems: no price was given but a source told Reuter that it was about £30m.
NO COMMENT ON ICEBERG'S PROGRESS
Storage Technology Corp declined to comment on market rumours that its Iceberg high-speed disk array is about to be completed: it noted that it had made no new statements on Iceberg's progress since last November when it said that beta site testing will extend into the second half of the current year.
INTEL LOOKING FOR COOLING TECHNOLOGY
Intel Corp is said to be talking eagerly to anyone with cooling technology that could prevent its Pentiums turning personal computers into desktop microwave ovens.
EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT INTERNAL TELCOMS CONTRACT AWARDED
The Belgian state phone company Belgacom and P&T Luxembourg have cosily been awarded the contract to install the European Parliament's internal telecommunications network, which requires that they supply, set up and operate the private network, integrating all services used by the deputies and the administration: the network links Brussels, Luxembourg and Strasbourg and will be installed during the summer of 1993 to be ready for the first autumn session.
IBM FRANCE OFFER FOR CGI INFORMATIQUE
The offer by IBM France SA for CGI Informatique SA will open today and will close on June 9: IBM is offering one IBM France bond convertible into IBM Corp shares for every CGI.
NORTECH SYSTEMS LOOKING TO ACQUIRE SOME CUSTOM COMPUTER CABLE ASSETS
Minneapolis-based cable assemblies maker Nortech Systems Inc signed a letter of intent to acquire some assets of Custom Computer Cable Inc, a contract manufacturing and data communications company based in Eden Prairie, Minnesota: terms of the pact were not disclosed.
INTEL SCIENTIFIC PLANS TO INFILTRATE UNIVERSITIES
Intel Corp's Intel Scientific is readying a plan to get low-end versions of its 80860 RISC-based massively parallel systems into universities and other sites that can't afford the full-blow Paragon XP/S models; Paragon's OSF/1 microkernel operating system is due this month.
OPEN DESKTOP 3 LAUNCH
The Santa Cruz Operation Inc will launch Open Desktop 3 on May 18.
HEI AND VTC TO PROVIDE MINIATURISATION PACKAGING
Minneapolis-based thick film microelectronic device maker HEI Inc has teamed up with chipmaker VTC Inc to provide miniaturisation packaging for the disk drive market on undisclosed terms: the pact calls for VTC to supply unpackaged read-write preamplifiers to HEI for mounting and connecting to miniature flex assemblies designed to save space and improve disk drive performance.
AT&T SET TO TRANSFORM THE ORDINARY TELEVISION
AT&T Co says it is studying a device that would turn an ordinary television set into a terminal that could call up films, shows and information or act as a video telephone, but it insisted that it is only in the prototype phase and denied a Los Angeles Times story that a field test of the technology would be announced next month; it would neither confirm nor deny that it is teaming up with BellSouth Corp and Viacom International Inc in the interactive television work.
UNIDATA INCORPORATE ENCINA TRANSACTION PROCESSING MONITOR
Denver, Colorado-based Unidata Inc is to integrate Transarc Corp's Open Software Foundation Distributed Computing Environment-based Encina transaction processing monitor into release 4 of its Pick-derived UniData database due in mid-1994.
EDS WINS TEN YEAR CONTRACT FROM SOUTHLAND CORP
Electronic Data Systems Corp has won a 10-year contract from Southland Corp to install as many as 4,000 automated teller machines in 7-11 stores across the US: installation will begin in June and the process is expected to take three years to complete and the General Motors Corp subsidiary will manage processing, administration, fulfillment and enhancement of the kit.
VIACOM ACQUIRES INTERACTIVE SOFTWARE DEVELOPER
New York-based cable television operator Viacom International Inc says it has completed the acquisition — on undisclosed terms — of Chicago-based interactive software developer ICOM Simulations Inc: ICOM will be integrated into Viacom New Media, which was created by Viacom in October to develop, produce and sell interactive software.
TANDY RESUMES MONTHLY CHECK-UP
Tandy Corp, Fort Worth, Texas, has resumed its monthly pulse-taking of its business, and reports that sales in April from stores that were open a year ago rose 2% to $256.4m compared with April last year; total sales rose 12% to $256.4m; stores that have been closed as part of the company's comprehensive restructuring are not included in the figures, Tandy, now a pure electronic retailer, said.
CORRECTION
Correction: Ares Software Corp, the company with FontChameleon technology for reducing the storage space required by fonts (CI No 2,153), is based in Foster City, California.
A BETTER LOOK AND FEEL?
Funny that — that's what a lot of people familiar with Macintosh System say about Windows: commenting on the venture between Apple Computer Inc and Novell Inc to build the Macintosh look and feel atop DR DOS, Microsoft Corp general manager Brad Chase told the Wall Street Journal he didn't see any new software from Apple and Novell as a threat — such software ‘is like putting lipstick on a chicken,’ he said —‘but it's still a chicken.’