

IBM ‘PLANS A SINGLE MID-RANGE CPU FOR ALL LINES’
As well as developing an AS/400 H-series processor around the Rios 2 RISC, IBM Corp is working on a parallel project to develop a single processor architecture that would become the basis of all its mid-range offerings in around 1995, the May issue of IBM System User believes.
The new processor would likely come with the Taligent object-oriented operating system, which would support not only OS/400 and AIX Unix but also OS/2, Windows and NT as guest personalities.
The drawback, and the reason for the AS/400 H-series development continuing in parallel is that OS/400 users would need to go beyond recompilation and undertake some degree of conversion to run their applications on the new processor.
Since IBM is also downsizing the basic building block for its MVS mainframes with a view to moving to a moderately parallel mainframe architecture, it seems likely that the planned processor-Taligent combination would also succeed the CMOS ES/9000 chip that the company plans to make the basis of its future parallel mainframes over the next couple of years.
NCR ENHANCES MAINFRAME LINKS IN TOP END RELEASE 2
NCR Corp has enhanced its Top End mainframe-class, open distributed transaction processing system that enables customers to integrate existing mainframe applications with those running on Unix machines.
The new Release 2 enhances IBM co-existence with links to CICS and IMS/DC applications so that a Top End application can interoperate with them through LU 6.2.
As well as supporting MS-DOS, Windows and Unix Remote Clients, the new release supports Microsoft Windows Dynamic Link Library and OS/2.
A new Remote Login Client feature enables Unix users to move all character-based processing to local systems and send only complete messages or transactions to the server for processing, reducing communications costs.
An Enhanced Routing/Load Balancing is designed to ensure that system resources are used effectively by intelligently allocating resources and an Automatic Throughput Optimization feature is designed to improve system utilisation, ensure consistent response time and cut overall application development costs in a dynamic workload environment by adding, or subtracting copies of the application to meet current demands.
The transaction monitor is also now fully integrated with Ingres 6.3 and 6.4 for transaction management.
NCR notes that it added 3270 Terminal Support a few weeks back.
The system costs $4,000 to $18,000 depending on the size of the server and as well as being available on the NCR System 3000 family is also available on the HP 9000 line through Independence Technologies Inc, Fremont, California, and it is to be offered on other non-NCR systems shortly.
APPLE SETS POWERPC MACINTOSH FOR FIRST HALF 1994
Apple Computer Inc yesterday duly announced its plans to enable users to run Macintosh applications unmodified on Unix servers, workstations and X terminals as Apple Services for Open Systems, and showed Macintosh System 7 running on a PowerPC 601.
Its first PowerPC machines will appear in first half 1994, and the Centris 610 and 650 computers, Mac IIvx and IIvi, Performa 600 and Quadra 800 systems will be field-upgradable to the new CPU.
CANON PLANS TO RESURRECT NEXT HARDWARE SIDE IN NEW US COMPANY
Canon Inc says it plans to resurrect NeXT Computer Inc's Redwood City, California workstation business.
The company told Reuter that it will probably set up a new company employing NeXT technicians to develop high-speed workstations.
Canon still holds 17% of NeXT Computer Inc, which is hoping to continue as a software company.
MIPS RALLIES ALLIES TO INVEST $150m IN JOINT T5 R-SERIES EFFORT
The MIPS Technologies Inc subsidiary of Silicon Graphics Inc has rallied all its fabrication licensees to help with development of the next generation of its R-series RISC architecture to speed the design process.
The partners are Integrated Device Technology Inc, LSI Logic Corp, NEC Corp, Performance Semiconductor Corp, Siemens AG and Toshiba Corp.
The group plans to invest $150m over the period of the programme.
MIPS says the joint development includes funding for research and development, participation by partner design experts and semiconductor process development.
The new part, code-named T5, is expected to deliver more than 200 SPECint and 300 SPECfp and to serve as the heart of the powerful desktop systems running Microsoft Corp's Windows NT and Unix operating systems.
These efforts are expected to result in commercial availability of T5 and related software in 1994
TATUNG RESPONDS TO SPARCSTATION 10 WITH NEW MODELS
Tatung Science & Technology Inc has responded to Sun Microsystems Sparcstation 10 announcements by coming out with the Super Compstation 10 Series, a line of seven MBus-based workstations.
Three of the new models incorporate one or more 50MHz Supersparc processors, while others feature 36MHz and 40MHz versions.
With prices starting at $15,000, the company claims to undercut Sun prices significantly, and to offer more configuration flexibility.
The seven Super Compstation 10 models are each offered with a range of options for storage, monitors and other peripherals.
The Super Compstation model 10/30, out now, has one 36MHz Supersparc and is rated at 86 MIPS, 44.2 SPECint92 and 52.9 SPECfp92, and the $14,790 price includes 512Mb disk 32Mb memory.
The 10/40, set for June, has one 40MHz Supersparc and is rated at 96.2 MIPS, 52.6 SPECint92 and 64.7 SPECfp92.
With 1Gb disk and 32Mb memory it's $16,690.
The 10/51 has one 50MHz SuperSparc+ and 1Mb cache and starts at $21,790 with 1Gb disk and 64Mb memory, from the third quarter.
The 10/41 has one CPU, 1Mb cache and comes in June; the 10/402 with dual 40MHz chips and the 10/512, with dual 50MHz processors and 1Mb cache are both set for the fourth quarter; a four-processor 45MHz model is planned for first quarter 1994.
They have built-in ISDN and 16-bit audio.
TALIGENT CHIEF EXPLAINS HIS PLANS TO CREATE OBJECTS TO SATISFY ALL TASTES
Taligent Inc, the Apple Computer Inc-IBM Corp venture devoted to building an object-oriented operating system environment plans to deliver a complete 32-bit object-oriented operating system around the middle of 1995 and will be looking well beyond its masters' horizons for custom.
There will be a development environment and beta versions of the complete environment tailored for vertical markets running up to its release.
The firm is also aiming to make available chunks of its technology for inclusion in other companies' operating systems as the various components of its object environment are completed.
It escaped general attention at the time, but Joseph Guglielmi, Taligent's chairman and chief executive says that one of his first moves on joining the company was to create three quite separate divisions.
The first of these concentrates on Taligent's native implementation, now firmly based on a version of the Carnegie Mellon University Mach kernel, which IBM has slimmed down and turned into a true micro-kernel implementation.
The second group handles development tools, while the third ‘complementary products’ division is looking to promote parts of the Taligent technology for adoption on existing hardware.
Too early
Its too early to say which bits these will be, says Guglielmi, but the most obvious choices, he suggests, are the big functional blocks such as graphics subsystems or the development environment.
Both Apple and IBM will take Taligent work for incorporation in future versions of their existing offerings.
The potential pitfall of this approach is that the Taligent add-ons could make the conventional offerings so attractive as to damage the acceptance of the native product itself.
Guglielmi acknowledges this but says that if his company had ignored the market it would have given competitors free rein.
This way, he says, when native Taligent, finally arrives in mid-1995 it will find an industry well stocked with Taligent-compliant tools and objects — and developers, claims Guglielmi, just love what they have seen so far.
The Taligent system will use de facto protocols and support the Open Software Foundation Distributed Computing Environment, Sun Microsystems Inc's remote procedure call and Network File System, Apple Events, AppleShare and the Object Management Group's Common Object Request Broker Architecture mechanism for distributed computing.
Taligent says its stuff does not conflict with Sun's Distributed Objects Everywhere scheme, which is more focused on distributed networks, and the layered products will not require commitment to any specific microkernel — they will run on top of existing operating systems.
IBM will be putting Taligent stuff up on OS/2 2.
X and AIX microkernel-based systems from from next spring.
Taligent kernels — as opposed to layered products — will act as the hardware-specific interface in place of current operating systems, and application programming interfaces such as the Apple Mac user interface and IBM's Workplace Shell will become modules that run on top of these kernels.
That Hewlett-Packard Co is thought to be lining up for a piece of Taligent, should come as no real surprise.
Taligent was conceived as a stand-alone developer of technology: Hewlett-Packard has worked closely with IBM and Sun on objects and the deal for IBM to convert its Distributed Systems Object Model — DSOM — for Hewlett-Packard's Precision Architecture RISC architecture is thought to have been the impetus for the Common Open Software Environment initiative.
Indeed Hewlett-Packard and IBM are now thought to be working on much closer relationship —‘Hewlett-Packard and IBM is a done deal,’ according to one insider.
Meanwhile, IBM's Personal Systems Products division — which will have decamped to Austin, Texas, from its Somers, New York headquarters by the end of next quarter — is also working to convert its Distributed Systems Object Model object-enabling technology — which is front-ended by Hewlett-Packard Co's Windows-based NewWave object interface — for Microsoft Corp Windows (by the third quarter), Macintosh, Novell Inc and Sun environments in that order.
Distributed Systems Object Model is a general-purpose mechanism for communicating between objects based on the OS/2 Workplace Shell, and is also up under AIX.
The idea is to enable packaged objects to be accessed from anywhere on the network and from any programming language.
It includes a distributed object application development environment, object services, inheritances, persistence, authorisation, verification and is also to include a Corba-compliant object dispatcher.
IBM needs a set of binary compatible objects like these precisely because OS/2 and AIX do not share common binaries.
IBM is developing a hardware-independent microkernel system based on the Carnegie Mellon University Mach 3 system that will take advantage of its own and Taligent object technologies.
The idea is for operating system personalities such as OS/2, AIX and MS-DOS with Windows to run on top of a microkernel that will be available across a range of IBM machines, enabling the same applications to run under a variety of personalities.
Mach 3 will handle all basic hardware functions.
More complex services — from device driver interfaces up will be handled by the operating system personality on top.
Mach runs to some 40,000 lines of code but can operate out of 512Kb RAM.
Beta releases of AIX and OS/2 Mach microkernels are due in a few months and in the second half of the year respectively.
PowerOpen
IBM is reportedly trying to sell the Mach concept to the likes of Apple and Novell Inc.
The PowerOpen environment it is developing out of AIX for PowerPC RISC will be compatible with the OSF/1 operating system, but will not be microkernel-based.
IBM's RS/6000 group, meanwhile, is pursuing a separate, non-microkernel version of AIX.
Standards from groups such as the Object Management Group will ensure that various object technologies, including whatever Distributed Systems Object Model evolves into, Taligent, Sun's Distributed Objects Everywhere and Hewlett-Packard Co's Distributed Object Management Facility, share much common ground.
Existing products, such as the Object Design Inc's ObjectStore object database are already becoming widely adopted.
Vendors simply haven't had the time to go off and develop very proprietary offerings, yet.
While there was much talk of objects at the Common Open Software Environment initiative roll-out, firms associated with the effort do not yet seem to have decided if or how this playing field can be levelled, or whether basic object functionality is to be used to gain competitive advantage.
The question is how Sun, Taligent, IBM, Hewlett-Packard and others would be able to accommodate each others' technology under such an umbrella.
SUNSOFT LAUNCHES LATEST RELEASE OF INTERACTIVE UNIX, PLANS RECOMPILED VERSION FOR PENTIUM
SunSoft Inc last week launched version 4.0 of Interactive Unix, its Unix System V/386 3.2 implementation pitched squarely at the Santa Cruz Operation Inc market for Intel Corp systems with up to 20 users.
SunSoft claims many Santa Cruz Unix and Open Desktop applications now feature among the 5,000-odd software packages it says are up under the operating system.
Enhancements include distribution on a 150Mb tape, support for file names of up to 512 characters, symbolic file linking, up to 256Mb system memory, Micro Channel Token Ring, boot loadable device drivers and remote console login.
Users will be able to run Windows applications with the bundling of SunSelect's Windows-on-Unix Wabi software during the second half of the year.
The Interactive software development system includes a new version of Liant Software Corp's C compiler, which is said to run 80% faster than the previous version, plus a Motif version of the CodeWatch debugger.
In addition there are new releases of TCP/IP, Network File System, X Window and the VP/ix MS-DOS 5.0 emulator for Unix.
From now until December SunSoft will bundle a copy of Fifth Generation Systems Inc' FastBack Plus back-up program with Interactive 4.0 free of charge.
Interactive 4.0 is priced at $545 — upgrades from 3.
X cost $215.
Upgrades from Interactive Unix to SunSoft's Unix System V.4-based Solaris x86 system are $200.
SunSoft says its Interactive product won't be extended to include Unix System V.4  compatibility eserve of its Solaris x86 product — but maintains there is ‘no end-of-life plan for Interactive Unix.’
New Interactive releases will follow in the second quarter of every year, though there will likely be an interim release later this year, recompiled for Intel's Pentium chip.
SunSoft is awaiting more robust SunPro and MetaWare (back-end) Pentium compilers before doing the job — it has a schedule but won't say what it is — Solaris x86 may also get an interim release compiled for Pentium too, the company says.
SunSoft says it hasn't worked out whether Solaris for the IBM Corp-Motorola Inc PowerPC RISC will be compatible with the PowerOpen environment that IBM is developing for the CPU, but says it will observe all binary standards.
SunSoft company claims it did 35% more business on Interactive Unix in 1992 than in the previous year, when the Interactive Systems Corp unit was still owned by Eastman Kodak Co.
It claims some 150,000 Interactive Unix licensees and says it added around 75,000 last year — many, but ‘not a great percentage’ were upgrades.
Its big growth markets are South America and Asia.
New distributors include Arrow Electronics Inc, Commercial Systems Group Inc and GBC Technologies.
ALLIANCE SEMICONDUCTOR BUYS SBUS CHIP SET MAKER NIMBUS TECHNOLOGY
San Jose, California-based Alliance Semiconductor Corp has bought the Sparc Mbus and Sbus chip set designer Nimbus Technology Inc on undisclosed terms: the Santa Clara, California start-up created a stir last year with its chip set designed for use with the superscalar Sparcs from Texas Instruments Inc and Cypress Semiconductor Corp — Nimbus received $1.5m funding from the Cypress subsidiary Ross Technology Inc.
MICROSOFT STAFFERS BURNING MIDNIGHT OIL TO GET NT INTO SHAPE
Microsoft Corp is expected to by-pass the formality of a press conference for the announcement of Windows NT in two weeks.
Bill Gates will supposedly do the honours himself in his Windows World keynote address.
Atlanta, Georgia, the show site, will apparently be all dolled up for the festivities with billboards, local advertising, the works.
Meanwhile, the boys and girls at Microsoft are working 70- and 80-hour weeks trying to get NT out as soon as possible.
At 8:30 pm the parking lots outside the NT buildings on the Microsoft campus are observed to be 80% to 90% full.
Travel plans have been curtailed so people can focus on the imminent launch later this month and people who have  visited Redmond over the last 11 years say they've never seen the intensity level so high.
Faced with lingering criticisms that NT is still fat and slow, they're doing lots of performance tuning and debugging, which of course leads to the burning issue of when NT will actually be shipped.
Microsoft senior vice-president Paul Maritz told Compaq Computer Corp he was expecting NT to ship by the end of June and Sequent Computer Systems Inc was told pretty much the same.
However as of May 3 the code had not been frozen.
Once it is frozen, OEM customers estimate it will take another six to eight weeks for independent software vendors to get their applications into distribution channels.
NT manufacture should ramp up relatively quickly using compact disks.
MOTOROLA ROUNDS UP HEAVYWEIGHT SUPPORTERS FOR FIXED AND WIRELESS INTEGRATION SOFTWARE STANDARD
Schaumberg, Illinois-based Motorola Inc has announced new software that it hopes will form the standard for seamlessly integrating disparate wireless and wired data networks (CI No 2,158), and seems to have attracted a broad base of support.
While it was unable to gain the backing of L M Ericsson Telefon AB — which manufactures the Mobitex system, one of the two most-widely used wireless data networks — it did win RAM Mobile Data Inc, the New York company that operates Mobitex networks in several countries.
Not surprisingly, Ardis network operators in the US and Canada also lent their support: Ardis is a Motorola-IBM Corp joint venture, and chief rival to Mobitex.
Other supporters include BT North America, General Magic Corp, Psion Plc, SHL Systemhouse Ltd and Tandem Computers Inc.
The announcement was made by Motorola's Paging and Wireless Data Group.
Its technology consists of software that — coupled with switching hardware — is claimed to form an intelligent data gateway that handles the routing and delivery of messages, information such as user preferences (for a particular network or class of service), billing and settlement information, and directory services.
It includes a tool kit and an Application Programming Interface.
Motorola has also issued a deployment timetable; beta testing is under way, and the company hopes for a demonstration in June, followed by field testing with end-users in July.
A product announcement is scheduled for the third quarter, followed by operational service for beta customers in the final quarter.
The company is aiming to persuade private and public wireless and wireline data network operators, application developers and manufacturers of computing and communicating devices and infrastructure equipment to license the software architecture.
SHAKESPEARE SPEECHWRITER OFFERS SPEAKER-DEPENDENT CONTROL SYSTEM
East Grinstead, West Sussex-based company Shakespeare Speechwriter UK Ltd, formerly EMG Software, has come up with the ultimate system for keyboard-phobes — a voice activated personal computer.
The eponymously titled Shakespeare Speechwriter is based on what was EMG's flagship product — the Shakespeare database-word processing-relational database system, with additional Shakespeare Office Organiser and voice recognition algorithms.
It supports dictation at a rate of over 30 words per minute, which is quite an improvement on the 20 words per minute rate average clocked up non-touch typing executives.
Training the system to recognise the user's voice takes about three hours and involves dictating 200 so-called ‘control’ words, three times each, into the system.
As words are spoken they are identified by the system's 80,000-word dictionary and converted to digital text which is immediately displayed on screen.
A further 5,000 unfamiliar words can be added to the system, along with up to 99 standard paragraphs that can be called in as required.
Ambiguous words like there/their/they're are flagged as options with the most frequently used being the one initially chosen by the system.
The system took five years to co-develop with partner Redtenbacher GmbH of Stuttgart, Germany.
Telesales
It comprises a ‘one stop shop’ pre-configured, 80486 Compaq Computer Corp 450 Prolinea, running under MS-DOS, provided complete with microphone headset.
At present it occupies a hefty 30Mb of memory which makes it too big to co-exist with Windows.
However, Shakespeare's managing director Malcolm McPherson is currently speaking to Intel Corp with a view to producing a viable shrink-wrapped version for 80486 personal computer users.
Other future developments include foreign language versions — the core Shakespeare system is already available in French, German, Spanish and Roumanian — and also a special order desk system.
Here telesales operators will be able to feed information directly into a database as they take customer calls.
The idea is simple: the customer asks for an item — and the operator then repeats the request which is then automatically registered.
British Gas Plc, which employs some 27,000 operators has already shown an interest.
The speechwriter also has applications as a tool for disabled users who are unable to work a keyboard and, provided it can one day be shrunk to laptop size, could well be useful for sales people wanting to record data while on their travels.
It costs £5,000 will be available only in the UK initially through Brentford, Middlesex-based distributor Merisel (UK) Ltd.
The target sales figure for the first year is 1,000 units though Mr McPherson reckons that this could be the tip of the iceberg.
MATHSOFT STEAMS INTO THE UK PUSHING MATCHCAD 4 AND LOOKING FOR RELATED APPLICATIONS ACROSS EUROPE
Hot on the heels of its flotation (CI No 2,101), MathSoft Inc has opened a subsidiary in Sunninghill, Berkshire with a view to pushing its newly upgraded Mathcad 4.0 technical calculation package into Europe.
The new operation, which should have some 12 staff by the end of the year, will concentrate on sales support and will help co-ordinate distributor networks across Europe.
MathSoft reckons to have shipped around 300,000 units of Mathcad so far, mostly in the US, and the company is confident that it could well equal such success in Europe.
It is also keen to boost the success of its recent entry into the electronic book market, which is now the fastest growing side of its business.
Electronic handbooks, which are sold as a complement to Mathcad, give desktop users on-line access to textbooks, enabling them to search for, use and even transfer information into their own documents.
According to chairman and vice-president Allen Razdow, they are a lucrative sideline for MathSoft, since they take only six months to bring to market and yield high returns once on sale.
The prospects for growth also seem rosy given that the US technical print market is worth around $2,000m.
MathSoft currently offers around 20 titles, mostly for Windows users.
It has delivered electronic versions of standard technical reference books from publishers McGraw-Hill and the CRC Press in the US, and also has its own titles.
It is now talking to the Cambridge University Press here and is seeking deals with other European publishers too.
Having raised $17m from its flotation, it is also keeping its beady eye on potential acquisitions — mostly in the US.
Prime candidates will be small companies that have developed mathematical software considered to have broad appeal and deemed complementary to Mathcad.
Handy scratchpad
Mathcad is described as an easy-to-use ‘handy scratch pad for quick number crunching’, which is positioned as an alternative to popular spreadsheets and which boasts a user base already nearing that of Borland's Quattro Pro and Excel in the US.
It runs under Windows, MS-DOS, the Macintosh operating system and Unix, is aimed at anyone needing to perform technical calculations.
Users can make automatic calculations using its whiteboard format, which can also be combined with graphs, text and other graphical information.
The new 32-bit version 4.0, MathSoft claims, is the first application to use Microsoft's new WIN32S libraries — Windows being the format predominantly used to run with MathCad.
MathSoft reckons the package runs twice as fast as before and enables users to manipulate ‘virtually unlimited’ amounts of data.
It uses a simplified version of the engine from Mathsoft partner Maple Software Inc and supports Microsoft's Object Linking and Embedding technology.
This enables users to transfer data and graphics to and from applications like Lotus 1-2-3, Microsoft Word or Excel — or from MathSoft's range of electronic titles.
Dynamic Data Exchange is also provided to enable Mathcad to act a server within other Windows-based applications.
A new SmartMath processor reviews the user's input and provides a strategy for solving problems by writing a new set of Mathcad equations in a pop-up window.
Other SmartMath features include symbolic/numeric optimisation which simplifies expressions before they are calculated and so speeds up calculations, and live symbolics which trigger the program to evaluate expressions symbolically, using all previous definitions in the document.
Extra SmartMath modules are promised in the future.
Mathcad 4.0 has been made easier to use thanks to its new toolbar, cut and paste, auto scrolling, auto equation and text alignment, zoom, drag and drop facilities.
It has improved graphics features too, for abstract mathematical modelling, and new selectable fonts.
It needs an 80386 or 80486 CPU with preferably 8Mb to run under Windows 3.1. but can be run as a 16-bit MS-DOS application in 640Kb.
It is out now in the UK, Europe and also Japan and costs £375.
Upgrades are £70.
Japanese, French and German language versions are also planned soon.
PUT ON THE RACK BY LA TRIBUNE, OLIVETTI's NUMBER TWO SETS OUT THE COMPANY's RECOVERY PLAN
According to Corrado Passera, the number two executive at Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA, the Italian computer manufacturer's problems are not financial, but economic, caused by margin pressures in the personal computer business.
Passera was appointed to his current post about five months ago, charged with improving the company's financial situation; he came from Carlo de Benedetti's Compania Industria Riunite SpA holding company, which has 36% of Olivetti, and also owns publishing company Mondadori and weekly news magazine L'Espresso.
In an interview with the French business journal La Tribune last week, Passera was asked how he persuaded Digital Equipment Corp to increase its stake in Olivetti early, and at what price.
He noted that the agreement had been for DEC to increase its stake in Olivetti to 10% in July 1994, but found a means whereby it could make good on its commitment earlier than expected.
Part of the new cash from DEC will go to buying between 4% and 5% of the total Olivetti equity from the Italian's management board,(of which CIR is the majority shareholder).
He was not prepared to reveal the price paid by DEC, but it was in line with the formula agreed in 1992.
Asked whether raising new capital was sufficient to put Olivetti back onto an even keel, he said ‘We must be very clear.
Olivetti, like all of the companies in the industry, has problems.
But they are surely not financial: at the end of 1992, net debt was less than $785m.
Its net assets reached $1,960m and net funds available were $2,360m.’
So why did the company need even more cash?
‘Olivetti wants to grow and needs to finance this growth.
It seems to us a good time to tap our shareholders.
Customers of our systems division must be convinced that Olivetti really will still be around in five years’ time.
We prove it to them by demonstrating that the money we need for research and investment over the next few years is in place.
In the end, when, despite substantial losses, you are convinced that the business can improve, shareholders and management have to make a gesture to demonstrate their commitment.
The problems of the group are caused by economic factors, above all, one of margins.
Trying to fix the problem
We're trying to fix the problem by reducing costs — we have cut our staff to 40,000 from 60,000 at the end of 1992.
It will be down to 37,000 at the end of this year.’
Challenged that the company has been criticised for not investing enough in research and for not being a technology leader, Passera retorted that the company invested over $785m every year, of which about half went into research and development.
‘Our revenue is distributed equally among products, systems and services, but the last does not require research and development expenditure.
The rate is 5% of turnover for products, the average in the industry.
We devote $300m of research and development expenditure exclusively to the systems division, which has annual revenues of $2,360m: that corresponds to an respectable level of 12%.’
On the thorny issue of when the company can be expected to return to profit, Passera said that the target was to break even in 1994, and that that would require the company to break even at the operating level this year.
‘We are on the right track.’
According to Passera, the personal computer division is budgeted to make a profit this year.
The systems division is still not profitable after charging research and development expenditure, but services — technical support, third-party maintenance, consulting, are said to be very profitable and represent 30% of receivables all told.
Asked whether executive chairman De Benedetti would be ready to sell his shares for the sake of the company, Passera pointed out that in the current capital-raising exercise, he is injecting $180m, and has burdened his own company with additional debt to help Olivetti.
‘C'mon now,’ challenges La Tribune, ‘isn't it time to cut your losses and simply sell the company?’
Passera responds solemnly that there had been the opportunity to sell out to AT&T Co at a very good price, and that option had been rejected.
‘In light of the current recapitalisation, does it really look as if we are preparing to sell the company now?’
VIGLEN THRIVES IN THE UK PERSONAL COMPUTER MARKET WITH SALES UP 43%
Unlike the many victims of the personal computer price war, London-based manufacturer Viglen Ltd is thriving, with turnover up 43% to £54m because of what it describes as its emphasis on customer support.
No profit figures were given.
The number of boxes it shifted also increased 59% to 40,000, accounting for 80% of total group turnover.
Another 15% of revenues came from selling other manufacturers' peripheral products, including Hewlett-Packard Co's printers; and the last 5% was generated from services, such as on-site maintenance, up-grades and repairs.
According to technical marketing director, Diran Kazandjian, the group's main customers are found in the corporate market, government, and education — he claims Viglen is one of the top three suppliers to UK universities.
But it only sells its products in the UK because, Kazandjian says, each year it has worked to the limits of its capacity, and so ‘never managed to expand’.
This could change though, he added, if UK sales flatten.
As for the year ahead, he said he would be very happy to maintain growth at current levels, but reckons this in unlikely as ‘it is difficult to keep on growing at such high rates’.
But the thrusting company does have lots of new products in the pipeline, he added, to help it on its way.
PERSONAL COMPUTER SOFTWARE SALES IN EUROPE PC UP 19%
The Paris-based European end of the Software Publishers Association reports that the European market for personal computer software products grew 19% by revenue last year, to $1,700m, which was greater than the 14% increase registered in the US.
The figures clearly showed the effects of price-cutting in the personal computer software mass market — European sales by unit increased by 53%.
According to a series of studies the group has published, Germany and the UK remain the largest two markets, growing by 16% and 32% respectively.
They are followed by France and Scandinavia.
With recession dragging Germany down, and the hardware price wars increasingly spreading to software prospects for the rest of the year look rather less rosy.
GROUP AXIME MOVES INTO PROFIT FOR FIRST HALF OF CURRENT FISCAL
Groupe Axime SA, France's third-largest software and systems integration house, reported net profit equivalent to $2.9m for the first half of its 1992-93 fiscal year to December 31, compared with net losses for both the first half and the full year 1991-92.
First-half turnover was down compared with the first half of 1991-92 to $171.1m from $196m, although the company says revenues were constant, given comparable structures.
Operating profit more than doubled to $13m in the half, from $5.8m in first half of the 1991-92 fiscal.
SHARE & BOND ISSUES
Bell Atlantic Corp's Chesapeake & Potomac Telephone Co of West Virginia is to redeem its $50m of 9% debentures due May 2015 on June 6 at 104.37% of the principal, plus accrued interest from May 15.
Concurrent Computer Corp, the Oceanport, New Jersey real-time Unix and proprietary systems builder, duly filed to offer sufficient new shares to raise about $60m (CI No 2,165), probably in June.
The company has signed Salomon Brothers Inc and Needham & Co Inc to be the co-managers of the offering.
PeopleSoft Inc, Walnut Creek, California duly filed to offer 1.55m shares, 349,000 of them new (CI No 2,164).
The underwriters are Goldman, Sachs & Co and Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette Securities Corp.
Vystar Group Inc, which is in process of merging with Salt Lake City neighbour Megahertz Corp — its only asset is a 47% stake in facsimile modem maker Megahertz — has filed to offer 3.5m shares, 2.57m of them new, of Vystar — which will actually trade under the Megahertz name — after the two firms complete the merger, to raise working capital.
The offer will be underwritten by Salomon Brothers Inc, Cowen & Co and Nomura Securities International Inc.
CREDIT RATINGS
NEC Corp has been hit by a downgrading from Moody's Investors Service Inc, which cut the long-term debt rating to A3 from A2.
The short-term debt rating of NEC and its NEC Industries Netherlands BV, was cut to Prime-2 from Prime-1, affecting about $1,300m of debt.
The downgrade reflects Moody's expectations that NEC's debt protection measures will be considerably lower than historical results because of severe competition in several of its key markets and likelihood of market share erosion in NEC's personal computer business, the agency said.
COMPANY RESULTS
ALC Communications Corp saw first quarter net up 558.2% at $21.5m, after $13.5m gains from the cumulative effect of an accounting change this time and $1.3m tax credits last time, on sales up 10.6% to $101.8m.
Net per share rose 577.8% to $0.61.
American Software Inc saw third quarter net down 81.6% at $1.1m, on turnover down 17.3% at $25.7m; net profit for the nine months was down 71.2% at $4.3m, on turnover that fell 4.6% to $81.1m.
Net earnings per share fell 80.8% to $0.05 in the quarter, and 70.3% to $0.19 in the nine months.
Analogic Corp has reported second quarter net profits up 45.3% at $2.9m, on turnover up 18.3% at $43m; mid-term net rose 31% to $5.7m, on turnover that rose 17.4% at $84m.
Net per share rose 50% to $0.24 in the quarter, 38.2% to $0.47 in the half.
Aspect Telecommunications Inc has reported first quarter net profit up 90% at $1.9m, after $365,000 tax credits last time, on turnover up 40.2% to $21.8m.
Net earnings per share rose 80% to $0.18.
Base Ten Systems Inc has reported first quarter net profit up 900% at $70,000, on turnover down 35.8% to $4.3m.
Net earnings per share stood at $0.01.
BKC Semiconductors Inc has reported first quarter net profit up 103.8% at $106,000, on sales up 19.4% to $2.4m.
Net per share rose by 166.7% to $0.08.
Cincinnati Microwave Inc has reported first quarter net losses of $2.8m against profits of $274,000 last time, after $1.4m gains from discontinued operations and $531,000 extraordinary charges last time, on turnover that rose by 20% to $9.7m.
Engraph Inc has reported first quarter net profit up 22.1% at $2.9m, on turnover up 9% to $62.5m.
Net earnings per share, adjusted for a 5% stock dividend paid in December 1992, rose 25% to $0.15.
First Data Corp has reported first quarter net profit up 20.8% at $36.3m, on turnover up 22.9% to $346.8m.
Net per share rose by 13.8% to $0.33.
Lannet Data Communications Inc has reported fourth quarter net profits up 15.4% at $2.9m, on turnover up 65.8% at $12.3m; net profit for the year to December 31 was up 69.8% at $13m, on turnover that rose 90.9% to $46.8m.
Net per share rose 8% to $0.27 in the quarter, and 26% to $1.21 in the year.
Metro Tel Corp saw third quarter net down 54.6% at $17,052, on turnover down 9.2% at $1.1m; net profit for the nine months stood at $90,973 against losses of $30,186 last time, on turnover that rose 4.9% to $3.4m.
Net earnings per share fell 50% to $0.01 in the quarter, amounted to $0.05 in the nine months.
Perfectdata Corp has reported third quarter net profits down 40.4% at $102,000, after $35,000 extraordinary credits this time and $53,000 last time, on turnover down 0.5% at $1.9m; net profit for the nine months was down 26.1% at $342,000, after $117,000 extraordinary credits this time and $150,000 last time, on turnover that rose 2.1% to $5.7m.
Net earnings per share fell 40% to $0.03 in the quarter, and 28.6% to $0.10 in the nine months.
Science Dynamics Corp saw net losses of $522,894 for the year to December 31 against profits of $136,088 last time, on turnover down 12.9% at $6m.
Scientific-Atlanta Inc saw third quarter net up 72.5% at $6.9m, on turnover up 25.8% at $184.1m; net profit for the nine months was up 77.6% at $15.1m, on turnover that rose 32.9% to $542m.
Net earnings per share, adjusted last time for a three-for-two stock split paid in December 1992, rose 63.6% to $0.18 in the quarter, 70.8% to $0.41 in the nine months.
The 1992 figures were reported at 13 and 39 weeks, the 1993 ones at 13 and 40 weeks.
Scientific Software International Inc has reported net profit for the year to December 31 up 27.7% at $1.4m, on turnover that rose 16.8% to $29.2m.
Net earnings per share rose 17.4% to $0.27 in the year.
S3 Inc saw first quarter net profit up 921.3% at $5.5m, after $3.5m gains due to the cumulative effect of an accounting change, on sales up 382.5% to $17.6m.
Net per share rose by 750% to $0.68.
Teleflex Inc has reported first quarter net profit up 7.6% at $8.6m, on turnover up 18.6% to $157.6m.
Net earnings per share rose by 6.4% to $0.50.
Three-Five Systems Inc has turned in first quarter net profits up 537.4% at $1.5m, after $924,000 gains due to the cumulative effects of an accounting change, on turnover that rose 60.1% to $7.2m.
Net earnings per share rose by 633.3% to $0.44.
Twin Disc Inc saw third quarter net up 437% at $870,000, after $305,000 gains from restructuring, on turnover down 5% at $33.5m; net losses for the nine months stood at $13.3m, after $14.4m charges due to the cumulative effect of an accounting change, against profits of $64,000 last time, on turnover that rose 3.6% to $100.2m.
Net earnings per share rose by 416.7% to $0.31 in the quarter.
EIT Group Plc, in administration, has reported a net loss for the six months to September 30 of £966,000, up from a loss last time of £97,000, on turnover up 591% at £8.6m.
IBM EXPECTED TO ANNOUNCE FULL SCALE DISK ARRAY NEXT WEEK
IBM Corp is still not ready with a full scale disk array for its mainframes, but next week, the company is expected to come out with the new 3390-9 disk drives, offering three times the capacity of the 3390-3 — could be as much as 60Gb on the As, 100Gb on the Bs (CI No 2,046)— but they will be somewhat slower than the existing ones: a new 3990 controller that will be able to talk to disks that do not exist yet is expected to follow later, probably in the autumn.
BT IN A RUT
Hemmed in by restrictions in the UK and thwarted at every turn when it tries to expand overseas, British Telecommunications Plc faces steady erosion of its UK business as competition increases with no immediate prospect of filling the hole from abroad — so how can the company avoid slumping into persona of a dull, low-growth utility?
The one move that is seen as a means of significantly improving the picture is another sharp improvement in efficiency — but that means still more job cuts, and word is that the company is considering seeking another 70,000 voluntary redundancies over the next four years, brining its workforce down to just 100,000 by 1997, compared with 240,000 in 1991; finding more volunteers should not be too hard — its last offer was massively oversubscribed, but ironically, many of those that depart will end up working for its incoming competitors.
GERSTNER AND GATES TO MEET LATER THIS MONTH
The recognition by IBM Corp that Microsoft Corp products are not going to go away and that it can't build its own personal computer world solely on OS/2 — which has led the company to decide to put NT up on the PowerPC and to do a DB2/NT version of its personal computer database is to culminate in a meeting between new IBM chief executive Louis Gerstner and Microsoft chief Bill Gates later this month to discuss areas of mutual interest, the Wall Street Journal says.
DEUTSCHE BUNDESPOST TELEKOM HAMPERED BY SISTER UNITS
The Deutsche Bundespost Telekom last year failed to make enough operating profit to offset losses by its sister units, according to yesterday's edition of Focus magazine: the weekly reckons that Telekom's 1992 profit totalled about $4,065m and after transferring $3,125m to the government, it was left with only $935m to offset losses of $1,685m at the Deutsche Bundespost Postdienst postal service and $185m at the Deutsche Bundespost Postbank savings bank.
IBM ADDS NEW MODELS TO PC RANGE
IBM Corp has at last woken up to the fact that to remain competitive in the personal computer business, it is necessary constantly to add new models, and in the US, the company yesterday added new 80486-based PS/1 models based on chips ranging from the 25MHz 80486SX to the 66MHz 80486DX2; they come in desktop and minitower configurations and are available now at prices expected to go from $1,200 to $3,000; they are upgradable to the Pentium.
EC MINISTERS AGREE ON TELECOMMUNICATIONS LEGISLATION
European Community telecommunications ministers yesterday agreed the legislation intended to ensure that voice telephone services are provided in an open and efficient way across the Community, Reuter reports from Brussels: the legislation, which must be reviewed by the European Parliament before it becomes final, would improve access of users to public telephone networks and impose rules or objectives in areas such as prices, contracts and billing; it would establish the principle that prices are based on cost, rather than cross-subsidy — in many countries, long distance calls subsidise local calls; France won agreement on changes that would enable tariffs to be adjusted to ensure ‘cohesion’ within a state — in order to cover things like service to remote areas; the ministers are also due this week to debate the controversial plans to liberalise the telecommunications market by 1998.
LOTUS SHIPS NOTES 3
Lotus Development Corp yesterday began shipments of Lotus Notes 3, which offers cross-system support and is available in a Macintosh client and a server version for Windows and MS-DOS, and there are upgrades to the existing OS/2 server and Windows and OS/2 clients; Notes Release 3 costs $500 for any client or server implementation.
1-2-3 RELEASE 4 FOR WINDOWS
Lotus Development Corp also launched 1-2-3 Release 4 for Windows, at $500: it includes a Version Manager feature for tracking changes in spreadsheets shared among workgroups, a new data query tool, and close integration with other LotusWindows applications: it should be available in the US in June, and will also be included in the new SmartSuite 2.0 for Windows with the Ami Pro 3.0 word processor, Freelance Graphics 2.0 presentation graphics software, Organizer 1.0 personal information manager, and the cc:Mail 2.0 electronic mail.
FTC LOOKING FOR CASE AGAINST MICROSOFT
The US Federal Trade Commission is still trying to put together a case against Microsoft Corp that will win support from its commissioners, US PC Week reports, and will be collecting final depositions this week: the complaint is now expected to be drastically simplified in an effort to make it acceptable to at least three of the four voting commissioners, and the latest depositions are primarily focused on allegations that Microsoft intentionally built incompatibilities into its software so it wouldn't work well with offerings from competitors — a complaint set off by Novell Inc, which alleged DR DOS wouldn't work with Windows 3.1 because Microsoft deliberately added incompatible code; Microsoft said it had ‘never developed a product to be intentionally incompatible with some other product’; the Commission is also expected to address the manner in which Microsoft disseminates technical information to developers, and the manner in which it has capitalised on operating system monopoly to build applications sales; if at least three of the four commissioners agree with the complaint, the case will go to administrative court and Microsoft will be sued by the federal government for anti-trust violations, but the company is not expected to be asked to do anything so drastic as sell units.
MCI WINS $30m WORTH OF CONTRACTS
MCI Communications Corp, the Washington-based phone company, won two contracts worth $30m all told to provide its Vnet voice service and HyperStream Frame Relay data service to the US Congress.
HARRIS SIGNS PACIFIC RIM DISTRIBUTOR
Harris Corp's Fort Lauderdale, Florida-based computer systems division has signed Singapore Electronic & Engineering Ltd to distribute its real time Night Hawk computer systems throughout the Pacific Rim and provide technical support.
TELEPANEL SYSTEMS SIGNS LICENSE AGREEMENT WITH IBM
Toronto-based Telepanel Systems Inc has signed a licensing agreement with IBM Corp under which Telepanel's shelf labelling software will be integrated into IBM's point-of-sale systems: IBM will offer customers an integrated software application called the Shelf Label Management Application for its 4680 system; Telepanel says there are more than 50,000 4680s installed.
IBM UTILISES CIRRUS LOGIC VIDEO PRODUCTS
Fremont, California-based Cirrus Logic Inc reports that IBM Corp's new PS/1s use its CL-GD5424 Local Bus Super VGA Controller and CL-GD5426 True Color VGA Accelerator.
COMPUTER ASSOCIATES TRIED TO ACQUIRE NOVELL
Borland International Inc chief executive officer Phillipe Kahn told InformationWeek that Computer Associates International Inc wined and dined Novell Inc boss Ray Noorda in an attempt to acquire the NetWare company: Kahn said Noorda quoted an inflated price and chief Computer Associate Charles Wang and executive vice-president Sanjay Kumar stormed away from the table; the Islandia, New York company has also try to get Borland, Kahn said, going so far as to threaten a hostile takeover bid for the company.
JOINT DEVELOPMENT TO MEET WIRELESS MESSAGING MARKET
Lotus Development Corp and the Skytel unit of Mobile Telecommunications Technologies Inc plan joint development of technologies and applications to meet the demands of a growing wireless messaging market: first product from the agreement is a wireless messaging gateway for Lotus Notes, which is claimed to be the first US national wireless gateway for workgroup software — combining Notes and a SkyWord alphanumeric receiver, the gateway will create a Notes ‘thinking mailbox’ that can forward changes in information from a Notes server to SkyWord receivers, the firms say.
COGNEX AND CAP GEMINI SOGETI TO OFFER JOINT PACKAGE
Cap Gemini Sogeti SA's ITMI artificial intelligence systems company has teamed up with vision systems specialist Cognex Corp to offer a joint package to customers: Cognex has nearly 12,000 vision systems installed around the world and a wide library of software tools; ITMI has installed around 150 systems for big European manufacturers.
PARS SERVICE PARTNERSHIP BOUGHT FOR $25m
Worldspan Travel Information Services, owned by Delta Air Lines, Northwest, TWA, and Abacus Distribution Systems Pte Ltd of Singapore has bought the Pars Service Partnership airline reservation system from Northwest Airlines and Trans World Airlines, paying $25m for it.
NETWORK SYSTEMS CUTS PRICE OF ROUTER PRODUCT
Minneapolis-based Network Systems Corp cut the price on its 6600 single-board router products by as much as 38% for some models: prices will now range from $5,000 to $17,000, and the cuts are in response to a price cut by a competing company and due to‘tremendous improvements in manufacturing efficiency;’ 3Com Corp has recently slashed the prices for its routers.
COMPUTER OUTSOURCING SERVICES TO ACQUIRE ANONYMOUS PAYROLL SERVICES  COMPANY 
New York-based Computer Outsourcing Services Inc signed a definitive agreement to acquire that privately-owned provider of payroll processing and services, which the acquirer declines to name, for 150,000 new shares: Computer Outsourcing expects it to do $3m in gross revenues in the first year.
CALIFORNIA MASS MICROSYSTEMS BECOMES WHOLLY-OWNED SUBSIDIARY OF RAMTEK
Sunnyvale, California Mass Microsystems Inc completed sale of the company to Ramtek Corp and becomes a wholly-owned subsidiary: the deal was a tax-free reorganisation accounted as a pooling of interests.
MEAD DATA GENERAL LOOK UNIX PARTNERS
In its vast project to kick the mainframe habit and move to Unix-based client-server systems, Mead Corp's database operator Mead Data Central Inc is spreading its favours around, and while some Unix business has gone to Hewlett-Packard Co, NCR Corp is also in there as a so-called strategic technology partner (presumably its non-strategic technology partners are the people that supply the brooms they sweep the floor with) as Mead moves existing applications off mainframes to a client-server environment: the two have been working together for the past year on projects to re-engineer access to the widely-used Lexis and Nexis on-line information services and create a new internal information system infrastructure and campus-wide network, and Mead is using NCR System 3000 symmetric multiprocessors and AT&T Co and NCR network products.
EDS AGREEMENT TO SUPPLY SYSTEMS INTEGRATION SERVICES TO TELEFONICA DE ESPANA
Electronic Data Systems Corp has agreement in principle with Telefonica de Espana SA to provide ‘substantial systems integration services in the billing area,’ says Xavier Ribas, EDS director of marketing for southern Europe: the contract, which Ribas expects to sign by the end of June, would provide a system that will enable Telefonica to provide itemised billing; although an exact figure was not available, Ribas says it would be ‘probably one of largest software and services contracts ever signed by Telefonica —‘There is a lot of public pressure on Telefonica for better service, especially in this area; our piece is part of a more complex modernisation programme being undertaken by Telefonica, including the installation of digital lines’; the planned system will be installed gradually, according to geographic areas, he added.
IBM OFFERS UK ANTI-VIRUS SERVICE
As of now, IBM Corp is offering an anti-virus service to its UK customers: this comprises updates to anti-virus programs four times a year — these provide users with ‘install-and-forget’ automatic protection on MS-DOS, OS/2 and Microsoft Corp's Windows operating systems, and can detect viruses in the memory, on floppy and hard disks; if viruses are found in the memory, they are disabled, but if found on disks the user is given a recommended course of action on-line; other services consist of detection tools for any new viruses; access to an anti-virus bulletin board, from which the latest products and documentation can be downloaded; phone support desk; and customer alert service to forewarn of known or threatened virus outbreaks; prices will be amended on an annual basis, but for one to 250 machines, the service is £1,000, on 3,001 to 5,000 workstations it is £12,000.
APPLIED DIGITAL DATA SYSTEMS TO DISTRIBUTE FACETTERM WINDOW
NCR Corp's Hauppauge, New York-based subsidiary Applied Digital Data Systems Inc has signed a co-marketing agreement with Structured Software Solutions Inc for ADDS to distribute the latter's FacetTerm Window and session manager software with ADDS' AlphaWindow and character terminals, making ADDS the only terminal manufacturer to offer windowing systems on both character and AlphaWindow terminals; to encourage evaluations, value-added resellers can currently buy a single AlphaWindow terminal and FacetTerm for a reduced price of $350.
TIVOLI MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK HAS NOT BEEN DROPPED BY OSF
Headlines in a US paper saying that the Open Software Foundation has dropped Tivoli Systems Inc's management framework from its Distributed Management Environment are flat out wrong and creating unnecessary waves: as our sister paper Unigram.X has already said, DME 1.0 is being made fully compliant with the Object Management Group's Common Object Request Broker, a specification that post-dates development of both DME and the Tivoli framework and as a result a small piece of low-level code is being reworked, hardly something to write home about, and the Foundation says Tivoli's framework remains central to the object management framework.
SYBASE FORMS NEW SWISS SUBSIDIARY
Sybase Inc has formed a new subsidiary, Sybase (Schweiz) AG in Switzerland through the acquisition of SQL AG, a former Sybase distributor: this  acquisition , part of an energetic expansion plan in Europe, gives Sybase its sixth European subsidiary, and the second new one this year; SQL AG has 250 customer sites, and its founder, Peter Ohnemus has been named managing director of the Swiss unit as well as sales director for central Europe.
WABI ‘NOT BAKED YET’
Univel Inc president Joel Applebaum last month said in an interview that the Sun Microsystems Inc WABI Windows Application Binary Interface ‘is not baked yet’: he thought it was good for the RISC environment but he's content with the Windows system that Univel Inc is adopting for the iAPX-86 environment which it is apparently on the brink of shipping; meanwhile, Univel says it is selling into Europe, South America and the Middle East.
OLIVETTI APPOINTS ACORN COMPUTERS FOUNDER AS DIRECTOR
Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA has appointed Acorn Computers Ltd founder, Dr Andrew Hopper as director of corporate research: he will continue to head up Olivetti Research Ltd's UK laboratories in Cambridge — which he also helped to set up — but will also direct research at the firm's Pozzuoli facility in southern Italy, where he replaces Piercarlo Ravasio; he reports to Lucio Pinto, executive vice-president, technology strategy and corporate research.
USL APPOINTS BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT MANAGER
Unix System Laboratories Europe appointed Julian Lomberg business development manager, northern Europe.
COOLING TOWER FOR PENTIUM MODEL
According to the US PC Week personality gossip column, Motorola Inc staffers have been passing around a model of an Intel Corp Pentium chip complete with a miniature Three Mile Island nuclear cooling tower.