

LEADERS
The neo-Nazi scourge
An even bigger problem for Germany than for other countries
IN MOST ways, post-war Germany has been a model citizen.
Responsible, neighbourly and democratic, for nearly half a century it has been as gemütlich abroad as it has been at home, pulling either its weight or its punches as the occasion demanded.
Knowing that some foreigners, and even some Germans, would worry about a possible reversion to past behaviour, it has been at pains to show itself to be a reformed character not just by these qualities of good citizenship but by its guilty conscience.
It is unfortunate, therefore, that doubts about the extent to which its character has changed should occur just as Germany has chosen to abandon one of its strongest symbols of guilt, its constitutional right to asylum.
On the face of it, the Bundestag's decision at the end of last month to abolish refugees' automatic right to asylum was reasonable.
Post-war Germany had offered itself as a place of refuge to the persecuted in recognition of the hospitality given by other countries to all those driven out of pre-war Germany by the Nazis.
But Article 16, which guaranteed this right, had acted as a one-way turnstile that allowed foreigners in their tens of thousands to stream into Germany never to leave.
Nineteen out of 20 claiming asylum were found to be ineligible when their claims were eventually examined.
But then they had a habit of melting into society, and in the meantime many had been the expensive guests of the German taxpayer.
With 6.4m foreigners already in the country, Germany was receiving about 60,000 arrivals a month last year.
No other country, in Europe anyway, had been anything like as welcoming.
Cold-hearted Kohl
Without the right to asylum, Germany thus becomes much like the other members of the European Community, whose ministers met on June 1st to try to devise a common system for dealing with refugees.
All, especially France, are anxious to stem the flow of foreigners.
Some have right-wing parties like Germany's Republicans that stir racial hatred and exploit the tensions that tend to come with large-scale immigration.
Few, however, are led by politicians who are quite as equivocal about racism as Germany's chancellor, Helmut Kohl.
Mr Kohl's mouth is at its mealiest in connection with the attacks on foreigners in Germany.
Last year there were over 2,000 such incidents, the most notorious being an arson attack by neo-Nazis in Mölln in which three Turkish women died.
On May 29th another outbreak of arson, this one in Solingen, killed five Turks, three of them children (see page 37).
Condemnation was at once forthcoming from many politicians, but in the first few days after the murders Mr Kohl turned down invitations to appear on television, preferring to offer his denunciation from the pages of a newspaper.
In general, when he condemns right-wing violence, of which there is all too much in Germany (670 attacks by right-wing extremists in the first four months of this year, up from 420 in the same period last year), he is careful also to condemn left-wing violence, of which there is fortunately much less.
He has yet to visit a home for asylum-seekers and was not proposing to attend the memorial services for the victims of the Solingen attack.
Neither has Mr Kohl been ready to take a lead in giving more rights to the 1.8m Turks in Germany.
Under German law, though anyone of German ancestry can claim citizenship, and thus the vote, no matter where they were born, the children and grandchildren of immigrants to Germany are not entitled to citizenship, even if they were born there.
When the state looks upon such people as second-class, it is no wonder that racists take the same view.
Yet Mr Kohl seems more interested in getting votes from right-wingers than in winning them for Turks: the most he has done to change the citizenship law is to wonder aloud whether Germany's Turks might be granted dual citizenship for a trial five years, at the end of which they could choose to be either Turks or Germans.
After nearly 50 years of good behaviour, Germany is poised for a bigger international role.
The world needs it, for peacekeeping duties as much as for diplomatic and economic ones.
For that reason, many people, at least until recently, would have been forgiving of Germany's decision to abandon the symbol of its guilty conscience by repealing the right to asylum: the reformed character had done enough to show that it was not recidivist.
Neither the neo-Nazi thugs nor the Republicans who threaten to do well at the polls next year point to anything like a return to the days of Hitler.
But Mr Kohl's lack of forthrightness in acting against racist attacks and his reluctance to take up the cause of their victims suggests a chancellor, if not a country, who has yet to come fully to terms with the past.
Success in Cambodia
Don't let it fail now
GOOD news slips quickly from the world's consciousness, so the United Nations' extraordinary and unexpected achievement in Cambodia looms less large in the public mind than does the grand failure in Bosnia.
But now that the road to peace in Cambodia once more looks at risk, the country needs the world's attention again.
The Cambodian venture is the most ambitious the UN has ever attempted.
In Namibia, it supervised elections; in Somalia, it is trying to rebuild a country.
Only in Cambodia has it tried to do both at once.
And the effort was, said the realists, doomed to disaster.
The country was sunk too deep in chaos to be dragged out of it; the climate of violence was such that voting would be impossible; intimidation by the ruling Cambodian People's Party (CPP) meant that if there were an election it could not be free and fair.
The gloomsters have been proved wrong on the first part of the operation.
Bits of the well-organised election looked like a utopian dream of the new world order: Indians and Canadians, Ghanaians and Australians, travelling the countryside with helicopter-borne polling stations, bringing democracy to grateful if puzzled peasants in distant Cambodian villages.
The population turned out to vote — 90% of those registered cast their ballots — with an enthusiasm for the activity which should hearten westerners too used to these political luxuries.
And, despite the CPP's best efforts, attempts to intimidate people into voting for the governing party did not work (see page 71): by mid-week the CPP was trailing FUNCINPEC, the party founded by Prince Norodom Sihanouk and run by his son Prince Ranariddh, by 38% to 46%.
That is the trouble.
The CPP, which was happy to go along with the election, seems averse to the idea of losing it.
It has been suggesting to UNTAC, the UN authority in Cambodia, whose mandate requires it to stay until the elected assembly writes and enacts a constitution, that the election was rigged in the places (like the capital, Phnom Penh) where the CPP did worst.
It wants a replay.
A curious situation has emerged in which the Khmer Rouge guerrillas, who boycotted the election, are now saying that they will resume the war if the CPP, their most-hated enemy, does not respect the results.
War remains a fearsome possibility, since Cambodia remains a country with too many soldiers, bearing too many guns.
Although all the factions agreed to disarm and demobilise their armies when they met in Paris to 1991 to sign the peace agreement that paved the way to last month's election, they have not honoured their word.
That UNTAC has been unable to make them do so is its only serious failure so far.
It now has to deal with the consequences.
If more fighting is to be avoided, UNTAC must assert itself.
That means making it clear that it will not allow anyone to steal the election, least of all the Cambodian army, which is the servant of the state, not of the CPP.
If you can't beat them, buy them
The army itself seems unsure of this proposition, perhaps because it is waiting to see who is most likely to meet its wage bill: many soldiers have not been paid for months.
UNTAC's idea is to bid for the 100,000 soldiers' loyalty by paying their wages.
This proposal is meeting some resistance at the UN's headquarters in New York.
The fear is, first, that paying a national army would create an awkward precedent and, second, that it would cost $1m–7m a month on top of the $1.2 billion that the operation is already expected to cost.
Precedents can be dangerous, but so is the future that Cambodia faces.
Refusing to pay the army's wages risks not only throwing away all that has been achieved, against the odds, but also consigning Cambodia to renewed civil war.
Once a constitution is enacted and a legitimate government established, UNTAC's job will be done.
For Japan, which has taken the lead in the Cambodian operation, one more act of generosity might ensure the success of its most ambitious post-war venture into international affairs.
The money must be found.
America's sluggish recovery
Despite slow growth, the Federal Reserve must not be afraid to raise interest rates if inflation continues to increase
AMERICANS are fretting again that their economic recovery is frail.
Revised GDP figures show that growth slowed in the first quarter of 1993 to an annual rate of only 0.9%, down from 4.7% in the previous quarter.
Other indicators suggest, at best, a weak rebound in the second quarter; but consumer confidence plunged in May to below its level a year ago.
Worse still, this sluggish growth has not prevented a rise in inflation.
In the first four months of this year, underlying consumer-price inflation (excluding food and energy prices, which are volatile) has quickened to an annualised 4.5%, from 3.4% during 1992.
Stagflation is a nasty mixture: lack of growth might seem to require another cut in interest rates; the inflation figures, by contrast, suggest rates should rise.
What should the Fed do?
It should not panic — not, at least, about growth.
One step backwards for every two forwards is common in economic recoveries.
In the year to the first quarter, America's GDP grew by a respectable 2.6%.
If that sounds feeble by comparison with ‘normal’ American recoveries, then thank goodness.
Given America's relatively mild recession, a vigorous expansion would have soon slammed into capacity constraints, driving inflation up sharply.
Modest growth with low inflation is what America needs.
It matters little that consumers are still cautious.
An expansion led by companies will prove more sustainable: in the past year business investment in new machinery has jumped by a healthy 16%.
With modest growth and an unemployment rate of around 7%, it may seem odd to worry about inflation.
In the 12 months to April consumer prices rose by only 3.2%.
Perhaps the increase in inflation in recent months is merely a blip?
Perhaps America will win next year's soccer World Cup.
There are several reasons for policy makers to be concerned about inflation.
First, proposed increases in energy and payroll taxes could have a knock-on effect on wage demands and prices.
Second, American industry has much less spare capacity than at the start of previous recoveries.
The Fed estimates that industry is operating at 81.4% of capacity, not far below the 83% level above which inflation has historically started to accelerate.
A third worry is that the Treasury's decision to finance its budget deficit by selling more short-term securities (see page 99) and issuing fewer long-term bonds will increase the government's incentive to pursue inflationary policies.
The attraction now is that short-term interest rates are currently half those on long-term bonds.
In future, however, it means that the Fed could face even stronger pressure to keep short-term interest rates low, to limit the government's interest bill.
True, the Fed is, in theory, independent of politicians, but not as much as Germany's Bundesbank.
The Fed has been blamed (unfairly) for the recession; its critics in Congress are eager to curtail the central bank's power.
That threat may constrain the Fed's willingness to fight inflation too keenly.
The fact that American long-term government bond yields remain higher than those in Germany, even though its short-term rates are less than half Germany's, reflects the financial markets' fears that inflation is about to flare, along with concerns about the fate of the administration's budget-reducing package.
Though Mr Clinton has pushed the bill through the House of Representatives, it faces a rough ride in the Senate (see page 51).
Slower growth is no excuse for delaying the package.
Although higher taxes will dampen consumer spending, they should also help to reduce the long-term interest rates which matter most for business investment and home buying.
Another cut in short-term interest rates, by contrast, would provoke new jitters about inflation and so keep bond yields high.
Eyes on stability
The idea that monetary policy can be used to fine-tune the real economy has long been exposed as a myth.
The primary task of monetary policy is to fight inflation, keeping it to an acceptable level.
But what inflation rate is acceptable?
Many American politicians reckon that 4% is good enough.
But the best foundation for growth is price stability.
Alan Greenspan, the Fed's chairman, has defined this as changes in the price level which are too small to have a material effect on the decisions of businesses and households — 2% or less, say.
So the Fed's task is to push inflation lower without tipping the economy into recession.
The best guide is nominal GDP, which measures the value of all spending in the economy.
Assuming a target inflation rate of 2% and a sustainable, medium-term growth rate of 2.5%, then the Fed should aim for growth in nominal GDP of around 5%.
In the year to the first quarter of 1993 nominal GDP rose by 5.3%.
Conclusion: interest rates, already at their lowest for 30 years, should not be cut further.
When should interest rates be increased?
Nominal GDP figures, awkwardly, are published only after a lag.
But if the May inflation figures, due in mid-June, confirm that inflation is edging up, then the Fed should lift interest rates, if only a little.
To hesitate would add to suspicions that the Fed cares more about staying on good terms with the White House than about price stability.
If so, America will have missed its best opportunity to lock itself into low inflation.
The Polish precedent
The decline in parliamentary support for Eastern Europe's economic reforms does not mean that those reforms are failing
IN THE countries of Eastern Europe, political stability seems to be eroding just as economic reform bears fruit.
Witness Poland, which has been the first to recover from three years of relentless slump.
On May 28th Poland's parliament threw out the government of Hanna Suchocka by a vote of no confidence and was then unable to come up with a replacement.
With the country's government paralysed, President Lech Walesa suspended parliament and called a new election for mid-September.
Is Eastern Europe's bold experiment with economic reform about to come undone?
No, but not because, as some people argue, Poland's mishap doesn't matter anyway because it was all a mistake.
No one, including its sponsors, expected the vote of no confidence to pass; it did so by one vote because a former minister had overslept.
But that is no comfort.
What had been intended as a warning shot across the government's bows has sunk a government that had given Poland a year of political continuity, maintained budgetary austerity against populist opposition and taken the first steps on two essential reforms that now go into limbo.
These are the mass privatisation of 600 large firms and the ‘enterprise pact’ under which trade unions have promised to support the privatisation of 4,000 smaller firms in return for a say in running them (see page 43).
All this has happened in the country that was first to reap the benefits of radical reform.
Last year, despite the worst drought for decades, Poland's economy just managed to grow; this year industrial output is likely to rise by 3–4%.
Private enterprise now accounts for half the economy and is expanding by 25% a year.
Elsewhere in Eastern Europe, output has fallen by between one- and two-thirds.
How can opposition to reform be contained in other countries if it is so strong in more successful Poland?
Optimists had hoped the answer was that opposition would ebb of its own accord as evidence of growth began.
But, on the face of it, Poland suggests something different may happen: as economies start to grow, voters will recover the confidence to kick out reformist governments.
This is too gloomy.
As a result of the no-confidence vote, Poland faces four months with a lame-duck government at a time when hard decisions about privatisation, tax and banking reforms have been left untaken.
But that is all.
Despite appearances, it does not face popular opposition to reform itself.
And if, as seems likely, the election confirms support for reform, the costs of the no-confidence vote will be worth bearing.
Regrouper pour mieux sauter
Throughout Eastern Europe, there is a big difference between popular and parliamentary opinion.
Popular support for reform is not failing.
Opinion polls in Poland show that Ms Suchocka's standing with the voters remains far higher than with their elected representatives.
The Polish parliament, however, has lost the stomach for radical change.
Enthusiasm in other Eastern European parliaments is waning too, but not as much as it is in Poland because Poland's politics is even more fragmented than that of other countries.
Sixty-seven parties fought the election of 1991; 29 won seats in parliament; a dozen have been jockeying for seats in coalition governments.
Such parliamentary chaos is not a symptom of underlying social disorder.
It is a result of the huge number of parties, most allergic to party discipline, that the collapse of communism threw up.
To encourage post-communist parliaments to be as representative as possible, Polish electoral law exacerbated political fragmentation by trying not to discriminate against small parties.
This was a mistake.
Happily, before the vote of no confidence, parliament set it right by passing a new electoral law.
Henceforth, parties which fail to get 5% of the vote will not be represented in parliament.
With luck, the forthcoming election, which is to be fought under the new law, will result in a consolidation of Polish politics — and provide the parliamentary stability that is needed to support Eastern Europe's emerging economic success.
How to steal an atom bomb
DID you stop worrying about nuclear obliteration when the cold war ended?
Start again.
To make an atomic bomb, a terrorist or a would-be proliferator would need to get hold of only 5kg of weapon-grade plutonium or 15kg of weapon-grade uranium, less than you would need to fill a fruitbowl.
At present the world probably contains about 250 tonnes of this sort of plutonium and 1,500 tonnes of the uranium.
To lose one bomb's-worth from the stock is the equivalent of losing a single word from one of three copies of The Economist.
But the loss would be harder to detect.
The world's stock of nuclear-explosive material is dispersed and hoarded.
Almost none of this material is covered by international nuclear-accounting rules.
And more than half of it is inside the chaotic relic of the former Soviet Union.
For four decades, countries with nuclear weapons have tried to keep weapon-grade material safe from terrorists and foreign powers.
They know that there is no room for error.
Despite occasional lapses (like the 100kg of highly enriched uranium that went missing in the early 1960s from a factory in Pennsylvania) the system has not failed catastrophically.
Bomb-grade plutonium and uranium have been kept securely enough to persuade most potential proliferators that, if they want a bomb, they will have to make their own nuclear material, not just steal or buy it.
Because making the material itself is a lot harder than turning it into a rudimentary bomb, it is the tight control of plutonium and uranium that has until now restricted the spread of nuclear weapons.
Unfortunately, for two reasons, the job of the nuclear thief or illicit buyer may be getting significantly easier.
It is becoming easier, first, because the world's stock of plutonium is growing (see pages 109–112).
According to one authoritative study, stocks of civil plutonium separated from spent reactor fuel in Britain, France, Russia and Japan could grow from 72 tonnes in 1990 to more than 250 tonnes by 2010.
Because it has been in reactors for so long, this sort of plutonium is not best-suited to nuclear weapons.
But it would still make a bomb that could flatten much of a city and drench the place with fall-out.
The second thing making life easier for the would-be proliferator is the break-up, and breakdown, of the Soviet Union.
The break-up has given new regimes in Ukraine, Belorussia and Kazakhstan a say in what will become of the nuclear weapons on their soil.
The breakdown threatens to create a shambles where a reasonably well-ordered nuclear establishment used to be.
The different parts of Russia's nuclear-weapons complex are in conflict with one another.
The inspectorate that Boris Yeltsin has put in notional charge of nuclear materials has less muscle than the mighty nuclear ministry and the military establishment.
Its rivals have excluded its inspectors from their installations.
In a way, nuclear disarmament makes matters worse.
As weapons are reduced, six tonnes of plutonium and 30 tonnes of uranium from dismantled warheads must pass through Russia's rickety bureaucracy every year for the next 15 or so.
Given the unpredictable changes sweeping through Russia, and the penury of its bureaucrats, the danger of nuclear theft or bribery is clearly growing.
Some western experts believe that Russia has never properly counted the exact amount of nuclear material it possesses.
The only sure way to reduce the danger is to reduce the world's store of uranium and plutonium.
But there is no easy way to undo the nuclear binge of the cold war.
Although uranium can be put to use, and used up, as fuel in existing reactors, plutonium is much harder to get rid of.
Its value as a fuel is limited, since uranium is cheaper and plentiful.
By most estimates it would cost at least $1 billion to level Russia's and America's plutonium mountains, either by mixing it with waste in glass, or by burning it away in special reactors.
And this money would have to be spent in the knowledge that it would never produce a profit, only the hope of a safer world.
Plutonium pipedreams
Sadly, the Russian nuclear industry does not yet see things that way.
Even if rapid disposal of precious plutonium were possible, Russia's nuclear experts would shun it.
They have grandiose ideas about creating a plutonium economy, built upon advanced reactors, reprocessing plants and thermal reactors burning plutonium fuel.
This is a dangerous dream.
Not even the West has mastered the necessary reactor designs.
And Russian demand for energy is collapsing along with the country's industries.
Right now, Russia has neither the money to build new nuclear facilities, nor experience of burning plutonium in its already unreliable civil reactors.
In other words, the bulk of its plutonium is likely to remain stashed in potentially vulnerable stockpiles for at least a decade.
Here, the West could lead by example.
Its own drive to create a plutonium economy has stalled, yet western nuclear contractors are encouraging Russians in their dream.
The contracts which western utilities signed in the 1970s and 1980s to reprocess their nuclear waste have taken on a life of their own.
But the environmental and economic cases for reprocessing have faded.
Reprocessing does nothing to help manage waste from modern reactors; plutonium fuel is dearer than uranium, and is likely to stay that way.
It would be a far sounder policy to run down western reprocessing.
This would not only save money and help to curb the growth of the world's stocks of separated plutonium; it might also help to persuade Russia to dispose of its plutonium, rather than weaving an economic pipedream around it.
Will Russia listen?
It has a solemn responsibility to make sure that its own house is put in order.
Fortunately, pure self-interest demands as much.
Russia cannot afford to be flanked by newly nuclear states on its southern borders; or to allow the ethnic strife in and between ex-Soviet republics to turn nuclear; or to see extremists among its own fissiparous peoples demand independence on pain of nuclear terrorism.
Because plutonium cannot be made safe rapidly, Russia must at the very least compile and police a thorough inventory of its nuclear materials.
If some material is lost already, that is all the more reason to stop a lapse becoming a loophole.
The United States has earmarked $100m to help Russia count and monitor its nuclear materials.
In the end, international supervision would provide the best reassurance.
But Russia still has its pride as well as its plutonium.
It would not accept such inspections unless America accepted them too.
That might not please American generals used to secrecy, but America should agree anyway.
Mutual inspection, careful inventories and a steady reduction in the world's stockpile of nuclear fuel: these three measures will not guarantee security.
But they are the least the world must do to make itself safer from nuclear blackmail.
Bricks and staying power
Banks that lent for property at the top of the market would be wrong to bail out near the bottom
SUDDENLY it is all go in Britain's commercial-property market.
Their share prices soaring, property companies have raised more than £700m ($1.1 billion) in new capital in the past month.
On June 2nd George Soros, the Hungarian-born slayer of sterling, announced a move into British property (see page 100) that is bound to brighten its prospects further.
As interest rates and property prices have tumbled, the yield on good rented office blocks now outstrips the yield on government or blue-chip bonds, tempting domestic and foreign investors alike.
The crisis in commercial property that has dogged the developed world for almost five years is far from over, but in Britain as in America — not, alas, in Japan or much of continental Europe — its end can now be imagined.
This is good news for the banks that lent hugely on property as prices soared in the late 1980s, only to see their profits diminished by massive reserves and write-offs as prices then plunged.
Yet these brighter prospects pose their own dilemma.
Should banks now unload their property loans and repossessed office blocks while the unloading is good, accepting a big discount to put their problems behind them?
Or should they hang on in the hope that these assets will soon be worth serious money?
Lessons from the previous headache
The answer matters, for banks' bad-debt burdens have restricted their new lending and hence, most likely, economic growth.
In America banks including First Chicago, BankAmerica, Fleet Financial and Chase Manhattan have in recent months made cut-rate sales of property assets with a nominal value of $1 billion or so.
British bankers, who only months ago felt locked into problem property loans, now see a bit of sky as the prison door creaks open.
Yet they would be wrong to bolt through it.
If bankers simply sell property at the first sign that anybody is willing to buy it, they will do themselves and the property market a disservice.
Banking history offers more than one example in which patience was its own reward.
Dodgy lending to developing countries loomed over banks in the mid-1980s much as property loans do now.
Those banks that chose to ditch their exposures to Mexico and Argentina mostly received kudos for doing so.
Those who clung on, however, received more money in the end.
Mexico's par bonds, which once fetched 42 cents on the dollar, now sell at 70 cents, reaping pretty profits for the likes of Citicorp and Lloyds.
Two things made that strategy profitable in third-world loans which do not obviously apply in property.
Developing-country debt was concentrated on a handful of borrowers and, eventually, a couple of dozen big banks.
It took America's Treasury secretary to find a formula to bail out both with honour; property debt, more diffuse, inspires far less urgency in the political breast.
Another is that commercial property is intrinsically less liquid than even distressed third-world debt.
Trading in sovereign loans grew from almost nothing to half a trillion dollars in less than five years.
Office blocks are less easily priced relative to one another than Peru 2005 and Argentina 1998.
Nonetheless, the property market could and should be far more liquid than it is.
America is closer to making it so than Britain.
Billions of dollars of commercial mortgages have been securitised (ie, bundled up to back tradable bonds that are sold to investors); real-estate investment trusts (a tax-favoured property-investment vehicle) are booming; and other ways of encouraging more investors to own small parts of big buildings are being explored.
Such developments have been far slower in Britain, held up in part by regulatory and tax barriers.
In a welcome change of emphasis, a senior official of the Bank of England suggested on June lst that banks explore ways of shifting property assets into more enthusiastic hands, securitising them where possible.
Broadening the base of investors and increasing the tradability of property-related assets will in the end mean higher prices for these assets.
All this requires bankers to worry less about putting yesterday's mistakes behind them and more about learning — indeed, profiting — from those errors.
LETTERS
Bosnia
Does the end of Bosnia (May 29th) also spell the end of superpowerdom?
The two messages that clearly ring out to the rest of the world from western inaction are that
(a)
the rich nations no longer have the stomach for sending their men to fight unless it is safe or there is a threat to the rich nations' own pampered existence, and
(b)
victims of aggression, no matter how brutal, should not count on their help.
The European ‘gridlock’ and the American indecision will embolden every despot with a little firepower to do what the Serbs seem to have got away with.
It is time to give serious consideration to a standing United Nations army, perhaps paid for by the rich and manned by the poor of the world.
Your call (April 3rd) for caution about western military involvement in the Bosnian civil war while the fighting continues is sensible.
However, you should not join the myth-makers who simplistically assert that earlier outside resolve might have averted conflict.
The roots of the Bosnian mess precede the outbreak of combat there, and can be directly traced to Germany's shortsighted insistence on recognition of Slovenia and Croatia without adequate consideration of what this might touch off.
International law forbids outsiders to intervene in civil wars, and premature recognition of breakaway states is properly seen as interference in the domestic affairs of the state endeavouring not to fragment.
Yugoslavia, in short, had a right to try to remain undivided.
Similarly, the UN's charter recites that nothing authorises the organisation to interfere in matters within domestic state jurisdiction.
Current UN operations in Somalia, characterised by outside military forces inside a state's territory without the permission of any governmental authority, have put the camel's nose of intervention under the tent of state sovereignty.
Should an apparent truce in Bosnia lead to the sending of substantial peacekeeping forces, the subsequent breakdown of such an agreement would trigger acute pressures for sending sufficient troops to achieve peacemaking (‘smothering the war by force’).
There would then be no end in sight short of the bankruptcy (legal and financial) of the UN and the distortion of international legal principles that have served well to avoid any return to the nonsensical assumption that peace is indivisible.
Break up Russia
You imply that the disintegration of Russia is a negative process.
Look at the likely positive effects of it.
For instance, because of a decision of some bureaucrat in Moscow, oil extracted in Sakhalin island in the Far East is transported through ten time-zones to the European part of Russia for consumption by local industry instead of being sold to Japan, located next door.
The transfer of decision-making powers from the centre to the regions would certainly change this.
However, such a transfer can happen only at the expense of the central authority.
The present situation in Russia makes it impossible for the centre to control this process.
The independent states which will be created as a result of Russia's disintegration will be able to strengthen the economic cohesion of what is now an awkward conglomerate of disparate regions.
Japan's foreign aid
Your article analysing the approach of Japanese companies to, and behaviour in, Asian countries (April 24th) makes reference to foreign aid.
You state that ‘Japan's foreign-aid programme directs spending at infrastructure (which companies can make money out of) rather than technical health (which they cannot).
It concentrates on Asia, where more money can be made than in impoverished Africa.’
The largest amount of technical co-operation for Asia comes from Japan ($115m in 1991) and, just as Britain and France give priority in aid to the Commonwealth and former French overseas territories for historical, political and economic reasons, Japan has placed priority on Asia.
Moreover, you give a misleading impression that Japan's foreign aid is a tool to promote Japanese companies' business activities.
Japanese aid is not given for the benefit of Japanese companies but for promotion of the sustainable development of the recipients in accordance with Japan's Official Development Assistance Charter, which outlines the philosophy, principles and priorities underlying Japan's aid.
Infrastructure-building assisted by official Japanese loans has played a significant role in promoting economic self-reliance and development in Asian countries by stimulating local private economic activities through trade and investment.
No country has ever successfully developed on aid alone.
Private investment is essential for development and such investment occurs only when sufficient infrastructure (ports, bridges, railways, highways) is in place.
You also state: ‘In the year to March 1992, Japanese firms won 31% of the contracts financed by their country's aid.’
That figure is true as regards loans made in the 1991 fiscal year, and means 69% (worth $1.8 billion) of the contracts were won by non-Japanese companies.
It is also true that British companies got more than 76% of the contracts stemming from official British loans and grants in 1989.
Japan's aid is unusually open by international standards.
Not only is it the largest in the world in volume ($11 billion in loans and grants in 1991), but its untied ratio (79.7% in 1991) is the highest in the world.
Rampant hawks
Week after week you publish reports claiming that Israeli doves are winning the political argument, that more and more Israelis want to abandon all the territories administered since 1967, and so on.
The most recent article in this vein is ‘Rampant doves’(May 8th).
In the same week Ma'ariv published a poll showing such claims to be plain silly.
Of those polled, 51% believe that the government is making too many concessions to Palestinians, 82% oppose the return of the deportees, 89% reject any change in the status of Jerusalem as Israel's undivided capital, and 59% oppose what you constantly demand, that is, withdrawal to the pre-1967 lines with slight modifications.
Even more striking, 75% either oppose all territorial concessions or demand an election or referendum before making any, and 69% — with little difference between Labour and Likud voters — want all the Jewish settlements in Judea and Samaria to remain permanently under Israeli rule.
Most ominous of all, 54.5% would even support the use of force to resist a government attempt to evacuate settlers.
Many events in recent weeks have foreshadowed the poll's results.
Your correspondent, however, seems to prefer to rely on his own wishful thinking.
To state (May 15th) that ‘many secular Israelis believe they face two enemies: the Arabs without and the ultra-orthodox within’ is incredible.
Many more Israelis (most of whom, after all, describe themselves as religious and traditional, rather than secular) consider Shulamit Aloni, the minister of education, to be a vile enemy with a passionate hatred of the Jewish faith and faithful.
Since Ms Aloni took over the education ministry, she has succeeded in needlessly provoking almost every segment of the population.
She turned out to be an arrogant fanatical hyperactive zealot, piously lecturing everybody else about ‘democracy and pluralism’ while dismissing, indeed suppressing, every point of view different from hers.
Detroit consolidates
You suggest that Detroit should ‘join its suburban neighbours in a regional government that does away with redundancies and evens out the huge inequities in school financing and municipal services’(May 8th).
But the Detroit metropolitan area, comprising various cities in three surrounding counties, already has regional governmental authorities.
The tri-county area shares various services such as water and sewage, parks and recreation, transport, education and utilities.
Moreover, so-called inequities have been addressed for a number of years.
First, all non-Detroit residents who work in the city pay a stiff income tax.
Furthermore, the City of Detroit is the chief benefactor of much indirect revenue sharing.
The largely working-class suburbs pay higher rates for shared services to make up for the high percentage of Detroit residents who default.
Suburbanites in the tri-county area also pay premiums on licensing fees for automobiles to offset transport problems in the city — whether or not they enter the city limits.
The typical Detroit suburban school district spends far less (half to two-thirds) than Detroit's generous $1,000 per pupil.
And most suburban districts do not have the same high taxable industrial base that the city enjoys.
The tax base in the suburbs is largely composed of single-family residences.
Moreover, it is misleading to cite the expenditure of Bloomfield Hills, one of the nation's wealthiest enclaves, where homes cost from $100,000 into the millions.
Homes in the vast majority of Detroit suburbs cost $10,000–100,000.
The real conflict between Detroiters and suburbanites is in their different approaches to handling corruption.
Suburban communities swiftly expel sleazy politicians and weed out corrupt practices.
Zero tolerance prevails.
To the amazement of suburbanites (many of whom once lived in the city), Detroiters continue to re-elect politicians who are less than squeaky clean.
Doubting Thomas
Lexington's hatchet job on Thomas Jefferson (April 17th) caused me to chuckle.
It's quite obvious your loss of the American War for Independence still sticks in your craw.
In defence of Egypt
Your article on Egypt (May 15th) is based on unfounded assumptions and perceptions.
The government and President Mubarak derive their legitimacy from the overwhelming support of the Egyptian people.
The tremendous achievements in economic, social and political reforms are widely acknowledged, and prompted the IMF and World Bank to extend their economic-assistance programmes to Egypt.
As you are aware, these two institutions are not charity organisations; their programmes are conditional on real progress being made on reform.
Egypt has a multiparty system.
The National Democratic party, holding the majority, is the ruling party, and the opposition groups are represented in the parliament and have their own daily or weekly newspapers.
They enjoy full freedom of expression.
A reading of the Egyptian press indicates that neither the government nor any official is immune from criticism or above the law.
As for terrorism, this is an international phenomenon.
In Egypt, attacks by Islamic extremists are widely condemned by all parties, and the people stand firm behind the government.
In dealing with these acts, the government does not adopt any extra-judicial measures; existing laws apply.
The emergency law, applied only in exceptional cases, is similar to anti-terrorist laws adopted by many countries, including those used in Britain to deal with IRA operations.
It is surprising that you make a fuss about the succession.
The succession system and the transfer of power are fully covered and secured by the provisions of the constitution.
Bank of Spain
In your article on the Spanish peseta (May 1st), you imply that the Bank of Spain had sold mark/peseta options through the Spanish Association of Savings Banks (CECA).
We can assure you that the Bank of Spain has never made any kind of operation in options with our institution.
You mention that the Bank of Spain used Spanish banks, believed to include Banesto, to sell currency options in the market.
The central bank has never used Banesto to sell currency options.
A severe contest
Your special on the future of Microsoft (May 22nd) quotes Nathan Myhrvold as saying that we need an advance on ‘smearing ink across dead trees.’
Maybe; but the computer-information industry is still a million miles behind the ink-and-dead-trees standard in many respects.
For instance: in standards of textual presentation; in ability to thumb rapidly through a text; in immediate portability of the viewed page (desk to bed to balcony to garden); in freedom of posture for the user (stand, sit, lie); and so on .
Yes, there are print-outs, but how labour- and time-intensive they are.
The fact is that most computer stuff is still designed for people who like playing with technology.
When that changes, ink and dead wood may indeed be threatened.
Could it be that the success of Microsoft is due partly to the fact that Bill Gates is an avid reader of your newspaper, therefore winning the ‘severe contest between intelligence, which presses forward, and an unworthy, timid ignorance obstructing our progress’?
Just wondering…
It's a cover up
It is just as well, in view of the profusion of black ink blotting out the salient points in Goya's Maja Desnuda (‘Homeless masterpieces’, May 1st), that there are no plans to publicly exhibit this or other similarly rude paintings in Indonesia.
I would be interested to know whether this act of Philistinism was perpetrated on all copies for circulation in Indonesia; or whether mine was singled out by an over-zealous protector of the public morality in customs — or the censorship bureau?
In any case, might I suggest that you now forward my subscriber copy in a brown-paper envelope.
BOOKS AND ARTS
Making the fossils frolic
NEW YORK
LIKE the fox and the hedgehog, two of the world's great museums are resorting to strikingly different tactics to shake off unwelcome predators.
Staff both at New York's Metropolitan Museum of Art and at London's British Museum are acutely nervous of penny-pinching governments with an increasingly utilitarian approach to the arts.
The Met thinks it can deflect New York's city politicians by showing how useful it has already become; the British Museum hopes parliamentary auditors will give up, dispirited by some prickly opposition.
The Met has craftily had its research department produce — in conjunction with New York's Museum of Modern Art and the Guggenheim Museum — a report stuffed with charts, statistics and dollar signs entitled ‘The Economic Impact of Major Exhibitions’.
It shows, say the authors, what a spanking investment the politicians are making with every cent of public money they put into the three big museums.
Their main exhibitions over recent months are reckoned to have helped attract tourists who spent over $100m in the city.
Ergo, public money for the Met — it currently gets about $16m a year — is well spent.
In London, meanwhile, a Whitehall report citing all sorts of commercial opportunities at the British Museum has drawn a defensive response: suggestions that the museum might see itself more like a branch of the leisure industry have got the staff bristling with indignation.
The report, originally prepared last year by the government's National Audit Office as a quick swot of the services offered by London's top galleries and museums, has just been circulated as a final draft; it is due for submission to Parliament shortly.
‘But it is so naive that it seems unlikely the politicians will want to spend much time on it,’ says Jean Rankine, the museum's deputy director.
Both institutions claim to be under severe strain — although both are also busy planning new extensions.
On any single day, several galleries at the Met are closed for lack of staff.
Much the same goes for the British Museum.
It employs 1,000 people now, just as it did in 1981, but in the intervening years it has had to take on far more duties — most notably the upkeep of its building which was looked after by the government from 1816 to 1988.
And the number of visitors has grown dramatically, from 4m in 1987 to 5.1m in 1990 to 6.3m in 1992 — astonishingly, nearly 2m more than the Met.
The upshot: more closed galleries.
The finances of the two museums are chalk and cheese, with taxpayers providing a mere 17% of the Met's annual budget but over 80% of the British Museum's (see chart).
Yet both museums blame the politicians for pushing them to the edge.
The Met got 50% of its budget from the city in 1969.
As that percentage has dwindled, the Met has scrambled with great success after private money but even so has not been able to raise enough to take up the slack.
William Luers, its president, says it will soon be eating into its $100m endowment fund.
Ask his London counterpart about private cash and she talks, without irony, of the proceeds from donation boxes.
The British Museum gets the odd handout from Hong Kong plutocrats and the like.
But big benefactors receive no tax breaks in Britain; nor are they lionised at cocktail parties, as they are in America.
So the museum is stuck firmly in the public sector — except that, as Miss Rankine drily observes, the politicians have robbed it of all Whitehall's perks, including free auditing and legal advice.
It has to fend for itself, out of a budget that has just about risen with inflation in recent years.
What really worries the people in charge of these museums, however, is not the ledger details for the next year.
It is the suspicion that governments are over-influenced by the readiness of many outsiders to ditch the idea that a great (and expensive) museum is worth supporting per se as a public good.
This idea is being supplanted in much of America, but nowhere more than New York, by an idea of the arts as a sort of glorified social-services agency — concerned above all with promoting cultural diversity.
The bogey in Britain is different — the fear that more commercialism may be foisted on the British Museum, just as it was on British Airways.
Defending the Met against the forces of the politically correct will require a good bit of cunning but at least New York's politicians are becoming much less hostile towards public funding of the  museums .
Few now want to follow Philadelphia's lead and cut museums off from the public purse altogether — a policy that would surely up-end the Met's unrivalled success at striking the right balance between showbiz and the unworldly.
That balance means the Met generally has far less to worry about, financially, than the British Museum.
And it has enabled the Met to build up an institution that makes the arts splendidly accessible to the general public, without it indulging in crass commercialisation.
There are elegant hallways and sumptuous shops at the Met, but no weddings or barmitzvahs in its galleries.
Corporate benefactors are heavily circumscribed in the uses they can make of their link to the museum.
Above all, its directors remain resolutely uncommercial in their choice of exhibition and gallery subjects.
Perhaps the British Museum, for all the constraints of public ownership, might try to push for more of the same balance.
With less money but far more visitors, it needs to be at least as imaginative as its New York cousin.
Yet standing in its austere reception hall, leading off to early Romano-British antiquities in one direction and library halls in the other, it is hard to deny the scope for a more populist approach.
This could be explored between now and 1996, as the British Library's move from the museum makes available about 40% more exhibition space — much of it to be devoted, as it happens, to one theme: life in the Americas.
Islamic tome
Prophetic
DAMASCUS
THE eastern Arab world — Syria, Lebanon, Jordan and the Gulf — is witnessing a publication phenomenon: in the past year an expensive 800-page tome in which a Syrian author, Muhammad Shahrur, tries to rethink Islam in modern terms, has sold more than 30,000 copies, with further printings under way in Damascus and Beirut.
It owes its success entirely to recommendations from one reader to another.
The book is banned in several countries and has not been publicised.
Mr Shahrur, who holds an engineering doctorate from University College, Dublin, spent 20 years writing ‘Al Kitab Wal Koran’(The Book and The Koran).
In it, through a strict linguistic analysis of the words of the Koran, he arrives at an interpretation of the prophet Muhammad's teaching that is in tune with modern philosophic and scientific thought.
As he puts it:
We must approach our prophet as if he had lived five years ago.
This should determine how we look at the Koran now…
We have to live in the present, not make our present in the past.
The governments of secular Syria and of free-wheeling Lebanon permitted the printing of the book but it has been banned in Saudi Arabia and, under Saudi pressure, in Qatar, the United Arab Emirates and Egypt.
Despite the official bans, pirate copies are not hard to find in Egypt and many thousands of photocopied versions are circulating underground in Saudi Arabia.
And, in the face of Saudi disapproval, it is on sale in Kuwait, Bahrain and Oman, whose ruler, Sultan Qaboos, was so impressed after reading the book that he had copies distributed to his cabinet ministers.
The Jordanian government sits squarely on the fence; it has neither banned the book nor approved its sale.
Muslim fundamentalists do not like the book's questioning approach, says Mr Shahrur, because ‘they stick to the way Islam was understood in the 8th century.’
In Syria, Muhammad Said Buti, a conservative theologian at Damascus University whose sermons on television are popular, says the author is ‘an enemy of Islam’ and ‘a western and Zionist agent’.
Mr Shahrur is agreeably surprised that so many want to read his fat and difficult book.
He thinks this demonstrates the vitality of Islam and of the unwillingness of the thinking Muslim to accept the harsh, intolerant version of it offered by the fundamentalists.
These thinking Muslims, it seems, want a version of Islam that is deeper, quieter and more thoughtful, which is what Mr Shahrur's book offers.
Poetry
Just Les
HE REMINDS people of Sir Les Patterson, the philistine Australian cultural tsar created by Barry Humphries.
Appearances are misleading.
On a European reading tour to flog his new collection of poems, Les Murray has demonstrated why he is often called Australia's best poet.
Not that he has any ambitions to be thought high-brow.
The poet says: ‘I've no time for the exclusiveness of high culture, anything that excludes my people.
I'm only interested in everything that's been sidelined.’
What about opera?
‘I've never been to one.’
And music?
‘I don't understand it.
Ask me to listen to Beethoven and my mind kind of drifts away…
You have to start from your roots — though I do enjoy ethnic music.
I'm an old ethno really…‘
Words are another matter.
One of his forebears was James Murray, compiler of the ‘Oxford English Dictionary’, and when Les Murray went to Sydney University in the 1950s he spent his days ingesting the contents of the famous Fisher Library, which was ‘full of the cultural wonders that bushies like me were despised for not having.’
He is an omnivorous poet, quite as comfortable in the world of technology as in that of animals, plants and other country matters, which are often thought to be the more proper subjects of poetry.
The rural culture of New South Wales has changed dramatically since Mr Murray was a boy, but he harbours no easy nostalgia for the ways of the past.
Many things are better now.
‘The education is better.
People are more bookish…
’ And although the old folk do not sit around the fire any more telling stories as they once did — many of the yarns told by Mr Murray's own father have found their way into his poetry — there are always the excitements and discoveries of the present by way of compensation.
And, of course, its battles.
One of his current preoccupations is the way in which the Australian literature boards disburse their grants to writers.
‘It's ridiculous,’ he says, ‘this system of giving writers a grant for a year.
All it does is to make them unemployable.
Far better to change the system altogether.’
But how?
By a method of royalty enhancement.
Instead of the author receiving 10% of the list price when a copy of his book is sold, the literature board could fund a scheme by which he receives the whole of the list price.
It would be a reward for effort.
Mr Murray has no time for the fashionable preoccupations of academic critics or for the dead-end road of existentialism.
His is a Christian vision (he converted to Catholicism in his teens), and his poetry is a continuous celebration of the world in all its multifariousness.
Poetry is the best medium for this sort of thing, he says.
Prose serves for day-to-day communication, but not for the more sacred things of life.
The Reichmanns
A high-rise demolished
TOWERS OF DEBT.
By Peter Foster.
Hodder & Stoughton; 312 pages; £19.99
THE Reichmanns set the stage for much of the financial drama of the 1980s.
For a brief and glorious time, they were the world's most expansive landlords.
Their skyscrapers dominated the skylines of New York, London and Toronto, and provided homes for some of the world's most powerful companies.
Then the stage came tumbling down.
Peter Foster tells the tale of this rise and fall, but his description of the family's fall is the better-told part and, inevitably, the more gripping.
Although most of the Reichmanns' empire-building occurred in the 1980s, it already seems a far-away era when banks and their customers were willing to suspend disbelief and dare to be, well, if not great at least borrowed to the eyeballs.
The Reichmanns' dream began in Tangier, where they fled from Vienna to escape the Nazis.
They were well-to-do Jews, strictly Orthodox in religion, and they flourished amid the international wheeling and dealing of this souk at the edge of the war.
When Moroccan nationalism in the mid-1950s ended Tangier's brief prominence as an international financial centre, the Reichmanns moved to Toronto — having rejected New York as too frenzied and noisy.
In Toronto the family ran a tile-importing business.
When the business needed to expand, the Reichmanns took bids for a new warehouse.
The lowest, C$125,000 ($100,000) struck the family as far too expensive.
So they decided to build the warehouse themselves — which they managed to do for C$10,000.
Realising that they could undercut the bids of competitors and still make a fat profit, the Reichmanns turned their company, Olympia & York, towards the property business.
After ten years building warehouses, they moved into high-rise development in 1965, and then spent the next ten years making their mark on the Toronto skyline.
All the cost-cutting tricks which the Reichmanns had learnt on warehouses served them well, as did their single-minded determination to give their customers what they wanted.
By 1977 the family had accumulated enough capital, acumen and experience to pull off the property deal of the century: the purchase for $120m of eight Manhattan skyscrapers when the city of New York was on the brink of bankruptcy.
At this point, the Reichmann story changes tone.
The hard-working property developers became financial swashbucklers.
Quite how they (and others) did it defeats Mr Foster.
He does not entirely explain how so many people could lift off so quickly into the deal-making stratosphere.
Why, for instance, did Paul Reichmann, the family patriarch, think that his property business would benefit from an oil division (when he took over Gulf Canada) or booze (when he bought into Hiram Walker)?
Why did the banks cheerfully lend billions to a man who would never open the family books or provide them with a balance sheet?
What motivated Mr Reichmann, a former Talmudic scholar who had always spurned the glitz of Donald Trump or the hubris of Robert Campeau?
Perhaps the 1980s cannot be explained from such a near vantage point as the present, but, in any case, the underlying forces of the time are (perhaps fittingly) lost in Mr Foster's litany of acquisition.
Sketchy though Mr Foster's account may be on the mechanics of the mass suspension of disbelief that supported the Reichmanns' rise, he is at his best in explaining, meeting by meeting, how they came back to earth.
Their downfall came with the financial collapse of the Canary Wharf project, and the accompanying collapse of their hopes to create an alternative financial centre to the City of London.
But by then their finances were already weakened by the takeover frenzy of the late 1980s and by their alliance with Robert Campeau, whom they helped buy Federated Stores in the United States.
Their involvement with Mr Campeau chalked up losses of C$100m when Federated Stores staggered into bankruptcy under the mountain of debt which Mr Campeau had piled upon it.
(Yet, by Mr Foster's account, they had never even liked the man.)
This and other poor investments cut the cash available to meet the soaring costs of Canary Wharf.
The resulting squeeze brought an end to the love affair between the Reichmanns and the money-lenders.
The banks were not at all keen to lend to somebody who seemed actually to need money.
The Reichmanns, for their part, seemed astounded that bankers who had brought them so far should desert them in their hour of need.
In 1992 Olympia & York filed for protection from its creditors.
With it, a whole era entered restructuring.
African wars
Beating about the bush
SMALL WARS, SMALL MERCIES.
By Jeremy Harding.
Viking; 442 pages; £17.99
THE cause of national liberation, suggests Jeremy Harding, ‘gave a moral language to the disputes in Africa.’
Well, up to a point.
The other thing it did, since the one-time imperialists were in NATO and their opponents were not, was to bring the cold war into Africa.
The author's sounder proposition is that, when South Africa's rulers at last(perhaps too late) released the one black leader they might strike a deal with, they marked the end of the period in which the words ‘national liberation’ had any meaning in Africa.
The release of Nelson Mandela in February 1990 coincided neatly with the end of the cold war.
The outside world scrambled out of its African involvements.
The way was open, in a continent where the idea of nationhood is at best tenuous, for (Mr Harding's phrase again)‘the new, freelance warrior’.
Since Mr Mandela was freed, the author has visited conflicts in six countries: Angola, Namibia, Western Sahara, Eritrea and South Africa itself.
All had been festering for many years.
Only Namibia and, maybe, Eritrea are now settled.
Yet the Africanness of those wars has meanwhile been obscured by the outbreak in Europe of tribal fights that would once have been dismissed as typically African.
Trying to classify conflict is pointless.
The one useful generalisation about war in impoverished Africa is that it takes place where there are not many expensive weapons for soldiers to kill each other with, but where the conditions of organised life are so fragile that its disruption causes lots of civilians to die of famine and disease.
Into these horrible circumstances steps Mr Harding, equipped with a real descriptive talent, some unlucrative freelance commissions, and a liking for Africa and its peoples.
Against the odds, he seems to have enjoyed himself.
From his own observations, and such scanty and often mendacious published sources as exist, he pieces together accounts of what seemed to be going on.
Best of all, he tells of the people caught up on the fringes of small wars, and finds in their resilience the small mercies of his title.
He witnesses the burial and resurrection of Manuel Antonio, the Mozambican magician who built a victorious local pro-government militia on prophecies from the grave.
He incredulously observes the Eritreans putting their socialism triumphantly into practice against the vastly better armed and more numerous Ethiopians.
He is as honestly confused as everybody else by a South African township riot.
Throughout it all, he keenly defends himself against the propaganda with which the minders assigned to foreign journalists bombard him.
‘I know the continent by fragments only, some of them remote, all of them particular,’ says Mr Harding.
That is the value of his book.
It will help the reader know, if not understand, what is going on.
Mr Harding's small wars are only a sample.
As a freelance journalist he could report them because just enough editors were just sufficiently interested to pay him just enough for doing so.
They were interested because these wars had tenuous cold-war implications.
Recent fighting in (to name but a few) Togo or Rwanda or on the Senegal-Mauritania border has lacked even that vestigial interest for western readers.
It has gone unreported, except occasionally and often in a needlessly partisan way through the accounts of western aid workers or visitors passing through on other business.
There is a dire shortage of reporters (and diplomats) with the experience of Africa's peculiarities to interpret what is happening.
When big trouble comes, maybe soon, maybe in Nigeria or Zaire, there should be no shortage of work for Mr Harding.
Bad old Smithy
WITH ‘Rhodesians Never Die’(Oxford University Press; 400 pages; £45 and $19), Peter Godwin and Ian Hancock have produced the best account yet of the death throes of white Rhodesia.
Their lack of knowledge of other civil wars means they are unduly shocked by the way otherwise decent people are first desensitised and then brutalised by terrorist atrocities.
So they do not know that white Rhodesians behaved in a relatively civilised manner compared, say, with the French in Algeria or the Portuguese in Mozambique.
When the war was lost, even the hotheads did not try to sabotage the peace.
This is the authors' only blindspot.
They provide a wholly convincing study of the way white Rhodesians were weakened by their own propaganda.
Most of them really came to believe that Rhodesia had excellent race relations and that the war was perpetrated by ‘communist-trained hand -inspired murdering scum’.
And once they had deluded themselves that the blacks were content, the whites were quite unable to recognise, let alone tackle, the real grievances that caused so many peasant farmers to side with the ‘boys in the bush’.
Amazingly, after 13 years of black government, some old Rhodies still try to behave as if Ian Smith —‘Good Old Smithy’— was still the power in the land.
Literary friends
Opposites attract
FLAUBERT-SAND: THE CORRESPONDENCE.
Harvill; 428 pages; £20.
Knopf; $10
THERE could not have been a less likely literary friendship.
He was morose, pessimistic, obsessed with achieving the perfect style.
She, 17 years his senior, was ebullient, romantic and far too impatient to spend even a minute searching for the perfect phrase when a cliché would do.
Her fluency resulted in almost 100 books; Flaubert's entire output fits one volume no fatter than the average airport blockbuster.
The association began in 1863.
Sand had written a friendly review of Flaubert's ‘Salammbô’.
Soon afterwards, as the only female guest at a dinner, she was conspicuously uneasy.
It was only when she started talking to Flaubert that she was seen to relax.
Never a woman to keep her thoughts to herself, she told him how comfortable she felt in his company.
The compliment took root; Sand was rewarded with an invitation to stay with Flaubert at Croisset, where she kept her host in conversation until two in the morning.
She was, he noted then, a very good woman, and a perceptive one.
He did, however, deplore her socialist tendencies and her readiness to advertise her opinions to the world in her books.
That was shocking; for him, the novelist's duty was to remain invisible, inaudible, discreetly omniscient.
It is difficult to imagine what Flaubert would have thought of Sand in her younger days, as the headstrong lover of Musset and Chopin.
By 1863 she was ready to settle down and enjoy the charms of a pastoral, grandmotherly existence at her home in Berry, where Flaubert duly visited her.
The correspondence shows a deep affection, untinged by any element of flirtation.
Sand was a writer with a popular following; Flaubert, who never grew used to the lashings he got from the critics, struggled to follow her instructions to rise above their hostility.
He drew comfort from her warm support, increasingly so as his closest friends — Broisset, Sainte-Beuve, Turgenev — began to die, leaving him to sigh that he was ‘crammed with coffins, like an old cemetery.’
They had their differences.
Flaubert was a vehemently reactionary anti-Christian, arguing always against the need to assist or promote the weak and meek.
Sand was a true daughter of the French revolution; Flaubert, examining it with his head rather than his heart, saw dismal proof of human stupidity, the failing he excoriated in ‘Bouvard et Pécuchet’.
He was appalled by modern life; Sand, although older, embraced it wholeheartedly.
But life was, as Henry James shrewdly observed, her greatest talent; she was ‘a supreme case of the successful practice of life itself.’
Sand had spent a lifetime being the older woman; in the case of her friendship with Flaubert she went one decade further and became a mother-substitute.
It had been, Flaubert told her son after her funeral in 1876, as if he had been forced to bury his own mother a second time.
‘You have never done me anything but good, and I love you tenderly,’ he had written to her soon before her death.
It is that tender, chiding, mutual affection which makes these beautifully translated letters between them so agreeable to read.
The International 500
The atmosphere at the Indianapolis 500 could hardly be more American.
The race itself could hardly be more international
ALTHOUGH the world's largest sporting event to take place on a single day is called the Indianapolis 500, the track is actually in Speedway, Indiana, a smokestack-America suburb of small frame houses, storefronts and industrial plants.
On race day the graves in the local cemetery have fresh flowers placed on them to recall Decoration Day, the original name of the Memorial Day observance.
People living within walking distance of the track decorate their houses for the family cookout with checkered flags and banners.
It is a tradition, and since 1911 the Indianapolis 500 has been rooted in American patriotism.
Yet for all its traditions the Indianapolis 500 is, again like America itself, on the cutting edge of technology, combining the latest advances in engineering and the car racer's desire to apply them to the maximum.
But this year the race itself became less American and even more international when it lost the 58-year-old veteran competitor who best embodies what the Indianapolis 500 represents.
His full name is Anthony Joseph Foyt but, like H.G. Wells, nobody knows him by anything other than by his initials: A.J. Foyt, Jr.
His record at the Indy 500 speaks for itself.
He first competed at the speedway in 1958, qualified to compete a record 35 consecutive times and won the race on four occasions.
He drove more than 12,000 miles in competition on the track, and raced against 240 of the 596 drivers who had ever entered the event.
In recent years, Mr Foyt has taken things a bit easier, skipping some races and training a racing team of younger drivers.
On the first day of time trials in the race for the pole position at this year's Indy 500, Mr Foyt watched his 24-year-old protégé, Robby Gordon, crash.
Strapping himself into his number 14 car, Mr Foyt drove one lap at more than 220mph.
He parked the machine and announced to a stunned crowd that he had just retired.
‘There comes a time,’ he said as his voice broke with emotion.
The track that Mr Foyt made his second home has changed over the years, but perhaps no more so than in the past year.
In 1992 Roberto Guerrero from Colombia set a record qualifying speed of 232.438mph (374.073 km/h) in a year marked by serious accidents.
After the race, the track was redesigned to slow down traffic at the corners.
The 12ft (3.7m) wide apron below the racing line was cut away and replaced by a rumble strip and a warm-up lane divided by a grass barrier.
The narrower corners and restrictions on aerodynamics slowed the entrants in this year's race — at 223.967mph, the pole speed of Arie Luyendyk, the fastest qualifier, would have placed him far back in the field in 1992.
With the slower speeds the qualifying heats as well as the race itself were almost injury-free this year.
Cars built abroad predominated.
Bobby Rahal, the reigning champion in the current Indy Car series, has tried to develop a domestic car-building programme.
He has struggled all season with the only American-built car in the sport while others have used Lolas, Galmers and Penskes built in England.
Realising that this experiment was a flop, Mr Rahal ordered two Lolas for the remainder of the season.
Unfortunately, Lola could not deliver the cars in time for Indianapolis and Mr Rahal failed to qualify for the race.
Bitter fans made posters of Mr Rahal holding signs saying ‘Will drive for food’ and ‘I need tickets.’
Nine of the first ten qualifiers in this year's race were born outside the United States.
So were seven of the first ten finishers (see table).
The foreigner who created most excitement was England's Nigel Mansell.
The current Formula One champion is leading in the Indy Car season competition, finding the success in his first year that has eluded Michael Andretti, the 1991 Indy-car champion, in his foray into Formula One racing.
When compared with A.J. Foyt, Mr Mansell came to the Indianapolis 500 with no record to speak of in Indy Car racing.
He won the first race of the season in Australia but was injured before the Phoenix 200.
He had never raced on an oval nor ever driven more than 200 miles in a race.
Yet Mansell-mania reminded some of Beatlemania in the Swinging Sixties.
Lots of Union Jacks waved out of a race-day crowd of 500,000.
After the hyperbole the race began.
Raul Boesel, a Brazilian, sprinted into an early lead as the field tested the narrow corners.
Despite many rumblings that the changes would cut down on passing and crowd drivers into the walls, the race was one of the most competitive, as well as one of the safest, in recent years.
The lead changed 22 times among 12 different drivers.
At the end of 500 miles a record 24 cars remained on the track, with ten on the lead lap.
Mr Mansell, the first Indy-500 rookie to finish the full distance in 23 years, at one point drove past his pit and lost valuable time.
With 16 laps to go Mr Mansell was leading the pack.
At the end of a caution period (ie, a period of brief interruption in the race), Mr Mansell was a fraction of a second too slow to respond to the green flag restart.
As Mr Mansell hesitated, Emerson Fittipaldi from Brazil and Arie Luyendyk from Holland zoomed past him on the main straight.
Mr Mansell chased them around the track trying to regain the lead.
He hit a wall hard enough to briefly ignite a magnesium wheel, but refused to slow down.
Mr Fittipaldi, who has twice been the Formula One champion, held off Mr Luyendyk to score his second Indy-500 victory.
The Brazilian, the owner of an orange plantation, declined to accept the victor's traditional bottle of milk that a track official kept on trying to press upon him.
Instead, Mr Fittipaldi held aloft a bottle of orange juice from his farm.
Another tradition gone, another begins.
TWO dead white males (Sir Sidney Nolan and John Bratby) and one dead white female (Dame Elisabeth Frink) make a big impact at this year's summer exhibition at the Royal Academy.
All were distinguished members of the Royal Academy and all three have died within the past year.
Brooding busts by Frink are so powerful that they dominate the largest room in the exhibition.
Nolan's ‘Hare in Trap’ recalls his famous Ned Kelly series, with an animal taking the place of the outlaw.
In ‘Dog and Duck Hotel’ he captures again the bleak, brave lives of people scraping a living out of the Australian Outback.
The blue and brown eyes that stare out of Bratby's ‘Self Portrait With Others, 1954’ shine with love.
More than 13,000 works were submitted this year and 1,800 of them are on show.
Most are ordinary but there are some gems, particularly in a room devoted to print.
‘Shorebound’, the etching by John Duffin pictured above, is an outstanding case in point.
ASIA
Japan
Remember, the tortoise won
FROM OUR TOKYO CORRESPONDENT
In the curious world of Japanese politics, the cause of political reform may be moving forwards just when it seems to be moving backwards
SIX months ago, dramatic things were happening in Japanese politics.
Public disapproval had brought about the resignation of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party's corrupt kingmaker, Shin Kanemaru.
The LDP's unending grip on power seemed threatened by a collapse in the opinion polls.
A rebel faction hinted it might leave the LDP, destroying the party's lower-house majority.
A small opposition group called the Japan New Party was rising quickly in the polls by promising freshness and honesty.
Socialist politicians seemed intent on forging a new unity and modernising their hard-left policies.
In recent weeks, however, disillusion has displaced optimism.
‘The only hope is that a new party will emerge and change everything,’ says a typically frustrated businessman.
Mr Kanemaru's arrest has not been followed by others.
The government's opinion-poll rating has edged up, from 20.1% in November to 26.3% in May, according to polls conducted by Yomiuri Shimbun, Japan's biggest newspaper.
The LDP's rebellious faction no longer looks like splitting off: on June 2nd one of its members said secession would achieve nothing, and that the best way to bring about reform was to work behind the scenes.
Why are the reformers now retreating?
Partly because one of the leading LDP rebels, Ichiro Ozawa, rose on Mr Kanemaru's coat tails.
His patron's arrest on charges of tax evasion suggests Mr Ozawa should not risk angering the tax authorities, or their friends.
Kiichi Miyazawa, the prime minister, used to work in the finance ministry, which oversees the tax office.
At the same time, the opposition's appeal to would-be LDP secessionists is waning.
The Social Democratic Party and the Clean Government Party, Japan's two biggest opposition parties, have both failed to use the LDP's disarray to improve their own poll ratings.
The Japan New Party's support rose from 0.5% in September last year to 5.6% in April, according to Yomiuri Shimbun polls.
It slipped back to 4.2% in May, perhaps because of the party's failure to offer new policies, perhaps because of reports of the party leader's dalliances.
Yet, although the reformers have been floundering, the chances of reform suddenly look better than ever.
Powerful people, as Japan's subtle politicians know, stay powerful by bending to others' wishes.
The LDP's mainstream has been quietly promoting change, and more than half its Diet (parliamentary) members recently signed a petition in favour of political reform.
So it is that the prospects for four political-reform bills are suddenly looking good.
Three of them propose rules to make political bribery more difficult.
The fourth would change Japan's electoral system.
At present several candidates are elected in each constituency.
This discourages campaigns based on party policy; usually the main contenders are all Liberal Democrats.
The LDP's previous proposal for voting reform was to replace the Japanese system with a first-past-the-post system.
That would have given it around 90% of seats in the lower house and, since the opposition would never accept that prospect, the bill seemed destined for the dustbin.
But on May 28th the Liberal Democrats put forward proposals that the opposition might swallow, because they would preserve the current balance of power.
One idea is to revive a bill put forward in 1991, in the wake of a previous corruption scandal.
This envisaged 300 first-past-the-post seats plus 175 that would be filled by proportional representation.
The opposition has proposed something similar, so the stage is set for compromise.
The current Diet session is due to end on June 20th, which leaves little time for the horse-trading that will be necessary.
Some talk of extending it until the Group of Seven summit in Tokyo in early July; others favour calling an extraordinary session in September.
Either way, however, politicians of both rebellious and conservative sorts say some kind of reform is likely to be enacted.
The staunchest opponents of reform strike a revealing pose: rather than argue against it, they seek to undermine it by espousing an extreme version.
Even they do not believe the issue will just evaporate.
If the politicians flunk change this time, the issue of electoral reform will return to haunt them.
Japan seems to be shuffling inexorably towards change.
The princess, the god and the dead fish
FROM OUR TOKYO CORRESPONDENT
A FLASHY acquisition, a shower of publicity: such hubris often foreshadows slump.
So it may be with Japan's imperial family.
The crown prince's marriage to Masako Owada on June 9th will be marked by a national holiday and widespread television coverage.
But it threatens to blur the institution's brand image.
The imperial family, steeped in Shinto ritual, appeals to the traditionalist and nationalist markets.
Miss Owada, a polyglot career woman who has degrees from Oxford and Harvard, appeals mainly to modern-minded internationalists.
Milder differences have soured many a merger before now.
The imperial family is doing its best to put its stamp on the future princess.
Following her engagement in January, Miss Owada gave up her career in the foreign ministry, acquired a new and frumpy wardrobe, and suffered 50 hours of tuition in Shinto ritual and the traditional poetry that members of the Japanese royal family are supposed to write.
Her engagement present was hardly internationalist or fashionable: two dead fish, six casks of sake, some silk for a kimono.
After her wedding she will stand naked before a priestess, who will ‘purify’ her with bran.
Her husband, after all, is believed by diehards to be descended from a god.
Yet divinity, too, will have to make concessions.
Miss Owada rebuffed the prince on several occasions; indeed, winning her hand in marriage required so much pressure that the union, billed as a merger, was rather more like a hostile takeover.
Miss Owada is thought to have held out for one concession: relatively open public relations.
In days gone by, the emperor shunned all publicity.
Commoners were discouraged from looking directly at any part of his person other than his feet.
The crown prince's grandfather, Emperor Hirohito, spent most of his life inside his palace, performing Shinto rites and gazing at small fish.
In 1945 he announced Japan's surrender on the radio: ‘The war situation has developed not necessarily to our advantage.’
It was the first time that most of his people had heard him speak.
Hirohito's death in 1989 brought more open attitudes by the imperial family.
His successor, Akihito, visited China last year and half apologised for Japan's wartime behaviour, which brought him closer to matters of state than his predecessors had deemed wise.
In April he apologised again in Okinawa, Japan's southernmost island and scene of much wartime brutality.
These risky ventures may well grow more common when Akihito is succeeded by his son.
Traditionalists are complaining that the wedding's publicity threatens the imperial mystique.
The Imperial Household Agency, a secretive ministry that minds the royal family, has objected to a telephone card showing a picture of the couple.
Japanese magazines have picked over the details of the imperial engagement, including the less flattering ones: Miss Owada's creased kimono, her unsuitable confidence when talking to the press.
In spite of the ignominy to which Britain's royal family has descended, Japanese concern may seem premature.
But divinity is a fragile commodity.
Cambodia puts its trust in princes
FROM OUR SOUTH-EAST ASIA CORRESPONDENT
PHNOM PENH
YASUSHI AKASHI, the head of the United Nations operation in Cambodia, keeps a mask of a dog on his desk.
In accordance with a Japanese tradition, Mr Akashi coloured in one eye of the dog when the UN moved into Cambodia, to mark the beginning of the mission.
On May 29th, the day after voting was completed in Cambodia's election, Mr Akashi coloured in the second eye, to signify that the mission was accomplished.
‘I thought that was a little incautious,’ comments one of his staff.
So it has proved.
Old communists may sometimes die, but they have trouble fading away.
Political defeat has come as a profound shock for the ruling Cambodian People's Party (CPP).
Unable to face the thought of losing power, the party is trying to reject the result of the election.
The UN, for its part, is relearning the recent lesson of Angola.
Overseeing a free and fair election is one thing; enforcing the result is quite another.
With almost 90% of the votes counted, FUNCINPEC, the royalist party, had won 45.7% of the vote and the CPP had 38.1%.
Projections suggest that FUNCINPEC will have 57 seats in Cambodia's constituent assembly, against the CPP's 52, with minor parties picking up the remaining 11 seats.
Since the assembly's main job is to enact a constitution, and that will require a two-thirds majority, the assembly members can look forward to much horse-trading.
Before the election many UN officials had privately hoped for a close result.
They reasoned that, if neither main party won a commanding majority, both would have a stake in negotiating rather than fighting.
They had not reckoned with the mentality of CPP officials, used to exercising unchallenged authority in a one-party state.
Deprived of the crushing victory it was confidently expecting, the party cried foul.
Party officials complained of irregularities and called on the UN to rerun the election in at least seven provinces.
They backed up these demands with scarcely veiled threats.
In language that was strikingly reminiscent of the Khmers Rouges, a CPP official predicted that popular anger at the conduct of the election might lead to ‘insurrection or riot’.
Party officials warned the UN that local military commanders might be tempted to take things into their own hands.
The UN Security Council passed a swift and unanimous resolution, on June 3rd, calling on all parties to respect the results.
The UN people in Cambodia, having seen the promised Khmer Rouge offensive fail to materialise, are publicly calm about the new threat.
Their line is that the CPP is in a state of shock and will eventually be reconciled to its new position.
But just to be on the safe side, the UN has called in its senior officials to be fitted with bullet-proof waistcoats.
Some UN officials speculate that the CPP may soon split.
They hope that a moderate faction — perhaps led by the current prime minister, Hun Sen — will accept a role as the junior partner in a coalition government.
But if the bulk of the CPP continues to reject the election result and refuses to take its seats in Cambodia's assembly, the UN will have to come up with ways to winkle the party out of power.
Much will depend on whether the government of Mr Hun Sen can continue to command the loyalty of its troops and bureaucrats.
The UN knows that much of the Cambodian army has not been paid for some time, so, until a new government takes over, it is considering paying the troops itself.
UN officials reckon that to pay both the army and the civil servants would cost some $1m-7m a month.
If the UN were to take over some government functions, the bill might rise to $10m a month.
Inevitably, the proposal is running into difficulties.
Though the UN is already paying the local police in Somalia, officials in New York worry about setting precedents.
There is also the matter of who should provide the money.
Even if the proposal is approved, the UN will probably not be able to pay Cambodia's 100,000-strong army before June 30th.
Officials hope that an early announcement might calm the soldiers.
The UN thinks it has one other card.
According to Mr Akashi, ‘one of the main differences between Cambodia and Angola [where the losers' repudiation of the election result has led to renewed civil war]is Prince Sihanouk.’
Mr Akashi is hoping that the prince — widely regarded as the ‘father of the nation’— can persuade all sides to accept the election result.
Certainly the prince is in ebullient form.
On June 3rd he announced that he had become head of state, prime minister and chief of the armed forces.
He said he had the agreement of the two leading parties.
It was not clear exactly what powers he had acquired.
Earlier he had mentioned some model heads of state for consideration: François Mitterrand, Vincent Auriol (one of Mr Mitterrand's predecessors) and Fidel Castro.
UN officials smiled uneasily at this new example of the prince's sense of fun.
They were more reassured by the news that the prince was about to give a lunch, which would be attended by his son, Prince Ranariddh, who leads FUNCINPEC, and by Chea Sim, the general secretary of the CPP.
The oddest performance comes from the Khmers Rouges.
Having denounced the election as a ‘stinking farce’ designed to hand Cambodia over to Vietnam, they have suddenly warmed to the democratic ideal and are now denouncing the CPP for resisting the result.
Pakistan
Who stole the secretary?
FROM OUR PAKISTAN CORRESPONDENT
GENERAL ABDUL WAHEED, Pakistan's army chief, has made a reluctant debut in politics.
Disgusted by the latest battle between the quarrelsome politicians, he met the prime minister, Nawaz Sharif, and the president, Ghulam Ishaq Khan, separately on May 31st and told them to make peace or else.
Politicians listen to generals in Pakistan.
Within hours of the meeting, Mr Sharif addressed a special session of parliament which he had called in order to try to impeach the president.
He appeared to have forgotten his plan, instead using the speech to offer reconciliation talks to Benazir Bhutto, the leader of the opposition.
But this sudden quiet is likely to be no more than a brief lull.
Pakistan has been in upheaval since May 26th, when the Supreme Court overturned President Ishaq's dismissal of the government and gave Mr Sharif his job back.
The argument over who runs the country remains unsettled.
Mr Sharif's immediate aim is to assert his authority by getting control of the provincial assembly in Punjab, his home base and the country's biggest and richest province.
Mr Ishaq wants all the provincial assemblies dissolved, in order to create a constitutional crisis that will force a general election.
Mr Sharif's first move after his restoration was to return to Punjab on May 28th.
His friends had been in control of Punjab until Mr Ishaq's people pushed them out after the central government was sacked on April 18th, and Manzoor Watoo, an ally of Mr Ishaq's, installed himself as Punjab's chief minister.
Mr Watoo dissolved the assembly on May 29th.
Some of Mr Sharif's infuriated followers then kidnapped the secretary of the provincial assembly, Chaudry Habibullah.
They forced him to sign a chit claiming that he had received a resolution of no confidence in Mr Watoo's government nine hours before the dissolution: under the constitution, the chief minister cannot dissolve the assembly if a vote of no confidence has already been tabled against him.
Mr Habibullah is still missing, the matter has now gone to the Lahore High Court, and the assembly's fate will be decided when Mr Sharif's friends produce the unfortunate Mr Habibullah next week.
Similar shenanigans in the North West Frontier Province led to the dissolution of the assembly on May 30th and the announcement of fresh elections.
Mr Sharif's followers are contesting the dissolution.
The assemblies of Sindh and Baluchistan are also on the brink of being dissolved.
Faced with a revolt in the provinces, and with little prospect of being able to run a government, Mr Sharif set about trying to impeach the president.
At that point, General Waheed decided that things had gone far enough, and stepped in.
Mr Sharif has now set up ten ‘reconciliation committees’ to negotiate peace with opposition parties, including Miss Bhutto's Pakistan People's Party.
Her attitude is central to breaking the deadlock.
She is demanding a government of national consensus, leading to an election run by an independent election commission.
And, in an oblique attack on the partiality of judges, she has said she wants a commission to review appointments to the higher levels of the judiciary.
Mr Sharif is not yet in any mood to accept these demands.
For the next episode, watch the Lahore High Court.
If it restores the Punjab assembly next week, Mr Sharif will get control of the province.
But neither Miss Bhutto nor President Ishaq is ready to allow Punjab to fall into Mr Sharif's lap, and the constitutional battle is bound to continue.
Mr Sharif will have little time to think about the budget, which is due next week.
For six months Pakistan's governments have been preoccupied with intrigue, and it may be that their carefree attitude to running the country is beginning to show up in the figures.
The budget deficit is around 9% of GDP.
Foreign donors are worried.
So will Pakistanis be, when they start paying for it.
Tigers
China purrs
THERE has not been much good news for tigers recently, so conservationists are astonished by the noises coming out of Beijing.
The Chinese government has said for the first time that it intends to try to stop the tiger trade.
Peter Jackson, chief cat-man at the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN), describes the development as the most encouraging thing that has happened to tigers for years.
Until a year or so ago, there was a growing complacency about the tiger's future.
Project Tiger, the grand campaign to save it started by Jim Corbett in India in 1969, paid for by the World Wildlife Fund and run by the Indian government, appeared to have been successful.
Tiger numbers in India, which had fallen from 40,000 at the beginning of the century to around 2,000 at the end of the 1960s, rose to 4,300 by 1989, said officials.
Outside India there are 1,600–2,500 tigers (depending on whose estimate you believe), scattered around South-East Asia, China and Russia.
But by the late 1980s, conservationists in Indian reserves started to notice that some of the familiar old cats had disappeared, and began to question the official figures.
In February the Indian government admitted they were inaccurate.
Conservationists' estimates vary between 3,000 and 4,000; but everybody agrees on the most important point, which is that numbers are no longer growing, but shrinking fast.
The Indian tigers' problem seems to be that the Chinese have killed all theirs.
Tigers were declared vermin in China in the 1950s, and were slaughtered in droves not just because they were dangerous but also because they were valuable.
Bits of tiger are used in Chinese medicine: bones for ulcers and burns, for instance, the fat for piles, the whiskers for toothache.
There are now thought to be 20–25 tigers left in southern China, with a few more of the Siberian variety left in the north.
Chinese tiger buyers have therefore turned to Indian suppliers.
Taiwanese, it seems, are often the middlemen.
Although the sale of tiger products is banned in Taiwan, a large and not-very-covert market continues there, where an IUCN researcher recently found tiger bone on sale for $180 a pound.
The 300 or so remaining tigers in Russia are also being killed.
Some conservationists attribute the fast decline in their population to the collapse of the Soviet Union.
Old systems for protecting them are collapsing, and shrinking incomes increase the incentive to sell them.
There are stories of tiger skins being exchanged for second-hand cars.
The realisation that complacency was no longer in order led members of the Convention on Trade in Endangered Species to pass an emergency resolution on tiger protection at a meeting in March.
That has set in train a process that could, eventually, lead to sanctions against offending countries; but that might take years, and tigers, as a species, are short of time.
Developments in China, on the other hand, might just make a difference.
In April the Chinese and Indian governments agreed to co-operate on anti-poaching measures.
At a meeting with Martin Holdgate, head of the IUCN, in May, the Chinese minister for science asked the IUCN to help China draft legislation against the tiger trade, and was talking about a domestic ban on the use of wildlife in 160 medicines.
That would reduce the threat not just to tigers, but also to rhinos, bears, pangolins and many others.
The law must have teeth, and it must be enforced; but the purrs from Beijing are a start.
China
The mystery deepens
FROM OUR BEIJING CORRESPONDENT
ON APRIL 26th, Li Peng, the Chinese prime minister, was due to meet a foreign visitor.
The meeting was cancelled and Mr Li has not been seen in public since.
Speculation about his fate is rife.
Reporters who first asked officials about Mr Li were told that he had a ‘bad cold’.
After some weeks they said he was recovering, but had been ordered by doctors to rest.
That might seem reasonable, except that in China it is quite normal for ailing politicians to be filmed for the evening television news on their sick beds, perhaps receiving wishes for a speedy recovery from solicitous friends.
Was Mr Li too ill to be shown?
A rumour went round Beijing that he had heart disease.
Officials would not comment on this suggestion, even to deny it.
Newspapers printed a photograph of a letter to a flood-control committee bearing Mr Li's signature, so it was assumed that he could still put pen to paper.
That Mr Li should be felled by illness at the relatively youthful age of 64 has come as something of a shock in a country where leaders are traditionally long-lived.
Mr Li could with a little luck look forward to another 20 years of political life.
But even should he reappear tomorrow looking hale and hearty, his long absence will have cast a shadow over his position.
Questions will be asked, even if they are not asked publicly, about whether he is physically fit to continue in office.
Many Chinese would be happy to see him go.
Mr Li is not a popular prime minister.
He is blamed for ordering the army crackdown on pro-democracy students in Tiananmen Square in June 1989.
Perhaps as a result of his unpopularity, speculation about him has taken a new turn.
Is his illness political rather than physiological?
It would not be the first time that a ‘bad cold’ has referred to a political chill rather than a runny nose.
Mr Li is believed to have been criticised last year by China's senior leader, Deng Xiaoping, for his caution on the economy.
Mr Li quickly adopted a more reformist tone — a change that is thought at least temporarily to have saved his career.
His absence has given a rare opportunity to his deputy and political rival, Zhu Rongji, who has taken over the reins of government.
Mr Zhu has been tipped to replace the cautious Mr Li eventually.
During recent weeks he has been praised warmly by the mainland press in Hong Kong.
Those with a taste for Machiavellian plots have suggested that maybe Mr Li has set a trap for Mr Zhu by leaving him in charge at a time when he will have to tackle the delicate problems of an over-heating economy.
But even were Mr Li to harbour such intentions, he would run the risk of seeing Mr Zhu come out shining.
If Mr Li's illness continues through the summer, China's bid to play host to the Olympic games in 2000 may benefit.
China is known to be worried about who to send to plead its cause at the final presentations in Monte Carlo on September 23rd.
A prime minister might generally be considered the best candidate, but not if he has been dubbed ‘the butcher of Beijing’.
The urbane Mr Zhu, who is not connected with the Tiananmen Square crackdown and who speaks excellent English, would be ideal.
Taiwan's little problem
FROM OUR TAIWAN CORRESPONDENT
WHEREAS China bemoans its growing mouth-count (the Chinese count people by mouths, not heads), Taiwan is worried that its population is not growing enough.
The Taiwanese government said last week that the rate of population growth this year would dip below 1% for the first time, to 0.95%, and forecast zero growth by 2035.
Back in 1951 it was 3.8%.
The slogan of Taiwan's more fertile years, ‘Two is just right, one is not too few,’ has been subtly amended: ‘Two is just right.’
Early marriage and procreation are no longer discouraged.
Infertile couples are offered specialist advice.
Taiwan's experience is typical of poor countries that have become rich and industrialised in a relatively short time.
As prosperity has grown — income per person has risen from $145 in 1951 to $10,215 in 1992 — the birth rate has fallen, from about 50 per 1,000 in 1951 to just over 15 per 1,000 in 1992.
The labour market has pulled women out of the home, and decent childcare is expensive.
Good education is costly, too.
Some parents say they can barely afford children: living costs rocketed in the late 1980s, and Taipei is now reckoned to be one of the world's most expensive cities in which to live.
Couples that do decide to have a child often prefer boys.
Some clinics helpfully provide forecasts of the likely sex, although this is against the law.
Whereas 106.7 boys were born for every 100 girls in 1985, by 1990 the figure for boys had risen to 110.3.
Remaining single is fashionable.
A best-selling novel, ‘Single Nobles’, by Huang Ming-Chien, has become a model for young people.
‘Single-hood is becoming an acceptable way of life,’ says Lu Pau-ching, of National Chengchi University.
‘Young women have become more realistic about marriage and managing the conflict between career and family.’
Divorce is becoming more common, and carries less of a stigma.
The government's main concern is that the Taiwanese of 2034 (forecast to number 25.8m) will be greyer than the 20.7m of today.
The number of over-65s is expected to rise from 6.7% to 21.6% by 2036.
Increased life expectancy will mean that for every 100 workers aged 15–64 there will be 28 young and 35 elderly dependants in 2036.
At present there are 39 young and ten elderly dependants per 100 workers.
The government's pro-baby policy is unlikely to have much effect.
‘Policy will not change people's attitudes,’ says Wu Huilin, of the Chung Hwa Institution for Economic Research, a private think-tank.
Some Taiwanese think this is no bad thing.
Peter Chang, of the government's Council for Economic Planning and Development, points out that among countries with more than 10m people, Taiwan's population density ranks second only to Bangladesh's.
And with plenty of cheap labour just across the puddle, who needs more people in Taiwan, anyway?
Sharp as a razor in Central Asia
FROM OUR CORRESPONDENT IN ISTANBUL
NOT many people know that 68.8% of men in Azerbaijan have a moustache.
This, and other intimate details of the lives of the people of Central Asia, are now being researched by the many Turkish companies that are excited by the prospect of 10% green-eyed, 12% hazel-eyed and 100% starry-eyed potential customers longing to lose their material innocence.
It has to be said that the countries in this bit of the world, which were previously part of the Soviet Union, do not look a promising market.
They are quarrelsome, politically unstable and poor; some are preoccupied with fighting.
Wages, for those who can find work, are unlikely to be more than the equivalent of $15 a month, paid in clumsy wads of devalued roubles.
No wonder that (another fact coming up) less than half the men in Central Asia carry a wallet.
But true salesmen are unlikely to be deterred by mere realism.
Take the moustaches and other whiskery matters.
According to the Siar Research International Corporation, the source of many of these facts, at least half the men in Kazakhstan shave every day.
This is clearly a better place to sell razor blades than Azerbaijan, where the men say they shave only once a week, or, if they want to look their best, every other day.
But it is women who are more likely to buy things.
‘There are people who have never heard of shampoo, deodorant or a whole range of sanitary products,’ says Bulent Tanla of Piar-Gallup, a market-research company in Istanbul.
Gold has, in the past, been a coveted luxury: 38.7% of Azerbaijanis have at least one gold tooth and some have three or more.
This is no doubt the result of frequent visits to the fridge (most people have one) and too many sweets with meals (four a day are customary).
Some findings will have a familiar ring in the West.
Many Central Asian men consider themselves to be helpful around the house; fewer women agree with them.
But men do not want to get into demeaning details about how they help with the housework: few admit to doing the washing up.
They seem to be a gloomy lot.
In Kazakhstan only a quarter of those interviewed thought that life would get better next year.
Many thought it would get worse (36%) or stay the same (39%).
‘The fear is that the old regime will come back again,’ says a researcher.
Still, about half the people never take anything for a headache.
Put the two together and what do you have?
A market for aspirin.
AMERICAN SURVEY
Mushrooms
Death in the woods
SEATTLE
IN LATE spring, delicious brown mushrooms nose out of the moist soil of the Pacific north-west.
For years, this has been the time when small bands of mushroom pickers wander through the forests.
They are wandering again this year, but keeping their heads down.
Even the most avid mycologists dislike being shot over a chanterelle.
In late May, police in Oregon had to reinforce back-road patrols after gunfire erupted in disputes over mushroom grounds.
One bullet struck a picker's car, narrowly missing him.
Last year, a picker was shot dead.
The problem (as always) is money.
European and Asian gourmands will pay up to $100 per pound for the morel, matsutake and chanterelle mushrooms that grow in the forests, creating an industry that, by some estimates, is worth $10m a year.
Lured by stories of pickers making up to $1,000 in a single day, unemployed loggers, SouthEast Asian immigrants and garden-variety opportunists have all rushed in.
A thousand or so pickers may crowd into a few square miles, followed closely by mushroom buyers whose pockets are stuffed with cash for spot purchases.
The buyers are frequent targets for hold-ups.
A more subtle approach is to ask the buyer simply to raise the price offered; a pistol offers encouragement.
The new mushroom dynamic has stunned amateur mycologists, by nature a gentle breed.
They are usually more concerned by the loss of mushroom habitat.
Matsutakes and chanterelles need undisturbed forest, something that is becoming scarce in the much-logged north-west.
Morels thrive briefly after a fire or bout of logging, but then they too disappear.
Less clear is the question of whether mushrooms can be hunted to extinction.
It seems possible, provided pickers do not wipe each other out first.
The New York mayor's race
Off and running
NEW YORK
SOONER than anyone expected, the mayoral contest in New York has shaken down into a re-run of the 1989 race between David Dinkins, now the incumbent, and Rudolph Giuliani, his Republican rival.
Mr Dinkins has seen off both his main challengers for the Democratic nomination in recent weeks.
The outcome, though, looks a far cry from the straightforward fight he faced in 1989.
The good news for Mr Dinkins is the retreat by Andrew Stein, his most outspoken rival within the Democratic Party.
Rich, handsome and intensely ambitious, Mr Stein's failure to run a real race — after more than 20 years in New York politics — has been a baffling feature of the election from its outset.
Just a pretty face, said his kinder critics.
But Mr Stein had the backing of some thoughtful advisers, and tried hard to push serious economic and fiscal issues higher up the electoral agenda.
Just a week before stepping down on May 27th, his camp put out a proposal for radical tax changes in the city.
Mr Stein was never going to win; but his constant carping during the summer about the shortcomings of City Hall might have weakened Mr Dinkins ahead of the autumn fight.
The other main challenge for the Democratic ticket came from Herman Badillo, easily the most experienced of New York's Latino politicians.
He pulled out in mid-May.
But on May 28th Mr Giuliani was cock-a-hoop with the news that Mr Badillo had agreed to join him in a ‘Republican-Liberal alliance’ against Mr Dinkins.
According to a recent poll, 88% of the black votes are falling to Mr Dinkins and 60% of the white votes to Mr Giuliani.
It does not take a psephologist, therefore, to spot the importance of the city's Latino voters.
In 1989 two-thirds of them (about 114,000 people) helped elect Mr Dinkins as the city's first black mayor.
But he still only just squeaked home, by a margin of 47,080 votes out of 1.9m cast.
And the signs are growing that many Latino voters might turn against him in November.
About 70% of the city's registered Latino voters are Democrats; but recent opinion polls have shown 40–45% of them supporting Mr Giuliani.
Mr Badillo will run for the post of city comptroller, now held by a fellow-Democrat, Elizabeth Holtzman.
If successful, he will be the first Puerto Rican to win office at city level.
But will his support help Mr Giuliani to split, or even to win over, the Latino vote?
Democrats are clearly nervous that it might.
Several job offers were pushed Mr Badillo's way before his defection; now Mr Dinkins's supporters are busy making light of it.
In fact, no one seems sure what effect it will have.
Mr Badillo is a lawyer with a full-time private practice, not a local political activist; and he has been out of office since 1978.
Still, to dismiss him as yesterday's man might be rash.
‘He cannot deliver the Latino vote,’ says Angelo Falcon, head of a non-profit think-tank on Puerto Rican politics, ‘but he will help to tip it.’
For a start, Mr Badillo's presence in the campaign will make it tougher to paint Mr Giuliani as a white politician opposed to the interests of ethnic minorities.
On a more positive note, he might help the Republican challenger to pose as a mould-breaker in New York politics.
News of the Republican-Liberal alliance was carefully staged last week to evoke parallels with the ‘fusion ticket’ put together in 1933 by Fiorello La Guardia, one of New York's greatest mayors.
La Guardia, a Republican, used a cross-party platform to break the power of the Democrats' Tammany Hall machine.
Has Mr Giuliani, a former federal prosecutor, set himself equally lofty goals?
He has occasionally sounded like a man with genuinely radical ideas of his own about the future of the city, raising questions about its tax base and the shape of its government.
But he can also sound like one of New York's rent-a-speech politicians, playing off one ethnic sensitivity against another.
He started this week, for example, by stoking up memories of the violent clashes three years ago between blacks and Jews in the Crown Heights area of the city.
It was a pogrom against New York Jews, said Mr Giuliani — a daft remark that simply suited his purposes by provoking another row over what really happened.
Mr Dinkins is ready for that kind of campaign.
Suitably indignant this week over the pogrom nonsense, he can address the city's racial tensions with a transparent decency and integrity that did much to get him elected in the first place — and that have served the city well since 1989.
His standard campaign speech is full of promises to expand the police force, crack down on crime and unite the city's various ethnic groups.
There are worse ways to try to rebuild his support among Latino voters.
Racial unrest
Dog does not bark
MIAMI
QUIET cities rarely make good copy; but on May 28th, when Miami failed to explode, it was news of a sort.
That day brought the acquittal of a white police officer, William Lozano, of the killing of two black men in January 1989.
The shooting itself caused three days of riots; and although a racially mixed jury found Mr Lozano guilty of manslaughter shortly afterwards, an appeals court threw out the verdict because it thought the jury had been intimidated by the unrest.
The second trial, after months of going to and fro, moved at last to Orlando, an overwhelmingly white and conservative city, where juries, it is said, have never convicted a police officer for alleged misconduct in the line of duty.
The outcome may have turned on the closing arguments of Mr Lozano's lawyer, Roy Black, who had previously defended William Kennedy Smith on charges of date rape.
Mr Black read a poem, ostensibly by another policeman, which ended: ‘When you were afraid, I felt fear.
When you cried out, I felt the pain.
When you bled, I cried…
I was there when you needed me.
Will you be there when I need you?’
Several jurors dabbed handkerchiefs to their eyes, and tears slid down Mr Lozano's cheeks.
Miami braced for the verdict.
The National Guard was called in; offices sent workers home early; exits from main roads into previously troubled neighbourhoods were blocked off.
But nothing happened.
Why?
Part of the reason was good preparation.
The police showed they had no intention of ceding the streets to trouble-makers.
The slightest hint of trouble over the weekend brought a massive response from fleets of police cars.
In the first few hours after the verdict, 60 people were arrested on charges of disorderly conduct.
Most of them were youths throwing bottles.
The police had also learned deeper lessons from earlier confrontations.
Since the 1989 riots, the Miami police department has encouraged officers to walk the beat, rather than drive through streets in squad cars.
The department has sponsored athletic programmes, set up neighbourhood offices and introduced mandatory racial-sensitivity classes.
A black has been appointed as the city's new police chief.
Political changes helped, too.
In 1992, the redrawing of district boundaries led to the election of many blacks in the city.
Miami previously had no black members of Congress; now it has two.
More blacks have been elected to the state legislature, and a black also heads the Dade county commission.
A three-year boycott of the area's tourist attractions, called to draw attention to the low number of blacks employed in the industry, ended in May when a bi-racial group suggested an ambitious solution.
Lastly, it rained.
But Miami, it could be said, was cool enough already.
Base closures
Bigger, smarter,
better
SEATTLE
THE risk of war with the former Soviet Union may have vanished, but plenty of fighting is still going on; not least over which military bases should be shut down as the Pentagon tries to trim $1.1 billion from its budget over the next four years.
Two west-coast cities — Everett, in Washington state, and Alameda, near Oakland, California — are locked in fierce debate over the matter.
Alameda has been a navy town since the second world war.
It contains the Alameda Naval Air Station, the Mare Island Naval Shipyard and various support facilities, including a military hospital.
Everett, about 30 miles north of Seattle, has a not-quite-finished ‘home port’, one of several relatively small bases started at the height of the defence build-up of the Reagan years.
The purpose of these ports was to spread out American naval forces so that a sneak attack could not cripple the fleet, although others suggested that their intent was actually to spread the pork as widely as possible.
When Les Aspin, the secretary of defence, announced his list of 31 base closures, Alameda was on it; but Everett was not.
Alameda was mortified.
Officers, workers and congressmen decided to fight the decision, mostly by persuading the Defence Base Closure and Realignment Commission to shut down Everett instead.
In late April, some 1,000 Alameda supporters packed a meeting in Oakland attended by the commission.
Much of the time was spent bashing Everett: it was said to be too small, and with no adjacent military airfield.
Backers of Everett tried to counterattack, but were undermined when the Port of Everett, a regional economic development agency, inadvertently faxed to the base commission a draft of a letter hinting that the port could use the naval facilities for civilian purposes.
On May 21st the base commission put Everett on the possible-closure list.
What are the actual merits of the two bases?
Alameda can accommodate three big nuclear-powered aircraft carriers, against just one in Everett.
Alameda has worked with the navy for a long time, and 8,000 jobs would go if it closed; Everett expects 6,000 sailors and their families to arrive when it is finished, and has built most of the infrastructure.
Everett has a snappy, high-tech look with lots of smart facilities; Alameda is more than 40 years old, and looks it.
From Alameda, ships need only one hour of cruising time to reach the open sea; Everett is seven hours from the Pacific.
But then again, once in the open sea, ships from Everett are a full 36 hours sailing time closer to strategic points near Alaska and Japan.
Solomonic decisions are out; one or the other must go.
Alameda's trump card is the job losses it could suffer and, beyond it, the cumulative loss of defence jobs in California.
Momentum, though, seems to favour Everett.
The idea of closing a mint-new, nearly finished base, for which $138m in completion funds have already been appropriated, looks daft.
There is a third option: close both bases and ship the whole lot to San Diego, which has a fine base, great weather, superb ocean access, and enough room to swallow any number of ships.
Fencing
SAN DIEGO
THE American government believes, with Robert Frost, that good fences make good neighbours.
Mexico disagrees.
Nonetheless, the United States is busy fortifying its borders with corrugated steel.
The 15-mile metal fence completed near San Diego in late 1992, which cuts off access to the main California highways, has reduced illegal immigration and drug-running considerably.
Immigration officers are so pleased with it that they are putting up more, along the Arizona-Mexico border.
Four miles of border fence are under construction at San Luis, Arizona, and fences are planned for Nogales (sister city of Nogales, Sonora) and in the small town of Naco.
Modest chain-link fences have existed for some time in the border cities of El Paso and Brownsville, Texas.
Local people say the fences deter the Mexican ‘bandits’ who pester border towns.
Immigration officials say they help channel drug-runners and undocumented workers into remote places, where they are more easily picked up.
The Mexican government, by contrast, insists that the fences will not keep Mexicans out.
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari has said on many occasions, in his campaign for a free-trade agreement, that if Mexico cannot send its products to the United States, it will send its people instead.
The new forty-niners
SAN FRANCISCO
GRAB your wading boots, seize a crevicing hook, wash out that sluice pan.
A weekend's sport in California no longer requires a surfboard: panning for gold is now the sport of choice.
For the first time in seven years, heavy winter snow has filled California's rivers.
The torrents are loosening high mountain rocks and soil, and are washing downstream with the gravel tiny flakes of gold.
Large flakes, too: in mid-May an experienced miner turned up in Sam's Jewellers in Sacramento with half a dozen three- and four-ounce nuggets fished from the American River.
The wash-down coincides with a sharp rally in gold prices, which rose by more than 15% since March before falling back slightly.
By the end of the year, some market-watchers predict a price of around $100 an ounce.
Sales of gold coins are soaring.
Gold addicts are, by nature, an optimistic bunch, unworried by the stomach-turning ups and downs of the gold price in recent years; and gold-prospectors, hoping to catch that rogue speck in millions of gallons of silt-filled water, are every bit as resilient.
The new gold rush revolves round the so-called Mother Lode, in the lower foothills of the Sierra Nevada, about two hours' drive from San Francisco.
There, Ralph Shock, of Gold Prospecting Expeditions in Jamestown, kits visitors out for $10 a day with boots, pan and suction gun.
He admits they are unlikely to get much; prospecting is just a way to pretend to re-live history.
All the same, he now sees 136 visitors each Saturday, against about a dozen a year ago.
Pickings will be still better when the flood-waters abate on the upper reaches of the rivers, near the old gold-mining towns.
At the moment, the water there is flowing too swiftly for prospecting; but a lot of old mine-tailings are being washed down, and with them, presumably, gold.
Both Nevada and Arizona produce more gold than California does; but California, with 48 producers using new extracting techniques, now accounts for around 1m ounces a year.
Plenty of gold, no doubt, is still there.
But modern prospectors should remember that what their forebears found, in the 1840s, was the accumulated silt of millions of years.
After a mere seven, a microscope will need to be packed with the gold-pan.
Immigration
A giant sucking sound
SAN DIEGO, CALIFORNIA, AND AUSTIN, TEXAS
AT NIGHTFALL, groups of undocumented workers rush the corrugated metal fence that divides Mexico from the main highways leading into San Diego.
They climb over in groups of 100, then quickly split up to evade the border guards.
Many of them are successful, joining the 2m people who illegally enter the United States each year.
The ‘giant sucking sound’ that Ross Perot keeps hearing, and which he thinks is the rush of American jobs to Mexico under the North American Free Trade Agreement, is more likely to be the magnetic pull of the still-irresistible United States.
Labour economists predict that the flow will continue for years.
NAFTA, if and when it comes, will boost the Mexican economy, but not quickly or strongly enough to stem the tide.
In fact, illegal migration may increase at first under the trade agreement, as hundreds of thousands of peasants displaced by recent land reforms in Mexico look for new jobs in the north.
By one estimate, 600,000 of these economic refugees could come across the border.
Already, the vast majority of illegal immigrants each year — about 1.5m — are from Mexico, and roughly 10% of these people settle permanently in the United States.
The figures point to large holes in the Immigration Reform and Control Act (IRCA) of 1986, which was introduced to staunch the flow.
Illegal migration flourishes, in part, because sanctions on employers for hiring illegal aliens — the cornerstone of IRCA — do not work.
The Zoe Baird mini-scandal, in which Bill Clinton's first candidate for attorney-general was found to have employed two illegal Peruvians as household helps, shows how feebly the law applies in middle-class suburbs.
But the greatest problem, as revealed by a recent report from a bipartisan commission, is on the nation's farms.
There, illegal immigration contributes to a labour surplus that is depressing farm wages and making working conditions worse.
Of the 2m seasonal workers in the United States, about 60% are either legal or undocumented Mexicans.
Glad of the work, they put up with shabby trailers, long hours and sketchy benefits.
Phil Martin, a labour economist and member of the bipartisan commission, estimates that 90% of the new entrants into the American agricultural market will have been born in Mexico.
Sanctions on employers are weak because almost everyone fiddles his papers.
Nearly 30 separate documents can be used to prove that a man or woman is eligible to work, and employers are not required to verify any of them.
Because employers do not bother, the papers can be produced cheaply, so more illegal immigrants come in.
Neither workers nor bosses need fear they will be caught; the Immigration and Naturalisation Service (INS) employs a mere 350 people to police all the nation's industries.
Since sanctions came in, about 47,000 aliens, out of a total entry of 10m-12m, have been arrested at work.
Both the bipartisan commission and INS officials believe that sanctions on employers could be strengthened with, in the commission's words, a ‘fraud-proof work-authorisation document’.
This proposal, for a sort of identity card, is sure to meet resistance both from civil libertarians and the American public.
The law itself, according to the bipartisan commission, is a source of continuing illegal migration.
IRCA granted amnesty to nearly 3m workers in the United States for the year ending May 1st, 1986.
Those workers, mostly young Mexican men, have been inspired by the amnesty to bring other family members along behind them.
Labour economists say the problem is not simple.
Even before IRCA, the ties between Mexican workers and the American labour market were so strong that migration was bound to increase.
Mr Martin, in his research on migration, discovered the existence of a toll-free telephone number linking Michigan growers to farm workers in the Mexican state of Michoacan.
About 90% of rural adults in Mexico have friends or relatives who are or have been working in the United States.
These pass on tips about jobs or lodgings, or can give a firm base of support once a migrant has crossed the border.
California bears the brunt of illegal migration, in part because it receives nearly half the Mexicans coming across the border each year.
The state attracts seasonal labour because it has an intensive agricultural economy that complements the Mexican growing season: two-thirds of all state produce is harvested from June to September, when Mexico is not harvesting.
Yet agriculture is only part of the attraction.
Increasingly, economists see workers slipping from farming into service industries in large cities like Los Angeles.
At a time of high unemployment and economic gloom, undocumented workers are resented; and so is the money the state spends on them.
Illegal aliens are no fools.
They know that the social services they will get in California are far better than those in Texas, and plan their routes accordingly.
A recent study for the California legislature showed that $1.1 billion of the $10 billion state budget goes into services for both documented and undocumented immigrants, including about $1.5 billion for education.
This has prompted state appeals for help from the federal government.
At a recent town meeting in San Diego, Bill Clinton acknowledged California's plight.
He promised help.
But it may be a long time coming; and, meanwhile, the flow of hopefuls from the south shows no sign of stopping.
In our May 22nd issue, we referred to Portland as the capital of Oregon.
We were wrong; Salem is the capital.
Our apologies.
Tax notes from the bayou
WASHINGTON, DC, AND BATON ROUGE, LOUISIANA
HAVING run for office promising to reinvent everything from health care to youth training, Bill Clinton is now devoting most of his time to reinventing his five-month-old presidency.
High on his reinvention list is his energy tax, the most controversial part of his budget, which is currently under scrutiny on Capitol Hill.
The budget aims to tame the deficit with a mixture of $150 billion in tax increases and $100 billion in spending cuts over five years.
But it is unlikely to pass the Senate unless the energy tax is radically revised.
It is easy enough to see why candidate Clinton opted for a tax on energy consumption.
The tax signalled that he was both tough on the deficit (it will raise, he hopes, $12 billion over the next five years, and $12 billion a year thereafter) and serious about the environment (the more people have to pay for energy, the less likely they are to squander it.)
The BTU tax also has the advantage of being less unpopular than a petrol tax, partly because it is almost impossible to understand.
It is dubbed the BTU tax because energy can be measured in British Thermal Units: a BTU is the amount of energy needed to raise the temperature of a pound of water by one degree Fahrenheit.
The abbreviation is widely held to stand for ‘Buy Thermal Underwear.’
Now he is president, however, Mr Clinton is finding the measure agonisingly hard to sell to a tax-averse and energy-guzzling country.
A powerful alliance, led by the National Association of Manufacturers, the United States Chamber of Commerce and the American Petroleum Institute, is determined to kill the tax.
New Democrats dislike it because it is a substitute for painful spending cuts, old Democrats because it is inherently regressive.
Manufacturers in energy-intensive industries complain that the tax will make their products less competitive; the petrochemical industries say they are having to bear an unfair share of the burden of reducing the deficit.
Nobody inside or outside the administration is making a good job of selling the tax.
It was the BTU tax, more than anything else, which all but scuppered the budget in Congress on May 27th.
Despite an 81-seat Democratic majority and an intensive bout of lobbying and arm-twisting, the president won by only 219 votes to 213, with two-thirds of the Democrats from oil-rich Texas siding with the Republicans.
The Washington rumour mill suggests that the president secured his narrow majority only by promising all sorts of concessions on the BTU tax: trimming here, exempting there, scattering rebates everywhere.
And that was the easy part.
Party discipline in the Senate is even weaker than in the House; several powerful senators have a better-than-nodding acquaintance with the petrochemical industry; and the Senate Finance Committee, which starts looking at the bill on June 7th, has a Democratic majority of only 11 to nine.
David Boren, the Oklahoma Democrat who holds the swing vote on the committee, has already made it clear that he will not vote for the current package, dubbing it ‘Stimulus 2’, a reference to Mr Clinton's ill-fated emergency spending package.
Mr Boren hopes to substitute deep spending cuts for the BTU tax.
Mr Boren has a reputation for defying his party (about a third of his votes over the past four years have been against the Democratic line) and for changing his mind.
Ten days after Mr Clinton unveiled his package, he said he supported it ‘unconditionally’, describing it as ‘the best, most promising budget I've seen since I've been in Congress.’
His alternative is unlikely to attract more than 20 votes.
But he is not alone in his distaste for the BTU tax.
John Breaux, a Louisiana senator who also sits on the Finance Committee, is too close to the president and the treasury secretary, Lloyd Bentsen, to be as outspoken as Mr Boren, but he will not vote for the BTU tax as it stands, and prefers a straightforward petrol tax.
Louisiana's other senator, Bennett Johnston, is firmly in the Boren camp, seeing the BTU as a make-or-break issue.
‘It is particularly bad for my state,’ the senator says.
‘All the charm, persuasion and judgment in the world can't change that.’
To understand the senator's point, take the lift to the top of Louisiana's state capitol, Huey Long's quixotic replica of the Empire State Building, and look out over the acres of petrochemical plants below.
The local economy is overwhelmingly dependent on oil and gas extraction and, more important still, on energy-guzzling industries, with the chemical industry accounting for 41% of the value-added in the state and oil refining for another 17%.
The fact that these two industries pay extremely well — average weekly wages in the chemical industry are $146 and in the refining business $128 — means that every job in these sectors creates about nine other jobs.
Locals liken the potential impact of the BTU tax to the impact of the oil bust in the mid-1980s, when the oil price fell from an average of $18 a barrel in 1985 to $15.05 in 1986.
Energy-producing states like Louisiana, Oklahoma and Texas will not be the only ones hit by a BTU tax.
Florida will suffer because it is a centre of the fertiliser industry; Pennsylvania, because it has a concentration of steel and cement works; Kansas, because farmers use a lot of fuel; California, because its residents habitually drive a long way to work.
The list of injured parties and special pleaders grows by the day.
Convinced that an unreconstructed BTU tax will kill the budget in the Senate, the administration is busy signalling its willingness to compromise.
Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the chairman of the Senate Finance Committee and one of the administration's key allies on the Hill, has made it clear that Mr Clinton is willing to scale back the tax, exempting whole industries and offering generous rebates to exporters.
The resulting loss of revenue will be recouped with additional spending cuts, possibly from Medicare, the government health programme for the elderly.
Meanwhile, congressmen from energy-producing states are going around town telling everybody who is willing to listen what splendid concessions they got in return for their votes.
A compromise package is beginning to emerge.
The BTU tax will survive in name, but it will look much more like a consumption tax.
Mr Clinton will scale back the $12 billion he hopes to raise from the tax over the next five years by between a third and two-thirds.
Energy-hungry industries may well be exempted, and exporters given a rebate.
‘We want it to have as little impact as possible on the production process,’ says Senator Moynihan.
‘This is a consumption tax, not a production tax.’
In other words, the BTU tax is the most complicated petrol tax in history.
The trouble with all these concessions and compromises is that they raise as many problems as they solve.
Cutting entitlements, in particular, will arouse the wrath of traditional Democrats and alienate powerful interest groups, notably the pensioners' lobby.
It may also queer the pitch for health-care reforms, which will need big tax increases.
What is more, every change makes the tax more difficult to understand and more expensive to administer.
Even the simplest VAT eats up 2–4% of its revenues in administrative costs; the BTU tax may eat up as much as 10–20%, turning it into a full-employment programme for bureaucrats.
The ghosts of Vietnam
TWENTY-FOUR hours after the Memorial Day celebrations, the Vietnam Veterans' memorial was back to normal.
The usual slow-moving line of visitors filed past the black buried wall.
As usual, plenty were red-eyed, plenty rubbing impressions of the names of their dead onto paper.
And there was the usual squad of veterans, some selling T-shirts, many with POW/MIA hats and stickers.
Many were dressed in fatigues; some, with unkempt hair and pot-bellies, looked as if they had started to go to seed long ago.
A day earlier, some of these veterans had taken part in as emotional and personal a demonstration against a president as Washington has seen for years.
Bill Clinton had come to their shrine on Memorial Day, the first president ever to do so.
And Mr Clinton had wriggled his way out of the draft for the Vietnam war.
For that, some will never forgive him.
They heckled; they called him a liar; they turned their backs on him when he spoke.
And so comes the baleful conclusion: that Vietnam, a war that split America apart on class lines, continues to be a national sore, causing a steady throb of pain.
Hence the perception that, however hard he tries — and it was brave of him to go to the wall at all— Mr Clinton will always carry this particular cross, and that his relations with the armed services will always be shaped by it.
But that may not be quite right.
The awkward truth is that no power on earth could ease the torment of some Vietnam veterans.
In the end, they want the war not to have happened.
They are bitter, and understandably so.
But they do not always have right on their side.
It should not be too much to ask them to forgive the miserable uncertainty of a young man at Oxford 23 years ago, and it should not be impermissible to say that they are in the wrong if they refuse.
In a fine speech that preceded the president's, Colin Powell, the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, said in essence that it was wrong for servicemen to hold back respect for their commander-in-chief simply because of what he did long ago.
He quoted from Lincoln's speech at his second inauguration, those almost painfully moving words delivered when the end of the civil war was in sight and the country had to bind up its wounds.
There was a moment when it seemed that General Powell was commanding the crowd.
When he spoke of himself with evident authority as ‘the senior Vietnam veteran on active duty’ you could read the subtext as if it was in neon: if I am prepared to give my commander-in-chief unquestioned respect, so should you.
General Powell retires from the army this autumn.
He will leave as one of the most respected of all Americans, if also one whose actual influence and qualities are least public.
Like the vice-president, the chairman of the joint chiefs must keep his advice to the president secret.
But he openly helped Mr Clinton on Memorial Day, which seems to confirm the sense that some of the tensions between the president and the armed forces are easing.
There is a compromise on the way on the question of admitting gays into the military, which goes by the nickname ‘don't ask, don't tell’: recruiting officers will not screen candidates for homosexual tendencies, and homosexuals will be expected to keep their preferences to themselves when on duty, as heterosexuals are supposed to.
In one way, burying this question also helps to bind some of the wounds opened by Vietnam.
Those who made it an issue were the direct descendants of the anti-military counter-culture of the 1960s.
It is not far-fetched to say, as Charles Moskos of Northwestern University argues, that campaigners for gays in the ranks wanted to use the armed forces as a social-engineering experiment; and that they wanted to impose their values on a supposedly irredentist segment of American society.
(They forget, though General Powell never does, that the army has placed more black Americans in positions of authority over whites than any other body in the country.)
Disposing of the matter of gay rights in the military, even if messily, can do nothing but good for the relationship between uniformed and civilian powers.
But in respect of one crucial legacy of Vietnam, and one with which Mr Powell is closely associated, there can be no such happy outcome.
The central lessons that the armed forces learned from Vietnam were threefold.
They declared that they would never again go willingly to war without clear political aims; that when they did go to war for such aims, they would do so with overwhelming force; and that they would discover, in advance, how they were supposed to get out of a job once they had started it.
This was the policy that General Powell argued before George Bush when the United States invaded Panama in December 1989, and when Iraq went into Kuwait in 1990.
In both cases, the situation on the ground was such that the conditions could be met.
But as the debates over possible American intervention in Bosnia showed, there are many cases where such conditions are not going to be met; where the political case is confused, the endgame a matter of guesswork.
Hence one of the most difficult conundrums for modern America.
Are the forces of the mightiest military power on earth to be deployed so sparingly that they might as well be shrunk much more than most imagine?
Or, put another way, are the Powell conditions too tough — tough not just for Americans, but for those, like Bosnia's Muslims, whose plight is such that they can plausibly look only to America for salvation?
Come the autumn, Colin Powell will not be there to help Mr Clinton answer those last questions from the Vietnam war.
Someone needs to.
INTERNATIONAL
Soldiers in search of a war
FROM OUR CAIRO CORRESPONDENT
ONCE praised as heroes, they are now denounced as villains.
Young Muslim men from all over the Middle East were inspired by their preachers to join Afghanistan's glorious war against the communist infidels.
Now, not so long after the rebels won, their war has been ignominiously recast in official Arab circles as a training school for religious terrorists.
Security officials in Algeria, Tunisia, Jordan and Egypt blame the ‘Afghanis’, as the Arab veterans of the war are called, for importing military discipline and expertise about weapons into their own countries' Islamic fundamentalist movements.
Egypt has made it a capital offence to receive military training abroad; it has arrested dozens of returning veterans and tried 26 of them before a military court.
Afghanis are hunted down in Algeria, Jordan and Tunisia.
Even Saudi Arabia, which encouraged its citizens to give money to the Afghan rebel cause — for many years it matched America's covert financing — is now trying to stop the flow.
At a time of near-panic about the threat of militant Islam, the Afghanis are a convenient and conspicuous scapegoat.
Armed fundamentalists existed before the Afghan war, and would now pose a threat to Middle Eastern governments without the help of a single Afghan veteran.
Most of the 20,000–30,000 Arab volunteers who came to Afghanistan and next-door Pakistan during the war worked in relief organisations or as doctors and teachers.
And although some 6,000 of them did fight, either in their own units or occasionally side by side with Afghans, most returned home without incident.
Some, who acquired a taste for the soldier's life, have made their way to Bosnia to fight another holy war against the Serbs.
Yet, without a doubt, the Afghan war left a bad legacy for the region: stockpiles of sophisticated Soviet, Chinese and American weapons, and dispirited veterans with bomb-making and tactical skills.
A small but destructive minority has turned from religious zeal to crime, or to insurrection against its own governments.
Some Afghanis — their thinnish ranks supplemented by eager non-veteran Algerians who copy their dress and swagger — proclaim themselves a paramilitary wing of Algeria's now-banned Islamic Salvation Front; they attacked a military post near the Libyan border in late 1991.
In Jordan, 21 veterans operating under the name of Muhammad's Army attacked security forces last year and were imprisoned by King Hussein, who later released them in a politic amnesty.
Leaders of Tunisia's outlawed Islamic party have connections with the Afghan resistance.
So do several of the suspects in the bombing of New York's World Trade Centre in February.
Among the Egyptian volunteers believed to be still in Pakistan are Islamic radicals who went into battle, with travel documents provided by the obliging Saudis, after having served time in Egyptian prisons.
Muhammad Islambouli, a brother of the man who assassinated President Anwar Sadat in 1981, is one of these.
He was sentenced to death in absentia last December after being charged with ordering assassinations from abroad.
The Egyptian press has received a fax, purportedly from the Jamaat Islamiya, now waging war on Egypt's secular regime, which was sent from a post office in Peshawar, the Pakistani border headquarters for many of the remaining Arab Afghanis.
Pakistan's immigration records show that about 2,800 Arab volunteers are still in the country, including 500 involved in relief work among the Afghan refugees in Peshawar.
Most of the Arabs have stayed out of the fratricidal wars of the victorious Afghan factions in Kabul.
But several hundred are thought to have taken refuge with their old fellow-fighters — either Gulbuddin Hikmatyar or members of the group supported by Saudi Arabia.
Some Arab volunteers are said to be making trouble for Tajikistan across Afghanistan's northern border.
Deciding what to do with the Arab volunteers is hard for Pakistan, which is under pressure from other Islamic governments, and from America, to eject them.
After complaints from Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Tunisia, the authorities arrested 230 Arabs in Peshawar in April and May.
All but 53 of these men had valid immigration documents and were released.
Afghanis with expired visas or invalid papers are expelled to a country ‘of their choice’; many end up in Sudan, a place with conveniently permeable borders.
But Pakistan does not have extradition treaties with most Arab countries and will not turn over a wanted man against his will.
In any event, say the Pakistanis, none of the Arab countries except for Egypt is prepared to take its awkward citizens back.
Exasperated Pakistani officials have threatened to round up the Arabs and drop them off at the American embassy.
Egypt's President Husni Mubarak said in a recent interview with Le Figaro that the Afghanis are prey to dark forces.
In other words, Iran recruits and pays them to undermine regimes in countries such as Egypt and Algeria.
He argued that the Afghanis are few, but potent.
Others discount Iran's influence, citing the traditional hostility between Shia Muslim Iranians and Sunni Muslim Arabs.
Academic experts on Islamic fundamentalism tend to believe that the danger of the Afghanis is overstated by queasy Arab leaders.
The Afghan border area is open and wild, with good communications in Pakistan and all too many weapons around.
This makes it an attractive base for radical groups; at least until recently, offices for just about every outlawed Arab Islamic organisation could be found in Peshawar.
But Arab journalists who have visited the area lately say the Arab radicals are badly split, have no central organisation and live in fear of expulsion or arrest.
Whatever the truth, it is always convenient to blame outsiders for creating trouble.
Some Arabs take pleasure in blaming America.
It created these fanatics during the Afghan war, they say.
Now Iran is using the fanatics to fight pro-western regimes.
‘I think the fire burns the fingers of the magician,’ said a senior member of the Palestine Liberation Organisation, ‘and the magician was the United States.’
Time to leave the sinking party
FROM OUR SOUTH AFRICA CORRESPONDENT
ALARM bells are ringing for President F.W. de Klerk's ruling National Party.
On current trends the party will be lucky to get a fifth of the vote at the non-racial election now less than a year away (the tentative date is April 1994).
Its political survival depends on solid backing from South Africa's 5m whites.
But a recent poll of white voters showed only one in four giving the party their support.
These findings are backed by other signals, including a poll showing Mr de Klerk's own popularity at a new low.
The Nationalists' fortunes have been dropping steadily since their triumph in the 1977 election, when they won two-thirds of the whites-only vote.
But the fall has now grown precipitous.
Whites, particularly white men, are deserting the party for the right-wing Conservative Party.
White women are more likely to declare themselves ‘undecided’.
Two Nationalist members of Parliament recently defected to Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi's Inkatha Freedom Party.
True, the opinion poll showed only 5% white support for both the IFP and the liberal Democratic Party.
But many of the ‘undecideds’ could well decide to turn to the IFP.
Many South African whites believe that the National Party can no longer protect them.
Mr de Klerk has been unable to stop the sharp rise in violent crime: 20,135 murders last year compared with 14,700 the year before.
White farmers, particularly if they are elderly, are increasingly the targets; the killings, which are prominently reported, feed the resurgent right.
In addition, say disillusioned ex-supporters, the party has lost the initiative to the African National Congress (ANC)— or, as some say, capitulated to it.
Mr de Klerk is criticised as an appeaser, not praised as a statesman.
Desertions from the National Party are reflected in a similar scramble from the Broederbond, an Afrikaner organisation that shares some of its leaders with the party and played an important part in persuading it to move boldly on reform.
It was once a privilege to belong to the Broederbond; now there is a scurry to get out, led by Andreas van Wyk, who was supposed to become the group's next chairman.
Bad news for the party comes from all sides.
In the past, Nationalist governments used their control of television and radio to help the party in elections.
But now Mr de Klerk has lost control of the South African Broadcasting Corporation.
A new board has been installed from a list of candidates selected by an independent panel.
Although Mr de Klerk is accused by the ANC of meddling with the list to get his own people in, there is no doubt that the days when the SABC was part of the Nationalists' mighty propaganda machine are over.
If whites no longer love the party, its appeal for Coloured (mixed-race) and Indian voters will fade.
Coloureds and Indians have tended to support the National Party — one estimate is that 60% of them gave it their backing in mid-1992 — because they saw it as a bulwark against black domination.
Nowadays it looks like a bulwark built on sand.
Canada
Not so fizzy
FROM OUR CANADA CORRESPONDENT
NEVER say Canada cannot produce unexpected changes, even if the change turns out to have a rather Canadian twist.
Three months ago, when Brian Mulroney announced his intention to retire after more than eight years as prime minister, it looked virtually certain that his successor as Conservative leader would be the bright and effervescent minister of defence, Kim Campbell.
This 46-year-old newcomer to federal politics from British Columbia was so far ahead of her colleagues that she seemed bound to win.
That at least was the view of many influential Tories worried about who might lead them to victory in the election due later this year.
Now it has all changed, and the likely winner at the party convention on June 13th is a young man from Quebec, Jean Charest, the minister for the environment.
Of the five candidates for the leadership, two will get only a handful of votes.
A third, James Edwards, can call on the loyalty of the party's right-wingers, particularly from his own Alberta.
The view is gaining ground that, if Ms Campbell does not win more than 40% of the delegates' votes on the first ballot, Mr Charest will take the crown with the help of Mr Edwards's backers.
Why the decline in Ms Campbell's fortunes?
Her French is adequate, but Canada's French-speakers naturally prefer the bilingual Mr Charest.
At 34, Mr Charest has the edge in youthfulness.
And the tart-tongued, photogenic Ms Campbell has clumsily, and unexpectedly, stumbled.
She has made a wooden impression in televised debates.
She has stoutly defended the acquisition, for C$1.8 billion ($1.6 billion), of 50 naval helicopters, while arguing that she wants to reduce the budget deficit.
She has defended the Mulroney government, whereas Mr Charest has discreetly distanced himself from the old regime.
Most damagingly, Ms Campbell has not heeded the wartime warning recalled by mariners in Newfoundland and Nova Scotia as they marked last month's 50th anniversary of victory in the Battle of the Atlantic: ‘Loose lips sink ships.’
What she explains as the free manner of speech of West Coast Canadians, which would probably go down quite well in the United States, has raised Canadian eyebrows.
In closing one television debate she angered critics of the government's economic policies by calling them ‘enemies of Canadians’.
In a magazine interview she managed to upset Catholics by referring to ‘the evil demons of the papacy’, insult some would-be Tory leaders of the past, and raise doubts by making dubious claims about her command of several languages, including Yiddish and German.
The amiable Mr Charest has, in Gilbertian style, said nothing in particular and said it very well.
He has been quietly eroding the Campbell lead by speeding around Canada to meet delegates in some 270 constituencies.
He has shown himself as a devoted family man; Ms Campbell is twice divorced and childless.
Ms Campbell has a good lead over Mr Charest in delegates who have declared their commitment, but is well short of the 1,900 needed for a first-ballot win.
In the end, it may come down to who makes the better speech at the convention — and who the delegates believe can beat the Liberals in the election, probably in September.
The only opinion poll on this, so far, has favoured Mr Charest.
The Liberals' strategists, after panicking about Campbellmania, are now praying for her to become Tory leader.
Their spirits are high after Liberal victories in three provincial elections this spring, including the ejection of the Tories from office in Nova Scotia after 15 years.
They fear that Mr Charest, but not Ms Campbell, will be a match for them in the provinces where it matters most, Quebec and Ontario.
Visitors from outer space
FROM OUR ISRAEL CORRESPONDENT
SOMETHING new happened in the Middle East when 192 devout Libyan Muslims arrived in Israel on May 31st to visit Islam's holy places in Jerusalem.
It ended in retreat and red faces the next day, after the group's spokesman had called for the dismemberment of Israel.
Zionism, he explained, was a Christian plot against the Muslims.
The pilgrims departed hurriedly on June 2nd, amid demands from Israeli right-wingers for their forcible deportation and accusations from Palestinians and other Arabs that Libya's President Muammar Qaddafi had betrayed their cause.
Why Colonel Qaddafi should have let the group go to Israel is a mystery.
Perhaps he was trying to butter up America and Britain, because the United Nations Security Council will soon be discussing tighter sanctions against Libya unless he hands over the people who are believed to have blown up an American airliner over Scotland in 1988.
Perhaps he was trying to infuriate his enemies in the conservative Arab world, especially Saudi Arabia, which, because of those sanctions, will not let pilgrims fly directly from Libya to Saudi Arabia to take part in the haj.
The truncated visit may yet have a consequence or two.
Israel's foreign minister, Shimon Peres, who was asked by the Libyans several months ago to allow the trip, says he had no illusions about Colonel Qaddafi's motives.
But he believes that post-pilgrimage Libya ‘is not the same Libya in the eyes of the other Arabs’.
Colonel Qaddafi's ritual abomination of Israel will ring a touch hollow now.
Rafaelo Falah, a Libyan-born Jew who lives in Rome, was downing his houmous alongside Israel's tourist minister in the ceremony put on to welcome the Libyans to Israel.
He says that Colonel Qaddafi wants to hold a Muslim-Jewish-Christian ‘inter-faith colloquium’ in the autumn, and has invited Israel's chief rabbis to attend.
Mr Falah, who is president of an association of Libyan Jews that includes two Israeli members of parliament, recently spent two hours mulling over old times with Colonel Qaddafi, and emerged with a promise of compensation for Jewish property sequestrated by the Libyan regime.
What happens in Libya is not a reliable guide to what other North African countries will do.
But one or two things have aroused Israeli hopes.
Morocco's King Hassan has long entertained Israeli leaders in secret; last week, for the first time, an Israeli minister visited Morocco openly to attend a regional environment conference.
Morocco and Tunisia are to be hosts to two of the next sessions of the multilateral Middle East peace talks.
Ex-Moroccan Jews in Israel often visit their former homeland, picking up their visas in France.
Recently 5,000 ex-Tunisian Jews, now living in Israel and Europe, gathered in Jerba for a Jewish festival.
Bolivia
The odd couple
FROM A SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT IN LA PAZ
POLITICS makes strange bedfellows, but one of the partnerships in Bolivia's election on June 6th is uncommonly curious.
General Hugo Banzer, who led a relatively successful military dictatorship in the 1970s, is one of the leading candidates for the presidency.
His running-mate is a former Maoist revolutionary, Oscar Zamora, better known as Comandante Rolando in the 1970s, when he led the Union of Poor Farmers in raids against rich landowners.
It was Mr Banzer's wrath that made him go into exile in Argentina.
In a country familiar with caudillos, Mr Banzer has done well.
On the eve of the election, he was running neck-and-neck with Gonzalo Sanchez de Lozada, the candidate of the National Revolutionary Movement and one of the architects of Bolivia's radical economic reform of the mid-1980s.
At Mr Banzer's closing rally in La Paz, many Bolivians defied the cold to hear him call for higher taxes on the rich and more efficiency in government: ‘We will tighten the government's belt and loosen the belt on the people.’
If neither man wins a clear majority, parliament will decide in August, after the usual inter-party bargaining.
The outgoing president, Jaime Paz Zamora, promised at the 1989 election to continue free-market economic reforms, but has not fully kept his word.
Mr Sanchez's party, and many trade unions, disliked both foreign investment and the privatisation of state-owned companies.
The early enthusiasm of foreign banks and investors waned as the government caved in to their opposition.
Despite some mildly encouraging growth figures (3.5% in 1992), Bolivia is still miserably poor.
The World Bank reckons that on most measures of welfare it ranks down with much of sub-Saharan Africa, and only a bit above Haiti.
The collapse of tin prices in the 1980s destroyed the tin-mining industry, many of whose former employees have since turned in desperation to growing coca.
The attempt to replace coca with other crops has had only limited success, despite large aid programmes by America and the United Nations.
The GATT estimates that the cocaine industry still provides up to 15% of Bolivia's gross domestic product; official Bolivian statistics value it at $180m a year.
The departing government can claim at least one achievement.
It did something about corruption, by bringing in a new civil-service law which makes officials more accountable for their actions while at the same time making them freer of party patronage.
But corruption, though less widespread than it was, remains part of Bolivian politics.
Just before the election, which is for Congress as well as the presidency, the ambassador of the United States caused a row when he alleged that one congressional candidate had links with drug traffickers.
Bolivians prefer to choose their governments the democratic way, but this is not to say that they admire the means at present available for doing it.
A recent opinion poll revealed that only 5% of those questioned thought the existing parties represented their interests.
The press, the Catholic church and even the army are held in far higher regard.
One result is that the old parties face a growing challenge from new groups led by energetic men who have been excluded from the ruling class because of their race or their class.
Carlos Palenque, a mestizo who built up a media empire by getting poor Indians to telephone their complaints to his radio and television shows, may win quite a few votes in the capital.
Max Fernandez, a poor man who became a beer baron despite accusations of ties to drug trafficking, is another figure prowling on the outskirts of the old politics.
It may be uncomfortable for the established order, but the time may be coming for it to move over.
Guatemala
Out, out
FROM A CORRESPONDENT IN GUATEMALA CITY
HE THOUGHT he had pulled it off.
When President Jorge Serrano suspended Guatemala's constitution and dissolved its Congress and Supreme Court on May 25th, he had the imprimatur of the armed forces.
A week later the same generals shoved him out.
What happened?
One reason the military men, long the real power in Guatemala, changed their tune may have been the unity, and the strength, with which Guatemalans opposed the president's power grab.
Almost everyone, from right-wing businessmen to left-wing union and student leaders, condemned it.
No less important, a quick and strong reaction came from the United States, which was anxious not to let Mr Serrano's autogolpe become a fashion in other shaky democracies in Latin America.
The Clinton administration cut $15m in aid.
More woundingly, it threatened to withdraw Guatemala's favourable trading status.
The final straw may have been the visit of Joao Baena Soares, the secretary-general of the Organisation of American States.
Though the OAS has traditionally carried little weight, the appearance of Mr Soares seems to have emphasised the international isolation that awaited the country if Mr Serrano remained in power.
The army started to lose its nerve.
The defence minister, General Jose Garcia Samayoa, suddenly called for a return to constitutional rule.
The civilians took heart.
Mr Serrano was told by the electoral authorities that he would not be able to hold either a plebiscite or elections for a new Congress, which he had hoped to do.
Newspapers started to defy the strict censorship imposed during the coup and to poke fun at Mr Serrano.
One paper changed its title from 21st Century to 14th Century.
The generals listened.
On the night of May 31st, a broad coalition led by the armed forces presented Mr Serrano with an ultimatum: stay president and face prosecution, resign and leave the country — or be forced from power.
Mr Serrano tried to hang on.
He called back the Congress he had dissolved the week before and, according to several congressmen, offered $10,000 to anybody who would show up.
There were few takers.
The next morning, a week after his coup, senior army officers told him his time had run out.
By June 2nd he was in El Salvador, reportedly on his way to Texas.
Once he was out of power the unlikely coalition of former enemies fell apart.
From the National Palace, General Garcia, flanked by senior officers and political leaders, told the country that Congress would first purge itself of corrupt members and then elect a new president.
This cosy arrangement upset a lot of people and an angry crowd gathered outside the palace.
General Garcia then decided to back the vice-president, Gustavo Espina, who declared himself president.
But Mr Espina has his work cut out to convince people that he was not in cahoots with Mr Serrano.
The hopeful view is that the thwarted coup will strengthen Guatemala's eight-year experiment with democracy and serve as a lesson for other would-be dictators in Latin America.
But Mr Serrano, it seems, has learnt little.
He left claiming that history would vindicate him.
BRITAIN
Austin Robinson
A general theory of economists
A BIT of economic history died on June 1st.
Sir Austin Robinson, a close associate of Keynes, was the last of the pre-war Cambridge economists.
His 95 years spanned extraordinary changes in economics, which he eloquently described in an article for this newspaper in 1986.
Most important was the quantification of economics.
As late as the 1920s, apart from figures on population and foreign trade, official statistical data barely existed.
So economists spent their time discussing the logic of the subject and the rationality of policies.
Lacking statistics, ‘we seldom if ever discussed growth,’ but concentrated on what is now microeconomics.
We were expected to know, and did know, a great deal about the principal industries of the country, their processes, technologies, locations and markets.
About this we knew far more in detail than most who are teaching today…
We were greatly interested in the lives of machinery and equipment…
We failed to realise that product life was more important than machinery life.
Then, in the 1930s, Keynes laid the foundations of macroeconomics, stressing the importance of aggregate demand in determining the level of economic activity.
Robinson contributed by helping to found the Central Statistical Office in 1941.
He took a less favourable view of later developments in economics, insisting on the importance of studying long-term trends and forecasting developments.
‘It is ridiculous’, he wrote last year, ‘to talk about rational expectations if there are no adequate ways of forming them.’
Economists should look ahead and use both micro- and macroeconomics to throw light, for example, on ‘how, where, and in what form’ the workers released by technological progress over the next ten years will be employed.
In contrast: ‘No economist is more dangerous than the pure theorists without practical experience and instinctive understanding in the real world…seeking precision in a world of imprecision.’
Scottish islands
Ferry tales
The earth belongs unto the Lord
And all that it contains
Except the Clyde and Western Isles
They're Caledonian MacBrayne's
TWISTING biblical psalms to your advantage is not the standard reaction of a publicly owned company threatened with privatisation, but Caledonian MacBrayne's managers are a resourceful bunch.
After the Scottish secretary, Ian Lang, announced last week that he would consider ‘the privatisation option’ for the shipping company linking the mainland with 23 islands off Scotland's west coast, they made their opposition plain.
So did fiery islands residents, local councillors, MPs and newspaper editors.
All want CalMac — as the company is affectionately known — to stay in the public sector.
If the planned review of the service does indeed recommend privatisation, the government down in England is likely to have a wee fight on its hands.
The interest in CalMac is disproportionate to the size of its business (850 employees), the number of its customers (mainly 29,370 inhabitants of the Western Isles, plus tourists) or the amount of money it costs the exchequer: the company received a grant this year of £7.2m ($12.7m), much the same as previous years.
It has more to do with geography.
A few barren islands on the edge of Europe, set in a landscape of blue sea, white beaches and dark mountains, have a powerful grip on the imagination of the British — few of whom have ever been there.
What many islanders claim is less poetic, but more to the point.
They fear that the cost of transport would go up, making life on their windswept islands even more expensive (the same basket of goods costs £52.53 in Barra but £46.77 in Aberdeen).
This would lead to further depopulation of the Western Isles, which lost 8% of their inhabitants between 1981 and 1991.
The natives say CalMac is providing a vital service to a remote part of the country; leave it be.
CalMac's managing director, Colin Paterson, points out that his is possibly the only nationalised industry whose grant has gone down in real terms.
Nonetheless, he says, it will always need subsidy, as only four of its routes are profitable: the crossing of the river Clyde between Gourock and Dunoon (where privately owned Western Ferries provides muscular competition); and the services linking Ullapool with Lewis, Oban with Mull, and Kyle of Lochalsh with Skye (which CalMac will lose in 1995, when a new bridge will be ready).
With the profits from these routes, CalMac covers most of the cost of the other services, some of which — like the year-round crossing to Canna (12 inhabitants)— seem hardly attractive to private operators.
‘If you take the remunerative bits away and leave in public hands only the unprofitable ones, we will need a larger grant,’ argues Mr Paterson.
‘If you try to sell the whole thing to the private sector, they won't take it.
Unless, of course, you give them a subsidy.’
That is the case with P&O Scottish Ferries: its grant for providing services to and from Shetland and Orkney has just been been raised by £1.9m, to £8.6m.
CalMac has been doing well lately, says Alex MacDonald, chairman of the transport committee of Comhairle Nan Eilean (the Western Isles Islands Council).
Last year its 30 roll-on/roll-off ferries carried 6.2m passengers, 1.3m cars, 111,000 commercial vehicles and 16,500 coaches, and 95% of the sailings were on time.
Services have improved.
Souvenir shops (for tourists) and bars (for natives) have proved popular.
‘Now they even serve your drinks in proper mugs and glasses,’ says Mr MacDonald.
‘No more of those awful paper cups.’
Fog across the Channel, recovery cut off?
THE British economy may not exactly be booming, but at least it is picking itself up.
Across the Channel, by contrast, the rest of the European Community has plunged into recession.
Could continental Europe scupper Britain's recovery?
Every month The Economist polls a group of forecasters.
Their latest average forecast is that Britain's GDP will grow by 1.5% in 1993.
By contrast, the panel expects output in continental Europe to tumble by 1% this year.
If so, Britain would be outpacing the continent by the biggest margin for more than two decades.
Is that really possible, given Britain's reliance on continental markets?
Britain now sends the EC 57% of its exports.
The economies of Britain and the rest of the EC have marched closely in step since the 1970s (see second chart).
Britain's growth rate has rarely exceeded that on the continent by more than one percentage point.
The exceptions were in 1983 and 1987, when Britain grew by about two points faster than the rest.
Roger Bootle, chief economist at the Midland Bank, argues that it will be difficult for Britain to grow much faster than its recession-hit EC neighbours.
Imports would surge while exports stagnated, swelling Britain's current-account deficit to unsustainable levels.
A strong recovery in Britain would soon be cut short.
Anecdotal evidence from exporters suggests that their sales in Europe have slipped as weaker demand more than offsets the benefit of a cheaper pound.
Trade figures with the EC are delayed this year because of the removal of customs controls thanks to the single market.
Estimates for the first quarter of 1993 will not be available until mid-June.
But Kleinwort Benson, an investment bank, has done a spot of detective work.
The latest GDP numbers implicitly assume that Britain's total net trade deteriorated between the fourth quarter of 1992 and the first quarter of this year.
Since Britain's deficit with non-EC countries was broadly unchanged, this suggests that its deficit with the EC has indeed widened.
But unlike previous economic cycles, this has not been a ‘world’ recession.
The United States, Australia and Canada are now all recovering.
Economies in Asia and Latin America are growing strongly.
This will help to offset the recessionary effect of Europe.
Moreover, since last September, sterling has fallen farthest — and so gained most in competitiveness — against non-EC currencies: by 22% against the dollar and 32% against the yen, compared with only 13% against the D-mark.
Britain's exports to the EC account for only 15% of its GDP.
So long as the other 85% continues to rebound — thanks to stronger exports outside Europe and the boost to demand from lower interest rates — continental recession will dampen Britain's recovery, but not block it.
Blue saplings and Redwood
RESHUFFLE fever, which had Tory ministers scuttling around Parliament like hunted rabbits in the days before the ritual disembowelling of Norman Lamont, has been followed by a feeling of severe let-down.
Not even a sense of hangover: more of bafflement and emptiness.
For nothing much, apart from Mr Lamont's replacement by Kenneth Clarke, has happened.
The only sort of promotion that politicians really care about — to cabinet rank — went to John Redwood, the local-government minister and member for Wokingham, who has been bizarrely translated to Wales, a place for which he has no known affinity.
But then there has always been a touch of the extra-terrestrial about him.
Does the replanting of Redwood change anything much?
Should not John Major have taken the opportunity to cut away more of the dead wood from among the cabinet's other 20 members?
Most Tories in Parliament (not to mention ordinary voters) are disappointed.
No, they say sadly to the first question; and Yes, most definitely, to the second.
For it was the reshuffle that wasn't.
Tories are in a conspiratorial mood.
As they headed off on their Whitsun holiday, backbenchers were already muttering about the next shake-up.
‘He doesn't like sacking people,’ was a common complaint.
Too nice.
Too beholden to old friends.
‘Just imagine if Lamont had agreed to take environment,’ said a horrified party official, noting that Mr Major had shrunk from firing his chancellor outright.
‘There would've been a riot.’
Mr Redwood is 41 and academically impeccable.
His father started as an accounts clerk for a road haulier; his mother was a shop manager.
He took a first-class degree at Oxford and won a coveted fellowship at All Souls.
In his 20s he became a director of N.M.
Rothschild and a Treasury adviser.
At 32 he headed Margaret Thatcher's ideas-factory, the policy unit at Number Ten.
He wrote a string of polemical books, most notably ‘Popular Capitalism’, a blueprint for privatisation.
He is a massively informed, articulate, almost robotic Thatcherite brainbox.
And stunningly charmless.
It is a shock when he smiles.
He has no small talk, except about politics and, possibly, cricket.
He has a piercing gimlet eye.
Friends say he is shy.
‘One is left wishing that, just once, he might fart, burp or forget to shave,’ writes a former Tory MP, Matthew Parris, now a columnist.
Why Wales?
There are only six Tory MPs in the principality, four of them new boys.
The previous secretary of state, David Hunt, Welsh-born but hardly Welsh, is the new employment secretary.
Sir Wyn Roberts hangs on as Britain's longest-serving minister of state because he is the only Tory MP who writes poetry in Welsh.
The Welsh office could probably do with Gimlet Eyes scouring the corridors for waste.
His ‘zeal for privatisation,’ says a Welsh nationalist MP hopefully, ‘will go down like a rat sandwich’in the valleys.
Maybe.
But in his last job, Mr Redwood was just beginning to come to terms with Labour council leaders.
They may not have loved him.
But they sensed that he was determined to do business.
The more important reason for his elevation is that Mr Major thinks he must reassure the right that he has not gone soft.
Mr Clarke is famous for being a bruiser.
But there is no getting away from the fact that he is on the left of the party.
As home secretary, he had psyched himself up to batter the police unions and the chief constables, but on penal policy he was pushed to find anything in the agenda of Tony Blair, his Labour counterpart, to quarrel with.
Worse for the Tory right, the three main jobs affecting the economy are now in the hands of Europe-minded interventionists: Mr Clarke, Mr Hunt at employment, and Michael Heseltine at trade and industry.
Mr Hunt even voted for Hezza in the post-Thatcher leadership stakes.
As a trio, they fill the Thatcherites with gloom.
So Mr Redwood brings a bit of right-wing ballast.
Michael Howard, the new home secretary, and the purest right-winger near the top, has managed to keep his seat on several of the cabinet's economic committees.
Peter Lilley, the social-security secretary, and Michael Portillo, the Treasury chief secretary, are the only unadulterated Thatcherites left in key positions.
But with Mr Lamont out of the way, ‘a new dynamic’, in the words of one Majorite, should animate the cabinet.
‘The prime minister and Ken and Douglas [Hurd]should form a much easier triumvirate at the centre.’
All the same, the Redwood promotion does look odd on its own.
Backbenchers would have welcomed more fresh blood.
Tony Newton, leader of the House, and Peter Brooke, the heritage secretary, are competent but eminently dispensable.
John Gummer, now shifted from agriculture to environment, has been around too long, but is an old chum of the prime minister.
William Waldegrave, not populist enough to sell the Citizen's Charter, could have been shunted sideways.
A lot of Tories wanted John Patten out of education, but even tough leaders do not sack ministers in mid-crisis.
The cabinet contains no utter duffers.
The worst mistakes of the past year have been made by ministers at the top.
But collectively the fatigue of 14 years in office is taking its toll.
A real shake-up was needed — and missed.
Maybe there is a dearth of talent at middle level.
Stephen Dorrell, the impressive financial secretary to the Treasury, cool under fire and master of a complex brief, missed preferment this time because of his ‘sopping wet’ past.
Also knocking on the cabinet door are Jonathan Aitken, the defence-procurement minister, Sir George Young, the housing minister, and Baroness Blatch, the education minister of state, all of them able.
But few others cry out for recognition.
The most notable of last week's promotions, below cabinet level, are David Davis, a printworker's son and successful businessman, shrewd and tough enough to put teeth into the Citizen's Charter; William Hague, the ex-chancellor's bumptious and clever private secretary, who becomes Mr Lilley's number three at social security; and Jeremy Hanley, a Mensa-man who becomes number two to Malcolm Rifkind at defence.
Their day will come.
But it is tempting to suspect that one reason for Mr Major's reluctance to shake out his cabinet is that he cannot think who to put there instead.
The lingering impression: limp leadership and a lacklustre party.
White lie
The ‘relentless flow’ of immigrants must be halted if the ‘British way of life’is to be preserved, said Winston Churchill, a Tory backbencher.
He complained that immigrants made up half the population of Bradford and Leeds.
The figure is nearer 15%.
John Major did not publicly denounce Mr Churchill, but went as far as hinting that he disapproved.
Lost at sea
Nine people were reported killed and 27 injured when a tanker owned by British Petroleum collided with a cargo ship off the Belgian coast.
No ceiling The revival in house sales is starting to push up prices.
The index prepared by Nationwide, a building society, rose by 1% in May.
Derailed
The government admitted that companies bidding for franchises after the privatisation of British Rail might be allowed to concrete over the tracks and run buses instead.
Guided buses, attached to rails at their sides, can travel at high speeds without needing drivers to steer them.
Red rose
Glenys Kinnock, wife of the former Labour leader, won the party's nomination to defend the Welsh seat in the European Parliament which has the EC's largest majority.
A bid to step out of her husband's shadow?
‘She has never been in the shadow.
She has always had her own glow,’ said Mr Kinnock.
Own goal
Killing time before England's World Cup qualifier match with Norway, English soccer fans ransacked an Oslo pub causing over £100,000 ($154,000) of damage.
Several dozen fans were sent home.
They were spared from watching England lose 2–0, and thus become unlikely to qualify for next year's competition in the United States.
Mousetricht
A denizen of the government whips' office in the Commons, a mouse nicknamed ‘Maastricht’, was killed.
One of the mouse hunters, David Heathcoat-Amory, was made minister for Europe.
Long to reign over us?
ON JUNE 2nd the queen saw in the 40th anniversary of her coronation.
She spent the day at the Derby with her mother.
While newspapers have been asking whether the monarchy will last much longer, her subjects have been rushing to place bets that it won't.
William Hill, a firm of bookmakers, offers odds on the most likely monarch in 2000.
Since January the odds that there would be no monarchy at all have tumbled from 100–1 to 5–1.
The queen herself has lasted longer than most.
She beats all but five of her predecessors since William the Conqueror (and ranks fourth in the world).
If she stays on and lives as long as her mother she would overtake Victoria as England's longest-reigning monarch.
The fight of his life
How the chancellor of the exchequer performs in his new job could decide who is prime minister a year from now
KENNETH CLARKE has always been disarmingly frank.
Of course he would like to be prime minister ‘one day’.
He also knows that of 13 British chancellors since 1957, all but two — one of them John Major himself — have come to sticky ends: sacked (as Norman Lamont was on May 27th), removed by electoral defeat, forced to resign in high dudgeon.
Only James Callaghan, reshuffled after devaluation in 1967, retained enough dignity to rise again to the top.
As the cabinet's toughest fighter (and worst-dressed member), Mr Clarke knows how dishevelled he could look after grappling with a budget deficit forecast to be £50 billion ($18 billion) this year.
That should take his mind off prime ministerial ambitions for a while.
Yet further fumblings by Mr Major could haul Mr Clarke to the top job much earlier than that ‘one more year’ which, by Tory consensus, is now Mr Major's time-limit for proving he is the right man to lead the country.
Despite the delicate beginnings of economic recovery — too delicate to cheer most Britons — confidence within the Tory party remains low.
Lady Thatcher snipes away.
Last week Lord Lawson, a former chancellor, added his spoonful of mischief by blaming Mr Major personally for last September's Black Wednesday fiasco (because Britain entered the exchange-rate mechanism at the ‘wrong rate’ when Mr Major was chancellor).
Right-wing columnists are refusing to rally to Mr Major in his hour of need.
The British middle class is sounding unprecedentedly disloyal to Torydom.
If the Tories lose the looming Christchurch by-election, a new Tory refrain of Major-Must-Go may reach fortissimo.
Mr Clarke has become the heir apparent.
First, however, he must prove himself in the hardest job of his life.
His economic qualifications are thin.
A successful lawyer before entering Parliament in 1970, he was an industry spokesman in opposition in the late 1970s, attacking subsidies for British Leyland, arguing as a free-marketeer for imports of Japanese cars, bashing the trade unions and becoming an early enthusiast for privatisation.
As a committed pro-European, he supported the notion of the ERM.
He has common sense.
He can master a complex brief speedily.
But he can be sloppy about detail.
He will have to curb his natural candour, for fear of upsetting the markets.
He entirely lacks financial and business experience.
Nobody really knows what he is going to do.
Will he, like his predecessor, view inflation as Enemy Number One?
Or will he — as Mr Major a few months ago implied he would, before backing off —‘go for growth’?
Has he completely disavowed his earlier enthusiasm for the ERM?
‘I'd be surprised if we were back in before the end of this Parliament,’ he said three weeks ago, almost emphatically enough for the majority of Tory MPs who want to steer clear of the Bundesbank for as long as possible.
Most of Mr Clarke's colleagues reckon he will follow a cautious macroeconomic policy rather like Mr Lamont's.
It was politics, not policies, that did for Mr Lamont.
Mr Clarke has large presentational advantages.
As a fellow minister put it, ‘Norman had become beleaguered and defensive and jumpy.
Everybody knew he had become a lame duck.’
His Treasury officials were infected by the gloomy whiff of failure clinging to him since September.
It had become impossible for him to convince in Parliament, in the party, or in the country at large.
Mr Clarke, on the other hand, may be able to get away with some early twists and U-turns.
He is a master of the climb-down, presented defiantly as a statesmanlike change of opinion.
His crucial test will be the ferocity of his assault on spending.
Having taken on the teachers and the police, he will now square up to fellow ministers and the voters.
This, in the view of a Major adviser, is ‘the principal battle on which re-election depends.’
This summer, Mr Clarke will expect Michael Portillo, the Treasury secretary and hatchet-man, and Peter Lilley, the social-security secretary, to set about planning the cuts, along with a drastic revamping of the welfare system.
By the winter, a coherent political package should emerge.
It will be Mr Clarke's to sell.
Mr Major must hope that his new chancellor does well enough to rescue the economy but gets so battered in the process that he is judged unfit to be prime minister.
For the first time, Mr Major has put a bit of distance between himself and economic policy.
We shall see who is really the Tory's champion political fighter.
EC labour laws
Next chapter
JOHN MAJOR'S famous opt-out on the Maastricht social chapter may help British firms less than advertised.
Britain cannot escape laws based on other European Community treaties.
On June 1st EC ministers passed a law on working hours.
They are close to agreement on one to regulate child labour.
And there is more to come.
The new law sets a 48-hour limit on the working week.
There are exemptions galore (eg, for seamen, hospital workers and journalists).
But employers in some other industries, such as baking and construction, are fretting.
The Department of Employment reckons that fewer than half the 2.6m Britons who usually work more than 48 hours a week would be covered by exemptions.
Britain won a special arrangement, to be reviewed in ten years, allowing Britons who wish to work more than 48 hours a week to do so.
Other parts of the directive — including a minimum of four weeks' paid leave — apply to everyone.
Britain will ask the European Court of Justice to declare the law invalid, on the ground that it was falsely tabled as a ‘health-and-safety’ measure — with majority voting, so Britain had no veto power.
Britain has made similar appeals to the court in the past but lost them.
The law is one of the last to be inspired by the European Commission's 1989 ‘Social Charter’.
Britain has used its veto to block one other: a law that would require any company employing at least 1,000 workers in two or more EC countries to set up consultative works councils.
As soon as Maastricht comes into force, the commission and Belgium, which takes on the EC presidency next month, intend to work however many hours a week it takes to push through the works-council directive.
Maastricht's social chapter allows the EC minus Britain to decide laws on worker-consultation by majority.
It also allows the ‘social partners’— trade unions and employers — to reach agreements which the 11 could turn into law.
So, willy-nilly, the 11 look like getting their works councils.
British firms with subsidiaries elsewhere in the Community would have to follow the rules.
Next autumn the commission will publish a green paper on the future of EC social policy.
The new thinking in Brussels is that labour laws should focus on general objectives and leave details to national governments.
Padraig Flynn, the commissioner concerned, says that the more the ‘social partners’ succeed with their own deals, the less the commission will propose itself.
The green paper will tackle the relationship between the EC's social policy and its competitiveness.
The commission claims that most of its proposals have had little impact on labour costs (France, not the commission, thought up the 48-hour week).
It calculates the cost of implementing the works-council directive as no more than 10 ecus ($12) a year for each person covered.
The commission promises that its proposals under the social chapter will be squeaky-clean in their impact on jobs.
Mr Major bragged about his opt-out from the social chapter, saying that it would attract foreign investment from Britain's neighbours.
French politicians agreed and cursed Britain for promoting ‘social dumping’.
The commission thinks it can prove both wrong.
EUROPE
Blaming the victims
FROM OUR GERMANY CORRESPONDENT
Racist murders have returned to Germany in the wake of tighter immigration laws.
We look at German racism and European immigration policies
THE murder of two Turkish women and three Turkish girls in Solingen, a steel town near Cologne, has turned to ashes the assurances Chancellor Helmut Kohl gave in Ankara last month that violent racism in Germany was on the wane.
Outraged leaders in Turkey have turned angrily on the German authorities.
Far too little, they say, is being done to protect the 1.8m Turks living in Germany from neo-Nazi attacks.
For this was not the first time.
The Solingen killings echo in sickening detail a firebombing in Mölln near Hamburg last November in which three Turks (a woman and two girls) were burned alive in their beds.
Early on May 29th in Solingen, say the police, young neo-Nazis set fire to the house where the Genc family lived.
Four victims died from smoke and flames.
A fifth jumped to her death.
The attacks raise several issues of policy.
The Genc family, like the one in Mölln, had lived in Germany for more than 20 years.
In many countries, people with such strong local roots would long ago have been naturalised as citizens.
But in Germany, citizenship depends on ancestry not on place of birth or residence.
Very roughly, you are German if your parents are, not because you live in Germany or were born there.
Moreover, the role of the police is in dispute.
Less than a day after the Solingen fire, they had detained two teenagers.
They were also out in force on the streets when thousands of anti-Nazi demonstrators — Turks and Germans — gathered in Solingen.
A few turned to violence, smashing shop windows.
The police poured out to stop them, though it took three nights before the disturbances began to die down.
Some Turks ruefully wondered where all the police had been when the neo-Nazis were gathering.
Who's responsible?
The Solingen killings bring to 22 the number of people murdered by far-right thugs over the past 18 months.
Of these, 11 were foreigners.
The federal criminal office recorded 6,336 anti-foreigner offences (many of them minor) in 1992 and 1,339 in the first three months of 1993.
It would not be fair to accuse the authorities of doing nothing.
The federal prosecutor for crimes of terror and extremism, Alexander von Stahl, has begun to investigate the right-wing kind, albeit belatedly.
Police in Germany's 16 Länder (provinces) have started to share information on neo-Nazi groups.
Liberals and conservatives in government, however, disagree about tougher judicial measures.
Theo Waigel, the finance minister and leader of the Christian Social Union, wants stiffer sentences, tighter rules for granting bail and looser standards of evidence for people charged with rioting.
But the justice minister, Sabine Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger, is against this.
The law, she thinks, is strong enough as it stands.
It just needs to be applied.
But this is hard when the police have trouble recruiting because of low pay: 15,000 police apprenticeships are unfilled.
In an open society, racism cannot be turned off like a light.
Policemen cannot patrol every house where Turks sleep.
That leaves politicians with a lot of leading to do.
The biggest concern about Germany's response to racism lies here.
Leadership, from the chancellor especially, has been woefully lacking.
Mr Kohl has not visited an asylum-seekers' home where foreigners had been attacked.
He has not given a speech devoted exclusively to xenophobia.
Nor has he condemned right-wing extremism without condemning the rarer left-wing sort in the same breath.
It baffled even his friends this week when he declined to attend the memorial services for the Solingen victims.
Mr Kohl's aloofness may be unusual (other ministers attended).
But he is not alone in trying to rise above conflicting tides of opinion.
Most Germans are disgusted by anti-foreigner violence.
Yet most tend to agree with the right-wing slogan, ‘the boat is full’, meaning Germany has too many foreigners.
Nor do they always distinguish Turks who have been in Germany for years from recent ‘economic migrants’.
Germany is now paying a price few other countries would have accepted for not providing itself with better citizenship and immigration laws in the calmer years before unification.
Foreigners suffering poverty, but not political persecution, have been flocking to Germany at a rate of 400,000–500,000 a year.
This is at least ten times as many as to any other country (see chart on next page).
Once there, 95% of their applications for residence are rejected.
When rejected, many have just stayed on illegally.
By last year even Social Democrats and liberals agreed that the unconditional right of asylum — embodied in Article 16 of the constitution — needed changing.
Trouble arose, however, from the circumstances in which this was done — and leaders of all big parties must share some of the blame.
In May, after months of bickering, parliament amended the asylum law.
Though the new article of the constitution says ‘those politically persecuted enjoy the right to asylum’, in practice the right will be greatly restricted.
Asylum-seekers arriving from the West and, most significantly (since this is how 80% of refugees arrive), through Poland or the Czech Republic may now be refused entry.
They can then appeal only from outside Germany.
Though reasonable in itself, changing the asylum law has sent the message: burning asylum-seekers' homes is wrong but there are too many asylum-seekers.
Inevitably, it has come to seem as if the victims are to blame.
The limitation of the right to asylum does nothing to improve the status of 6.5m foreigners already in Germany, most of whom are long-time residents.
Nor has it dealt with the question of a new citizenship law, though the Solingen atrocity has revived debate about this.
Mr Kohl himself has floated the idea of offering dual citizenship on a trial basis.
But Conservatives in the ruling coalition dislike the idea because they fear losses at the polls next year to the far-right Republicans.
The Social Democrats once said that a new citizenship law should accompany any restriction of the right to asylum.
But their leaders thought Germany had too much on its plate to change its definition of nationality and that holding up the asylum reform for that would cost them too many votes.
For the time being, the 6.4m foreigners in Germany must remain second-class non-citizens.
Poland
A carry-on
FROM OUR WARSAW CORRESPONDENT
IT SHOULD prove a bump, not a derailment.
The fall of the Polish government on May 28th after a vote of no confidence in parliament looked worrying.
When President Lech Walesa refused to accept the government's resignation, preferring to suspend parliament and call an election, it looked more worrying still.
But after the surprise had worn off, the prospect of an early election was greeted with relief, not the despair that often accompanies parliamentary crises.
This Polish parliament had few friends.
The government's troubles began in May with strikes by teachers, miners and emergency-service workers.
In the past, with the economy in deep recession, strikes by Solidarity threatened not just the government but Poland's reforms.
With output recovering, the prime minister, Hanna Suchocka decided to stand up to Solidarity's threat to call a general strike.
But her government was weakened when one of her coalition partners, the Peasants Alliance, resigned soon after, costing her fragile alliance 17 votes and leaving the government in a minority in the lower house.
When Solidarity tabled a motion of no confidence after wage talks involving civil-service workers had broken down, assorted former communists, nationalists and anti-communists seized their chance to embarrass the government while showing support for embattled workers.
No alternative government was ever suggested.
It was political posturing — at which parliament has excelled — at its cynical worst.
When the motion passed by one vote, no one was more surprised than the government's opponents.
They were no better prepared for what followed.
Ms Suchocka tended her resignation.
President Walesa, instead of seeking a new coalition, dismissed parliament, called for an election on September 19th and asked Ms Suchocka to lead a caretaker government.
Compromise between parliament's 29 parties had become impossible.
Rather than restart the bickering, the president turned to the voters.
He did so in the knowledge that a new election law, passed shortly before the no-confidence motion, is likely to reduce parliamentary fragmentation.
By setting a threshold of 5% (8% for parties campaigning in coalition), the law should cut the number of parties in the new assembly from 29 to between six and eight.
As a result, coalition-building and policy-making may become simpler.
As the smoke cleared, it became apparent that the beneficiaries included Mr Walesa himself.
The wily president had showed himself capable of taking action while others were just bickering.
Poland's economy, with more than half its workforce in the private sector, is likely to weather the storm.
Foreign investors are largely unworried by the government's fall.
Ms Suchocka has emerged stronger.
Earlier this year, she had pushed through a bumper privatisation bill and won the IMF's support for Poland's reforms by keeping this year's budget deficit to a reasonable 5% of GDP.
As she goes into the election, she will be helped by the stronger economy.
In contrast, anti-reformist parliamentarians may find themselves hoist with their own petards.
Popular disgust with parliament is rising.
Many of those who voted against the government would not have done so had they expected an election.
That was one reason Mr Walesa called one.
It may make it easier to take tough decisions on tax reform, restitution of property confiscated by communists and local-government legislation.
Other casualties of the government's fall include a ‘pact on state enterprises’ between government, employers and unions.
The pact would speed up the privatisation of 4,000 medium-sized and small state enterprises by giving workers a greater say in running them.
Laws to bring this about were moving through parliament when the vote was held.
They — and the enterprises concerned — are now in limbo.
The mass-privatisation programme, parcelling up 600 of Poland's largest enterprises into 20 investment funds whose shares will be distributed to the population, will also go on hold.
Fund managers were supposed to be chosen by a board, including members of parliament.
With no parliament, the board cannot convene.
But the biggest victim may be Solidarity.
Without a parliament, changes to Poland's budget are doubtful.
As a result, striking unions are unlikely to find state enterprises have more money for them.
The irony is inescapable: the trade union that brought down communism has toppled what was arguably Poland's most reform-minded and pro-union government while achieving few of its aims and alienating a large part of Poland's voters in the process.
Germany's budget
Worse and worse
FROM OUR GERMANY CORRESPONDENT
WHEN Germany's politicians agreed in March on a ‘solidarity pact’ to help pay the cost of unification, their eyes were fixed dreamily on a distant future.
The deal made vague attempts at curbing government deficits this year and next but delayed most of the pain until 1995.
Theo Waigel, the finance minister, explained that Germany could not afford draconian budget cuts in the middle of recession.
That was then.
This is now.
His latest plan is to introduce DM20 billion ($12.5 billion) of extra savings and revenue increases in the 1994 budget, due to be unveiled on July 13th.
That is not because the economy looks suddenly resilient.
Western German GDP in the first quarter was 3.2% lower than in the same period of 1992.
It is because the deficit looks far worse.
The finance ministry expects a federal budget deficit this year of nearly DM70 billion, about 60% more than it forecast in November.
Recession is the culprit: it has slashed tax receipts and driven up the cost of unemployment benefits.
But Mr Waigel now fears the deficit as much as the recession that is widening it.
He caught his jitters from the financial markets.
As long as Germany's long-term interest rates sank and currencies dropped out of Europe's exchange-rate mechanism (ERM) like ripe fruit, the deficit could be ignored.
But yields on long-term bonds have been edging up since the middle of March, a sign that investors expect inflation to rise.
And the D-mark has lately begun to weaken.
Bundesbank officials have been fretting in public about rising bond yields and the weaker D-mark.
At one point at the end of May, four members of the ERM had interest rates lower than Germany's.
Most economists think the Bundesbank will pause before cutting rates again.
When the Bundesbank worries, so must Mr Waigel.
Cutting next year's deficit to please the Bundesbank and the markets is risky.
Budget savings will weaken an already sickly economy.
Lower interest rates provide a slow and uncertain cure.
The finance ministry's ideas for additional savings do little to inspire confidence.
Some, such as a suggestion to delay the government's move to Berlin, are sensible.
Others are not — such as adding to the cost of employment during recession by raising the amount workers and companies contribute to unemployment insurance.
The opposition has already sworn to block several suggested cuts in social programmes.
The Bundesbank can forgive the government for allowing recession to widen the deficit.
It will not forgive politicians for over-spending when the economy picks up.
Mr Waigel hopes that public-sector deficits (including those of state and local governments) will fall to 1% of GDP in 1997 from 5% this year.
Few independent economists believe this.
Mr Waigel is too optimistic about growth, they say, and relies too heavily on tax increases to bring the deficit down.
Outside Bonn there is broad agreement on how to do this.
Germany's five independent economic institutes recently called for bigger cuts in public subsidies to western Germany's private sector, which cost DM120 billion-130 billion a year.
All levels of government should privatise services to reduce the public sector's share of GDP, which has crept over 50%.
And the government should redirect its spending to infrastructure.
Investment spending in western Germany has fallen by one-third as a share of GDP since 1980.
Sensible advice.
But Mr Waigel may not be listening.
NATO
The fight for freer trade
IN THEIR anxiety to celebrate the end of the cold war and spend the ‘peace dividend’ western politicans have sometimes forgotten how many people earned their living from it.
Last week NATO's defence ministers called for a halt to cuts in defence spending, lest they undermine the cohesion of the alliance.
This may be the first piece of half-good news in three years for defence manufacturers who have seen orders for new equipment shrink even faster than national defence budgets (chart 1).
Only half-good, though.
The continued squeeze on defence procurement, combined with a demand for ever-more complex weaponry, has encouraged NATO to think the once-unthinkable: a code of practice for defence companies that should wring better value for money out of what used to be one of the capitalist world's most protected and pampered industries.
The proposed code has its origins in ideas put forward in 1989 for a defence GATT in NATO.
Like attempts to reduce barriers to world trade, a defence GATT would seek to reduce the barriers to a company from one NATO country bidding for a defence contract in another.
Like competition in civilian industry, this should drive down costs.
And like any dangerous idea, this one was eventually referred to a committee.
Almost two years later, the committee has come up with a document, which could be adopted early this month.
Its aim is to set the terms by which countries would move reciprocally to a more open market in defence trade, eliminating discriminatory laws and procurement practices and introducing some openness into the awarding of contracts.
The document builds on work already under way within the European Community.
But the great benefit of the NATO scheme is that it includes America, by far the alliance's biggest defence market.
Interest in the code has grown as it has become clear how swiftly the end of the cold war has begun to undermine NATO's defence base.
Some companies have sought mergers, others have sold off their defence factories or tried to convert them to other work; some have simply shut them down.
Employment is falling (chart 2).
One EC study predicts that another 20% of Europe's defence-sector jobs will disappear over the next two or three years.
This seems possible.
Employment in the American defence industry has fallen by nearly 1m people (or 14%) since 1987.
Clearly, the industry has to shrink.
The question is, who decides where the shrinkage occurs and which businesses go under.
Governments, on one view, cannot afford to leave that decision to the market because the stockmarket tends to reward those companies that abandon military R&D.
This, they argue, means that the West will lose skills and technologies essential for its defence.
In fact, stockmarkets do not seem to penalise the defence-related companies most heavily dependent on defence contracts; since the end of 1989, shares in companies which get most of their business from the Pentagon have risen more than diversified firms (chart 3).
Nevertheless, in a business which provides a public good and where the government is a monopsonist, it cannot be expected to stand aside.
Therefore, the argument goes, governments should try to manage the rationalisation by making it easier for companies to co-operate across borders.
Increased competition and easier industrial collaboration in a less sheltered defence market will not save jobs.
But they may save more of the skills that NATO's defence planners will need for the future.
Collaboration is not exactly a new idea.
The European Fighter Aircraft (EFA) is merely the latest in a series of collaborative projects that have produced radars, missiles and aircraft for the alliance.
But these deals are usually done with much government help.
As EFA has shown, the determination of governments to get their ‘fair’ share of the work and the jobs from such projects duplicates effort and adds to unit costs.
Recent reports suggest that EFA may now be running more than 50% over budget.
In theory at least, a more open defence market should expose some of these hidden costs.
Big projects like EFA require government help, since the R&D costs are so high.
But there is scope for competitive bidding in less ambitious projects.
That is, if NATO countries can narrow their differences over rules for arms and technology exports, whether to each other (witness Germany's arms embargo on Turkey in 1991, after German armoured vehicles were used against rebel Kurds), or the outside world.
National limitations on the re-export of equipment and parts limit the ability of companies to plan co-production across national borders and recoup investment through foreign sales.
The new NATO code, if it gets over these political hurdles, will not be legally binding; there will be no formal arbitration mechanism.
But it is a first step towards better value for defence dollars and D-marks.
Albania
Oh, dear
FROM A SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT IN TIRANA
WITH the most primitive economy in Europe lying in ruins around him, President Sali Berisha and his finance minister, Genc Ruli, a former professor of Marxist economics, spend much of their time travelling abroad in search of loans and investment.
When at home, Mr Berisha's main preoccupation is keeping his unruly party under control.
Some of his methods recall the past.
A group of intellectuals in the ruling Democratic Party broke away last August to form the Democratic Alliance.
Its leaders say their telephones are tapped.
The editor of the party newspaper is under house arrest for printing a report about tanks being moved out of Tirana.
The defence ministry denied the report.
It was confirmed by eye-witnesses.
Mr Berisha has more trouble with the party's increasingly vocal nationalist faction.
They belong to an old elite: the landowners and merchants whose wealth was confiscated by the former regime, which abolished all forms of private ownership.
Many spent decades in labour camps or in internal exile.
Unsurprisingly, getting their own back comes top of the nationalists' political agenda.
The civil service is in turmoil, with technocrats and members of the old regime being dumped in favour of the Democrats' placemen.
Local government is equally chaotic, as Democratic administrators clash with mayors from the Socialist Party, the renamed communists, who won last summer's municipal elections.
That said, the government has some achievements to be proud of.
Despite the problems in local government, the municipal elections and the general elections that preceded them have provided legitimate government both locally and nationally.
The government has managed, by and large, to restore public order which was notably lacking when it took over in April 1992.
At that time, it inherited an inflation rate of around 40% a month.
Prices are now falling slightly after stringent budget-deficit cuts.
The currency has been stable for six months.
This is an even more remarkable stabilisation than the one achieved in the Czech Republic, hitherto regarded as the region's most successful stabiliser.
Industrial output has stabilised, too, after falling over 60% in 1991–92, the most precipitous economic collapse in Eastern Europe (having fallen that far, it could hardly have got worse).
This year's harvest should be larger than last year's, which followed the privatisation of most farmland.
President Berisha, however, has given in to the nationalists over the question of property restitution.
Last month a new law was passed, allowing former owners to claim back their land, even if it had been built over.
The government's foreign advisers say the law is unworkable.
Even though it offers compensation to people who have already bought shops or flats, Albania's court system, now being rebuilt from scratch after almost 30 years without a justice ministry, will have a hard time sorting out property disputes.
Even worse, the law will discourage the foreign investment so necessary for the rebuilding of the Albanian economy.
Western countries have handed over more than $1 billion in aid, mainly as food, which is sold by the government as its main source of revenue.
But only $10m in foreign investment has arrived in the country.
As much as $10 billion will be needed to rebuild Albania's crumbling infrastructure.
Mr Berisha has no rival in either the Democratic or the Socialist Party.
Albania's only other significant political figure, Gramoz Pashko, one of the leaders of the breakaway Democratic Alliance, is leaving for an academic job abroad.
The Socialist Party is being forced to reorganise.
Its leader, Fatos Nano, is looking for support from China, once Albania's closest ally.
All this may bring stability to Albania, but it will not necessarily encourage the ruling Democrats to become more democratic.
The anti-aircraft ballot
FROM OUR SWITZERLAND CORRESPONDENT
THE soldiers of Switzerland usually get most of the things they want.
In a country where, as a popular song puts it, ‘every son is born a soldier’ and turns out each year for a spell of military service until he is well into middle age, the army has long been regarded as an essential part of the country's armed neutrality.
But the Swiss are also the world's most thoroughgoing democrats.
On June 6th they go to the polls to say Yes or No to a proposition that would stop the government buying 34 American-made FA-18 fighters, and slap a moratorium on buying any new military aircraft until 2001.
It is the first time the Swiss have been given a vote on the defence budget.
It may be one of the first times citizens anywhere have been allowed to vote on detailed defence-procurement questions.
The latest opinion poll suggests the vote could go either way.
The people who organised the anti-FA-18 campaign say the aircraft is too expensive.
Buying 34 would cost SFr3.5 billion ($1.4 billion), which could rise to SFr5 billion once all the gadgetry is counted.
The FA-18 is said to be not well-suited to Switzerland, where fast aircraft find mountains looming up alarmingly soon.
Could the government not spend the money better now that the Soviet Union, the last obvious threat to Swiss independence, has gone away?
The defence minister, Kaspar Villiger, and his supporters reply that Switzerland needs something to replace its now 30-year-old Hawker Hunters.
They say the cost of the FA-18, spread over ten years, is not inordinate in a rich country that spends SFr10 billion-15 billion a year on defence, if one counts everything (including the hidden contributions of businesses that regularly lend their employees to the army at full pay).
And they are not above using some sharp contemporary propaganda.
One of their posters shows refugees in Balkan head-scarves, with words implying that Balkan tragedies could happen in Switzerland too.
Those who want the FA-18s accuse their opponents of using this issue as the thin end of a wedge designed to abolish the Swiss army.
The antis cheerfully admit to being pacifists; yes, in an ideal world, they would like to see the Swiss (and every other) army demobilised.
Ruefully, they add that the time is not ripe, and now they are talking only about aircraft.
The outcome on June 6th could depend on how many people believe them.
Circling the wagons
KEEPING out foreigners is an art which European governments continue to refine.
Last week Germany got rid of its constitutional right to political asylum, the most liberal in Europe.
This week a meeting of EC interior ministers agreed to make tighter checks on immigrants and to expel illegal ones more readily.
Next it will be the turn of the French, whose parliament is debating a bill which would increase police powers to make random checks on suspected illegal immigrants.
‘France no longer wants to be a country of immigration,’ says Charles Pasqua, the interior minister.
The undertone is patently racist.
The murder last weekend of five Turks in Solingen, in Germany, coincided with a speech by Winston Churchill, a British member of Parliament and grandson of the grand old man, talking of the ‘relentless flow’ of immigrants into Britain (which is not happening).
Many European countries worry that the countries of the former Soviet Union, from which only a few emigrants have escaped since the second world war, could revert to their 19th-century role as big exporters of people.
Europe is now experiencing the political consequences of several changes that have been taking place over the past few years.
In the mid-1980s, the pace of immigration into Western Europe accelerated.
It accounted for all or most of the rise in population in some of Europe's most rapidly ageing countries, such as Germany, Italy and Sweden.
In several countries, including Germany and Sweden, a large proportion of legal immigrants came as asylum-seekers.
In Europe as a whole, applications for asylum rose more than ten-fold between 1983 and 1992.
Though some of those applications came from people who would be generally recognised as refugees, many — between half and two-thirds, according to some observers — are fleeing poverty not persecution.
The largest single group of asylum-seekers in Western Europe is, not surprisingly, from ex-Yugoslavia.
In the first few months of this year, they accounted for 20% of those applying for asylum in the main European countries.
But half the ex-Yugoslavs who have come to Western Europe since the start of the Balkan fighting have not applied for asylum.
Nearly two-thirds of all applications for asylum in Europe last year went to Germany, compared with less than half in 1988.
One reason for Germany's popularity has been its cumbersome process of checking claims for asylum.
Checks often take two years, giving an immigrant a chance find a job and make connections, strengthening his chances of staying put if his claim is rejected.
Broadly speaking, three-quarters of those who come to Europe as refugees stay on, half with permission, half without.
Behind the decline in asylum applications to France has been an effort by the French government to clear the backlog.
France also denies refugees the right to work while their applications are being processed.
An asylum-seeker, once in a job, may be harder to oust, even if refused permission to stay.
But jobs can be found, legal or not.
Few European countries impose penalties on employers of illegal immigrants.
The methods that European governments increasingly use to keep out unwanted foreigners work to the disadvantage of genuine refugees.
Because it is hard to expel asylum-seekers once they have arrived, potential host countries make it difficult for refugees to leave home in the first place.
For example, a passenger flying from Lithuania to London must first satisfy the airline staff in Vilnius that he has a valid visa.
Germany is giving money to Poland, the Czech Republic and Slovakia to help them patrol their borders more strictly.
Britain was the first country to impose fines on airlines which bring passengers without proper immigration papers; other European states are beginning to copy it.
As Europe becomes more exclusive, other countries will be caught in the backwash.
They will be obliged to take back rejected refugees.
One element of Germany's new policy has been winning Polish agreement to take back expelled asylum-seekers; a quarter of Germany's influx arrives via Poland.
Other countries will also find themselves becoming new targets for emigration.
Growing numbers of migrant workers from the former Soviet Union have been entering Poland and Turkey.
Serbia
Beyond the ultras
FROM A SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT IN BELGRADE
NON-SERBS may find it hard to believe, but people even more violently nationalist than Serbia's president, Slobodan Milosevic, are on the rise.
On May 31st they claimed their biggest victim so far: Dobrica Cosic, the president of what is left of Yugoslavia.
He was ousted after losing a vote of no confidence in the federal assembly.
The motion was brought by the Radical Party, led by Vojislav Seselj, a political protégé of Mr Milosevic.
Mr Cosic, who was not given a chance to defend himself, was charged with overstepping his authority by holding peace talks with the Croats.
He also stands accused of infringing the constitution by holding a secret meeting with leaders of the Serbian army.
It was not clear how this infringement is supposed to have taken place since the constitutional court has not ruled on it (as it should).
His real crime is that he is suspected by the Radical Party and militant members of the ruling Socialists (ex-communists) of plotting with the army, of which he was the nominal head, to stage a coup.
The radicals were jubilant at getting rid of him.
One deputy, a former boxer, punched one of Mr Seselj's parliamentary critics unconscious in the corridor outside the chamber.
The incident provoked a demonstration that led to the arrest and beating of Vuk Draskovic, head of the Serbian Renewal Movement, the largest opposition democratic party.
With the charismatic Mr Draskovic out of action, the opposition now seems too weak to stage any serious protests against the government.
Mr Seselj has often been used by President Milosevic to advance his own ends.
This may be happening again.
A former Sarajevo University professor who entertained his students by brandishing a pistol during lectures, Mr Seselj came to prominence in Belgrade as a critic of communism, though he himself is an ex-communist.
Backed now by his own paramilitary group, he advocates the expulsion from Serbia of ethnic minorities and ‘politically suspect’ Serbs (his phrase).
His party controls a third of the seats in parliament.
Still, Mr Seselj seems tame by comparison with Serbia's other prominent ultra-nationalist, Zeljko Raznjatovic, better known as Arkan.
He was elected to parliament last December as head of the Independent Citizens' Party, standing in the Serb-ruled (but Albanian-populated) province of Kosovo.
The party has five deputies.
Arkan owns the best ice-cream parlour in Belgrade, a shopping centre, a savings bank and other businesses.
Serbian opponents accuse him of blackmail and extortion.
In Kosovo, Albanians accuse his paramilitary group, the Tigers, of terrorism and mass murder.
The American government and international human-rights organisations have accused him and Mr Seselj of responsibility for war crimes carried out by his militia in Bosnia and Croatia.
The radicals' role in the removal of Mr Cosic has triggered dissent in Montenegro, the junior partner in what is left of the Yugoslav federation.
This could lead to Montenegro's secession and the final dissolution of Yugoslavia.
The Montenegro government wants peace in Bosnia and Croatia.
UN sanctions, it says, have damaged its economy more than Serbia's.
To underline their differences with Serbia, the government says it will accept UN monitors along the border with Bosnia — something that Mr Milosevic has refused.
Montenegro, with a population of about 500,000, may not be a viable state.
Its secession, however, would be a blow to Serbia because it controls the narrow strip of Adriatic coast that includes the rump federation's only commercial port and naval base.
Without it, Serbia would be landlocked, as well as diplomatically isolated.
BUSINESS
How to be ethical, and still come top
The study of business ethics is one of the more enduring management fads of the past decade.
So why do many managers consider it irrelevant?
ALTHOUGH the first course in business ethics was offered by Harvard Business School back in 1915, it is only since the mid-1980s that business schools have truly taken the subject to their hearts.
Blame this renewed interest on a string of business scandals: Drexel Burnham Lambert, Guinness, Salomon Brothers, Robert Maxwell and Recruit, not forgetting Olivetti, Fiat and a big chunk of the rest of corporate Italy; the list can seem endless.
Market-driven as ever, business schools have risen to the challenge.
In America alone, on one estimate, more than 500 courses on business ethics are on offer; 90% of the country's business schools now teach the subject.
Globally, more than 20 dedicated research units now study the topic, and business-ethics journals abound.
Appropriately, Europe's first such publication, Etica Degli Affari, was Italian.
While courses in business ethics are now among the most popular on business-school curriculums, many academics admit in private that the influence of their teaching is minimal.
Managers, it seems, find the topic too arcane and inaccessible.
Worse, they feel it has little relevance to everyday business decisions, where right and wrong are by no means always clear-cut.
So where are the business ethicists going wrong?
An article* by Andrew Stark, a professor of management at the University of Toronto, attempts to answer that question.
The fundamental difficulty with business ethics, thinks Mr Stark, lies in the way business schools have chosen to tackle it.
Most of the leading academics in business ethics have a grounding in moral philosophy, a discipline that takes the concept of altruism — doing good simply because it is right — rather seriously.
As a result, most of the advice on business ethics offered by academic papers (and by much business-school teaching) tends towards moral absolutism.
If ethics and the interests of the business conflict, managers and employees are invariably told that they must always do the right thing — for no other reason than that it is right.
As one recent treatise on business ethics put it, ‘If in some instance it turns out that what is ethical leads to a company's demise, so be it.’
Back in the real world, however, no businessman is going to sacrifice his company on the altar of such altruistic extremism.
What most managers want to know is how they should juggle what Mr Stark calls the ‘confusing mix of self-interest, altruism and other influences’ that make their businesses tick.
Yet on the subject of mixed motives, business ethicists have for the most part been unhelpfully silent.
A second, related problem is that business ethics has mostly concerned itself with grand theorising, trying to answer questions such as‘Is capitalism ethically justifiable?’ and ‘Can a profitable business ever be ethical?’.
Weighty as they are, these questions have little relevance to a manager struggling to run a business as ethically as possible.
Business ethicists have not helped their case by couching their arguments in language that is foreign to managers schooled in the lexicon of finance and economics.
Mr Stark cites one (depressingly typical) paper on business ethics which argued that ‘utilitarian and situation ethics, not deontological or Kantian ethics…should be used in a regional code of conduct for multinational companies.’
Small wonder that few managers read on, or that most mainstream management academics see business ethics as a ‘soft’ subject.
All this leaves business ethics in a state of unhelpful flux.
Increased interest in the topic has undoubtedly concentrated managers' minds on the need for mechanisms to help resolve ethical dilemmas in the workplace.
To that end, many firms (including, last month, Fiat) have implemented ethical codes of conduct and set up ethics ombudsmen, ethics committees and the like.
But once these new mechanisms are in place, managers are left with little guidance from business ethicists about how, precisely, they might best make use of them.
If their discipline is to survive, business ethicists must start getting their hands dirty.
Mr Stark reckons that an emerging generation of academics, disillusioned by the arcane teachings of their forebears, is starting to do just that by tackling many of the dilemmas managers face each day — those which business ethicists have previously side-stepped.
And at the heart of what Mr Stark calls ‘the new business ethics’ is a willingness to tackle head-on the vexed question of mixed motives.
At first sight, the work of Robert Solomon, of the University of Texas, looks dauntingly arcane: he claims to base his theory of ethical management on Aristotle's concept of ‘virtue’.
In practice, however, Mr Solomon's ideas are accessible to any businessman.
Managers, he notes, are taught to be tough, which can mean they sometimes take a decision regardless of its ethical consequences.
But temper such toughness with a set of easy-to-understand managerial virtues — Mr Solomon cites sensitivity, courage, persistence and honesty — and managers will find they can combine ‘a willingness to do what is necessary’ with an ‘insistence on doing it humanely.’
This may sound an obvious sort of compromise, but it is the kind of ethical advice many managers have been looking for.
Laura Nash, of the Boston University Graduate School of Management, takes the argument a stage further.
For managers to be able to resolve ethical dilemmas, says Ms Nash, they should think of their business in terms of covenants — with employees, customers, suppliers and so on.
A manager's primary obligation is therefore to ensure his covenants with each of these mean that ‘all parties in a commercial endeavour should prosper on the basis of created value and the voluntary exchange of resources.’
In other words, a compromise: management can never be wholly altruistic or spotlessly ethical, but the harm done to others can be minimised.
Such moderate pragmatism is a world away from the moral absolutism usually preached by business ethicists.
If it is the start of a trend, it may bring the theory of business ethics and the reality of doing business much closer together.
Whether it will prevent even a single business scandal is another matter.
* ‘What's the Matter with Business Ethics?’
By Andrew Stark.
Harvard Business Review, May-June 1993.
Nordstrom
Down the tube
SEATTLE
NORDSTROM'S ability to cater for what its customers want has helped make the Seattle-based company one of the largest retailers in America.
Store managers have a wide discretion to select what clothing, shoes and accessories their stores sell, based on local preferences.
And the smartly dressed sales staff who swarm like pilot fish around shoppers are expected not only to know the names of regulars but also their sizes and colour preferences.
Nordstrom's strategy is to expand.
Now based in 11 states with 72 stores, the company wants to be in all 50 within the next few years.
Not with shops, though.
To start with, the firm aims to produce a catalogue, competing with the likes of Lands' End, a Wisconsin-based sportswear company, and L.L. Bean, an old-line Maine outdoor-clothing supplier.
But Nordstrom's catalogue is merely a toe in the water.
Eventually it plans to launch a high-tech home-shopping service that combines the personal service it is famed for with the convenience of a catalogue.
It will do that on television.
Forget the faintly camp style of other home-shopping services on American television, where voluble pitchmen hawk false pearls and non-stick frying pans.
Nordstrom is working on an interactive television system in which customers will talk directly with a salesperson via their television set.
It should work something like this: the sales clerk will be visible in a small window on the screen.
The remainder of the screen will show whatever the customer is interested in buying.
An evening dress, for instance, would be modelled while the sales clerk answers questions about it, describes the material from which it is made and discusses the sizes and price.
Nordstrom has already spent a year researching the concept.
Details still need to be sorted out, but most of the technology to make it work is in place.
The firm has demonstrated to stockholders and analysts what the system can do.
Much will now depend on Nordstrom being able to plug into a ‘superhighway’ using digital and fibre-optic technology to provide new telecommunications links.
US West, an American telecoms firm, and entertainment giant Time Warner, teamed up last month in a $1.5 billion deal to produce just such a service.
Nordstrom hopes to have 1m television customers by 1996.
That may be too ambitious, but other stores (including Saks Fifth Avenue and Macy's) are also looking at starting TV shopping services.
If Nordstrom can be the first to offer an interactive service, it could put the retailer well ahead in a new high-tech retailing race.
But the pioneer also risks making costly mistakes which its rivals can learn from.
Nordstrom has not publicly put a cost on its plans, but they are going to be very expensive.
It might seem a smaller risk to stick to stores and wait for a retailing boom to return.
But that won't happen for a long time, says Richard Outcalt, a retail-sales consultant in Seattle.
He reckons that fickle customers, uncertain economics and brutal competition will plague retailers for years.
At the same time, shoppers are becoming highly receptive to new technology.
Mr Outcalt believes that Nordstrom's shoppers — typically bright, successful types who seem to spend nearly every waking hour with cellular telephones, laptop computers and videos — will accept Nordstrom-style television shopping as readily as they now use bank debit cards to buy their groceries.
‘Their reaction’, he says, ‘is likely to be ‘What took you so long?’’
A six-day flight plan
JERUSALEM
EL AL was among the few international airlines that managed to show a net profit last year: a respectable $11.5m on sales of $138m.
That is no small achievement considering that the Israeli flag carrier faces obstacles that would ground most airlines.
Even though the government picks up 80% of the cost of the huge security operation needed to guard the airline against terrorism, that still leaves El Al with a large bill.
And unlike its rivals, El Al is a six-day-a-week airline.
With its operations obliged to shut down on the Sabbath and Jewish holidays, the carrier losses more than 60 flying days a year.
Despite such handicaps, El Al intends to join the growing squadron of airlines that are being privatised.
Before that can happen, El Al has to come out of receivership.
It was put there in 1982 after a series of strikes led to the airline being shut down.
Its transformation since then has been led by Rafi Harlev, a retired air-force brigadier.
A large part of El Al's business comes from bringing Jews to visit and live in Israel.
Sometimes that is in unusual conditions; in 1991 the airline set a record by cramming 1,086 people into a Boeing 747 during the emergency airlift of Jews from Ethiopia.
Increasingly El Al finds it can no longer assume that people will choose to fly with it just because it is a Jewish airline.
One problem, says Mr Harlev, is that his airline's tough and time-consuming security problems can frighten people away, including many Israeli passengers.
Outside Israel, passengers can check in for a rival's flight later and without so much hassle.
Nevertheless, the company has succeeded in making a profit for the past seven years.
Lately, trouble has appeared on the radar screen: last year's profits were down by 15% from 1991, despite a sharp rise in tourism to Israel.
Although El Al has traditionally carried half of the air traffic in and out of Israel, its share since the start of this year has dropped to below 45%, with tougher competition from European and American carriers.
The market is more lucrative than Israel's size suggests.
Not only is tourism to Israel continuing to increase this year, but the number of Israelis travelling abroad in 1993 is expected to top 900,000 following the lifting last January of a $100 travel tax.
To lure passengers away from El Al, its rivals have been offering larger commissions to travel agents.
El Al has begun to fight back by reorganising its marketing department and increasing its travel-agency commissions.
The airline has beefed up the awards provided by its frequent-flier programme, and overhauled its aircraft to give more leg room.
Company officials admit that profits in 1993 will be down again this year.
But with many of the world's airlines collectively losing billions of dollars, that is unlikely to stall the Israeli government's hopes to privatise the airline within a year.
Her passion embraced a new adventure
TORONTO
THE propaganda machine which used to crank out the political fantasies of East European communists is being put to work turning out mushy romance novels.
With the help of many of the same printing presses, ink suppliers and distributors, Harlequin Enterprises, a Canadian firm which dominates the world's romantic-fiction market, is doing a roaring business by expanding into Eastern Europe.
Next, it plans to get into television as well.
Harlequin sold 16m books in Poland last year and another 8m in Hungary.
Sales of ten Harlequin titles, like ‘Duel of Passion’ and ‘The Darker Side of Paradise’, are already as hot in Moscow and St Petersburg as they were in Montreal and St Paul.
Harlequin has also joined forces with two big European publishers, Bertelsmann of Germany and Denmark's Egmont, to build an efficient distribution system for books, magazines and newspapers in Russia.
Harlequin, which is part of Torstar, a Toronto-based newspaper and publishing group, now publishes in 26 languages in 108 countries.
Demand for its books is confined almost entirely to women who, according to Harlequin, tend to spend more of their leisure time reading than men do.
In its 44-year history, the company has withdrawn from only one market: it stopped selling in Saudi Arabia when the royal family feared burgeoning sales made Saudi women too starry-eyed.
Harlequin needs new fans.
Its sales, which totalled 205m books worth C$118m ($146m) last year, are close to saturation in many western countries.
The company already churns out 62 titles a month under such imprints as Mills & Boon, Silhouette and Harmony.
Besides newsstands and supermarket checkouts, books are pumped out through mail-order ‘clubs’.
The most loyal readers buy as many as 30 titles a month.
A wider audience beckons through television.
Harlequin has signed a deal with Alliance Communications, a Canadian production house, to adapt up to six of its books for television.
CBS, an American network, will help choose the titles and provide technical help in return for the rights to screen the films.
It may take a stake in the venture.
Shooting a film is more risky than publishing a paperback.
But Brian Hickey, Harlequin's president, says the agreement with Alliance puts strict limits on production costs.
He also sees television as a means to another end.
Not only are the films expected to increase awareness of Harlequin books, but they could open up another business: Harlequin's heart throbs about video.
Japanese business
Bashed by the mighty yen
TOKYO
OPINION is divided in Japan on just how bad the soaring yen will be for Japanese business, especially the country's famous exporters of cars and electronics.
The bad news certainly outweighs the good, since Japan's exports were worth ¥43 trillion ($140 billion) last year, which was 46% more than its imports.
Businessmen are complaining loudly, as is only to be expected.
But the powerful Japanese bureaucracy is less convinced.
Officials argue that the rise in the yen, so far, is nothing like as steep as the near doubling of the currency which occurred after the 1985 Plaza Accord.
There are also those in the Japanese bureaucracy who, tacitly at least, view a strong yen as the best way to build a Japanese-dominated trading area in Asia.
Certainly Japanese companies are fast pushing ahead with plans to expand production facilities elsewhere in Asia.
Nissan and Sony are among those Japanese firms now considering building factories in China.
While a strong currency has some virtues, officialdom is probably a little too complacent.
The latest surge in the yen has come at the worst possible time for many Japanese companies, especially exporters.
In this sense comparisons with the post-Plaza period may not be so relevant.
The yen may have appreciated by a far smaller percentage, but this time the currency was already strong.
Some economists believe that most exporters are unprofitable at an exchange rate with the dollar of ¥115 or higher.
The yen is now significantly above this level.
In Tokyo, it rose to a record high of ¥107 to the dollar on June 1st.
Making matters worse is that many companies have not hedged themselves against a rising yen this year, expecting the currency not to trade any higher than around the ¥120 level.
A second problem is that corporate profits are already depressed, having declined for three years in a row for the first time since the second world war.
As a result, Japanese companies now have less room for manoeuvre.
In 1985 the profits of Japan's big car and consumer electronics industries were about 6% of their sales.
Now they are only around 1% of sales.
Worse, in the car industry American producers have become far more competitive.
Japanese car producers may have peaked in their efforts in North America, where they have been forced to raise prices and as a result have lost market share to their Detroit rivals.
The rising yen also has its dark side for domestic Japanese companies.
The last time the yen rallied, importers pocketed the windfall and the consumer did not benefit.
But that will not happen this time.
There is growing price competition from imported goods in Japan, ranging from clothing to consumer durables, processed foods and even cars.
The Japanese subsidiary of Britain's Rover cut the price of its vehicles by an average of 13% in February.
As a result it has seen sales climb by a third in the first four months of this year.
The weakness of the domestic economy has, for the first time in recent memory, turned the affluent Japanese consumer into a bargain hunter.
With discounting becoming rampant, what is good for the consumer will be bad for corporate profits.
This makes it increasingly probable that the recent surge in the yen will mean a fourth consecutive year of declining profits for corporate Japan.
S.G. Warburg, a merchant bank, forecasts that corporate profits (excluding financial firms) will decline by 10% this fiscal year.
However, that forecast assumes a ¥115 average exchange rate.
Jesper Koll, Warburg's chief economist in Japan, reckons that an average exchange rate of ¥105 would cause real GNP growth to decline to 1% this fiscal year and profits to fall by 33%.
Such a collapse would cause corporate profits to decline to just 3% of GNP (see chart), a level not seen since 1974.
Japanese businessmen, it seems, need to be worried.
Shoot out at the check-out
NEW YORK, LONDON AND LOS ANGELES
From Marlboro to Kellogg's, big brands are under siege from supermarkets' own-labels.
Many brands will perish or never be so profitable again
LIKE Shakespearean scholars after a spell at Harvard Business School, the managers of the world's best-known branded products have long pondered the question: what's in a name?
In 1988 a flurry of brand-driven mega-deals provided some breathtaking answers.
Kohlberg Kravis Roberts paid $15 billion for RJR Nabisco (more than double its book value); Philip Morris bought Kraft for $12.9 billion (four times book value) and Nestlé spent $1.5 billion for Rowntree (five times).
John Bryan, boss of Sara Lee, remembers 1988 as ‘a time of large dreams and loose money.’
It was, said many, ‘the year of the brand.’
Make that ‘decade’.
It was the spectacular performance of brands — and their owners — throughout the 1980s that lay behind the hefty premiums paid in these and other takeovers.
By exploiting consumers' loyalties to famous names with price hikes well in excess of inflation, firms such as Kellogg and Heinz increased profits by 15% a year.
By the decade's end, shares in America's packaged-food firms were trading at a 30% premium to Standard & Poor's 500-stock index.
Not just the purest treasures, brands were viewed as perpetual ones too.
Yet that was wrong.
Faced with a staggering array of products in every size, shape and shade, many cynical American and European shoppers have concluded (correctly) that there is scant difference between them.
Price-sensitivity is waxing and brand-loyalty waning.
This is taking a toll on even the savviest marketing machines, such as Philip Morris and Procter & Gamble (P&G).
In part, the fading lustre of famous names can be blamed on the economic downturn of the 1990s.
But much more of it is due to consumer-goods firms having encouraged shoppers to buy on price by bombarding them with special offers.
Also responsible are retailers' own-label products, which are eating into many brands' market shares.
Larry Light, a marketing guru and head of America's Coalition for Brand Equity (an industry study-group), says that ‘brands are being bargained, belittled, bartered and battered.’
Will 1993 be remembered as the year their spell was broken?
If it is, the day that will live in infamy is ‘Marlboro Friday’.
This was April 2nd, when Philip Morris admitted that one of the world's most powerful (and profitable) brands was losing out to cheaper cigarettes most people have never heard of.
As it slashed Marlboro's price, Wall Street wailed.
In one day, investors not only wiped $13.4 billion off Philip Morris's stockmarket value but also dumped shares in scores of other consumer-goods firms.
RJR, P&G, Coca-Cola, PepsiCo, Quaker Oats and Gillette were all bludgeoned by traders convinced that the explosive profit growth once delivered by branded standard-bearers was a thing of the past.
Brands on the run
Publicly, few packaged-goods companies admit that Wall Street's fears are justified.
Cigarettes, they argue, are a special case given the huge price gap between full-priced brands at over $1 a packet and discount smokes that cost as little as 69 cents.
There is some truth to this, but it is the other qualities of cigarettes — addictiveness, historic price inelasticity and unusually high levels of brand loyalty — that make price cutting by Philip Morris, and subsequently by its main rival RJR, such a stark symbol of change.
In private most managers worry intensely about how corrosive the change will be.
Consumers who once stuck to favourite brands most or all of the time are now willing to try any item that catches their eye.
Separate studies by the Roper Organisation, a research group, and DDB Needham, an ad agency, have found that the proportion of shoppers seeking out particular brands and willing to pay more for them has fallen sharply since the late 1980s.
Another study shows that the combined market shares of the top three brands among many supermarket goods have dropped too.
Causing these symptoms are three related maladies:
The first is perceived product parity.
According to research by BBDO, an international advertising agency, nearly two-thirds of consumers worldwide believe there are ‘no relevant or discernible differences’ between rival brands across a broad range of products.
They are largely right.
Technological advances in manufacturing have raised the quality of most goods and made it easier for competitors to copy one another 's innovations — which are, anyway, typically minor and increasingly rare.
As goods have become less unique they have become bewilderingly abundant.
Last year 16,800 new products (including extensions of familiar names to new products, but not old brands in new sizes or shapes) were introduced in America — a third more than five years ago.
There are now 200 brands of breakfast cereal in America; 220 types of cigarettes in Holland and 100 perfumes in Argentina.
This trademarked torrent, and the advertising avalanche that comes with it, has only bolstered the belief that brands are all the same.
Perceptions of product parity are highest in markets like Japan, where product proliferation is wildest.
Product proliferation also begat the promotion monster.
Faced with the blizzard of brands, retailers (especially in America) auctioned their coveted shelf space.
Suppliers were forced to give discounts and pay fees to supermarkets to stock their products.
Much of this was pocketed by retailers instead of being passed on to customers.
As more of their advertising budget was diverted into promotions, consumer-goods firms strengthened retailers by giving them far more discretion over pricing.
In Britain, where the trade-promotion system is not as byzantine as in America, supermarkets sometimes sell top brands below cost as loss leaders, thereby angering manufacturers.
Together these trends have produced the own-label threat.
Because of pioneering retailers such as Britain's J. Sainsbury and Canada's Loblaw, store brands in those countries have long grabbed big market shares.
What rattles brand managers now is the surge in own-labels in places such as Spain and America, and in products like cigarettes and detergent which were once thought immune to them.
Own-label products now account for more than 20% of sales in some European supermarkets (see chart).
Partly this is due to recession and to consumer-goods firms jacking up prices on many brands until there is a huge discrepancy with own-label rivals.
Last year Kraft was forced to slash prices when it began losing sales to own-label cheeses that were 45% cheaper.
Last month P&G cut prices for the same reason on its two leading brands of nappies, Pampers and Luvs.
Consumers have discovered that the quality of many own-label goods is just as high as that of established brands.
There is a reason for this: most big branded-goods manufacturers have started making own-label products.
Usually they stick to things in which they do not have a dominant brand.
Heinz is the biggest own-label soup maker; Ralston Purina the biggest in cereals.
Some firms have resisted: Kellogg, which has seen own-labels' share of the cereal market double since 1988, is now emblazoning its boxes with the slogan ‘We don't make cereal for anyone else.’
But Kellogg is in a minority.
Last year Campbell Soup, one of the last to hold out, started making own-label goods — except soups.
As their quality improves and sales rise, the threat from own-label products will get tougher.
Retailers, which often make twice their normal margin on these goods, are flexing their muscles and turning own-labels into brands in their own right.
Consider Britain, where Tesco, a supermarket chain, is now the brand with the biggest ad budget.
True, firms like Unilever spend more on their various brands combined; but it is to Tesco's advantage that all its own-labels fall easily under one ‘brand umbrella’.
Similarly, hundreds of products can be sold with ‘Good food costs less at Sainsbury’.
The same may soon happen in America: on Marlboro Friday, the country's biggest retailer, Wal-Mart, launched its second own-label line, Great Value.
That is one reason why many consumer-goods firms which reckon all they need to do is cut prices temporarily will probably be proved wrong.
Kraft and other firms such as Frito-Lay, a leading savoury-snack maker, have indeed helped their brands by lowering prices.
But shoppers are now more loyal to their local shops than to faceless behemoths like Philip Morris.
This means they are less likely to accept price hikes in future.
‘We have to face the fact’, says the boss of one manufacturer, ‘that our margins will never be the same again.’
No firm is more intimately acquainted with the difficulties of price cutting than P&G.
Over the past 18 months the giant Cincinnati firm has slashed the wholesale prices of about 70% of its products and eliminated discounts to retailers in an attempt to reward customers' loyalties with ‘everyday low prices.’
It has been rough going.
Retailers that rely heavily on promotions were furious; some denied shelf space to P&G products.
Worse, rivals such as Unilever stepped in with generous deals of their own.
Salomon Brothers says that in ten of 11 categories, including nappies, toothpaste and washing powder, P&G's market share fell last year.
Naturally, the advertising industry reckons the best way to shore up brand loyalty is to spend hugely on even more ads.
But that may not help much either.
Nowadays, consumers are far too sceptical.
And they are getting harder to reach.
The prospect of a future which provides hundreds of television channels gives Madison Avenue nightmares.
Many of the most durable brands were born because of television's wide reach.
As the media fragments, so will audiences.
This could cause companies to shed their peripheral brands and spend most of their money on innovating rather than launching yet more ‘me-too’ products.
This would enhance efficiency and slow product proliferation.
Frito-Lay recently slimmed its product line; now its main rival, Borden, is planning to do the same.
At P&G, where 25% of its 2,300 brand varieties account for only 2% of sales, old brands like Puritan cooking oil and White Cloud toilet paper are being scrapped.
Prell shampoo and Gleem toothpaste may be next.
Retailers, closer to the customer and flush with the success of their own-labels, will ensure the death of many brands.
In future, says David Robey, a top manager at Tesco, ‘all the ‘second division’ brands…will gradually disappear.’
Many of Mr Robey's colleagues at big supermarket chains would like to see just the top two or three brands in a product line left on the shelf — plus, of course, their own labels.
Russian entrepreneurs
Tatar sauce
MOSCOW
ANIS MUKHAMETSHIN is mildly wealthy by the standards of Russia's nouveaux riches.
Outside his smart office on the southern outskirts of Moscow is parked a big new Mercedes.
He has a lawyer in Gibraltar and private bankers in Antwerp.
Other Russian entrepreneurs boast of at least as much.
Yet many of them share Mr Mukhametshin's problem: making the first pile of cash was quick and relatively easy, but becoming a corporate tycoon — which usually involves a shift from trading to manufacturing — is hugely difficult in Russia's topsy-turvy economy.
The source of Mr Mukhametshin's wealth is a private company called, unsurprisingly, Anis.
It imports small luxuries like chocolate, scent, cigarettes and fizzy wine, with which most Russians can just afford to cheer themselves up.
Yet Anis stands apart from the host of other small-time importers who have filled Russian city streets with kiosks.
When it began three years ago, Anis used its own brand name.
So its fizzy white wine from Spain (which costs 69 cents a bottle to buy and ship to Moscow) wears a smart Anis label.
The brands are also backed by slick advertising, which features a Russian star and plenty of pretty girls.
Thanks to such marketing, Anis made sales in 1992 of 12 billion roubles ($15m).
Mr Mukhametshin, a 39-year-old Tatar who grew up in the Central Asian republic of Uzbekistan, began in business at 13 when he apprenticed himself to a family of travelling ice-cream makers.
A couple of years later he graduated to sticking up posters to advertise concerts.
After a spell in the army, he developed this into a business taking second-rate acts to provincial Soviet cities.
Now Mr Mukhametshin has a pile of projects he thinks Anis could take on.
He is building a factory to make cigarettes and would like to make shoes, ice-cream, scent, vitamins and china.
He also wants to move into property development by building a modern office block in Moscow and suburban housing for the city's emerging yuppies.
But the project closest to his heart is a studio to make television commercials.
‘It's a very good business,’ he says.
‘After every slump there's a pick-up, and then everyone wants to make commercials.
We must invest now to be ready.’
The problem is that like most other private Russian companies, Anis finds it impossible to raise capital.
In January all its planned projects would have needed 22 billion roubles.
But that estimate has risen sharply because most rely on importing components, and the rouble has since halved in value.
Mr Mukhametshin claims he could finance the whole lot from cash flow and is trying to tempt investors with the promise of juicy returns: the forecast return on capital on his ice-cream factory ranges from 360% to almost 850%, depending on what sort of ice-cream it produces.
Yet Russian banks are not interested.
Because of inflation, now about 20% a month, they are usually unwilling to lend for longer than three to six months, and would prefer to stick to simple trade finance.
Foreign banks would rather persuade Russian entrepreneurs to deposit their profits with them than consider extending loans.
Mr Mukhametshin went to see the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development in London.
It took the bank almost two months to write him a curt letter saying it was not interested.
Perhaps he should have tried flogging them some more marble to decorate their office.
Such a tactic would make sense, because the difficulty Anis faces in raising capital is that its business is back to front.
Instead of taking a huge currency risk by selling imported goods for roubles, Anis should use the devaluation of the rouble to its advantage by exporting.
The proposed shoe factory, for example, would make a return on capital of around 15% if it sold running shoes for 1,000 roubles a pair.
At the current exchange rate, that is barely $1 — a price which should make Russia competitive with producers like Indonesia.
Unfortunately, Mr Mukhametshin's past attempts at exporting have been a disaster.
He describes what happens after a typical Russian business deal: ‘One man goes off to find the goods and the other to find the money.
Both sides promise what they do not yet have.’
Mr Mukhametshin has been repeatedly let down by Russian suppliers, which in turn forces Anis to let down foreign customers.
This risks ruining an elaborate network of foreign-trade partners that has been built on trust.
Only when Anis controls every stage of production and can guarantee quality and delivery will it try exporting again.
If Mr Mukhametshin can achieve that, he will be seriously rich.
Gloom at the rich men's club
REVISING growth forecasts downwards has unfortunately become an all too popular pursuit during the past three years.
This week it was once again the turn of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) to shave its growth projections.
The Paris-based club of rich industrial economies has trimmed its forecast for GDP growth this year in the OECD's 24 member countries to 1.2%.
As recently as last December it pencilled in a figure of 1.9%.
But recovery, the OECD argues (with a familiar ring), is just around the corner: it expects average growth next year to rise to 2.7%.
The most dramatic revision is in Germany.
Last December it was tipped to expand by 1.2% this year.
Oops: now the OECD expects output there to shrink by 1.9%.
Even in 1994, Germany's economy is expected to grow by only 1.4%.
Germany's jobless rate is forecast to jump from 7.7% last year, to no less than 11.3% in 1994.
A total of 23m workers (11.9% of the labour force) are expected to be jobless in Europe by the end of 1994.
Japan's expected growth this year has also been reduced, to 1.0%, from 2.3% six months ago.
But the OECD reckons it will rebound strongly in the second half, at an annual rate of 3.2%.
These 1993 forecasts for Japan and Germany are almost identical to the average of The Economist's latest monthly poll of private-sector seers (see page 131).
Our panel, however, is rather more bullish about prospects in America, projecting 3% growth this year, compared with the OECD's 2.6%
The OECD's new forecasts provided gloomy reading for ministers of the 24 member countries arriving in Paris on June 2nd for the organisation's annual meeting.
Concerns about unemployment, especially in Europe, were high on the agenda.
Ministers were presented with a new report on unemployment prepared by the OECD secretariat, which repeated its pet theme that the key to reducing unemployment is to make labour markets work better, through measures such as better training and mobility.
In the short term, however, policy-makers feel helpless.
With no room for a fiscal stimulus in most countries, there seems little they can do to boost output and jobs.
But actually there is one important thing they can do which would certainly improve world economic prospects: resist the temptation to put up new protectionist barriers, and push ahead with a speedy conclusion of the Uruguay round of trade talks.
BT and MCI
Lines across the water
BRITAIN'S telecoms giant, BT, has been unlucky in love.
Its courtship of Mitel ended in tears last year when it sold its stake in the Canadian company at a loss of £120m ($120m).
Its affair with America's McCaw Cellular ended less unhappily with a profit of over £200m.
Only a month ago BT's attempt to woo Electronic Data Systems, the world's largest computer-services group, failed.
But on June 2nd, after an on-off romance, BT leapt into bed with MCI, America's second-biggest long-distance telecoms company.
‘The telecommunications deal of the century,’ says Bert Roberts, MCI's chairman.
Ah, but can it last?
The dowry is generous.
BT, which has a 95% share of the British market, and MCI are investing a combined $1 billion to launch a new joint-venture company; BT will hold a 75% stake in the new firm, MCI the remainder.
BT will also spend a high $1.3 billion on a 20% stake in MCI; about $130m of that will be spent immediately on an initial 4.9% shareholding.
And as part of the deal, MCI will acquire most of the business of BT North America.
To ease all this past America's Federal Communications Commission (FCC)— and to placate MCI's long-distance rivals, AT&T and Sprint — the two firms are taking pains to emphasise that MCI will retain its independence.
BT has agreed not to increase its stake in MCI for ten years and, in any case, America's regulators prevent any foreign investor from holding more than 25% of an American firm's voting shares.
Despite such caveats, the deal looks sensible for BT, which should reassure the British government as it prepares to sell a third tranche of shares in the partly state-owned company.
Eager to lessen its dependence on the highly regulated and increasingly competitive British telecoms market, BT has been struggling to turn itself into a ‘one-stop-shop’ provider of global telecoms services for multinationals.
The company's quest for a successful global strategy was given added urgency on May 25th, when AT&T unveiled its own global offering, WorldSource.
A $150m venture with Kokusai Denshin Denwa, Japan's biggest international telecoms carrier, Singapore Telecom and others, WorldSource is aiming at precisely the market coveted by BT.
BT had never intended to go global alone.
The firm's Syncordia unit, which provides network-management services for multinationals, was originally supposed to be a joint venture with Deutsche Bundespost Telekom and Japan's NTT; both subsequently dropped out.
And while Syncordia has won around $100m of business in less than two years, it is still losing a pile of money.
So, too, are Global Network Services, which offers worldwide data transmission, and Project Cyclone, which aims to provide an independent global telecoms network for BT's customers by 2003.
All told, BT had expected to invest some $100m in the three ventures.
That cost will now be shared with MCI, which expects the venture to be profitable after two years.
BT's new alliance should also give it the sort of access to the American market it has long been seeking.
In March BT applied to the FCC for a licence to operate a range of domestic and international telecoms services in America; AT&T countered in April with an application to Britain's Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) to provide similar services in Britain.
Since then, AT&T has been urging the FCC not to grant BT a licence unless the gesture is reciprocated; its British rival had until this week been taking a similar line.
But with the MCI deal in the bag, BT will no longer need a licence; its American services can be sold via MCI.
Expect BT's application quietly to be dropped once the deal has gone through.
For MCI, the new venture will do more than transform it into an international presence.
First, the firm is eager to expand its data-transmission services, which at present make up just 5% of total sales; by 2000 it hopes that will have risen to around 20%.
Second, MCI is eager to become a competitor in wireless communications; in the mid-1980s, to pay for expansion, the firm sold its cellular licences to McCaw Cellular, America's biggest wireless operator.
(Ironically, it was to AT&T that BT sold its 20% stake in McCaw last November.)
Third, MCI wants to expand its existing domestic network into new fields, such as interactive multimedia.
With such ambitions, a few billion dollars from BT will come in handy.
FINANCE
Mending Europe's currency system
Barry Eichengreen and Charles Wyplosz, two leading thinkers on exchange-rate economics, respond to our suggestions for reforming the ERM
SIR — The Economist is right to worry about the future of the European Monetary System (EMS).
Its leaders of May 8th and 15th warning of ‘fault lines’ running through the system (excuse our language) correctly diagnose the problem.
But they are strangely fuzzy-headed when recommending reforms.
One source of instability, you rightly note, has been lack of competitiveness in countries like Italy, whose unit labour costs rose by 10% compared with those of other industrial countries between 1987 and August 1992.
Another source of strain, as you again note, has been German unification, which burdened all of Europe with high interest rates.
Especially important, we agree, is the likelihood that governments pursuing policies of austerity will be forced by recession and rising unemployment to throw in the towel.
This danger, and with it speculative pressures, mounts each time doubts arise that the Maastricht treaty will be ratified.
What you miss is the additional instability emanating from the treaty itself.
Maastricht makes exchange-rate stability a precondition for participating in monetary union.
If driven out of the exchange-rate mechanism (ERM), a country might no longer qualify for EMU.
With the lure of EMU membership withdrawn, it might no longer wish to pursue the policies of austerity required for entry.
What better explanation for Britain's post-devaluation reduction in interest rates and Norman Lamont's singing in the bath?
The markets of course know that governments may be glad of a chance to change policy in the event of a successful speculative attack, which provides traders the incentive to undertake it.
Hence, speculating against ERM parities can be profitable even in the absence of fundamental competitiveness problems, a fact illustrated most recently by Spain.
What makes this possible, as you noted, is the absence of capital controls.
Speculators can take costless one-way bets against ERM currencies.
Countries' only defense is stratospheric interest rates, which are politically insupportable.
Given the clarity of your diagnosis, why then do you waffle when offering recommendations for reform?
You suggest continuous realignments, wider bands and ‘soft buffers’(which in effect means no bands at all).
Back to floating is hardly what one expects to hear from The Economist, which understands the threat this poses to Europe's single market.
If Hoover's decision to move a couple of hundred jobs from Dijon to Scotland was enough to provoke an uproar, imagine the corrosive effect on political support for the Single European Act of additional competitive devaluations.
More surprise realignments, the Bundesbank's preference, are not feasible when capital flows are unfettered.
The markets are smart enough to guess when a realignment is coming.
You can fool them once by realigning in the middle of the trading day, as Spain did recently.
But next time they will be on to you.
Widening the bands and shifting them before exchange rates reach their edges is no better.
Not only does this pose the same threat to the single market; it will also undermine any credibility that ERM parities retain.
Nobody will believe that governments are likely to intervene when exchange rates move toward the edge of their bands.
This is a recipe for instability.
Hoping for an early merger between the Bundesbank and the Bank of France is wishful thinking.
Will the Bundesbank put Frenchmen on its board?
Will France give oversight of its fiscal policy to Germany?
Hardly.
Without such formal arrangements, attempts to fix the franc's parity against the D-mark will not be regarded as credible.
This, after all, is why we have the Maastricht treaty in the first place.
It gives the signatories the safeguards they require before compromising their sovereignty.
It provides a formal structure within which a commitment to peg exchange rates will be credible.
Progress must therefore occur within the confines of the treaty.
Yet no country at present satisfies its preconditions for EMU — conditions which in any case are increasingly viewed as inappropriate.
Even if most EC countries qualify for monetary union by 1997, it is hard to see how the ERM can survive until then.
This picture is bleak.
It makes one despair of EMU.
And without the promise of such union to tie down foreign-exchange markets, the break-up of the EMS, and even of the single market, looms.
But there remains one feasible route to EMU, and hence salvation for the EMS.
This is temporarily to impose deposit requirements on institutions that take open positions in foreign exchange.
As we describe in a paper soon to be published by the Brookings Institution in Washington, DC, they should be required to make non-interest-bearing deposits with their central bank.
The cost would be passed on to speculators, discouraging one-way bets.
This could not support weak currencies indefinitely.
But it would provide the breathing space necessary to organise orderly realignments, and permit the ERM to survive until EMU is in place.
In placid periods this measure would represent only a very modest implicit tax on speculation.
It would not hamper financial-market integration.
But if tensions mount and interest rates rise, the cost of non-interest-bearing deposits would rise in parallel.
The implicit tax would thus rise and fall precisely as needed to counter speculative pressures.
Yes, investors will still have the incentive to sell grossly overvalued currencies.
But that is as it should be.
The idea is to throw sand, not concrete, in the wheels of international finance.
Yes, institutions will under- and over-invoice to circumvent deposit requirements.
But doing so takes time, so there will still be a gap in which to organise orderly realignments.
And how can deposit requirements be administratively impossible if they were used by the Bank of Italy in the 1970s and by the Bank of Spain just last year?
As a form of prudential supervision rather than administrative control, deposit requirements are consistent with the Maastricht treaty and the Single European Act.
Besides saving the EMS, a little prudential supervision of the world's last wholly unregulated financial market wouldn't be such a bad idea.
BARRY EICHENGREEN University of California, Berkeley CHARLES WYPLOSZCINSEAD
Property
Selling up
IT IS too soon to yell ‘recovery’ from the rooftops.
But both the American and British commercial-property markets are now showing definite signs of life.
Prices in most American markets (California, notably, excepted) have at least bottomed out.
Investment banks and rich individuals are buying billions of dollars-worth of buildings and non-performing loans.
Shares in real-estate investment trusts (REITs)— tax-favoured property vehicles — have been Wall Street's star performers, beating the S&P 500 index by more than ten percentage points since January.
Investors have bought almost $1 billion of REIT shares in initial public offerings already this year; the total for 1993 may exceed $1 billion.
British investors are bullish, too.
The FT property-company index soared by 32% in the first five months of the year, while the FT-All Share gained just 3%.
A flurry of rights issues by property firms has raised around £700m ($1.1 billion) in the past month.
Yields on well-let properties, even in the glutted City of London office market, have fallen by as much as a percentage point over the past six months.
Even the ever-cautious Bank of England has acknowledged the ‘stirrings of a recovery’.
as if to confirm it, enter George Soros, for now the leader of the speculators' pack.
On June 2nd it was announced that Mr Soros's Quantum Fund would form a partnership with British Land, a property firm, to invest an initial £500m in British commercial property.
Shares in British property companies gained another 6.4% on the news.
Mr Soros made a fortune by selling sterling short before it left the ERM last September, and bought gold early in its recent rally.
Since February he has been snapping up American commercial property.
For financial institutions, which have suffered much from their heavy exposure to property (through direct ownership and loans), this burst of activity is a godsend.
At last, they can slash their huge commercial-property holdings.
American banks' loans totalled $157 billion in 1992, of which one-fifth were not being serviced; British banks' lending to property companies alone stood at £37 billion in March 1993.
Since January American banks have offloaded around $1 billion of commercial real estate and loans, much of it in bulk to single buyers.
BankAmerica, for instance, is selling property and loans worth a nominal $1.7 billion to Morgan Stanley; GE Capital, the finance arm of General Electric, is buying a $1 billion package from First Chicago.
Bulk sales are unknown in Britain, for so are bulk buyers.
Yet the atmosphere may well be changing.
On May 25th a group of lenders, headed by Barclays, decided to put Speyhawk, a long-troubled property developer, into receivership.
The timing of the decision to close the firm has put other precarious property companies on edge.
They fear that bankers may now reckon to get a better return by selling off firms' assets quickly than by keeping debtors alive.
Barclays says it has no plans to pull other plugs.
It will manage the Speyhawk properties under the receiver, rather than sell them soon.
Its three big domestic rivals do not intend to cut and run either.
Nor are bulk sales the only strategy that American banks are pursuing.
Citicorp, which has more real-estate problems than any other bank — $1.2 billion in 1992 (see chart on page 102)— plans to sell its properties slowly.
So do Chemical Bank and Wells Fargo.
First Chicago believes that selling half of its commercial property portfolio en bloc boosted the bank's image with shareholders, regulators and rating agencies — though its share price is barely keeping pace with the S&P banks index, and its debt has yet to be upgraded.
Certainly, regulators are urging banks to make a clean break with property.
Those that do so have to set aside less capital to cover property risks and less time for completing detailed regulatory reports and managing a messy portfolio.
Banks that want to cash in on the consolidation of American banking now under way may also need to rid themselves of property.
That way, such banks can reassure shareholders of takeover targets that the shares they are likely to be offered in payment are backed by rock-solid assets.
But selling in bulk to a middle-man such as an investment bank, which then sells on the properties, probably means settling for a low price, reckons Bill Rhodes, a vice-chairman of Citicorp.
A firm with experience in managing and marketing property — like, say, Citicorp — can produce better returns for shareholders by doing the final sales itself.
For instance, the $150m that Citicorp raised from selling property-related assets in the past five quarters fetched an average 63% of their nominal value.
First Chicago's bulk sale realised only 50%; BankAmerica's managed even less.
Even if the economics of bulk sales improve — Chemical reckons that the bulk-discount has fallen sharply as the property market has revived — Citicorp considers it worth sticking with property in order to help create a liquid market in it.
How exactly it will manage to do so is, as yet, unclear.
But the goal is a good one.
Liquidity returned to the British market far more recently than it did to the American one.
British banks have had less time than their American counterparts to develop clear strategies towards property.
But they will soon face similar dilemmas.
On June 1st Pen Kent, a senior official of the Bank of England, urged members of the newly formed Property Bankers Association to consider securitisation and other means of reducing the banks' exposure to property, in order to create a more liquid market.
They will be only too happy to oblige.
Japanese banks
Boring at best 
TOKYO
THERE will be no quick recovery for Japan's banks.
The steep fall in interest rates over the past two years has boosted their operating profits enormously.
Yet such is the burden of bad debts that their final results for the fiscal year to March, which have just been announced, are dismal.
And they are as likely to get worse as to get better.
Japan's 11 big commercial (city) banks form the strongest part of its banking system.
Their operating profits rose by 31%, to ¥2.5 trillion ($10 billion) last year.
But recurring profits — what is left after deducting items such as loan-loss provisions and charge-offs plus losses on share sales — fell by 32%, to ¥964.2 billion.
Provisions against dodgy loans and write-offs of worse ones totalled ¥885 billion, and net realised losses on shareholdings another ¥109 billion.
Even these grim figures are lower than many once feared, thanks to the rally in Japanese shares since early March.
As recently as the late 1980s profits on share sales accounted for nearly all of city banks' earnings.
Japanese banks will continue to write off and provide against masses of doubtful debts for several years to come.
And they cannot expect the spread between the rates at which they borrow and the rates at which they lend to widen further, helping to pay for these lingering credit problems.
David Atkinson, an analyst at Goldman Sachs in Tokyo, notes that the banks' operating profitability began to deteriorate again in the second half of the last fiscal year.
The spread between city banks' loan rates and deposit rates narrowed from an average of 209 basis points (just over two percentage points) in March 1992 to 180 basis points in March 1993.
The main reason is that banks are continuing to reduce debtors' interest payments on a growing number of ‘restructured’ loans to levels below their own cost of funds.
Consequently, Goldman Sachs expects city banks' operating profits to decline by 10% in the fiscal year to March 1994.
Bankers would be foolish to expect the Bank of Japan to improve their spreads by cutting the official discount rate (ODR) again if the economy fails to recover as quickly as many now expect.
Depositors are already receiving next to nothing in interest on a large chunk of their bank balances.
Another cut in the ODR will not trigger a corresponding cut in banks' funding costs.
Nor does any upsurge in lending look likely to improve operating profits.
Private-sector bank loans increased by only 1.1% in the 12 months to March, the slowest pace on record.
Five city banks actually lent less last year than the year before.
And those banks that lent more often had the worst of reasons for doing so: namely, the need to keep afloat borrowers whom their creditors could not afford to see sink.
Thus, 38% of Asahi Bank's net new loans in the year to March were to the property sector.
Less distressed companies have little interest in credit.
And firms continue to run down their cash holdings.
City banks' deposits declined by 7% last year, for the first time in at least two decades.
So the outlook for Japanese banks remains boring at best.
And even continued tedium depends on two cosy assumptions.
The first is that the stockmarket does not collapse again, causing banks' equity capital and their unrealised share gains (which are their main cushion against bad loans) to dwindle.
The second is that the banks' bad-loan problems are now under control.
Yet this burden is still enormous.
Mr Atkinson estimates that Japan's 21 most important commercial banks — including the seven trust banks and the three long-term credit banks, all in far worse condition than the city banks — have a total of ¥31 trillion of loans on which they are receiving either puny interest or no interest at all.
The figure includes loans sold to the Co-operative Credit Purchasing Company, a loan-buying company set up by the banks themselves.
Even this conservative estimate of problem loans amounts to a striking 8% of the total loans in banks' portfolios.
Continued economic weakness in Japan, aggravated by the recent strength of the yen, may increase the volume of doubtful loans.
Although most of the existing dubious credits stem from the speculative frenzy of the late 1980s, banks have begun to admit that an increasing number of loans are non-performing because of general economic weakness.
This means growing credit problems for regional banks, some of which, tucked away in more sober parts of the country, had escaped the worst of Tokyo's bubble-era excesses.
An affair of state
WHEN credit-rating agencies disagree, investors get nervous.
Hence their interest in the difference of opinion that has recently emerged between America's two big rating agencies, Moody's and Standard & Poor's (S&P), and IBCA, a European agency, over the creditworthiness of Italy's big banks.
Though they crunch the same numbers and speak to the same executives, the agencies' analysts have reached markedly different conclusions.
The table shows how the agencies' ratings of three large Italian banks, Banca Commerciale Italiana (BCI), Banca Nazionale del Lavoro and Istituto Bancario San Paolo di Torino, have diverged since last year.
While London-based IBCA has held firm to an average AA for the three, S&P and Moody's have cut their grades to A. At the end of 1992 all three agencies rated them similarly.
Why have they since roughly parted ways?
The main reason seems to be a difference of opinion over the Italian state's role as lender of last resort to troubled banks.
The American agencies have taken the view that, given Italy's present economic and political woes, the government will be less prompt and predictable in its support for ailing banks.
And they argue that the eventual privatisation of BCI, among others, will make the state even less keen on a big bail-out.
IBCA begs to differ.
It argues that even though the Italian authorities may no longer bail out any old bank that gets into trouble, the likelihood of government support for big banks has not changed enough to affect its ratings.
And it points out that even the most cavalier Italian minister is aware that public confidence in the banking system is a matter of considerable importance.
This split in expert opinion could have implications for ratings in other countries such as France, where state support for the banking system has often been more explicit than elsewhere.
Moody's has already said it believes that an independent French central bank and more bank privatisations will make it harder to predict how helpful the French state will be to troubled banks.
Will IBCA again agree to differ?
Italian banking
Inching forwards
ROME
SLOWLY but surely, Italy's banking system is being transformed by the European Community's single market in financial services.
The country's adoption of the EC's second banking directive is the latest stage in this creeping revolution.
As well as authorising German-style universal banking in general, Italy's version of Europe's new rules will sweep away restrictions on commercial banks' ownership of industrial companies.
The authorities hope that such changes will help Italian banks compete more effectively against European rivals.
They will be disappointed.
The decision to let banks become shareholders in Italian firms marks a reversal of a policy of strict separation between banking and industry introduced in 1936.
While banks welcome the change, some critics fear it could do them more harm than good.
They point out that corporate bad debts have soared as the economy has slumped.
And they warn that banks may well have their arms twisted by troubled clients who want them to convert dud loans into equity.
The Bank of Italy, which is due to unveil detailed guidelines on links between banks and industry shortly, is alert to the danger.
At its annual meeting on May 31st, the central bank's new governor, Antonio Fazio, warned that Italian banks should invest only in financially healthy companies.
As a safeguard, the Bank of Italy's rules are likely to allow banks to take stakes in industry only as the strength of their balance sheets and the depth of their merchant-banking experience permit.
It will also keep watch for dodgy debt-for-equity swaps which leave banks owning chunks of ailing firms.
Italian bankers also welcome the introduction of universal banking, though some grumble that regulators have been slow to bring the country into line with other European states.
Under Italy's present ‘polyfunctional’ banking system, which took shape in the 1980s, commercial-bank holding companies are forbidden from, for example, doing factoring or leasing.
Such business can be handled only by subsidiaries with separate boards and bosses.
Regulators like these restrictions because it makes it easier to monitor the risks banks are taking; bankers object to the extra cost.
By switching to a universal-banking structure, banks will be able to shake off such shackles.
Under the new system, banks' holding companies can do almost everything directly, with the notable exception of trading securities.
Banks can thus cut costs by absorbing their leasing, factoring and other subsidiaries and setting up a unified sales team for many of their products.
The biggest benefit that Italy's commercial banks will derive from the new rules, however, is the right to make long-term loans.
At present, long-term lending is the preserve of only a handful of merchant banks, such as Mediobanca and Istituto Mobiliare Italiano, which have built strong ties with Italy's leading industrial groups.
Crafty commercial banks have tried to win a bit of the business by repeatedly rolling over short-term credits to companies (though they have had to charge higher rates than long-term lenders), or by buying long-term lenders of their own.
Thanks to the new rules, commercial banks will soon be able to compete with the merchant banks on the same terms.
That is good news for Italian companies, which will be able to play more lenders off against one another.
But there is a snag.
In converting to a universal-banking model, banks will encounter more internal resistance than they think, since it means eliminating subsidiaries and the extra management jobs they have created.
Nor will the switch necessarily create a more competitive banking sector in Italy.
Many Italian banks are still hopelessly overstaffed and strict Italian labour laws prevent them from curing this handicap quickly.
Moreover, the country remains heavily over-banked.
Many banks that used to be trusts or owned by the state have converted to joint-stock status in order to take advantage of tax breaks offered by the Italian treasury.
But there have been surprisingly few mergers and acquisitions.
In theory, foreign competition should now be forcing Italian banks to put their houses in order.
Yet foreign banks still account for less than 3% of Italian banking assets.
One reason they have not done better is that the largest and most inefficient Italian banks remain in the hands of the government, which has done its best to protect them.
Credito Italiano and Banca Commerciale Italiana, two big state banks, have been earmarked for privatisation, but progress towards a sell-off has been painfully slow.
Until they are sold, Italy's banking revolution will continue to creep.
Invisible bank accounts
IT IS the year 2013, and shares in GlobalBank are falling fast in New York.
The bank's accounts have just revealed that its intangible assets have shrunk alarmingly.
The number of personal customers has fallen by 8%, following problems with a new kind of account, while a computer glitch has persuaded dozens of big fund managers to take their business elsewhere.
Stock analysts have written down the bank's net asset value by a correspondingly precise sum.
It sounds far-fetched.
Yet customers of all types are to a bank what readers are to this newspaper — an important, but intangible, element of its value.
The greater their satisfaction and loyalty, the more the bank can rely on a future stream of income from them, and hence the greater its own value today.
If it loses more customers than expected, the value of its franchise declines.
Investors know that franchises are worth something.
For that reason they are willing to value bank shares in America at about twice their book value.
Banks which are strong in areas that typically produce long-standing relationships with customers sell at even higher multiples to book: investors pay two and a half times book value for Boston's State Street and Chicago's Northern Trust, for example, which specialise in trust services and asset management.
But can pieces of that franchise — intangible assets such as relationships embedded in deposit accounts, and credit-card and mortgage-servicing operations — really be measured accurately?
America's accounting standard-setters are encouraging banks to try.
A new standard known as FAS107 came into effect for banks' 1992 accounts.
Its main purpose was to make banks show the fair value of their financial assets by disclosing their market value, rather than the price at which they were acquired.
When the statement was just a proposal banks objected to it fiercely, arguing that unpredictable day-to-day swings in securities prices, for example, could expose them to crises of confidence among investors.
After a tortuous argument, the standard-setters agreed to let banks value and disclose their intangible assets in their balance sheets as well.
The problem lies in how intangible assets are defined and valued.
David Cates, a consultant with Washington-based Ferguson & Company, says that precise measurement is possible, although the mathematics is complicated and demands reliable flows of information.
Banks which have expanded through acquisitions, notably Banc One and NationsBank, have developed models for measuring intangible values in order to avoid paying too much for a target.
Yet only a handful of America's banks — including two in Minneapolis, Norwest and First Bank — took advantage of FAS107 and included an optional commentary on intangible asset values in their 1992 accounts.
Bank analysts barely reacted, says John Thornton, Norwest's chief financial officer, despite efforts to persuade them that the disclosures gave a better picture of his bank's economic value.
Mr Cates thinks there are three main reasons why intangibles are winning only grudging acceptance.
First, bankers are so used to thinking of intangibles as chiefly useful for pricing takeovers and then minimising taxes after them (intangibles can be amortised for tax purposes) that they have been slow to see them as a way of wooing investors.
Second, egged on by their accountants, most banks have been reluctant to appear to endorse FAS107 any more than they have to, for fear of encouraging more stringent market-value accounting rules.
A third reason is that some bank managers feel threatened by a measure which could prove embarrassing.
Properly calculated and regularly reported, intangible-asset values are an additional signal showing investors how well, or badly, bosses are husbanding a bank's resources.
And that, ultimately, is why intangibles will eventually become a commonly measured element of a bank's value.
For the best-managed banks can only gain by telling a fuller story.
Of governments, interest and maturity
NEW YORK
President Clinton wants to reap easy budget savings by borrowing shorter-term.
Will his successors thank him?
THE third-biggest expenditure in America's federal budget, behind health care and defence, is the cost of servicing the public debt run up by Americans in previous years.
In the 1993 fiscal year, net interest costs will be $100 billion: a seventh of all federal spending, equivalent to about 3.2% of GDP.
Along with health-care costs, the interest burden is the fastest-growing of all budget categories, swelling by around 10% a year.
It will keep that distinction as long as the government continues to gush red ink.
These figures underlie a lively debate about how the government can reduce its interest costs even if(not an unfair assumption) little is done about the deficit.
The debate has been sparked by the plunge in interest rates since 1990.
Yields on long-dated bonds are at their lowest in two decades: the benchmark 30-year Treasury bond now yields less than 7%, compared with 9% three years ago.
Yields on shorter-dated instruments have fallen, from something over 8% for a three-month Treasury bill to little more than 3%.
The difference between short and long rates has produced a yield curve that has rarely been steeper.
That steep yield curve has turned into political temptation.
Bill Clinton, during and after his campaign, promised to find budget savings by shortening the average maturity (currently five years and ten months) of the national debt by selling more short-term paper and less long-term.
Mr Clinton's February budget foreshadowed $16.4 billion of unspecified savings over five years, and the Treasury department was told to go off and find them.
On May 5th the Treasury announced the first big shift for years in its pattern of funding.
Henceforth, the quarterly auctions of 30-year Treasury bonds are to take place only twice a year, nearly halving in volume; auctions of seven-year notes are to be scrapped altogether.
The shortfall will be made up through sales of short-term paper — namely, bills — which have a maturity of up to one year, and through issuing more two- and three-year notes.
The result, over time, could shorten the average maturity of all marketable debt in private hands to something over four years.
The Congressional Budget Office (CBO), in a new study published on June 2nd, calculates that this move will shift $15 billion from longer- to shorter-dated maturities.
The interest savings over five years, it reckons, will come to $1.3 billion.
Neither the size of the shift, nor the sums saved, amount to much for a government with $1.5 trillion of privately held marketable debt.
Yet the move has won the implacable opposition of many economists, of the Borrowing Advisory Committee (which represents investors and meets Treasury officials each quarter) and of most of the career civil servants at Treasury itself.
Why is that?
One reason is that many suspect this is just the first of several unwelcome shifts in the government's funding pattern, despite official promises to the contrary.
The Office of Management of Budget (OMB) expects $10 billion of savings over five years from the shift to shorter maturities.
Its figure is higher than the CBO's largely because it does not take into account the fact that the quarterly long-bond auctions had already been pruned over the past year, from around $12 billion to $1.25 billion.
Yet even the OMB's estimate falls far short of Mr Clinton's promised $16.4 billion in interest savings that is incorporated in the budget bill now going through Congress.
If political imperatives dictate further and unpredictable shifts towards shorter maturities in future, the result will be to disrupt all the different credit markets (in interest-rate derivatives, corporate debt and mortgage-backed securities, for example) that have grown up around the Treasury's vast borrowing schedule.
Another group of critics, central bankers among them, point out that borrowing more at shorter rates may undermine the independence of the Federal Reserve.
Aware that any serious tightening of short-term interest rates added billions to federal debt-service costs, even the feistiest central bank might hesitate to tighten the monetary screw when inflation threatened.
The most fundamental objection is that the government could be ignoring its long-term obligation to manage the debt cheaply in favour of short-term gains.
In an excellent study published by Goldman Sachs, Robert Giordano, this New York investment bank's chief economist, calculated the hypothetical cost of shortening the debt.
Had the whole national debt been funded with one-year Treasury bills between 1965 and 1992 (which, admittedly, not even the most fervent shorteners now advocate), taxpayers would have spent $150 billion more than they did.
And that despite an interest-rate ceiling of 4.25% imposed by Congress until the mid-1970s, which shut off the long-bond market to government borrowing.
Since 1975 the Treasury has been working to lengthen the average maturity of the debt, and with good reason.
It is true that the interest rate now paid by the government on all its debt is some 300 basis points (three percentage points) above current bill rates.
But the yield curve is abnormally steep.
When it returns to ‘normal’(probably because short rates rise, which they now show signs of doing), Mr Giordano reckons that the Treasury will be paying an overall rate just 75–100 basis points above bill rates.
That remaining difference, it can be argued, is the cost of insuring against political, financial and economic risks by using a wide range of debt instruments.
If government borrowing were skewed towards shorter maturities, such risks might conceivably, at some future date, cause investors to shun short-term Treasuries and precipitate a funding crisis for the government.
That danger, known as ‘rollover risk’, remains slight.
Though federal indebtedness is now equivalent to 55% of GDP and rising, the United States is no Brazil, nor even an Italy.
As fans of shortening point out, bills account for only one-quarter of the marketable debt, down from a third a decade ago.
In turn, the shares of long bonds and of longer-dated notes have risen.
Yet these proportions mask a more alarming phenomenon: the amount of new money that needs to be borrowed each year purely to pay off maturing debt.
Fully one-third of the marketable federal debt is rolled over in any year; half is rolled over every two years.
Frank Newman, the Treasury undersecretary who oversees borrowing, says that the new proposals will bring the proportion of debt that matures in any one year to 40–45%.
That is far more than the $100 billion of fresh cash the government must raise each year to cover the deficit, which already provokes alarm.
Rollover risk, though now small, is therefore less implausible than it at first appears.
The risk will grow if any of the following should happen: a spike in interest rates (forward rates already indicate that investors expect higher rates by the end of the year); an unexpected collapse of the dollar (the Federal Reserve, at the Treasury's direction, was intervening furiously last week to prevent the already weak currency from sinking further); or, let's face it, if Washington proves itself unable to wrestle down the budget deficit.
Zurich Insurance
Taking on the world
ZURICH
WHAT do Californian rice farmers, American car dealers, Swiss dentists and English local authorities have in common?
They are all target markets for Zurich Insurance, Switzerland's biggest insurer and among the world's largest.
Zurich — which had gross premium income of SFr21.5 billion ($15.3 billion) last year, mostly from its non-life business — has decided to become a specialist insurer on a global scale.
The strategy has already been applied with some success (see box) to Zurich's American business.
This now contributes more than a third of Zurich's total premium income, and well over 40% of its non-life business.
Now the European market is getting the same treatment.
The move is Zurich's response to structural changes in the insurance market which threaten a ruinous price war in the familiar ‘off-the-shelf’ products that are now widely sold to households and companies.
Deregulation in Europe — for instance, of motor insurance throughout the European Community and Switzerland — has already stiffened competition in previously cartelised markets.
Banks too are muscling in on insurance, mainly on the life side, to keep customers' savings ‘in the family’.
In the space of a few years, Zurich plans to complete its switch from selling standard products (such as property, motor and accident insurance) to anyone who will buy them to fashioning customised insurance packages for specific groups.
That should mean more loyal customers (and lower costs in getting and keeping them), less reliance on price discounting and higher profits from services which add more value.
It sounds simple but it is not, which is why for the time being Zurich seems to have stolen a march on its rivals.
Identifying profitable potential markets is not enough.
Devising the right packages of insurance and related services requires an intimate knowledge of the market; for instance, nearly half the account executives of Universal Underwriters, a Kansas-based Zurich subsidiary which insures a quarter of American car dealers, have worked in motor dealerships themselves.
Selling insurance packages also means some large corporate reorganisations.
This can mean anything from setting up new local profit centres to revamping centrally provided services such as information technology and communications systems, or reforming ways to monitor and reward performance.
Zurich snatched a strong position in the market for insuring multinationals from sleepier British rivals by offering a comprehensive service to meet the needs of global corporations.
This included central and local insurance cover in a single package, as well as advice on risk assessment, loss control and claim management.
But, crucially, Zurich backed up its service by appointing international business managers in all its main markets and giving them the right staff and resources, not least information.
Zurich has benefited in its search for profitable target markets from having a strong international network, built up over nearly a century, with operations in 40 countries.
It has also made a number of acquisitions of mainly small specialist companies.
This year, for instance, it bought the remaining 50% of Fidelity and Deposit Company of Maryland, a surety and fidelity business with annual gross premiums of about $130m, from Swiss Reinsurance, its Zurich neighbour.
More ambitiously, it recently bought Municipal Mutual, an ailing British insurer of local authorities and their employees.
Spurned by other British companies, Municipal looks risky.
But Zurich believes that it can make the business profitable with the right package of tailor-made services — for instance, advice on security of buildings and reduction of accidents at work as well as insurance.
The purchase also raises Zurich's low profile in the British market.
All Zurich's 120 companies around the world are in the process of identifying priorities in at least four markets: private customers, small companies, big companies and global corporations.
The company is not turning away existing customers; it is trying to reassess business on the basis of customer needs rather than product lines.
Against this, however, it has already identified some areas where it has no plans for expansion, including commercial fire risks in Germany and brokered motor vehicle insurance in Spain.
Nor is Zurich neglecting its home base, where it still earns nearly a quarter of its premiums and does nearly half of its life insurance business.
In 1991 Zurich bought Genevoise Assurances to bolster its domestic position in the life-insurance sector.
Last year it went into partnership with Swiss Bank Corporation, Switzerland's third-biggest bank, with a view to cross-selling insurance and investment products.
Rolf Hüppi, Zurich's chief executive since 1991 and once the prime mover behind its multinationals business, sees a day of reckoning ahead for Europe's 4,000-plus insurance companies.
He expects them to follow America in polarising into two distinct groups.
There will be a handful of players operating at an international or ‘multilocal’ level, exploiting the benefits of size through the transfer of knowledge and resources and the efficient use of capital.
The rest, certainly many fewer than now, will do only a limited business.
Broadly-based companies without differentiated products have no future, he says.
Mr Hüppi, who began his career at Lloyd's of London, says that he places no emphasis on growth.
What matters is to serve customers better and more profitably.
Analysts, impressed by results so far, think Zurich is well-placed to do both.
Centre forward
CENTRE Re, one of Zurich's American subsidiaries, is a niche player par excellence.
The firm is headed by Steven Gluckstern, a financial wizard who previously worked for Salomon Brothers, a Wall Street firm, and Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway investment company.
Centre Re started with capital of just $150m in 1988.
Since then, it has been unstoppable.
Its assets have grown by an average of more than 60% a year, to around $1.5 billion in 1992.
It now commands a market niche known as ‘finite-risk insurance’, sold mostly to multinational companies.
This kind of insurance starts from the assumption that, for certain types of high-probability risk, firms face reasonably predictable losses over a shortish run of years.
They absorb these losses either by taking the hit themselves or by paying insurance premiums that are roughly equal to those losses.
Companies do the latter not to avoid losses but to spread the impact to match their income, Mr Gluckstern reckoned.
So Centre Re designed policies to achieve that more cheaply than the standard annual policies offered by other insurers.
Take, for instance, a firm that pays a single $10m claim for product-liability damages once every three years, on average.
To insure that risk, it would have to buy cover of $10m from a standard insurer every year.
A Centre Re policy would cover the firm for total claims of $10m during the three-year period.
This, in most cases, is all the protection the company needs, but it will pay much less for it than it would for a standard policy.
As a further carrot, Centre Re might give the firm a ‘profit share’: a bit of its premium back if it makes no claim.
Mr Gluckstern is about to manage a new subsidiary, Zurich Reinsurance Centre.
The new firm will take on the likes of Prudential Re in America's mainstream market for brokered property-casualty reinsurance (the insurance that primary insurers themselves take out).
This will be a tougher challenge.
Intense competition in the market has kept premiums low.
Losses in low-probability property-casualty reinsurance are far harder to predict than in ‘finite risk’ and less susceptible to financial-engineering solutions.
Even so, the omens are good.
The initial public offering for the new firm, on May 12th, raised $100m.
Though it has no track record, Zurich's new firm is already the biggest in its niche.
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
Uranium, plutonium, pandemonium
Disarmament has a dark side.
It sets free nuclear explosives that used to be tucked away in superpower arsenals, and must now be disposed of
THERE are various recipes for making nuclear weaponry.
Some can be carried out only by experienced master bomb makers.
Others are easy enough for beginners to have a go at.
All of them, though, contain ingredients — plutonium or highly enriched uranium (HEU)— that have always been very hard to come by.
It is the possession of these nuclear materials, more than know-how about their use, that separates the Israelis from the Iraqis, or the Indians from the Iranians.
Making them is hard, and requires the sort of efforts only rich countries or desperate ones will undertake.
Even with money and will, a uranium-enrichment programme takes time to build, and might easily be detected by others.
The cost of making materials for nuclear weapons, and the risk of being caught in the act, are the biggest obstacles facing countries tempted to gate-crash the nuclear club.
Mindful of this, countries with nuclear weapons have developed elaborate systems to guard plutonium and HEU.
But the authoritarian mechanisms that guarded Soviet nuclear material can no longer be guaranteed.
Nuclear smuggling is already on the increase.
The number of reported cases rose to over 100 last year, compared with 35 in 1991.
So far the contraband is low-grade stuff from industrial sources, not weapon-grade materials.
All the same, smuggling routes are being established that could serve more dangerous trades, and customs authorities are beginning to be stretched.
The mere possibility of a black market in weapon-grade material is terrifying.
Instability would spread like a chain reaction.
Countries newly unsure about their neighbours' capabilities would find themselves ever more tempted to try to get a bomb themselves.
Terrorist groups, kept from the nuclear game by their lack of industrial infrastructure, could become players.
Exploiting these fears, nuclear blackmailers could make a mint.
There have already been more than 50 attempts to extort money from America with nuclear threats, some frighteningly credible.
The people who decide whether to believe them or not have been able to check their own stocks quickly, to make sure no bombs or material are missing.
Such checks will be less reassuring if the world's supplies become more accessible — and, alarmingly, less well documented.
The Soviet syndrome
The break-up of the Soviet Union has fractured the brutal certainties of the cold-war nuclear regime.
Roughly 3,000 weapons in Ukraine, Belorussia and Kazakhstan are now less firmly in the grip of the top brass in Moscow.
Ukraine has been reluctant to honour its pledge to relinquish its arsenal.
Whether or not these countries have nuclear ambitions, there are worries about security on their soil.
One Russian officer is reported to have advised his western counterparts to ‘take seriously’ rumours that three or four weapons have disappeared in Kazakhstan.
In Russia itself, the nuclear industry that once supported whole cities, such as Chelyabinsk east of the Urals, and Tomsk and Krasnoyarsk in Siberia, is facing a crisis.
Grandiose Soviet schemes for nuclear power have been replaced by Russian realities.
Thousands have lost their jobs.
The chances of a foreign country finding a Russian engineer ready to sell nuclear advice or materials are growing.
Disarmament treaties between America and the former Soviet Union could further strain the regime for guarding weapons materials.
Roughly six tonnes of plutonium and 30 tonnes of HEU are due to be released annually over the next 15 years as Soviet warheads are scrapped.
Many western sources believe that there is no reliable overall inventory system to keep track of this material.
All this is happening against the background of a worldwide accumulation of civilian plutonium.
Plutonium is not found naturally on earth, but it is produced whenever uranium is used in a nuclear reactor.
Military production reactors are designed to burn fuel in short bursts and thus maximise the production of a particular isotope of plutonium, Pu.
Civilian reactors, designed to produce power, use their fuel for longer and so produce heavier isotopes, Pu and Pu.
To get the plutonium into a usable form, the fuel has to be ‘reprocessed’.
The bombs in today's stockpiles contain almost pure Pu.
The other isotopes mess up the workings of the nuclear reaction.
But isotopically impure plutonium produced in civil reactors can be made into bombs; American scientists at Los Alamos National Laboratory have tried it, and it worked.
According to Frank Barnaby, once director of the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, it takes about 35kg (77lb) of civil plutonium in its oxide form to make a bomb, whereas a mere 5kg of good military metal will suffice.
Despite being larger, bombs made from civil plutonium will have low, unpredictable yields, especially if inexpertly designed and assembled.
But terrorists do not need the power, precision and elegance of a high-yield weapon that fits on a missile.
Low-yield bombs in lorries could serve their purposes, demolishing a fair fraction of a city and spreading fall-out far and wide.
Geiger counter
The first convincingly reasoned inventory of the world's nuclear material was published earlier this year*.
Working from a variety of sources, public and private, the authors conclude that there are roughly 1,000 tonnes of plutonium and 1,500 tonnes of HEU.
Because of the doubt attached to their estimates, they want all governments to publish their inventories and submit them to international supervision.
At the moment, international supervision is woefully limited.
Only 1% of the world's HEU comes under the safeguards administered by the International Atomic Energy Agency; that is mostly used to power small research reactors in countries that have no nuclear weapons.
Almost all the rest, 95% of the total, is held by the American and Russian armed forces.
It is not all in weapons; as much as 100 tonnes of Russian HEU is used simply to power ships and submarines.
A tiny fraction of this amount could be the basis for a successful third-world weapons programme.
A mere 130–220kg of HEU, accumulated in its own enrichment programme, has made Pakistan a nuclear power.
This is 0.01% of the world's total stock.
By contrast, most of the world's 1,000 tonnes of plutonium are in civilian hands — though only 30%, that in Britain, France and the non-nuclear states, is under international safeguards.
More than half of this plutonium is sitting in used fuel-rods from commercial reactors, unusable for anything until it is reprocessed.
But stocks of civil plutonium are flowing forth from reprocessing plants ordered during the 1970s.
These plants were supposed to provide fuel for a new generation of ‘fast’ reactors which would burn plutonium, but neither the demand for nuclear power nor the performance of fast reactors has met the planners' expectations, and the cost of uranium fuel has dropped.
Most of the reprocessed civil plutonium — 72 tonnes — is sitting in storage.
And yet reprocessing will continue.
Billion-dollar reprocessing plants have been built in Britain and France.
It is hard to resist the pressure to use them, especially as some nuclear-power generators have tied themselves into long-term reprocessing contracts.
When they did so, they hoped that reprocessing could cut the cost of disposing of nuclear waste.
That claim has not been borne out for today's designs, but such contracts cannot easily be broken.
So on current plans the reprocessing plants will separate an average of 21 tonnes of plutonium a year over the next 20 years.
By 2010 a total of 545 tonnes of plutonium is due to have been separated.
Most of this plutonium will be produced in Britain and France, though some could also be separated in Russia and possibly Japan.
When it comes to military plutonium, America and the former Soviet Union have the lion's share: some 250 tonnes between them.
Again, small amounts can have striking political consequences — witness Israel and India with about 300kg of plutonium each.
Russia and America both say they need no longer make military plutonium.
And yet, even as military production stops adding to the total amount of nuclear material in the world, plutonium and HEU from dismantled weapons will add to the stocks.
The danger of disarming
The former Soviet Union has more bombs to dismantle — at least 33,000 weapons in all.
The reason the Russians have so many is that fresh plutonium slowly undergoes radioactive decay, making it unpredictable in warheads.
America solves this by recycling old material, chemically extracting impurities, occasionally going so far as to make ‘ivory’ plutonium, almost pure Pu.
As a rule, the Soviet Union did not refresh its plutonium.
Aging weapons simply got put into reserve, replaced by warheads full of plutonium fresh from the reactor.
The differences in design account for some of the differences in safeguards.
With most of the Russian plutonium in weapons, either ready for service or held in reserve, control of materials could be maintained by locking up bombs.
In America, partly because of more recycling, safeguards depended more on full accounting for the nuclear materials themselves as they passed through the long and complex procedures.
A greater distinction between the two systems of safeguards, though, lies in their psychology.
The Soviet system, confident in its control over its own people, saw threats coming from outside.
In America treacherous and corruptible insiders have always been seen as a potential danger.
The snag with disarmament, for all its other merits, is that it disrupts the established Soviet routine.
The chart shows how much plutonium and HEU might be released from warheads if the INF and START disarmament treaties are implemented.
Weapons will be broken open and the plutonium and uranium stockpiled or processed.
This material will be passed to civilian inventories controlled by Minatom, the ministry of atomic energy; counting bombs will give way to accounting for material.
There is no systematic connection between the two inventories.
Gosatomnadzor, the regulator which was given responsibility for civil and military materials last June, has been refused access to some military inventories.
The great bonfire
The HEU that gets to Minatom can, eventually, be burnt in commercial reactors.
Uranium comes in two isotopes, U and U. It is U that releases energy; but 99.28% of natural uranium is U. For this natural uranium to be made more potent it must be enriched in U, which means sorting through the uranium and discarding some of the U. A little enrichment — to a U content of 2–6% — is good enough for most reactors, though some can work with unenriched uranium and some research reactors use highly enriched uranium.
The HEU in weapons is usually enriched to 94% U.
Enrichment is hard, which is why bomb programmes are rare.
Reversing it — diluting HEU by adding less enriched uranium — is easy, and America is making it profitable as well.
America has agreed to buy Russian HEU diluted for commercial use.
It is set to pay $780 a kilogram for material blended to a concentration of 4.4% U, a price competitive with that of enriched fuel.
A total of 500 tonnes of HEU will be blended into 15,000 tonnes of fuel, which makes the deal worth $12 billion.
The Uranium Institute, based in London, has calculated that the 816 tonnes of HEU that might be released from American and Soviet disarmament could take the place of 166,000 tonnes of natural uranium, roughly three years' worth of world demand.
This is a headache for the world's uranium producers, which are already suffering from depressed uranium prices.
For everyone else, though, it is a blessing: once blended, the uranium presents no more threat than any other nuclear fuel.
It would be no easier to enrich than any other reactor-grade uranium.
If only it were as simple for military plutonium.
But the world has a surplus of plutonium, even without extra supplies coming from disarmament.
And there is no commercial plutonium-fuel industry equivalent to the uranium-fuel industry into which diluted HEU so neatly feeds.
Many bright ideas — and failed ideas looking for a second lease on life — are being put forward as ways of converting weapon-grade plutonium into a form too awkward for the weapon-minded to bother with.
One such scheme would mix the plutonium with nasty but useless nuclear waste and seal it in blocks of glass.
Most of the rest would help pay for disposing of the plutonium by generating electricity from it while turning it into waste.
France has thought about reviving Superphenix, its experimental fast reactor, which was shut down after technical mishaps.
General Atomics, based in San Diego, has floated a plan for a $1.5 billion helium-cooled reactor — a novel design it has long wanted to build.
There are other, more radical designs.
One is a molten-salt reactor.
Liquid plutonium is squirted in, waste is siphoned off.
Scientists at Los Alamos have suggested using particle beams to help burn up the plutonium, rather than relying entirely on particles given off by a chain reaction going on within the material; they think it would be like holding a flame underneath the plutonium, rather than starting a dangerous plutonium blaze.
A study of different ways to burn up plutonium by America's Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory came out against such clevernesses, at least as far as using up America's surplus plutonium is concerned (though it did recommend more research into a few).
Not only would these novel reactors take too long to develop, but the electricity that comes from them will, in most cases, be needlessly expensive.
Instead the study prefers a proven technology known as mixed-oxide fuel, or MOX.
The idea is to take plutonium and mix it with unenriched uranium.
Since Pu acts like U, the end result is quite like the low-enriched uranium used as reactor fuel.
The idea dates from the 1950s, when it looked as if there would be plutonium left over from the fast-breeder reactors that were being planned — reactors which could produce more plutonium than they consumed.
Under such conditions MOX made sense.
If you have to pay to reprocess the plutonium from spent fuel, though, it does not.
An OECD study in 1989 found it unlikely that MOX could compete with uranium under realistic circumstances.
According to the fuel-cycle manager of a large German power company, it is twice as expensive as uranium.
Even with free plutonium, MOX is unlikely to be cheaper than making uranium fuel from scratch unless uranium prices soar.
Some MOX fuel has been made — the lack of an economic rationale has never stopped the nuclear industry trying things — but as yet it has used up only 12.5 tonnes of plutonium.
Now disarmament and reprocessing are bringing about what fast reactors never did: surplus plutonium.
MOX would be a relatively safe way of disposing of the stuff.
Moreover the Livermore study concluded that it would be easy to adapt designs for tomorrow's reactors so they could burn MOX exclusively — rather than a mixture, one-third MOX and two-thirds uranium, as is the practice today.
Given free plutonium, the report says that such a plant could generate electricity at 3.1 cents a kilowatt hour (kWh), compared with 3.0 cents a kWh using uranium fuel in a standard reactor.
Unfortunately there is not enough capacity in MOX factories to turn the weapons surplus from both superpowers into fuel.
And governments have not licensed enough MOX-burning reactors to absorb the plutonium coming from reprocessing plants, let alone tonnes of weapon-grade plutonium as well.
According to the authors of the inventory, even the most optimistic projection — which, incidentally, takes no account of military plutonium — sees plutonium stocks growing from 72 tonnes in 1990 to 113 tonnes in 2000, before decreasing to 36 tonnes in 2010, as MOX fabrication and fast reactors take off.
As a matter of course, many will protest about shipping and flying civilian plutonium around the world in large volumes.
Terrorists will not be among them.
Some of the planned MOX factories will probably fail to get approval; reactors will be refused licences to load MOX into their cores.
In Germany and Japan, where reprocessing nuclear waste has been a requirement, using the plutonium produced seems less popular; several utilities are having difficulty securing licences to burn MOX.
A projection that tries to take account of some of these factors sees civil plutonium stocks growing to 265 tonnes by 2010.
The commodity from hell
The problem is not just that MOX reactors provide only a narrow channel for disposing of military plutonium, or that the channel will be clogged by the plutonium from uneconomic civil reprocessing programmes.
It is that these programmes, and the plutonium economy they seek to bring into being, encourage the Russian nuclear industry to think of plutonium as valuable.
Far from talking of the plutonium problem, desperate Russian nuclear engineers, encouraged by the plutonium industry in France and Britain, want to begin a new programme to build fast reactors running on plutonium, undaunted by difficulties the West has had with such technology.
Even if it were technically possible, Russia does not have the money to do it.
The alternative, when plutonium is seen as a fuel, is to load it into existing Russian reactors, unused to the stuff and already regarded as unsafe by outsiders.
Either way, as long as reprocessing plants make plutonium look like a commodity, the risk that the wrong people will buy it remains.
* ‘World Inventory of Plutonium and Highly Enriched Uranium, 1992’ by David Albright, Frans Berkhout and William Walker, Oxford University Press 1993
SPECIAL
The man who talked too much
In 1992, Bill Clinton raised the expectations of too many Americans too high.
If he is to rescue his presidency, he must choose which of those expectations he wants to meet
HERE is a thumbnail sketch of political events in America in the last two weeks of May.
President Clinton is less popular in the polls at this point in his term than any president since such records were kept.
He then makes the kind of silly gaffe — getting his hair cut while Air Force One sits at Los Angeles airport, closing down two runways — that will be the stuff of jokes about him for as long as he is in public life.
Next, his staff in the White House hamfistedly fire seven non-political civil servants who happen to be popular with their only real clients — the White House press corps.
The firing is both preceded and followed by blatant cronyism.
When the press gets wind of it, the cronyism gives way to abuse of power, as people whose worst offence is to have arranged expensive air trips are smeared with the rumour that they are to be subject to criminal investigation.
While this comedy of errors is being played out, the central element of the president's programme, a five-year package of measures designed to reduce the federal deficit by almost $100 billion, is in danger of being rejected on Capitol Hill — by members of the party he is supposed to lead.
At the last minute, enough congressmen rally round to get the package through the House of Representatives: not because they believe in it, but because Mr Clinton has made them an offer they cannot refuse, or worse, because they pity him.
The president, convinced that his real problems are not of substance, but of ‘communication’, then hires as his chief communicator a man of the opposite party.
Accept this sketch of what has just happened, and you might conclude that Mr Clinton's presidency is over.
Some do.
Amazing as it must seem to non-Americans, skirmishing for the Republican presidential nomination for the 1996 election has already broken out.
Here, an ex-governor makes much of the TV programmes he is launching to revitalise the Republican Party; there, a senator finds himself, quite by chance, eating rubber chicken in both Iowa and New Hampshire.
Even to the jaundiced eyes of veteran Washington reporters, this is mighty early to be planning a presidential campaign.
Too early: Mr Clinton's May was not quite the disaster the sketch makes it seem.
But to be more than a failed one-term president, he must be driven by these brickbats to decide what kind of president — indeed, what kind of man — he really wants to be.
Death by a thousand claims
At the heart of Bill Clinton's crisis is this.
Too many groups of people, with mutually exclusive agendas, want him to be their very own president and remember him saying that he would be.
Gays thought he was going to be their president; but so did blue-collar Catholic heterosexuals.
The powerbrokers of the resource industries in the mountain west thought he was going to be their president; but so did the environmentalists who loathe them.
Bosnian Muslims thought he was going to be their president; but so did those who want America to disavow meddling overseas.
Trade unions thought he was going to be their president; but so did those businessmen who want a free-trade agreement with Mexico.
All these groups can think that Mr Clinton is their man because of what he said during the mesmerising presidential campaign of 1992.
In retrospect that campaign continues to haunt Mr Clinton.
After two harpoons had been stuck into him — one marked ‘philanderer’, one marked ‘draft-dodger’— he swam bleeding through the Democratic primaries of February and March.
A year ago he was as weak and unloved a Democratic presidential candidate as it was possible to be.
He had to shore up support among traditional Democrats, and he did; hence the expectation that he would be the harbinger of a hundred new social policies on everything from vaccination to AIDS.
He was then faced during the presidential election campaign with an unexpected challenge by Ross Perot, a billionaire from Texas.
That challenge forced Mr Clinton into another change of emphasis, mainly concerned with the need to reach out to the private sector and to reduce the federal budget deficit.
That led in turn to the expectation (already raised by Mr Clinton's past political record) that he would be pro-business and fiscally conservative.
At the end of it all, he had simply promised too many people too many things.
Of all the groups that thought that Mr Clinton was their man, three are most important.
The first are the ‘new’ Democrats, those who have come to believe that the identification of Democrats with high taxes, social liberalism and a distrust of the armed forces was catastrophic.
Mr Clinton, all agree, first rocketed to national stardom when he dominated the meeting in Cleveland of the Democratic Leadership Council (DLC)— the shock-troops of the new Democrats — in May 1991.
Historians will want to examine whether Mr Clinton was really the first choice of those new Democrats, or merely stepped into a breach when others, such as Sam Nunn, a senator from Georgia, or Al Gore, now the vice-president, were measured and found wanting.
Some doubt that he was.
In any event, the new Democrats took him to their hearts, and convinced themselves that he really was — as he said — a ‘different kind of Democrat’.
They thought that he would be committed to tough reform of the welfare laws, that he would set his face against the racial balkanisation of America, that he would support free trade and eschew the idea that great dollops of federal money would revive the economy.
But the new Democrats are, by definition, new.
They do not control the party; they are not well organised enough to do so.
At the Democrats' convention in New York last July, as the DLC folk strutted around, one journalist mused: ‘It's a bit like a coup in central America.
The new guys have got the radio station but I don't think they've got the barrios.’
He was right.
More liberal constituencies in the party, some of them with close links to Hillary Rodham Clinton, the president's wife, then spent the last half of 1992 making sure that their claims on the presidency were not forgotten.
Many of them wanted to see an administration whose make-up visibly broke the supposed lock on political power of white males.
Their belief that government activism can lead to benign policy changes has been echoed in the priority given by the administration to health care reform.
For many of them, indeed, reform in health care and elsewhere is best achieved through command-and-control regulation.
The same old Democrats, mindful of the importance to the party of the manual workers and trade unions, are now sniping at free trade with Mexico.
The third group thinking that Mr Clinton is its man is harder to define, but may prove to be the most troubling of all for him.
The ‘baby-boomers’, generally liberal in social matters but not particularly engaged in Democratic politics, saw in Mr Clinton the first president who had shared their experiences.
Had he not smoked dope (if only once)?
Had he not enjoyed the new dispensation of sexual freedom?
Had he not opposed the Vietnam war?
Since he had, like them, done all these things, it was an easy step for ageing trendies — who hated the cultural conservatism of Ronald Reagan and George Bush — to believe that he was going to act on the things that most concerned them.
So he would be nice to gays; he would be in favour of, and even extend, abortion rights; he would be anti-militaristic; he would hug trees.
Quite how Mr Clinton would manage to do all these things while maintaining support among churchgoing, monogamous, southern small-businessmen with sons at West Point, was never satisfactorily explained.
The old order changeth
Even a political genius coming to power in propitious circumstances would have had a hard time meeting all these claims on him.
But Mr Clinton had an additional burden; he came to power at what would have been a singularly difficult moment for any American president.
The difficulty stems from an historical anomaly.
Economists are in broad agreement that the period from the end of the second world war to the early 1970s was peculiar.
Between 1913 and 1950 American GDP per head grew by an average of 1.6% a year.
Between 1950 and 1973 it grew by an annual average rate of 2.2%; since then it has grown by about 1.5% a year.
America's productivity growth in the 50 years before the depression averaged about 2% a year.
In the 1930s, it fell to half that.
After 1945 productivity growth soared to as much as 4% a year, but by the mid-1970s it was back on the historical, 2%, trendline.
The burst of growth and prosperity in America after 1945 had social consequences that were unprecedented anywhere in the world.
It created a huge pool of well-paid low-skill jobs, which in turn lifted family incomes to the stuff of which dreams were made.
But the golden age could not and did not last.
Somewhere around 1973, the upward movement in family incomes stalled.
American international economic dominance ended when the Bretton Woods system of fixed exchange rates collapsed.
An economy that had been virtually self-contained for 20 years after 1945 suddenly found itself severely tested by international competition.
The anomaly is this.
Though America's economic hegemony ended 20 years ago, the consequences of this were little appreciated within America, for the country's military and geopolitical power went unchallenged until 1989–91, when its old enemy threw in the towel.
The fact that the cold war lasted so much longer than the economic idyll meant that Americans never adjusted to the fact that, economically, their country had long ceased to be able to deliver the annual increase in prosperity they had come to consider a birthright.
Bill Clinton (who has thought these things through) might have tried to persuade them of this.
Instead, although he drenched his campaign with the rhetoric of ‘change’, some of the most potent symbolism he invoked in his speeches was backward-looking.
He was the star of a soft-focus film that stressed his roots in a small-town, 1950s America, whose prosperity and sense of cohesion, he seemed to suggest, he could recapture.
He cannot.
That America is dead.
So is the cold war giant, at least in the sense that a mighty military machine with no visible threat to its well-being might be said to be dead.
The question now is whether Mr Clinton is going to be forward-looking; to give shape to a sense of what the next American Dream, and what America's post-cold-war role, could be.
The weakened president
Any honest assessment of his chances of pulling this off should start from the realisation that he has only a few rusty tools at his disposal.
Since the quadrupling of the defence budget in 1950–55, the president's main source of power has come from the fact that he sits at the head of a great ‘national security state’— to adopt the phrase of Daniel Patrick Moynihan, a Democratic senator.
But in the absence of an adversary, the president has no compass that can guide his actions at the head of that state, except the new requirement to shrink it.
National security apart, the president's power is curbed in three ways, one old, two new.
The old constraint is federalism: the grant only of certain powers to central government.
This now matters in an unexpected way — or at least, in a way that most people in Washington singularly fail to notice.
Mr Clinton may say that he wants to concentrate on domestic policy until he is blue in the face; the truth of the matter is that in a federal system such single-mindedness will not get him far, because most domestic policy is reserved to state and local governments.
Take education, in which Mr Clinton has a long and distinguished interest.
The federal government controls just 6% of the education budget.
All the talk about demonstration projects, all the talk of using the federal government as a bully pulpit for education reform, cannot hide the fact that any reforms that Mr Clinton is able to make will be ones on the margin.
The first new constraint is the persistence of historically high peacetime budget deficits.
The 1990 Budget Enforcement Act put caps on ‘discretionary’ spending — everything except entitlements to pensions, health care and the like.
They are very tight, have not been broken, and may, before the year is out, be tighter still.
‘Old’ Democrats are going to have to get used to the fact that there is not enough money for the huge array of new programmes they want (especially if health care reform costs an additional $100 billion, as it may).
That, perhaps, is one reason why Mr Clinton has dwelt particularly upon ‘symbolic’ politics: like making the armed forces accept gays or staffing his administration with an eye to ethnic ‘balance’.
None of this costs much money; all of it buys off, quite cheaply, some bothersome liberal constituencies.
The second new constraint arises from the fact that Mr Clinton was always fated to be something of a weak president.
The landslide he had in the electoral college last November obscured the narrowness of a victory based on just 43% of the popular vote.
Lots of people neither like nor trust him; they still think of him as ‘Slick Willie’.
The heckling to which he was subjected at the Vietnam war memorial on May 31st was disturbing evidence of his failure, so far, to establish that universal respect in the country which most presidents acquire within a month of taking office.
In Robert Dole, the top Republican in the senate, he faces the most effective leader of the opposition that Washington has seen for decades.
He is subject to constant sound-bite sniping by Mr Perot.
Nobody should think he has things easy.
So much for the constraints on Mr Clinton.
Now for some of the solutions offered to him.
The first, which he currently seems to believe himself, is that his failures so far are attributable to bad ‘communications’.
The case would be easier to make if his friends knew what his message was meant to be.
David Gergen, his new director of communications, returning to a job he did for Ronald Reagan, is a fine man, deservedly respected in Washington.
But unless Mr Clinton sits him down and tells him what he believes in, Mr Gergen will work no miracles.
The second conventional solution is that Mr Clinton should ‘focus’ on two or three policy areas.
That is harder for an American president to do than most who suggest it realise; whether they start in Waco or in Warsaw, the crises of the world sooner or later force their way onto the president's desk.
Moreover, focusing is not Mr Clinton's strength.
As anyone who has spent time with the man knows, his whole charm derives from his lack of focus.
He is constantly making connections — pulling apparently disconnected experiences together, and synthesising a variety of different views.
Still, if you reinterpret ‘focus on a few policies’ to mean ‘decide what you believe in’, the conventional wisdom becomes good advice.
Mr Gergen will best serve his new boss if he reminds him of the strengths of one of his old ones.
Judged strictly on his own terms, Ronald Reagan was a great president.
He said he would reduce regulation; he did.
He said he would cut taxes; he did.
He said that he would spend the Soviet Union into submission; he did.
He was a successful president not because he ‘focused’— few men can have done so less — and not because he was the ‘great communicator’, but because he knew who he was and what he believed in.
Mr Clinton cannot believe in all the things that his myriad groups of supporters think he believes in, or at least he cannot if he is to rescue his presidency.
He has to choose, publicly, between the many ‘Clintons’ that are on display.
The quest for Clinton
What will the choice be?
Ask many who have known him for years, and they will say that he looks most comfortable at his annual visit to the Renaissance Weekend at Hilton Head Island over the New Year holiday.
Renaissance, an annual symposium, is earnest, slightly religious and very southern; you get the feeling that its tone is set by the kind of conversations about family and country that businessmen in Greenville, South Carolina would have on a Sunday after church or a round of golf.
Those kind of folk, even if Democrats, are not particularly partisan; they are broadly liberal but not stridently so.
They are committed to a growing American economy based on the private sector; they don't see any magic in taxes.
They don't hate government; but they don't believe that government can do everything.
Greenville Man would think — and would be right to think — that Mr Clinton ended May better than most believe.
His economic plan was made to be tougher on the deficit in the House of Representatives, and may be made tougher still in the Senate.
Mr Clinton has shown no inkling that this bothers him, no sense that the social programmes he will now not be able to enact are ones over which he will shed many tears.
And he has appointed Mr Gergen, a long-time Renaissance man who gave a fine speech on the fragmentation of America at this year's Hilton Head weekend, to a key position.
So he has, at a stroke, reached out to Republicans and independents who have hitherto felt spurned.
There is, perhaps, the beginning of a choice here: a choice that confirms that Mr Clinton really is a new Democrat, really is suspicious of old Democratic liberalism, and really does want to govern from the solid, decent centre of America.
There will be plenty of chances over the rest of this year to judge whether that is the case.
Will Mr Clinton explain that some short-term localised pain is worth the long-term prize of a new economic openness towards Mexico?
Will he remember how often he spoke last year, and to what good effect, about welfare reform?
Will he support the Federal Reserve if it again becomes necessary to douse the embers of inflation?
Will he appoint the best available candidate to the Supreme Court, even if he is white, male and non-doctrinaire on abortion?
If Mr Clinton answers such questions with a Yes, he will disappoint the expectations of many to whom he talked last year.
He talked too much.
Now he must govern; and to govern is to choose.
BUSINESS THIS WEEK
Communications gap
Bill Clinton, facing growing criticism for his performance as president, brought in David Gergen, a former adviser to Presidents Reagan and Bush, to be his communications director.
Mr Clinton's economic package squeaked through the House of Representatives by 219 votes to 213.
The president was heckled by ex-servicemen as he laid a wreath at the Vietnam memorial.
In an effort to improve relations with senior officers on the question of homosexuals in the armed services, he moved closer to agreeing that recruiting officers should not ask about sexual orientation and that recruits should not flaunt it.
In the New York mayor's race, Herman Badillo, the leading Hispanic Democrat, defected to join Rudolph Giuliani, the Republican candidate, against the Democratic incumbent, David Dinkins.
President Jorge Serrano was forced out of office by army chiefs in Guatemala.
The generals had initially supported his seizure of near-dictatorial powers, but reversed their stand in the face of public protests and international pressure.
Two men were arrested for the killing of Juan Jesus Posadas, a Roman Catholic cardinal, and six others in Mexico.
The gunmen are said to have mistaken the cardinal's car for that of a rival drug cartel.
No confidence
Lech Walesa dissolved the Polish parliament and called an election for September rather than accept the resignation of Hanna Suchocka's government after a vote of no confidence.
The Bulgarian government managed to survive a parliamentary vote of no confidence.
In Hungary, the ruling party expelled Istvan Csurka, the country's leading right-wing nationalist, from its ranks.
The decision raises the possibility of the party's defeat in parliament and early elections.
Boris Yeltsin called four representatives from each of the republics and regions of Russia to a special assembly on June 5th to adopt a new Russian constitution.
The rouble continued to sink.
There were violent demonstrations in Belgrade after the Yugoslav federal president, Dobrica Cosic, was voted out of office by an alliance of the ruling Socialist Party and the ultra-nationalist Radical Party.
In Sarajevo, 15 people were killed and 80 wounded in the worst attack on civilians for a year.
Five foreign aid workers were murdered and others came under fire.
Relief flights into Sarajevo were suspended.
Protesters in Germany took to the streets of Solingen after an arson attack by neo-Nazis that killed five Turks.
After nearly 8,000 reported attacks on foreigners since the start of 1992, it was the first big, violent public reaction.
The dispute between Russia and Ukraine over the Black Sea fleet worsened after more than 200 of the fleet's ships, which are anchored in Ukrainian waters, hoisted the Russian ensign.
A French court ruled that no compensation was payable to two couples, who both claimed to be the subject of Robert Doisneau's famous 1950 photograph, ‘Le Baiser de l'Hôtel de Ville’.
Up the royalists
Results from Cambodia's election suggested that the royalist party, FUNCINPEC, had won, with 46% of the vote, compared with the ruling Cambodian People's Party's 38%.
With the agreement of the two parties, Prince Norodom Sihanouk assumed power as head of state.
Police in South Korea arrested 44 students and seized petrol bombs in pre-dawn raids.
The government is considering new measures to control the student protests.
The British and Chinese governments held a fourth round of talks on the future of Hong Kong, and promised to talk again in mid-June.
Neither side will say what progress has been made.
Pilgrims' progress
Defying Saudi Arabia's ban on political demonstrations during the haj, Iranian pilgrims held a rally outside Mecca in which they denounced America for the catastrophes facing the Islamic world.
The Saudis said such a protest was un-Islamic and denied it could have happened.
South Africa's appeal court upheld the kidnapping conviction of Winnie Mandela, the estranged wife of the leader of the African National Congress.
Showing political savvy, it reduced her six-year prison sentence to a fine of 15,000 rand ($1,700) or one year in prison.
Top Africans and black Americans met in Gabon to foster brotherly feeling.
Louis Farrakhan, a radical American activist, attacked African leaders for living well while their people starved.
In a surprise result, Burundians voted in their first democratic election since 1962 to boot out their military president, Pierre Buyoya, in favour of a banker, Melchior Ndadaye.
Teddy Kollek, aged 82 and mayor of Jerusalem since 1965, says he will seek another five-year term at elections in November.
Stunted
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development cut its forecast for 1993 economic growth in its 24 member countries from 1.9%, its estimate of last December, to 1.2%.
The revision results mainly from the woes of Germany, where the OECD expects the recession to deepen.
Unemployment in the OECD is expected to rise to a post-war record of 36m.
The organisation is glum about the social consequences for Europe.
At the OECD's annual meeting in Paris, America's treasury secretary, Lloyd Bentsen, told Japan that its huge trade surplus was stunting world growth.
He added that the world could not rely on American growth to pull it out of recession, and suggested that Europe should lower interest rates.
A statement from Germany's Bundesbank seemed to rule that possibility out.
As the yen reached another post-war high against the dollar, ¥107, Lloyd Bentsen denied that a strong yen was American policy.
After a rally lasting several weeks, the spot price of gold met resistance in the $180s.
It dropped to just under $170 an ounce in New York.
Italy's central bank is planning to allow commercial banks to take stakes in non-financial institutions, a strategy denied them since a banking crisis in the 1930s.
The central bank itself declared a 76% plunge in its profits last year because of big losses dealing in foreign currencies.
Net profit fell to 213 billion lire ($162m) in 1992 from 874 billion lire in 1991.
Despite Britain's objections, a maximum 48-hour working week in the European Community was agreed upon by EC employment minister