

LEADERS
Sri Lanka's violence
Other countries should learn from it
IT IS of no great consequence to the rest of the world that a small island off the end of the Indian subcontinent should have sunk over the past couple of decades into a condition of violence so endemic that the murder of the president and a leading opposition politician within eight days can be regarded by the locals with something like equanimity (see page 71).
Yet the story of Sri Lanka's disaster is worth paying attention to.
New countries in the former Soviet empire, now making mistakes similar to those Sri Lanka made after decolonisation, should note where they can lead.
Sri Lanka had a lot going for it: democracy going back to 1931 and a literacy rate which, at 88%, is the highest of the 43 countries the World Bank classifies as ‘low-income’.
Sri Lanka's recent governments, which have been busily unravelling state controls, see no reason why it should not be a Singapore.
Yet in the past decade more than 50,000 people have died in the fighting between the security forces, separatist Tamil guerrillas and a now-faded nationalist revolt; and prominent politicians and soldiers are murdered with monotonous regularity.
Economic growth, at an annual average of 4% over the past five years, is not bad in the circumstances, though not as spectacular as the South-East Asian growth rates that Sri Lanka aspires to emulate.
So was Sri Lanka's disaster drearily inevitable?
Probably not.
Unlike many countries that pull themselves apart, Sri Lanka was not artificially put together.
Tamils and Sinhalese have lived together on the island for 2,000-odd years.
Despite the Hinduism of most Tamils and the Buddhism of most Sinhalese, they coexisted for those two millennia without much hostility.
Indeed, when the Sinhalese were short of a king in the 18th century, they drafted in a Tamil prince to start the dynasty that survived until the British moved in.
What went wrong?
Language, mainly.
Short-sighted Sinhalese politicians decided, after independence in 1948, to make Sinhalese the only official language.
Tamils felt deprived of access to government and of their traditional route to advancement, jobs in the civil service.
There followed a series of laws setting up separate schools for Sri Lanka's different language-groups and establishing quotas for Sinhala-speakers in universities.
Many of these measures were later recognised as discriminatory and overturned.
But by then it was too late.
Angry young Tamils had started their terrorist movements, among them the Tamil Tigers, and so the terrible cycle of destruction and retribution began.
Watch your language
In the former Soviet Union, new nations are indulging in the luxury of nationalism, sometimes tinged with revenge on their former Russian masters.
The Estonians require a language test before full civil rights are granted, to the dismay of their Russian-speaking population.
The Moldovans have made Moldovan the only official language, putting Russians and Ukrainians at the same disadvantage as Sri Lanka once put its Tamils.
The Slovaks are trying to rub out the use of Hungarian in officialdom.
Such measures may be presented as a simple way of making the majority feel in control of its destiny.
Sri Lanka's deterioration suggests that, in the long run, everybody may suffer from such exclusivity.
It is easier to fall into a pit than to get out again, and the prospects in Sri Lanka are grim.
Ranasinghe Premadasa, the dead president, appeared to have learnt that indiscriminate killing of Tamils was not going to make the problem go away.
In the past year he had been restraining the army and trying for a political settlement; and there have been signs that Tamil extremists may be prepared to talk about autonomy rather than secession.
But the rest of the nationalist-minded government does not appear to favour the federal solution that is the only possible answer.
With Mr Premadasa's restraining hand removed, the army may again be allowed to do what it wishes.
If so, many more Sri Lankans will die before the government learns that more killing does not necessarily lead to less.
The blue and the red
A clash of values between north and south should not be allowed to result in second-class rights for the poor
AN INTERNATIONAL jamboree on human rights fits the mood of the times.
At best, or so it was thought, it would give the United Nations some muscle to stop governments doing terrible things to their peoples; at worst it would serve up a forest of platitude.
Now there is fear of damage: rearguard action from some developing countries could reduce the human-rights movement, which had begun to feel rather robust, to a lamentation of confused values.
Human rights, during the cold war, were largely ignored at the Security Council, which is the only UN body with teeth.
Its permanent members tended to turn a myopic eye to brutal domestic behaviour on the argument that ‘he may be a sonofabitch but he's our sonofabitch.’
That has changed.
The bit of the UN charter that tells nosey parkers to keep out of other countries' business is less respected than it was, as Saddam Hussein knows to his cost.
The election of Bill Clinton has brought in an American administration with human rights as the cornerstone of its foreign policy, according to Warren Christopher, the secretary of state.
Rich countries increasingly use foreign aid as a lever to promote political pluralism and individual freedoms.
All this has caused alarm in the third world, particularly among its autocrats.
The rich north and the poor south, it is argued, have different priorities.
For the south, the right to economic development is what matters.
The north should stop tut-tutting about juridical lapses or dictatorial ways and instead do something about the low commodity prices and the debt burdens that make the poor even poorer.
The regional meetings called to set the agenda for the big human-rights conference in Vienna next month have provided forums for this bitterness.
The Asian countries, meeting in Bangkok a month ago, mobilised a vigorous attack on the values that they think are being imposed on them.
Reaffirming the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of a sovereign state, they condemned the attempt to use human rights as a condition for development aid.
And they questioned the right of the rich world to set standards, arguing that human rights should be considered against the background of geography, culture and religion.
In theory, the UN's definition of human rights, as expressed in 1948, embraces everything from arbitrary arrest to an adequate standard of living.
But the twin human-rights covenants, one covering civil rights (sometimes known as blue rights) and one economic rights (known as red), are by no means equal.
There are instruments of a sort for upholding blue rights: working groups look into ‘disappearances’, rapporteurs are attached to particularly sinful countries.
There is no such mechanism for setting red abuse right.
Down with the excuse-seekers
Governments argue that they cannot make a development omelette without breaking heads.
It may be easier for an authoritarian regime than for a democratic one to carry out economic restructuring; Chile did it, Peru hopes to.
Industrialised countries are accused, rightly, of double standards.
And donors are in several minds about making human rights a condition for aid.
Certainly, the best hope for more political freedom in some countries lies in opening them up through trade; that is why America would be unwise to refuse China favourable trading terms (see page 54).
Nor can ‘cultural’ arguments always be dismissed.
Islamic punishments seem awful to Christians, but long prison sentences are no delight.
Any penal system can be vilely abused.
Goals are not rights
Out of the smudge, some distinctions should be made.
Rights are different from goals.
Everyone, bar a few ascetics, thinks it desirable that jobs and housing and education and medical care should be available to all.
But gifts such as these cannot be awarded to everybody, either by judges or by the most benign of governments.
The best that societies can do is to strive to achieve them.
Rights are different.
They can be given by passing laws, and taken away just as easily.
They are the weapons of the weak against the might of the strong.
That is why they have a place in the constitutions of democracies, and none in those of dictatorships.
Autocrats may start well intentioned (few stay that way), but none should be allowed to claim that their pursuit of good economic goals is just one way of upholding their subjects' human rights.
In fact, the route to prosperity is seldom on the backs of tormented people.
Rulers who argue that a country has to be well-off before it can afford to be politically decent to its people are generally providing themselves with an excuse for continuing in their bad old ways.
As the agenda for the Vienna conference is broadened and flattened, the immediate result looks like an acceptance of the lowest common denominator.
That would be a pity.
The rich north, with no reason to be smug, would be wise to listen to the south but not, in the end, allow itself to be diverted from the blue to the red.
New rules for banks
Keep them minimal
A BANK supervisor's lot is not exactly happy.
If his vigilance fails, he faces the wrath of ordinary people: depositors whose savings are at risk and taxpayers whose money is used to stop one bank collapse from knocking down the entire banking system.
Yet if a supervisor is too vigilant, he is lambasted for sheltering banks from the discipline of the market or the effects of their own blunders.
Striking the right balance is getting harder all the time as banking grows devilishly complicated, crossing borders and time-zones, spawning new products, using computers to bewitch and bewilder.
Regulators have struggled to keep pace, assuming that they should somehow take account of all the risks assumed by banks, no matter how bulky their rulebooks become.
They would do better to rethink why they regulate banks at all.
The latest proposals from the banking supervisors of the world's richest countries, who sit on the Basle Committee, are a case in point.
In 1988 the committee came up with reasonably simple minimum standards (adopted or exceeded by banks in most developed countries by the end of last year) which sought to match a bank's capital to the credit risks it runs.
It was clear then, and has become clearer since, that the risk of a borrower defaulting is just one — albeit the most important — of many threats to a bank's solvency.
Other, more complicated, types of risk need attention.
On April 30th the Basle Committee duly recommended three big innovations.
The simplest is letting banks put aside less capital when they have arrangements with other banks for ‘netting’— ie, reducing what would be multiple payments to a single transfer of a net obligation.
That is welcome, as is a second proposal to help supervisors measure how movements in interest rates might affect a bank's financial strength.
The third recommendation is farther-reaching.
It is to require banks to hold capital specifically against market risk — broadly, the chance that the price of a share or a bond or a currency, for example, will fall, and expose the bank that holds it to loss.
The proposal reflects the fact that the business of the world's biggest banks is shifting from lending to the trading of securities, securitised loans, foreign exchange and derivative financial products such as swaps and options.
If it is accepted, almost all big banks will need more capital by the time the new rules go into effect in 1997.
The Basle Committee's rules are not binding.
Given the welter of competing ideas on the subject (the European Community has recently adopted a slightly weaker measure, while securities firms outside the EC often operate under different rules than those governing banks), its 1993 proposals are less likely than its 1988 rules to find ready acceptance.
Nevertheless, the new Basle proposals confirm the curious charm which regulation has acquired of late.
Of course some bank supervision is essential: economies need functioning payments systems, and sturdy-looking banks do mobilise some savings that would otherwise be stuffed under mattresses.
And a degree of global harmonisation is a good thing.
Taxpayers in America, for example, can be hurt by the failure of a global bank's Luxembourg operations, and common minimum standards put a floor under destructive competitive deregulation.
Judged on these grounds, the new proposals from the Basle Committee seem to make sense.
Why bother?
The broader test, however, is whether it is correct to extend regulation at all.
Is it right to regulate more and more of what banks do, especially as these protean creatures are less recognisably banks each day?
There is, after all, another approach worth considering.
Rather than widening the regulatory net, why not narrow the banking fishpond?
Internationally or domestically, no supervisory system can capture or even measure all the risks that banks run, partly because these risks are constantly changing.
Instead, supervisors should consider concentrating regulation — and deposit protection — on those (shrinking) bits of banks' activities which there is truly a public interest in protecting.
The rest might safely be left to the markets.
If a bank's core activities were ring-fenced by rules limiting what it could do with insured depositors' money, its forays into securities, swaps and other financial markets need not threaten the banking system.
To finance their more adventurous activities, banks would bid for investors' money, competing with the other non-deposit-taking institutions which they increasingly resemble.
Their shareholders, not the taxpayer, would carry the risk of failure.
The rebuke from Pale
The West must now steel itself for military action in Bosnia
PIGHEADEDNESS was in plentiful supply in the Balkans even before war descended on Bosnia 13 months ago, and the world should not be surprised to see it once more in the ascendant this week.
Even so, the Bosnian Serbs' rejection of the Vance-Owen peace plan on May 6th stands out as a spectacular triumph of greed and folly over common sense.
It also obliges the outside world — meaning the West, and above all, the United States — to come to a decision about the military action it has been threatening.
The possibility, if not certainty, of American attack has acted in combination with diplomatic concessions and the pressure of sanctions to make Serbia's Serbs agree to peace.
Bosnia's Serbs either do not care or they reckon the Americans have been bluffing.
Any temporising now will confirm those who take the view that America's murmurings were indeed bluff.
The first test of Bill Clinton's credibility has come horribly early in his administration.
Admittedly, a No from the Bosnian Serbs should not be considered as an unequivocal, irreversible rejection of the peace plan, any more than a Yes should have been regarded as a wholehearted acceptance of it.
The pressure on the deputies meeting in their self-styled parliament in Pale this week was intense (see page 39).
It came not just from the outside world, but also from their friends (notably the Greeks), their allies (the Serbs of Serbia), and even their leader (Radovan Karadzic).
All of these felt able to argue that the Serbs had already achieved most of their war aims, and now had a good chance of hanging on to them.
That was because they had extracted from Lord Owen, one of the authors of the peace plan, a concession at a meeting in Greece last weekend that would prevent Croat or Muslim soldiers from reclaiming territory from which Serb troops had withdrawn.
Unless the United Nations peacekeepers proved very much tougher in Serbia than they have done in Croatia, that would have made it unlikely that Croats and Muslims would have felt secure enough to return to their former homes.
Ethnic cleansing would have worked.
Time to strike?
That eventuality would have been a worry for the UN had the Bosnian Serbs said Yes and thereby set the scene for the biggest UN peacekeeping operation ever.
As it is, a different worry confronts the West: how best to get the Bosnian Serbs to change their minds.
The obvious solution is to strike their military installations and lines of supply from the air.
There are three main arguments for this.
First, it would be evidence of western resolve; the Americans would not, after all, be seen to have been bluffing.
Second, it would be relatively free of risk to the American or allied airmen who would carry it out.
Third, it would be disagreeable for the Serbs, who, because they have been largely untested, have yet to show themselves to be a fighting force with much mettle.
Unfortunately, there are also arguments against it.
It would, for the first time, draw the outside world into the war not as a neutral peacekeeper but as an enemy of one side.
It would therefore run the risk of jeopardising all the peacekeeping and humanitarian-aid operations being undertaken throughout ex-Yugoslavia.
And it might not prove effective.
That is both because bombing does not always make the victims knuckle under — sometimes it can stiffen their resolve — and because it would be hard knowing what to bomb.
Perhaps the most potent weapons used in Bosnia are mortars; they can be fired from the grounds of hospitals or schools and quickly moved about.
Even in the days of precision strikes, attacks from the air would risk civilian casualties.
The alternative is to lift the ban on supplying weapons to Bosnia's Muslims, the main victims of the war and the ones most likely to fight back against the Serbs effectively.
That also jeopardises the peacekeepers, does less for western credibility and runs the extra risk of lengthening an already long war, without changing the balance enough to stop it.
The practical task of getting weapons to the Muslims is also formidable.
The least bad of these wretched choices would be to announce a series of air strikes on Bosnian Serb positions.
It is possible that advance notice of these strikes, combined with some noisy revving of jet engines from American aircraft carriers off the Dalmatian coast, would be enough to make the Bosnian Serbs change their minds.
They have done that before, and the hope must be that they will do it again.
If not, the logic of the threats made so far is that bombing must follow; threats may have been unwise, but it would be even less wise to make them and fail to carry them out.
So long as it is confined to strict military targets — roads, bridges, supply depots, gun emplacements — bombing need not alienate either public opinion in the West or the ordinary Serbs who must help change the minds of their stubborn, self-styled leaders.
At the same time the diplomatic and other pressure must continue.
That means the pressure on the Bosnian Serbs, pigheaded though they are: the Serbian border with Bosnia must be sealed, ideally by UN troops.
It also means the pressure on Serbia and Montenegro, because without the support of rump-Yugoslavia the Bosnian Serbs cannot endure indefinitely.
So sanctions must be ever more rigidly enforced on all fronts and the lesson driven home that Serbia will remain a pariah state until a peace is in place.
An imperfect plan, still worth support
In the absence of any other plausible plan, that peace will have to be based on the Vance-Owen deal.
Never perfect, it at least maintains the presence of Bosnia in its existing borders, and denies the Serbs their aim of a Greater Serbia and the Croats theirs of a Greater Croatia.
Further, it now has the agreement of all the belligerents except the Bosnian Serb deputies.
They are not so insignificant that they can be ignored; but nor are they so important that they can be allowed to kill the only prospect for peace that does not involve a fight to a standstill.
In many respects the war in Bosnia is the antithesis of Iraq's seizure of Kuwait.
Saddam Hussein's invasion was the clearest breach of the international rules imaginable; his expansionist intentions and despotic nature were in no doubt; western oil supplies were endangered and a consensus could readily be mustered against the invaders.
In Bosnia, the rights and wrongs are more muddled; no direct western interests are involved; and nobody is sure what can be done, let alone what should be done.
Yet some principles are at stake in Bosnia, and the world cannot let the complexity of the issues be an excuse for doing nothing.
Aggressors are grabbing territory; war crimes are being committed.
After so much huffing and puffing, inaction now would be seen not just by Serbs but by other potential ethnic-cleansers as a green light to press ahead.
That must not be the beacon that the West offers after the rebuke from Pale.
Drift over trade
Fine words will not bring a GATT deal — especially if mixed with threats
THE guns blaze, the bombs drop.
Then there is silence, while the aggressor waits to hear whether his warnings have provoked the desired response.
If there is none, what next?
The aggressor must be prepared to deliver on his threat, with more bombs and, if necessary, with all-out war.
No, this is not Bosnia.
It is the emerging trade policy of the Clinton administration, at least as demonstrated by trade sanctions threatened on April 30th against Japan, Brazil, India and others.
Such a policy makes sense only if the administration really is prepared to carry out its threats, and even to follow them up with worse.
Yet at the same time President Clinton claims he wants to do all he can to complete the Uruguay round of GATT trade talks, and is backing the appointment as GATT's new director-general of Peter Sutherland, an Irish former commissioner of the EC who has just the sort of political push to get a trade deal done.
Both directions of policy have their own logic.
But to combine them has no logic at all.
Many in Washington will disagree; toughness on trade, they think, is exactly the right way to force Japan and Europe to open their markets (see page 53).
Whether such countries choose to open up in a GATT round or in bilateral negotiations is beside the point; opening is opening, however it is achieved.
Well, no — but there lies the clue to where America's thinking on trade has gone awry.
Leave aside the danger that the victims of American threats will (as they should) refuse to negotiate and may retaliate, causing a war that will shrink trade and hurt economic growth.
America's use of its own laws, rather than international rules and procedures, to force open markets is a rejection of multilateral free trade, not a means towards it.
It undermines the very GATT deal that Mr Clinton claims to want to achieve.
It pushes countries into bilateral, market-sharing pacts with America which are the opposite of open trade: outcomes set by lawyers, not traders.
In those circumstances, ‘openness’ can be no better than being closed.
On Sutherland's side
It would be wrong to single out the Clinton administration for criticism.
Although any new administration prefers to pretend that its policies differ markedly from those of its predecessor, in this the White House is doing itself a disservice: President Bush, and his trade representative Carla Hills, were no champions of free trade.
They too pandered to protectionist sentiment — though more cautiously than do Bill Clinton and Mickey Kantor.
The right response to Democratic scorn of George Bush's free-trade line is ‘if only he'd had one’.
The point is that both administrations have been willing to risk undermining multilateral free trade.
This may not prevent a GATT deal, though it does make one less likely.
But such behaviour will continue to undermine GATT once the Uruguay round is signed.
It risks turning a triumph into an irrelevance.
To make a Uruguay deal the triumph it deserves to be, the first precondition appears to be there already: backing from the EC and America for Peter Sutherland to succeed Arthur Dunkel as director-general.
Mr Sutherland still needs approval from GATT's 110 members, but he is the leading candidate and would come with a splendid mixture of diplomatic credentials, top-level contacts and real backbone.
He would be a fine choice, giving the GATT job a higher political profile.
Appointing the right man is not enough, however; next you have to pay attention to what he says.
And one of the things that a new director-general will need to do is to say, loud and clear: you can have GATT, or bilateral do-it-yourself trade policies, but you cannot have both.
That done, he can busy himself getting the Uruguay round's warring parties back to the negotiating table.
All must accept that if a deal is to be struck by the end of this year, negotiation will have to begin in earnest much earlier, preferably during the next two months.
No country should carry all the blame for the round's paralysis.
America's besetting sin is its preference for acting alone, writing its own trade laws and using them to break its way into other people's markets.
The European Community's is its dogged resistance against efforts to make its farmers join the world economy.
France's new government has hinted it will be more willing than its predecessor to accept freer farm trade, along the lines agreed abortively between the EC and America late last year, but so far there have been only hints.
Those talking optimistically about GATT claim to want the makings of a deal in time for the Tokyo economic summit in June.
Which brings in Japan's besetting sin: its reluctance to lead on multilateral free trade, even though it has more to lose than most from GATT's demise.
The Tokyo summit will be the perfect moment for Japan to shed its shyness.
Can Europe put EMU together again?
CONSIDER this.
Britain, ejected so ignominiously from Europe's exchange-rate mechanism (ERM) in September 1992, is now enjoying an economic recovery worthy of the name.
Elsewhere in the European Community, growth is slow at best, and in some countries the recession is still deepening.
Why?
Britain, free of its ERM obligation to keep interest rates high and sterling strong, urged its recovery on with a massive easing of monetary policy.
Its EC partners, still bound by their ERM promises, cannot do the same.
What do you therefore conclude?
It was a mistake for Britain to join the ERM in the first place — and it is a mistake for countries such as France and Spain to stick with it now.
This argument is fatally inadequate, but its appeal is undeniable.
In Britain, most people with an informed opinion would assent to it enthusiastically.
In fact, the idea would command about as big a majority as the one in 1990 that favoured membership of the ERM.
Britain is not alone in changing its mind.
Elsewhere in Europe, Britain's strengthening recovery is being noticed.
Some of the EC's other governments will soon have to start explaining why they deny their voters a remedy for recession that has proved so effective.
For different reasons, Europe's governments are refusing to face these questions.
John Major wants to take credit for the recovery without owning up to earlier mistakes — which means he can neither praise the ERM nor bury it.
Meanwhile Europe's other governments maintain an equally awkward silence.
Their largely unspoken view seems to be that the crisis in the ERM has passed: the system has survived, despite exits and devaluations among its weaker members (no bad thing, by the way).
So there is no need for reform.
It is business as usual — and the EC's ambitious plans for monetary union are unaffected.
Time to think again
This will not do.
Even if nothing else had changed, widespread support for the idea that ‘Black Wednesday’ delivered Britain to recovery would alter the character of the ERM.
Whatever the merits of that view, its popularity lessens the financial markets' confidence in the system; and without that confidence the system is weakened.
Anyway, other things have indeed changed: it is ridiculous to pretend that the events of last September, and the exchange-rate strains in Europe that have creaked intermittently ever since, raise no hard questions about the future of the ERM and the prospects for monetary union.
The sooner governments begin to answer these questions, the better.
If pressed, many ERM-sympathisers would agree that last year's crisis calls for a rethink, but few see the need for anything radical.
This newspaper — an ERM-sympathiser and an EMU-enthusiast — disagrees.
To see why, it is necessary to understand the case for doing nothing.
If Europe's governments had to say why the ERM needs no repairs, they would say the following.
The ERM has proven its value over many years.
It has succeeded in greatly reducing exchange-rate variability within Europe, and in promoting regional convergence towards low rates of inflation.
These achievements have not been wiped out by the past year.
Moreover, If Europe returns to the exchange-rate volatility and misalignments of the 1970s, the great benefits of free trade within the EC will be in jeopardy.
Without the ERM, countries could competitively devalue their currencies: that would prove as inflationary in future as it has in the past, and it would give rise to the sort of trade frictions that plague the relationship between America and Japan, or worse.
Remember, too, that the strains within the ERM have been due to exceptional circumstances.
German unification, as severe a jolt to the system as you could imagine, obliged the Bundesbank, the system's de facto anchor, to adopt a monetary policy that was at odds with the needs of its partners.
This was especially awkward for Britain.
A new recruit to the ERM, its commitment to exchange-rate stability was untested.
Also, it was suffering a debt-driven recession — which made its economy sensitive (even by its own standards) to changes in interest rates, and ill-equipped to surrender monetary policy to the Bundesbank.
On top of all that came uncertainties due to the referendums in France and Denmark over Maastricht.
In short, this argument says, the situation in 1992 was uniquely unstable.
Henceforth, it goes on, things will improve.
German interest rates are coming down, which will relieve pressure on other countries to keep their interest rates high.
France, especially, has weathered the storm; from now on confidence in its ERM commitment will be all the stronger, which will also help to lower its interest rates.
Soon Britain will be worrying about rising inflation; not long after, it will rediscover the difficulties of conducting an anti-inflationary monetary policy without an exchange-rate peg — and will begin to wonder about rejoining the ERM.
Much of this argument makes sense.
It is undoubtedly closer to being right than the view that Europe would be better off if the ERM collapsed altogether.
The EC does need exchange-rate stability to promote intra-regional trade and investment, and to prevent competitive devaluation.
Without a doubt, Europe's small, open economies are far too sensitive to changes in currencies to withstand, without great economic cost, the unameliorated ups and downs of floating parities.
As Europe has discovered, however, the hard part is to make a system of semi-fixed exchange rates work in practice.
Governments appear to have drawn a purely tactical conclusion from the ERM's ordeal: never underestimate the strength of the financial markets.
Once investors are convinced that the interest-rate consequences of an exchange-rate commitment have become politically insupportable, no amount of talk or foreign-exchange intervention can defeat them.
How are such confrontations to be avoided?
The governments' answer, it seems, is to go back to the ERM as it worked for most of the 1980s — a more flexible ERM, in which exchange-rate realignments happened now and then, instead of being resisted at all costs.
That way, they hope, further shocks will be absorbed, instead of smashing the system altogether.
How convenient it would be if nothing else were required.
For a start, it would leave EMU an option for the countries that want it, and a cause of no bother to those that do not.
Many officials (for instance, at the Bundesbank) who doubt the case for monetary union would like to see this earlier-vintage, less-rigid ERM stay in business indefinitely: they see it as a workable long-term regime for European monetary policy.
Others want EMU to happen, but would not mind a slightly looser ERM meanwhile.
They have concluded that it is a mistake to approach monetary union by gradually stiffening the ERM.
A quick transition will work better than a slow one.
To Europe's governments, whatever they think about EMU, a return to the ERM of the 1980s looks a good way forward.
On this crucial point, they are wrong.
The ERM cannot be left unmodified.
To suppose that Europe can retreat to the pre-rigid ERM of the 1980s — to a system that has been tried and tested — is a dangerous illusion.
The world has changed since the ERM last worked that way.
The system of the 1980s was sustained by capital controls in many of the member countries.
Most of these controls have now gone, and international flows of finance have expanded hugely.
So the forces acting on the ERM are much stronger today than ever before.
For a while, the conviction in the markets that the system was secure, and that realignments would be avoided, was a self-fulfilling prophecy: speculative flows of capital helped to stabilise the system.
An ERM with fully integrated capital markets, and now without the glue of stabilising expectations of that sort, is anything but ‘tried and tested’: it is a new experiment, and one that could go badly wrong.
A different sort of ERM is therefore required — one that allows some of its members a flexibility even greater than that of the early 1980s.
There are three main ways of providing this extra flexibility: wider exchange-rate bands (the existing system allows currencies to fluctuate by plus or minus 2.25% around its central rate); bands with ‘soft buffers’, which would allow members to let a currency move outside its band under certain circumstances; and frequent, possibly automatic, realignments of the central rates, to take account of differences in rates of inflation (ie, bands that provide stability in a currency's real exchange rate, rather than its nominal exchange rate).
A system with these features was proposed in the 1980s, though not for Europe, by John Williamson of the Institute for International Economics in Washington, DC (see page 101).
If Britain is to return to the ERM — as it should — it will need flexibility under all three headings.
Other countries in the system could also be better off with such an arrangement.
A ‘soft ERM’ of this kind could work alongside both the existing ERM and — later — a monetary union comprising Germany and its closest monetary disciples.
It could be made consistent with the Maastricht treaty; a broader EMU could gradually evolve.
And membership could be offered to the reforming economies of Eastern Europe.
They would benefit from real exchange-rate stability within the European monetary area without having to surrender all discretion over monetary policy — which, even if desirable, would not be feasible.
Softly, softly
Every currency system involves a delicate balance of costs and benefits: no system is unambiguously right.
An added form of membership of the ERM that was soft in all three ways would give its adherents greater discretionary use of monetary policy for the purposes of managing their economies.
Also, such a system would be less vulnerable to speculative attack.
Those are substantial benefits, but the costs are great, too: more exchange-rate instability, and the loss of the anti-inflationary discipline provided by fixing the nominal (as opposed to real) value of the currency.
Countries opting for soft membership would have to put up with the first, and find substitutes for the second — for instance, by setting (and hitting) targets for money-GDP, using both fiscal and monetary policies.
Untidy, without a doubt.
But the ERM's most valuable achievement — the single market — would be made much safer by it.
If Europe's governments choose muddling through rather than such reform, then that achievement, as well as the ERM itself, will remain at risk.
LETTERS
Small is consistent
Having read your newspaper for many years, I believe your edition of April 17th best illustrates the dilemma facing those who interpret the events of the late 20th century.
Your business coverage begins with an excellent leader on the fall of big business.
You suggest that large firms must consider ‘federation’ by devolving responsibility to autonomous business units, or even consider break-ups.
You conclude that such developments would be in the interests of individual consumers.
After reading this, one cannot help but be puzzled that your politics and current-affairs coverage seems to start from the opposite premise and, unsurprisingly, reaches the opposite conclusions.
To begin, your leader on Italy laments that the proposed changes to the voting system could intensify the north-south divide and threaten the unity of the country.
But surely in an economically and culturally disparate country such as Italy, which has existed as a single entity for little more than a century, a north-south break-up would be the best thing to promote accountability, reduce bureaucracy and eliminate waste.
Like any small company, each half of the former Italy would take advantage of lower international trade barriers, more readily achieved economies of scale and access to international capital markets.
Moving across the Adriatic, you comment that ‘it has been a bad week for Bosnia's Muslims and a shaming one for the outside world.’
But surely the Bosnian crisis has arisen because two years ago, instead of supporting the principle of self-determination, The Economist joined most other western commentators in urging that the tottering, multinational conglomerate called Yugoslavia be held together at all costs.
Your interesting article on Slovakia and the Czech Republic disparages the countries spun off from another impossible conglomerate and forecasts a dire future for them.
This is despite quoting statistics that present a much more favourable view of the Czechs.
Last, in your article on Belgium you reveal your prejudices and start talk openly of the ‘slide’ toward federalism and ‘the demon of separatism’.
Make up your minds.
The forces that permit, and even promote, smaller corporate entities are the same forces that permit, and even promote, smaller national entities: flexibility, accountability, motivation of the individual, innovation, freer world trade in both the physical and capital markets, and lower thresholds for economies of scale.
In 1973 Norman Macrae advised your readers to encourage their children to join medium-sized, rather than big companies, as the future of international business.
In 1976 he wrote, ‘Big won't work.
Small should mean more technological.’
Let us acknowledge a prophet before his time.
You do not mention a way that permits a company to become bigger, and leaner.
It is through franchising.
Nowadays we associate this system with some specific services, but with some adaptations franchising is possible for industries as well.
Large organisations languish and die because the top executives listen only to echoes.
History suggests the curse of kingship is the need to be wary of your own counsellors.
Helping Eastern Europe
Your special on EC aid to Eastern Europe (April 10th) understates one important feature of the EC commission's approach to managing its Tacis programme — its ability to learn quickly from experience.
The commission has already made a number of improvements.
It designed a massive 400m-ecu ($100m) programme for 1991 in the context of the break-up of the Soviet Union and of rapidly changing government structures.
By the second year, it had moved from a sectoral base to a country base, to help achieve cross-sector policy objectives.
In recent months the management unit in Brussels (DG1) has been restructured, and moves have been made to devolve responsibility to a new Tacis unit in the commission's delegation in Moscow.
Management of part of the programme, the European Expertise Service, which gives policy advice to senior decision-makers in governments of the ex-Soviet Union, has been contracted out to the private sector.
The ability of DG1 officials to reshape management of the programme while continuing to cope with massive workloads deserves credit.
In describing the Tacis programme you emphasise the problems without mentioning the positive aspects.
We are co-operating with three European business schools (ESC Lyons, Henley Management College and ESADE, Barcelona) to develop the International Management Institute of St Petersburg, and do not consider that the Community is ‘making a hash’ of technical assistance to the ex-Soviet Union.
Although there is room for improvement in the way the programme is managed (more involvement of aid recipients, a more flexible approach to reporting requirements), the Russian environment has proved particularly difficult to deal with and it is understandable that Tacis needs time to adjust.
Tacis officials have generally been flexible in their approach to the design and implementation of our project.
As for payment times, we cannot disagree: they are unpredictable, and only those institutions willing to sustain major expenses, after the contract is signed and until the funds are finally transferred, should consider working with these programmes.
Educating the British
Your article on British education reforms (April 10th) says that objective assessment ‘allows both teachers and parents to see how well a child is doing’.
Unfortunately, it does no such thing.
The standardised testing of children aged seven and 14, currently the focus of so much controversy in Britain, will at best tell parents and teachers how well children are doing at learning the facts and basic skills.
They tell no one anything useful about whether children are learning the higher-order thinking skills that should be the focus of all education.
Moreover, such tests are a detriment to good education since teachers spend an inordinate amount of class time preparing students for them, particularly if the results are intended to be used to hold teachers and schools accountable for their performance.
There is not an iota of evidence that such standardised testing has improved education anywhere in the world.
Indeed, it may not be just coincidence that in the United States such standardised testing has proliferated over the past 25 years, during which time educational performance has rapidly declined.
The national curriculum is based on an unmerited regard for ‘traditional’ approaches and a narrow perception of present needs.
A shortage of people competent in mathematics, science and technology is thought to justify inclusion of these subjects in the ‘core’, and everyone is to learn a foreign language.
Yet the vast majority of children will use little of what they learn.
Even those who attain high levels may not choose to (a substantial proportion of graduates in science and technology do not pursue careers in these).
Qualities such as resilience, adaptability, creativity, tolerance and compassion are the real basics for employment and for general living.
The reforms are the most totalitarian of changes.
Although the government claims to support parents' (but not children's) freedom to choose, its actions have the opposite effect.
They restrict opportunities for choice, experiment and innovation, which are as much needed in education as in any other field.
Child-centred education has tried to make children work by concentrating on what interests the child.
Its success has been limited because some children will work on projects which interest them but which do not tax them sufficiently.
In a child-centred class of 30 children it is easy for some to slip through the net and learn nothing.
In Germany a child proceeds to the next year only when he has achieved a satisfactory standard in every subject of the curriculum.
This standard is tested not by an end-of-year exam but by adding the classwork marks throughout the year, so the child knows all the time how he is getting on.
If he fails in two subjects he will have to repeat the year even if he does well in all other subjects.
This system makes children work whether they find the work interesting or not.
It also involves all parents, who are anxious that their children should not repeat a year.
The system makes teachers careful with their marking system, for parents have the legal right to complain if they believe that their child's classwork has been unfairly marked.
If John Patten introduces such a system British children will work as hard as German children and a real educational revolution will have been brought about.
While attempting to give financial autonomy to schools the government has at the same time failed to help the market — that is, parents and pupils — to decide what subjects should be studied.
If schools were free of all restrictions on curriculum then the best schools, offering the best courses and getting the best results, would be the ones that succeeded.
The market, not the ‘experts’, would choose the curriculum.
This system is good enough for Britain's private schools; why is it not good enough for Britain's state schools too?
The Hindus of Kashmir
Your report from Srinagar on the Hindus of Kashmir valley was unfair (April 10th).
These hapless people did not take flight in response to the spread of ‘rumours of independence’.
The 1980s saw a pre-planned, sustained and ever-increasing harassment of the minorities in the valley — an attempt at ethnic cleansing by the fundamentalist muslims.
Fortunately, these muslims represent a minority.
Kashmiri people have a history of secularism which is deep-rooted: communal amity and harmony will return when peace is restored, but not before.
You report that the Hindus of Kashmir hold the top government jobs in Kashmir.
This is not substantiated by fact.
And to say that they have ‘been the eyes and ears of Delhi’ is insulting to a community that has contributed enormously to the progress and fostering of secular values among Kashmiri people.
You write that Kashmir is the only Indian state with a Hindu minority.
In Punjab, Sikhs (who are not Hindu) comprise 66% of the population and Hindus 30%.
In the Union Territory of Nagaland, Christians make up 85% of the population.
MacCurrencies
As usual, you mention a few concerns over the Big Mac index (April 17th), and I wonder if you should not have mentioned another one.
The degree of overvaluation of a currency versus the dollar could also reflect McDonald's attaining higher margins abroad than in the United States.
After all, it is common sense to expect low margins in the United States, given the intensity of the competition there.
In some other countries, however, McDonald's can probably achieve higher margins given its ‘status’ symbol or its near monopoly.
All this is fine, except that in Russia and Hungary, where McDonald's status symbol and monopoly are likely to play a greater role, local currencies are undervalued.
Does this mean that McDonald's doesn't achieve higher margins, or does it reflect an even larger degree of undervaluation of these currencies, or other factors?
Being a firm believer in purchasing-power parity as a forecasting tool, I find the Big Mac index significantly more accurate than the myriad of economists' forecasts that spew forth from the profusion of banking and security-firm literature.
Personally, I have been using the Church shoe index that I created some years ago.
This compares the price in sterling of a pair of Church shoes in the Burlington Arcade with the price in dollars of a pair of Church shoes on Madison Avenue.
It amazes me that a pair of shoes made in the north of England can cost more in common currency in London than that same pair of shoes shipped 3,000 miles to New York.
Your Big Mac index, and William Burke's letter in the same issue about the yen-dollar exchange rate, brought to mind an explanation, which may be apocryphal, of how the exchange rate of ¥360 to $1 was arrived at during the occupation of Japan.
General MacArthur was told that the Japanese character for YEN also means ‘circle’.
Reasoning that a circle has 360 degrees, MacArthur let geometry set the basis of Japan's international trade.
Today, millions of Japanese may be unaware that they are dining on the namesake of their late military governor, ‘Big Mac’.
Target practice
You mistakenly state (April 17th) that the National Association for the Advancement of Coloured People is ‘America's oldest civil-rights organisation.’
The National Rifle Association, founded in 1871, holds that honour and supports the natural and constitutional right of free men to keep and bear arms.
That right is under constant attack by omniscient social engineers who recognise the danger of dictating to an armed populace.
Can Richard Thomas (Letters, April 24th) really be serious in suggesting that lobby groups' heft is determined by ‘the quality of the message and the integrity of the messenger’?
Tell that to the victims of America's insane gun laws.
The strength of the National Rifle Association, widely acknowledged as America's single most powerful lobby, reflects not integrity or quality of message, but an awesome logistical capability backed up by lots and lots of money.
And don't let a million postcards tell you otherwise.
BOOKS AND ARTS
Country's money spinners
NASHVILLE
DOWN in Nashville, its capital, the 1990s boom in American country music has gone on long enough to prompt some heady forecasts.
Bill Ivey, the director of the local country-music museum and hall of fame, ranks its impact with the startling arrival in 1954-55 of rockabilly music (E. Presley and others).
Mike Curb, who has built up one of the most successful privately-owned record companies and recently moved his head office to Nashville from Los Angeles, thinks country is well on its way to being a big part of mainstream pop — making a nonsense of the current radio-station categories that still set country apart.
The scale of its commercial success, and the extraordinary fragmentation of styles on the music scene, suggest his prediction is not fanciful.
Country has doubled its share of record sales in America, to 16.5%, since 1990; its star performers are some of the hottest names in pop; and radio stations playing non-stop country are ranked first or second in an astonishing 70% of America's top 100 radio markets.
Even so, country looks a bit of an impostor when it poses as an agent of radical change in pop music.
For just about everything in country music has changed hugely since the mid-1980s — except the music.
Basically white American rural music descended from British and Irish folk traditions, country has a long and much cherished lineage.
Its devotees felt badly let down by an earlier boom set off by ‘Urban Cowboy’, a 1980 film starring John Travolta.
A sudden appetite for country records was fed by a lot of lousy music, full of lavish string accompaniments, that did country no good at all.
This time country's vigilantes have not much to complain about — yet.
Its new appeal goes back to around 1986, when a handful of singers led by Ricky Skaggs and Randy Travis insisted on recording their songs with a more basic, unabashed country sound.
Most of the big names since then — including Clint Black, Alan Jackson, Trisha Yearwood, Reba McEntire and, especially, Garth Brooks — have made a virtue of sticking close to country's roots.
They even appear on Nashville's Grand Ole Opry, the live radio show that has run weekly since 1925, where they share the stage with revered old-timers.
Respect for the past does not mean a reliance on fiddle and washboard.
But every song must still tell a story, with a chorus to define the moral, and most remain drippingly sentimental.
Musically, they are just as humdrum as ever.
Most rely on a few basic chord progressions, eke out their standard 3 minutes 20 seconds with a brief instrumental solo, and close with a bridge passage between two choruses.
This simple formula has benefited from some much improved recording techniques.
But few doubt, even in Nashville, that country has boomed precisely because of its predictable format and the readiness of its lyrics to engage with the mundane ups-and-downs of life.
Both qualities contrast with what is on offer elsewhere.
Top 40 rock is increasingly dominated by black music.
The latest buzz in rock, coming out of Seattle, features ‘grunge’ and ‘thrash’groups (Alice in Chains, Nirvana) that hold little appeal for ageing baby-boomers.
Reared on The Eagles and James Taylor among others, the baby-boomers have been turning instead to country.
And the disaffection with hard rock and techno-pop may go deeper.
Executives of country's cable-television channels say a third of their viewers are 18-34-year-olds.
To go after these converts, the music business — mindful of the lesson of ‘Urban Cowboy’— has cleverly kept hold of the basic country product while working wonders on its packaging.
In effect, country has picked up all the old paraphernalia of the pop world: slick videos, stage shows, merchandising, fanzines and so on.
And the new stars, often college graduates who have never set foot on a farm in their lives, have played it for all they are worth.
None of which is to say the record labels are not trying hard to stretch country where they can.
Well-known acts with an ill-fitting country label now range from old-fashioned southern rock bands to pure folk singers.
One big star, Billy Ray Cyrus, was invented by the marketing men last year and has been playing more or less bubblegum pop.
Surprisingly, perhaps, these acts have blurred the label without much affecting country's main thrust.
By the same token, though, the new acts have not done much to bridge the gap between pop and country, either.
Some names have certainly made the leap: a top record in the current light-rock charts belongs to a country band called Restless Heart.
And the country and light-rock categories are moving closer.
But music types in Manhattan and Hollywood say that they can see a country act as plain as a barn door.
And most, they tend to add, are about as interesting and distinctive as the cowboy hats that the men still insist on wearing.
For all their clout — and Garth Brooks last year sold 17% of all the records sold by EMI — country has still to win critical acceptance.
It is still confined to a sort of charts-land ghetto, even while the record companies are heaping praise (and new offices) on their lucrative Nashville subsidiaries.
For country to break out and realign the industry as some in Nashville think it can, perhaps it needs a vital new ingredient.
From black music, perhaps?
Motown, a leading black record company, is now making moves to set up a Nashville branch.
Any blend of black and country music would have powerful precedents.
They could even call it Rockabilly II.
God and cookies and rock 'n' roll
NASHVILLE
WHEN it comes to pop music, vice-presidents and their families are clearly trend setters.
In the past couple of years, Dan Quayle, the former vice-president, and Tipper Gore, the wife of the current vice-president, have railed against rockers for calling themselves things like Niggaz with Attitude and Megadeath and singing the praises of such antisocial activities as killing cops and committing suicide.
Mrs Gore even risked the wrath of the record industry by campaigning to have warning labels put on particularly offensive records.
Now, thanks to a new generation of gospel singers, you can indulge your tastes for pop music without having your values corrupted and your families fragmented.
Are you addicted to the thrashing of electric guitars?
Then Petra, a group which looks and sounds like Led Zeppelin, but is given to quoting from St Paul's epistle to the Ephesians (6:11-17: ‘Put on the full armour of God, that you may be able to stand firm against the schemes of the devil…’), is for you.
Or do you prefer rap?
Then why not listen to DC Talk (the ‘DC’ stands for ‘decent Christian’) rapping about everything from divine providence to abortion (‘Yo, children can live without it’).
Born-again rockers can choose between hundreds of albums with titles like ‘Psycho Surgery’, ‘Bishop of Souls’ and ‘Prophet of Idiocy’, while family values conservatives can dance to lyrics like ‘Thank God the world's been saved/ Marx is in his grave’.
Why this fashion for religious rock?
Partly because the baby-boom generation, with its eclectic musical tastes, is replacing the old gospel music establishment, and partly because there is money to be made out of grooving with God.
Convinced that there are millions of pop-music fans who would rather hear about spiritual salvation than sexual perversion, and fascinated by the soaring sales of country music, gospel-music companies are busy improving their marketing by booking their musicians into concert halls as well as churches, persuading retailing chains to stock their records, making sure that SoundScan, which tracks music sales, takes note of Christian music, and creating awards for rappers and heavy metal artists.
Amy Grant, BeBe and CeCe Winans and several other singers have made the leap from the religious charts to Billboard's ‘Hot 100’.
The big record companies are beginning to see the potential of religious rock.
Last September EMI Music bought Nashville-based Sparrow Corporations, one of the top three Christian music companies; and in January the Bertelsmann Music Group, part of a German conglomerate, formed a financial partnership with a couple of other Nashville companies.
As the song has it, God works in mysterious ways.
Ex-Renaissance sculpture
Oops!
ROME
MOST of Ravenna's history and its art treasures revolve around the years 402-476AD when it was capital of the Western Roman Empire.
Visitors are drawn to that city on the Adriatic by the mosaics depicting the Emperor Justinian and his notorious wife, Theodora.
Others may pause before the tomb of Dante, who died in exile from Florence.
But a stronger Ravenna drawing-card, at least in the tomb department, is that of Guidarello Guidarelli.
A warrior in the service of Cesare Borgia, he was stabbed to death in 1501 in a quarrel with another man over possession of a fancy Spanish shirt.
His tomb, said to have been originally in a Ravenna church, has a marble cover which bears a full-length portrait of the recumbent warrior decked out in his best battle-gear.
For the past 100 years, art historians, including Sir John Pope-Hennessy, have accepted the sculptured figure as being the work of Tullio Lombardo, dating it from about 1525.
But according to Andrea Bacchi and Desideria Cavina, the authors of ‘Sembrare e Non Essere’(‘It Seems So and Isn't’), a new book on art fakes due to be published this autumn by Longanesi of Milan, the venerated Guidarello sepulchral sculpture is more likely to be a product of the 1820s.
And not just because there is no extant reference to the sculpture from the first three centuries after the warrior's death.
Where was his tomb all those years?
They also note that there are too many chinks in Guidarello's fancy armament.
One is the absence of a shield, which would be attached to the helmet to protect the chin and throat.
Then there are one or two anachronisms: the spurs seen resting alongside his boots are of a kind unknown during the Renaissance.
So are the boots themselves, being made of a metallic fabric.
Federico Zeri, probably Italy's leading art historian and an intrepid debunker himself, rejects the ‘19th-century spurs, the helmet's visor that if lowered would not have covered the warrior's face.’
He adds: ‘The whole thing brings to mind the art troubadour that was in vogue around 1830.’
Guidarello's memorial was donated to Ravenna's Galleria dell' Accademia (founded in 1829) by descendants of the warrior's widow.
Not until 1886 did an Italian art critic attribute the work to Lombardo.
A document does, however, exist saying that Lombardo was paid 350 ducats in 1525 for ‘works’ in the Ravenna church, which is now dedicated to St Francis.
The few pieces that are known for certain to be by Lombardo — in a Doge's tomb in Venice and two busts in Vienna — show no sign of the naturalist force that the tomb artist gave to Guidarello's face.
That remarkable face is also the object of a pilgrimage of unmarried females.
Somebody started a legend that if a kiss is bestowed on Guidarello's eternally parted lips, the kisser will be wed within the year.
Custodians keep an alert lookout for any female without a wedding ring, as lipstick is not good for marble.
Religious art
Beyond belief
THE first permanent public gallery in Britain devoted to art inspired by the world's many religions has opened in Glasgow.
No hierarchical ranking of the paintings and objects it contains is attempted; each is there to be contemplated on its own terms.
But certain images are seen to be universal, such as that of the holy mother and child.
The setting of the St Mungo Museum of Religious Life and Art symbolises this eclectic approach.
Its courtyard contains a Japanese Zen garden, with exquisitely positioned rocks, moss and raked sand, and it is overlooked by Glasgow's 14th-century cathedral and by the Necropolis, a sombre collection of blackened Christian mausoleums and monuments.
Julian Spalding, the director of Glasgow museums, says he did not want to ‘create just a museum of Christianity, because that would be of limited appeal and too narrow in range.’
Neither did he want a drily academic museum of the history of religion.
Instead, he says, his aim was:
To emphasise the art, because most religions communicate to non-believers through the objects they make.
The aesthetic qualities in a Buddhist sculpture, or in an Indian Shiva sculpture or in Salvador Dali's ‘Christ of St John of the Cross’ communicate to people who don't believe in that individual religion.
The first two galleries have beautiful Christian stained glass windows dating from the medieval to the Art Nouveau.
They contribute to the museum's subdued, meditative air.
The first gallery houses ancestral figures, gods and mythical heroes.
These include an Egyptian mummy mask, a contemporary Australian aboriginal painting, a Nigerian ‘Kalibari’ screen, and Dali's ‘Crucifixion’.
The smaller second gallery has the atmosphere of a shrine.
Among its masterpieces are Albrecht Dürer's early 16th-century print series of ‘Christ's Passion’, two pictures by William Blake of a curiously enigmatic Adam and Eve in the garden of Eden, and a 19th-century sculpture of Shiva dancing in a circle of flames.
The one contemporary work in the second gallery, ‘Sabbath Candles’ by Dora Holzhandler, tenderly evokes Jewish family life.
Further galleries contain showcases devoted to particular religions and also to themes running across most religions, such as monasticism and the after-life.
They also deal with persecution — by the religious as well as of the religious.
Russia's economy
Capitulating to capitalism
CHANGING THE ECONOMIC SYSTEM IN RUSSIA.
Edited by Anders Aslund and Richard Layard.
Pinter Publishers; 237 pages; £35.
St Martin's Press; $19.95
IN A publishing field crowded with the works of eminent Kremlinologists, I-saw-it-all journalists and noisy principals (a book by Ruslan Khasbulatov, the speaker of the Russian parliament, is a recent entrant), a collection of papers from a conference at the Stockholm Institute of East European Economics does not sound gripping.
Persevere.
If you want to know about the main issues of economic reform in Russia, this is the book to read.
Largely because proper economics was taboo in the former Soviet Union, the number of people running Russia's reform programme is surprisingly small.
When the Soviet Union collapsed, Russia found that only about 200 people knew anything of any economic relevance.
Nearly all of them were under 40.
Most were associated with research institutes in Moscow and St Petersburg run by the architect of the reforms, Yegor Gaidar.
The leading figures are contributors to this volume.
They include the privatisation minister, Anatoly Chubais, and the finance minister, Boris Fedorov.
The Russian reformers have been supported by a small team of western advisers.
They, too, are contributors to this volume.
They include the book's editors — Anders Aslund, head of the Stockholm Institute, and Richard Layard of the London School of Economics — as well as such notables as Jeffrey Sachs of Harvard University.
The book amounts to a collection of the most powerful dispatches from the operating theatre of applied economics.
The diagnosis is that Russia needs shock therapy.
In the economic doctors' opinion, the collapse of communism left Russia with a government and civil service barely able to do anything.
As much as possible, therefore, should be left to the market.
Where the old regime's power survived intact — eg, in the parliament — that power has been used to the country's detriment.
The strength of this book is that it puts flesh on the bare bones of this argument.
It presents its evidence impartially, and so is useful to those who do not accept Russia's need for shock therapy as well as to those who do.
It also shows those who have not made up their minds why Russia's reformers are doing what they are trying to do.
It begins by arguing that Russia has not had proper shock therapy.
That assertion may sound surprising given the arguments in the West that Boris Yeltsin's reforms have been too much, too soon.
In fact, as Mr Aslund points out, not all prices have been liberalised; oil prices are still controlled; retail, wholesale and (especially) export sales have been subject to restrictions.
And, worst of all, monetary policy has been controlled by a central banker who does not believe in shock therapy, and who has inflated the money supply to allow companies to continue in their old ways.
Marek Dabrowski, a former deputy finance minister in Poland and an adviser to the Russian government, takes the argument to its logical conclusion: comparison with Poland's experience in switching from communism to capitalism shows that the ailments afflicting Russia have not been caused by the imposition of shock therapy.
They have been caused by the failure to impose it consistently.
Where the government has done exactly what it said it would do, its policies have worked.
The chapter by Mr Chubais outlines what the Russian privatisation minister wanted.
A chapter by Maxim Boyko (a Russian working in the privatisation ministry) and Andrei Schleifer (an American from Harvard) explains how the difficulties that this involved were overcome.
Events in Russia show that privatisation is now the jewel in the crown of reform.
Two features help make this book's arguments convincing.
First, it gives more space than is usual to money.
Jeffrey Sachs and David Lipton show how problems connected with the banking operations of Russia's former planned economy, together with the country's misguided attempt to maintain a single rouble zone (as recommended by the IMF), have had disastrous consequences.
Second, the book is informed by professional economic competence to a degree rare when looking at Russia.
Sometimes — as in chapters by Peter Boone and Richard Layard — the results look formidable.
Ignore the algebra.
The message is clear enough.
Economic experience shows that, if Russia sticks with reform, it can expect the kind of export boom that other reforming communist economies have had.
It also shows that, when Russian enterprises reacted to the reforms by jacking up prices and withholding output, they were not doing so because they could not adapt to the bewildering change around them; they were reacting to the incentives they faced, which said that goods were stores of value while money was not.
All this is important because of the argument that shock therapy has been a mistake.
That argument is wrong.
Had shock therapy been applied and not led to the results expected, then it would indeed have been a failure.
But that is not what has happened.
It has been applied only partially.
Where it has been applied, it has worked.
Ethnic struggle
Poor little devils
PANDAEMONIUM: ETHNICITY IN INTERNATIONAL POLITICS.
By Daniel Patrick Moynihan.
Oxford University Press; 221 pages; $19.95 and £17.95
THIS is a clever, glancing look at the mischief caused by the splendid principle of self-determination.
The will of the people, all democrats agree, is the legitimate basis of political order.
But which people?
Senator Moynihan's topical theme is how to make the world safe for, but also from, ethnicity.
The ambivalence of this approach is conveyed by the title.
In Milton's ‘Paradise Lost’, Pandaemonium was the capital where ‘Satan exalted sat, by merit raised/ To that bad eminence.’
It was inhabited by demons convinced that Satan had their best interests at heart.
‘Poor little devils’ is Mr Moynihan's concluding line.
He does not waste time on definitions.
He does, however, devote quite a bit of space to back slapping.
Maybe he is entitled to it; he was, after all, prescient.
After a spell of militant anti-communism as America's ambassador at the UN, he was, by the end of the 1970s, prophesying that the danger from the Soviet Union would come not from its expansion but from its disintegration.
Few listened, certainly not his own government.
Mr Moynihan holds an earlier American president, Woodrow Wilson, responsible for putting self-determination, that ‘fine amalgam of idealism and self-interest’, on the agenda of international order.
Wilson's secretary of state, Robert Lansing, foresaw trouble; self-determination was dynamite, he said, that would cause ‘much vexation’.
And so indeed it has done.
Dead empires have bred leaping ambition; international politics has developed into a struggle between competing ethnic groups; the United Nations has to pick an impossible path between respect for sovereignty and respect for nationalism.
There are, as Mr Moynihan points out, only seven countries in the world that can claim both to be homogeneous and to have no border problems.
But the victors of the first world war, without the gift of prophecy, set about with vigour to apply a great principle to the realms of the defeated empires: the Hohenzollerns, the Hapsburgs and the Ottomans.
They naturally did not think to apply it to their own empires.
Mr Moynihan indulges in nostalgia for departed days; like Milton's devils, he writes, men have made themselves smaller to enter new prison cells.
He has little sympathy for the Arab nationalism that destroyed the Jews of Baghdad and the Christian Assyrians, and he quotes at length from Stephen Bloom's ‘almost lyrical’ account of a Romanian childhood where Germans, Slovaks, Russians, Greeks, Turks, Armenians and Jews provided harmonious diversity.
On the other hand, Mr Moynihan looks forward with foreboding.
Do not expect too much from the new states; expect compassion fatigue from the rest of the world.
Perhaps, he writes, democracy should be reconsidered as the universal option for all nations.
Civil rights, as opposed to political rights, may be as much as can be hoped for.
Federalism, or what he calls ‘stratified systems of governance’, will help to bring order out of confusion.
The musings of a man as witty and erudite as Mr Moynihan contain many plums.
Yet they leave the reader hungry.
An inordinate proportion of this slender book is given over to digression and quotation (including a graceful, tongue-in-cheek, tribute to The Economist).
It is an expansion of a lecture given in Oxford in 1991, and was probably more satisfactory in its spoken, unpadded form.
Discursiveness in a lecture can be a delight; in print, the eye wanders.
Van Cliburn
Piano scandaloso
VAN CLIBURN.
By Howard Reich.
Thomas Nelson; 428 pages; $14.99
WHAT J.D. Salinger is to literature and Bobby Fischer was to chess, Van Cliburn is to classical music — the great success who gives it all up, without anyone understanding exactly why.
After the mighty publicity campaign that followed his victory at the Tchaikovsky International Piano and Violin Contest in Moscow in 1958 when he was 24, Mr Cliburn toured for 20 years.
But then he gave up concert performances to retire to his home in Texas.
Unfortunately, Howard Reich, a Chicago music critic, fails to solve the mystery of the pianist's rise and disappearance.
He seems more concerned with settling scores with rival music critics than getting behind the jolly, extrovert exterior that Mr Cliburn has always presented to the public, and, apparently, to his friends as well.
However, Mr Reich lays claim to one big scoop.
He is able to reveal that Mr Cliburn's famous victory in Moscow was engineered by one of the judges: Sviatoslav Richter, a great Russian pianist who was in his day a child prodigy.
Mr Richter was so smitten by Mr Cliburn's talent, and so bored by the competition (1958 was the last time he ever served as judge for anything), that he decided to give the talented American pianist the top score of 25 for everything and all the other contestants a zero for everything.
Subsequently, the victor fell so in love with Russia that in the late 1980s he sought to buy a flat in Moscow.
Mikhail Gorbachev took the request as as a joke but Mr Cliburn was entirely serious.
And perhaps the reasons for his quasi-retirement are not so mysterious after all.
There is a particular grace and sense of timing which enables artists to know when to make their exits.
Singers are called upon to exercise this talent more often than instrumentalists but Mr Cliburn realised that his success depended in large part on boyish charm.
He may have concluded after he turned 40 that his career could never have the same impetus.
The story has a lived-happily-ever-after ending.
Mr Cliburn, who was born in Shreveport, Louisiana, into a family that made its pile from oil, has been able to retire to a vast mansion.
The pianist seems aware of his good fortune.
By Mr Reich's account, he remains a cheerful and charming fellow — a nice antidote to surly and mean rich men like Howard Hughes and J. Paul Getty.
Champs and chumps
Many boxing fans say the Lennox Lewis v Tony Tucker title fight in Las Vegas on May 8th is a sham.
For them Riddick Bowe is the real world champion
WHEN is a champion really a champion?
These days it is hard to say, and not only in the heavyweight division.
Ask a boxing expert who is the current welterweight champion of the world, and the correct reply would be: which one?
There are four to choose from.
When no title is vacant or shared, 68 boxers have a world title belt in their care.
This is because four world boxing associations sanction championship fights in 17 weight divisions — making 68 titles in all.
The associations are the World Boxing Council (WBC), the World Boxing Association (WBA), the International Boxing Federation (IBF) and, last as well as least, the World Boxing Organisation (WBO).
How did this muddle happen?
And will it lead, eventually, to the ruin of professional boxing?
Until 30 years ago there were recognised world champions only at the eight classical fighting weights (in bold print in the table).
Fight fans knew who the champions were; the prize was worth having.
Champions fought the top contenders and, if they lost, return fights were often arranged.
There were fewer mismatches so spectators got better value for money.
In some ways it was a golden age.
Yet it was far from idyllic.
Mobsters had enormous influence in America and, if his manager was poorly connected, a good boxer could find himself waiting for years for a title fight.
Archie Moore, one of the finest light-heavyweights ever to step into the ring, was 39 years old before he finally got (and seized) his chance to win the world title in 1952.
Why?
Because at the time the big boxing promoters and the New York State Athletic Commission, which had links with the Mafia, more or less decided who fought whom.
The formation of the WBA in 1962 and of the WBC a year later shifted the balance of power.
National associations, like the British Boxing Board of Control, were fed up with the mobsters — so fed up that they were willing to pay an affiliation fee to one or both of these new bodies to gain the right to submit the names of boxers they licensed for title fights sanctioned by the WBA and the WBC.
The new bodies also recruited enough boxing promoters to persuade television broadcasters to take their champions seriously.
It was a power play but it worked.
One American manager described them thus:
The WBC and WBA are like private clubs with their own arbitrary rules and regulations.
And what you have to do, because the [television]networks force you to do it, is join one or both of those clubs and play by their rules.
In 1984 the IBF was formed by people dissatisfied with the Mexican-led WBC and Panamanian-led WBA.
Why, they asked, should these associations collect such large fees for sanctioning a title fight?
The WBC, for instance, usually charges 2.5% of each fighter's purse.
The WBO owed its formation to the cold shoulder presented by the world to South African sportsmen during the apartheid era.
It was founded by a South African boxing referee, Stan Christodoulou, chiefly to get ‘world title’ fights for his countrymen.
Television stations were initially pleased by this alphabet soup.
They wanted as many champions as possible.
Pay-per-view channels were buying up exclusive rights to the really big bouts and this left the regular channels desperate to find some way of increasing the number of championship fights.
The proliferation of boxing associations has served their purpose well.
With the creation of nine more weights, and of more world champions at each weight, there are now about 130 world title fights a year.
Just about everybody now agrees that matters have been allowed to get out of hand.
Television broadcasters blame the promoters for over-selling their product; the promoters blame broadcasters for demanding title fights at all costs.
Both, in fact, are at fault; both are helping to accelerate boxing's decline.
In consequence, boxing in the 1990s is even more confused than it was in the 1980s when only two titles were unified: the heavyweight title by Mike Tyson (and his successors James Douglas, Evander Holyfield and Riddick Bowe); and the middleweight title by Marvin Hagler.
Today the only boxer accepted by experts (and fans) as the ‘real’ world champion at his weight is the WBC junior welterweight titleholder, Julio Cesar Chavez of Mexico.
The same could be said of America's Mr Bowe as heavyweight champion until he split his unified title by throwing the WBC belt in a dustbin and fighting a clumsy challenger, Michael Dokes.
To some boxing purists, Mr Bowe's performance was only faintly more ridiculous than the addition of strawweight (or mini-flyweight) as the 17th weight division in the late 1980s.
There are now five weight divisions covering just 13lb, from strawweight at up to 105 lb, to bantamweight at up to 118lb.
A cup of tea could make the difference between a boxer fighting in one division or another.
Things look set to become even more confused.
Beau Williford, a respected Louisiana-based manager who cannot get his boys the fights he wants, has started the Universal Boxing Association.
Someone, somewhere in America has created a World Boxing Federation — chiefly, it seems, to boost the visibility, and the purses, of Australian boxers.
Perhaps titles do not matter much any more.
Knowledgeable boxing fans know that most of them are meaningless.
They are now more interested in the abilities of particular boxers and the attractiveness of particular matches.
But given the lack of effective regulation, and the propensity of most managers to find chumps for their rising stars or champions to flatten, the matches are often mismatches.
The sport is becoming ever more of a circus.
It may not be long before the roof falls in.
Plays and players
The English art
UTOPIA AND OTHER PLACES.
By Richard Eyre.
Blooomsbury; 206 pages; £16.99 and $14
ONE of the more abiding human mysteries is why the English — a proverbially tight-lipped and stiff-necked race — should have excelled in the louche world of the theatre for upwards of half a millennium.
Richard Eyre provides some clues.
He is director of the Royal National Theatre, and thus head boy of that dramatic sub-species known to brutish non-Thespians as the ‘luvvies’.
He is also, as his memoirs reveal, impeccably English.
One of the triumphs of ‘Utopia and Other Places’ is its convincing repudiation of the idea that Englishness and creativity should be seen as mutually exclusive.
Rather, it seems, the reverse.
Mr Eyre's thesis is summed up in the title of a chapter called ‘Acting Properly’.
This traces his training in the traditional virtues of upper-middle-class English childhood: free emotional deprivation at home, followed by fee-paying emotional deprivation at a public (ie, private) school.
Since one of the skills acquired on this course is an inability to express what you are, Mr Eyre contends, the English become adept at ‘pretending to be what they aren't’.
But there are compensations.
The obverse of the English tendency to self-repression — along, according to Mr Eyre, with a less desirable ‘deference to the monarch [and]House of Lords’— is a natural capacity for the theatrical.
This explains why ‘camp’, the secret argot of homosexuality, is also the lingua franca of theatreland.
(‘I heard it said of one of Hitler's speeches: ‘Oh, she's in a right state’,’ the author recalls.)
If he is right, then the more enlightened upbringing of English children since the war may also, oddly, go some way towards explaining the much-touted decline in contemporary English drama.
Mr Eyre suggests a different suspect.
Interwoven with a book's personal testament is a public appeal for government sponsorship of the arts and against another English tradition (philistinism), which the author identifies with Margaret Thatcher.
The author's credentials as an advocate for the popularity as well as the excellence of publicly-sponsored theatre are beyond question.
Since his tenure at the National Theatre, rigorous new works have appeared side-by-side with more accessible and lucrative (but still highly praised) productions of ‘Guys and Dolls’ and ‘Trelawny of the Wells’.
Mr Eyre's dictum is clearly Molière's —‘We who live to please must please to live.’
His book is honest without being sentimental and is nicely written.
Perhaps the most moving episode is the author's recollection of seeing Ion Caramitru's ‘Hamlet’ in Ceausescu's Bucharest: ‘Line after line [of Hamlet's]was greeted with the applause of recognition,’says Mr Eyre.
‘This was their story.’
That Mr Caramitru later helped form the post-Ceausescu provisional government clearly finds favour with Mr Eyre's Shelleyan view of artists as unacknowledged legislators of the world.
Given the clear-sightedness of his book, and the proximity of the National Theatre to the Palace of Westminster, you cannot help feeling that it might be worth giving Mr Eyre a chance as well.
Correction: ‘Seducing the French’ is published by University of California Press, not the University of Chicago Press as stated here on April 17th.
Sorry.
Day of the Hyena
HERE is something that really happened last week.
Saddam Hussein celebrated his birthday.
He wore a white suit.
Young girls from all parts of Iraq danced and sang folk songs in front of him.
They called him ‘Papa Saddam’.
Later in the day he cut a vast birthday cake, and mounted a gold — yes gold — chariot, drawn by six horses.
Officially, of course, the Iraqi dictator was humiliatingly defeated in 1991's Gulf war.
But let us be honest.
Nobody seems to have told him about his humiliation.
The birthday spectacle must have made General Norman Schwarzkopf want to weep into his beer.
If you feel like crying, too, Bloomsbury publishers have just the right antidote.
‘Shadow over Babylon’(480 pages; £14.99) is a wish-fulfilling fantasy about the assassination of Mr Hussein.
Watch the Iraqi strongman slump to the ground as he is felled by a sniper's bullet.
Hear his screams as his own mutinous soldiers administer the coup de grâce.
Admire the (British) assassins as they plan and execute the audacious operation.
In short, give the Gulf war a better moral and aesthetic ending than the real thing had.
All successful thrillers need hype.
Bloomsbury makes much ado about its author, David Mason.
He is an old Etonian, adventurer, ex-army officer, Arabic-speaker and trained sniper.
This last gives the novel some technical verisimilitude.
Advances and film rights have already earned Mr Mason nearly £1m ($1.57m).
Mr Mason deserves some of this.
His characterisation is as wooden as Frederick Forsyth's, but the plot includes a clever twist and spins briskly enough towards its conclusion — a conclusion millions of readers, including lots of Iraqis, would dearly love to believe in.
Has Bloomsbury arranged an Arabic edition?
ASIA
China
Dividing up the new riches
FROM OUR CHINA CORRESPONDENT
Deng Xiaoping's reforms have worked from the ground up.
Our China correspondent describes some of the results in Sichuan province
IN THE late 1970s, Sichuan was the seed-bed for the agricultural reforms that Deng Xiaoping (a native Sichuanese) later spread throughout China.
On paper, they seem to have done the province's lush grain fields and well-kept citrus orchards little good.
Sichuan is the size of France, with twice as many people (110m) and, according to official statistics, the fifth lowest income per person in China in 1989.
But look at individuals, rather than averages, and you see interesting things happening to some of the peasants' lives.
Mr Deng's dash for rural freedom began in villages like one a few miles outside Chengdu, Sichuan's capital.
The Li family — father, mother and two grown sons, plus the sons' women — live in a spacious two-storey house nestling beside the other villagers' more modest homes.
On their sitting-room wall hangs a big calendar illustrated by glossy colour photographs of Mr Deng's visit to southern China in early 1992 — the pilgrimage that relaunched radical economic reform in China.
The Lis have good reason to honour Mr Deng.
Because of his policies, their sitting-room also boasts an imported colour television — bought, they say, for 3,000 yuan ($125), nearly four times the yearly income per person in Sichuan.
Although the Lis live surrounded by neatly cultivated wheat-fields, they are no longer farmers.
The four working grown-ups are employed by a ‘township enterprise’— a Deng-era euphemism for a more or less privately owned company — in the construction business.
In order to stop working on the land, four members of the family paid 6,000 yuan each to the production ‘team’— the basic organisation of production under communism — to escape their obligations.
Mrs Li complains that they were cheated.
At first, the payment entitled them to go on receiving food-subsidy coupons from the team, even though they were no longer working for it.
But last year all food subsidies in Sichuan were abruptly abolished, so part of the Lis' capital outlay no longer brings them any return.
They do not have too much to grouse about, though: the family's income is about 1,600 yuan a month.
The Li parents' bedroom is outclassed by that of their eldest son: he has a new sofa, cuddly toys and silk flowers, their newness preserved by protective plastic wrappers.
Down the corridor, the younger son shares a room with his girlfriend.
When asked what she thinks of this, Mrs Li laughs at the quaintness of the question.
Yet ten years ago China was one of the world's most straitlaced societies, with neighbourhood networks of morality police who made premarital sex difficult to get away with and unmarried cohabitation impossible.
Sexual licence, evident in some coastal cities, is clearly spreading to China's interior.
Mrs Li reckons that in each of her township's 90 ‘teams’(each consisting of about 300 people) two or three families have incomes like hers.
Most would have earnings more like those of the Fu family, who live just around the corner on an income that is about one-fifteenth of the Lis'.
It would be unusual in the West to find people living next door to each other with so large a difference between their incomes.
The Fu family's house is large, with brick walls, electricity and a black-and-white television.
But the ceiling is made of rough wooden planks and the floor of mud.
A few pigs live in one of the rooms.
The Fus — grandma, young parents and two small children — eat and dress well enough.
Food comes pretty much free with the husband's job working in the fields for the team.
But his cash income of 80 yuan a month, even when supplemented by the sale of a pig or two a year, gives the family a yearly cash income of no more than 1,500 yuan.
Mrs Fu does not complain about their earnings, but she does resent government levies.
The family claims to pay the production team 300 yuan a year, presumably for maintaining farm infrastructure, and another 250 yuan to the commune, which builds things like roads and schools.
These numbers may be a bit of a fib.
A recent survey of the plight of peasants by China's Economic Daily showed that taxes and fees consumed less than a quarter of their average incomes, compared with the 35-40% Mrs Fu claims.
On top of that, though, they have to pay for education: the Fus say they pay 80 yuan for a half-year's schooling for one child, up from 60 yuan a year ago.
With two children, that amounts to a fifth of pre-tax income.
Mrs Fu shrugs that, if school fees rise further, they will simply have to save more and to work more.
They know the value of education.
Mr Fu, probably illiterate, cannot get the kind of job with a township enterprise that would enable them to keep up with the Lis.
India
To smile, and smile
FROM OUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT IN DELHI
HAS the BJP had a change of heart?
India's Bharatiya Janata Party, the main parliamentary opposition to the Congress Party government of P.V.
Narasimha Rao, has risen near the top of Indian politics by pushing a militant Hindu-nationalist line.
In December the militancy got out of hand.
Demonstrations led by the BJP at Ayodhya, a town in northern India that some Hindus celebrate as the birthplace of their god, Ram, were hijacked by a Hindu mob that then demolished a disused mosque there.
Some 1,200 people died in the Hindu-Muslim riots that followed.
This spring the BJP is trying to portray itself differently.
Never before interested in the nuts and bolts of public policy, the BJP has set up study groups to define the party's position on such communally uncharged questions as water supply and the (for Hindus, low-caste) leather trade.
At the annual meeting of the Confederation of Indian Industry in April, L.K. Advani, a BJP bigwig who is the prime minister presumptive should the party come to power, gave a speech in which he flayed Mr Rao's government for not moving fast enough on economic reform.
The BJP is the true believer in liberalisation, Mr Advani claimed.
There is less here than meets the eye.
The BJP knows that it is still unfit to govern.
The party has been the spearhead of what is essentially a protest movement against more than 40 years of mostly uninterrupted Congress domination of Indian politics.
The spearhead is dangerous because it has been dipped into the poison of communal rivalry between the 80%-plus of India that is Hindu and the 11% that is Muslim.
Both the Congress Party and India's constitution have kept the rivalry in check by standing firmly for a secular India in which the state is impartial between religions.
But Congress is in deep disrepute in India.
The past two years of economic reform have won Mr Rao and his finance minister, Manmohan Singh, much praise from foreigners and from Indian businessmen.
And the policy is bearing fruit: India's economy will probably expand by more than 5% this year and inflation is down to 7%.
Yet Congress seems to be getting little thanks for this from the voters.
Politics-watchers guess that, had Rajiv Gandhi not been assassinated at the end of the general-election campaign two years ago, the BJP would have won roughly as many seats as Congress.
The ruling party may be in a worse state now.
Opinion polls suggest that Congress is just ahead of the BJP, but allegations of corruption, nepotism and incompetence in the Rao government are growing.
Indian journalists are busily burrowing into the business affairs of the prime minister's family, and there are signs they might find something embarrassing.
The terrorist bombs and politically linked gang violence in Bombay in March have made Congress seem incapable of preserving law and order.
All of which explains why the BJP is scrambling to make itself presentable as a possible government.
Elections have to be held this autumn in several states whose BJP-led governments were dismissed by the central government after the Ayodhya riots.
If the BJP does well, the pressure for an early general election will become intense.
The party aims to win by portraying itself as a pro-free-market, pro-Hindu and anti-corruption alternative to Congress.
The soothing message Mr Advani presents to India's industrialists is one aspect of this campaign.
But the mood of the BJP's national executive meeting, held in Calcutta in April, showed a different side.
The meeting was inflamed with Hindu-nationalist emotion.
The party clearly intends to take its next populist stand on the issue of illegal Bangladeshi immigrants in India (of whom, after 20 years, there may now be more than 10m).
Of course, there are immigrants and immigrants.
A BJP vice-president said India had a ‘historical responsibility’ to welcome Bangladeshi Hindus, whereas ‘some of the Muslim migrants are part of the larger design of Bangladesh against India's stability’.
The resolution passed by the executive called for the immediate expulsion of illegal Bangladeshi Muslims.
The party has been remarkably successful at convincing many urban Hindu intellectuals and professionals that the real BJP is the reasonable-sounding one that praises economic liberalisation and is beginning to draft policy position-papers.
Just why such people are so sure this wing of the party will be in charge is hard to understand.
Cambodia
Chaos, please
FROM OUR SOUTH-EAST ASIA CORRESPONDENT
THE United Nations in Cambodia is charged with restoring peace and stability to the country.
Its chief problem is that most of Cambodia's leading political actors seem to have an interest in continuing conflict.
The Khmers Rouges are the leading merchants of chaos.
But the Phnom Penh government also has its reasons for favouring instability.
And even Prince Sihanouk, who many onlookers regard as the man with the best chance of leading a stable Cambodian government, may have an interest in seeing the UN's efforts founder.
The Khmers Rouges have the most obvious reasons for wishing the UN ill.
They have opted out of the election due on May 23rd on the pretence that it will legitimise Vietnamese domination of Cambodia.
A successful election would strip the Khmers Rouges of the international recognition they have enjoyed (incredibly enough) for more than a decade.
On May 3rd Khmers Rouges fighters staged their boldest offensive yet and briefly took Siem Reap airport.
The Phnom Penh government has been fighting the Khmers Rouges for more than a decade, but now it needs its old enemy.
Hun Sen, the prime minister, constantly emphasises in his election campaign that his government is the sole credible safeguard against a return to power by Pol Pot's men.
UN officials suspect that, to ram the point home, his troops may have staged attacks and blamed them on the Khmers Rouges.
If Cambodians fear the Khmers Rouges enough, they may forgive the Phnom Penh government for having been put in power by the Vietnamese.
A state of semi-emergency in the countryside also provides Phnom Penh government troops with cover for their continuing campaign of political intimidation.
In the past month 16 officials from the royalist party, FUNCINPEC, the Phnom Penh government's chief electoral rivals, have been murdered.
The royalist party is led by Prince Sihanouk's son, Prince Ranariddh.
Yet there is a latent rivalry between the two men.
If FUNCINPEC emerged as a clear victor, Prince Ranariddh might supplant his father as the natural leader of Cambodia.
For Prince Sihanouk, a better result might be deadlock, chaos and a call for his return to national leadership as the only person capable of sorting out the mess.
Prince Sihanouk has been issuing entreaties for a peaceful election from his Beijing residence.
But there are signs that he is distancing himself from the UN.
He has not turned up for the past two meetings of the Supreme National Council, which he chairs and which is supposed to govern Cambodia, in conjunction with the UN, in the period up to the election.
Instead, on May 6th he convened a meeting of the Cambodian factions, independent of the UN.
The prince is famous for his swings of mood and changes of mind.
For now he seems to be biding his time on the sidelines, ready to step in, should the UN's effort start to crumble.
Whales look better than they taste
NEXT week's meeting in Kyoto of the 39 members of the International Whaling Commission will be marked, as usual, by a battle between those who want to kill whales and those who want to save them.
Leading the first contingent will be Japan and Norway, which want to see the current moratorium on commercial whaling lifted.
Both worry about the fishing villages whose livelihood has been commercial whaling.
But the Japanese are beginning to find that conservation and commerce do not necessarily conflict: some coastal villages are starting to make money from taking tourists to look at whales.
In the United States, whale-watching is big business: 3.25m people went to look at whales in 1991, bringing in revenues of nearly $100m.
Japan's whale-watching industry, which started in 1989, is small but growing fast.
Most of the boats leave from former whaling villages.
At Ogata, in Kochi prefecture, 44 boats are now taking tourists from three ports, mainly to look at Bryde's whales.
Already, the trade provides about a third of the earnings of local fishermen.
The Whale and Dolphin Conservation Society, a British group, now hopes to demonstrate to the Japanese that whale-watching is more profitable in the long run than whaling.
It will argue to delegates in Kyoto that, while a Bryde's whale is worth about ¥33.4m ($100,000) in a fish market, the 16 resident Bryde's whales at Ogata are expected to bring in ¥675m to the boatmen over the next 15 years and nearly eight times as much in hotel accommodation and assorted knick-knacks.
Japan
Fear of foreigners
FROM OUR TOKYO CORRESPONDENT
A POLICEMAN is killed, and the prime minister cuts short his holiday: that is how sensitive the Japanese are about their involvement in foreign wars.
The death on May 4th of Haruyuki Takata, an unarmed policeman in Cambodia, also led the Japanese government to order all its people working for the United Nations there back to the capital, Phnom Penh.
The UN was furious, and Japan's new international boldness took a knock.
Japan wants a permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council, and knows that it has to show that it deserves one.
So, after nearly half a century of keeping its head down, it is beginning to take a higher profile abroad.
Hence the government's decision to send 600 soldiers and 75 unarmed policemen to Cambodia.
But anything to do with soldiers and involvement in foreign wars stirs fears among both the Japanese and their neighbours of a resurgence of militarism in Japan.
Since Japan's constitution forbids the use of its troops abroad except in self-defence, its participation in the peacekeeping force was hedged around with tight conditions.
Mr Takata's death, and the injuries of four other Japanese policemen, will reopen an argument about whether the conditions have been fulfilled.
The policemen were the victims of a Khmer Rouge attack near the Thai border.
But one of the conditions set by the Japanese government was that its people should take part only if there were a ceasefire between the warring parties.
Though the Khmers Rouges signed the agreement in Paris in 1991 that set the scene for the election campaign, they have not honoured their promise to stop fighting.
Japan's opposition Social Democratic Party is unlikely to let the government avoid an argument about exposing Japanese to even more danger.
A row has also erupted about sending people to Mozambique.
The government announced this week that it planned to send 53 Japanese soldiers there next month, to help prepare for UN-sponsored elections.
Some of them will be based at UN headquarters, making decisions about the deployment of troops.
Opposition politicians argue that this is deepening the country's involvement in peacekeeping.
The government has not so far given ground on Mozambique, and has insisted that it is committed to keeping its troops in Cambodia.
Its main ploy for deflecting criticism will be to demonstrate the depth of its respect for the dead man: it is talking of building him a memorial.
But if Japanese involvement in the new world disorder is to grow, more deaths are unavoidable.
At some point, the Japanese will have to decide which they value most: the comfort of staying at home, or the clout to be had abroad.
South Korea
Cleaning up the brass
FROM OUR CORRESPONDENT IN SEOUL
HELL hath no fury like the wife of a South Korean naval captain passed over for promotion.
When $15,000 and then $10,000 was paid to the wife of an admiral without the captain rising even one rank, his indignant lady publicly demanded her money back.
Her angry remarks to the newspapers would once have been quickly forgotten.
Corruption has long been tolerated in South Korea.
Palm-greasing for just about anything from entry to a favoured school to obtaining a bank loan has been considered a fact of life.
Some blame corruption on Korea's greedy bureaucracy, some on the tradition of Confucianism, with those in authority expecting ‘tribute’.
Some say it is just the Asian way.
Whatever the reason, the new president, Kim Young Sam, appears to have decided that it has to stop.
Mr Kim, the first civilian president for three decades, has started a campaign against graft with a gusto that has delighted ordinary citizens grown accustomed to nest-feathering by the rich and powerful.
He started with the upper reaches of government and the bureaucracy.
Three cabinet members tainted with influence-peddling had to go.
Members of parliament and top civil servants were made to reveal their financial assets, some of which proved to be astonishingly large.
The public approved.
Mr Kim's ruling Democratic Liberal Party had easy wins in three by-elections.
At first, he appeared to have no immediate plans to take on the armed forces.
Mr Kim, a former dissident who had been jailed by a military regime, was reluctant to pick a fight with the brass after only a few months in office.
The generals could wait.
His predecessor, Roh Tae Woo, a former general who embraced democracy, had moved the army out of public politics.
The middle class is growing and the military is no longer the only path to advancement for the poor but able.
And, in a country still technically at war with North Korea, the army remains important.
But scandals such as the one given publicity by the naval captain's angry wife could not be ignored.
As it happened, Mr Kim did not have to do anything about this affair.
Chung Yong Hoo, the admiral whose wife was said to be involved, had retired before Mr Kim became president.
So too had a former marine commander, Lieut-General Cho Ki Yup.
According to the prosecutor's office, both men have admitted taking $150,000 from junior officers seeking advancement.
A retired air-force general, Chung Yoo-hoo, is alleged to have accepted about $150,000 in 1989 from seven junior officers.
Talk of such sums has aroused indignation among ordinary people, whose average income is less than $1,000.
So will the army be purged?
If it is, Mr Kim is likely to move carefully.
He may seek to clean up military malpractice at the lower levels of command, while not jolting the top too much.
He does not want the army to feel that it is the subject of a witch-hunt.
Although a military coup seems unlikely in these democratic times, Mr Kim does not want to risk rattling the top brass or provoking earnest young turks unless, or until, a glaring new scandal emerges — and one may be brewing over fighter-aircraft procurements.
Neither is Mr Kim yet ready to tackle corruption in business.
A plan to end the use of pseudonyms in financial transactions has been put on hold.
That would have exposed tax-dodgers and forced the suspiciously rich to account for their wealth.
But it was thought to be too disruptive right now, given the soggy state of the economy.
Probes into the affairs of businessmen have been comparatively restrained, though a couple of government-appointed bank chiefs have retired.
According to one of the president's senior aides, some form of anti-corruption law is to be drafted.
But past misdeeds, unless particularly outrageous, will probabaly be forgiven.
It is future misbehaviour that will not be tolerated.
Even mild reform is likely to dismay businessmen.
But Korea may benefit if it can rid itself of corruption.
Foreign investors dislike the bribery that doing business in, say, Indonesia, the Philippines and Thailand often involves.
A clean country would look attractive by comparison.
The Philippines
Bay for sale
FROM OUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
SUBIC BAY
CAN Subic Bay, the huge military base that the Americans had to abandon in November, again become an asset to the Philippines?
Richard Gordon is convinced it can.
He is chairman of the authority that has taken over the 16,200 hectare (40,000 acre) site and mayor of Olongapo City, the town that grew up alongside the base.
The base has been made a free port and special economic zone.
It is now looking for clients.
Mr Gordon points to the airport where 747s can land, a deep-sea port where 600 ships can anchor, and a ship repair yard.
The base is spared the curse of the ‘brown-outs’ familiar in Manila because it has its own power plant.
There are 40,000 English-speaking workers left unemployed when the Americans went.
And swimming-pools, and a golf course.
Subic would seem to offer foreign investors a lot.
Some analysts in the Philippines reckon that if the project is successful it could account within five years for at least 10% of GNP.
The question is ‘if’.
The Americans may have contributed as much as $1 billion a year to the Philippine economy in rent for the base, pay for the local people and the money spent on women, booze and other necessities.
Making up that sort of money now that the Philippine Senate has sent them home is going to take some doing.
The facilities they left behind have been valued at $1 billion.
Mr Gordon appears to have been remarkably successful in keeping out the looters.
When the Americans left nearby Clark air base, everything moveable, even lavatory pans, was stolen.
In his office, formerly used by the American commander, Mr Gordon ticks off his successes.
Taiwan's government, he says, is to take over 265 hectares for light manufacturing.
A Malaysian firm is to build a casino, a hotel and a golf course.
He has hopes for Japan: its investment in the Philippines up to last September was only $1.9 billion, compared with $13.4 billion in Indonesia.
The Japanese are said to be keen to invest more, but worry about the safety of their executives there.
A number of foreign businessmen have been kidnapped and held for ransom in Manila.
But Subic is not Manila, as Mr Gordon will no doubt point out when he visits Tokyo this month.
A hole in Sri Lanka
WEAK countries need strong leaders to hold them together, and strong leaders leave large holes when they leave their jobs.
So Sri Lanka, after the assassination of its president, Ranasinghe Premadasa, on May 1st, is a weak country with a big empty space in the middle of its government.
This is a dangerous position to be in.
For a city that has seen plenty of violence, Colombo was curiously calm after Mr Premadasa's death.
That may be because people have got so used to killings: after the murder of Lalith Athulathmudali, one of Sri Lanka's two main opposition leaders, on April 23rd, the assassination of the president who some suspected of involvement in his rival's killing was no great surprise.
And there is, as yet, nobody clearly to blame.
The police have indicated that they believe the Tamil Tigers were responsible for the bomb, but people are sceptical: Mr Premadasa was the closest thing the Tigers had to a political friend.
Still, Tamil shops in some areas closed.
Memories of the 1983 riots, when thousands of Tamils were butchered in Colombo, are lively.
Mr Premadasa's five years in office have left Sri Lanka with a taste of the best and the worst that it can do.
The south and west of the island have prospered.
Liberal economic policies, including deregulation of trade, financial services, and privatisation, have created a flourishing zone of small industries — clothes-making, shoes, toys — of just the sort that a poor country needs.
In the past two years, tourism, the country's single biggest earner, has revived.
The east and the north, where most of the Tamils live, are a different country.
Violence has blighted the economy.
Five years ago the northern peninsula, Jaffna, used to be a cosy place, with neatly kept houses and well-maintained streets.
Now the Tamil Tigers run a totalitarian state, blockaded by troops, without electricity, running water or sewers, and often short of food.
In the past decade of war, terrorists and soldiers have killed tens of thousands of civilians.
About 500,000 Sri Lankans, out of a population of 17m, are reckoned to have left the country because of the war.
But over time Mr Premadasa's approach to the problem changed: foreign pressure and the failure of the military solution to terrorism combined to persuade him that the army needed to be discouraged from indiscriminate killing.
According to human-rights workers, the number of people disappearing has dropped from 6,000 a year in 1989 to around 60 last year.
Mr Premadasa tried to close the gap between Sinhalese and Tamils.
He reversed some of the laws on language and education which discriminated against Tamils, and took to visiting some of the Tamils' Hindu temples, even attempting the odd public statement in Tamil.
He set up a select committee with the job of trying to devise a political settlement to the problem of Tamil separatism; but it got nowhere.
The government has been quick to say that it plans to continue the economic policies that have pleased businessmen and kept the country relatively well-off.
But Mr Premadasa's approach to the Tamil question is less likely to be followed.
His belief that compromise might be possible and necessary had few followers in the ruling United National Party (UNP).
It did not bother Mr Premadasa that he was disliked by most politicians, including many in his own party.
He paid little attention to his cabinet, taking most decisions by himself and keeping ministers in ignorance.
Most colleagues of any stature were forced out of the party or left of their own accord — like Lalith Athulathmudali, once a UNP national-security minister, who tried to impeach Mr Premadasa.
As a result, the UNP, which has run Sri Lanka since 1977, is weak and demoralised.
Mr Premadasa had groomed no successor.
Dingiri Banda Wijetunga, who has been appointed acting president and will probably get the job permanently because the UNP has enough votes in parliament to secure it for him, is an unassuming 71-year-old compromise candidate.
(It may, however, be worth remembering that Indira Gandhi became prime minister of India as a compromise candidate who others thought they could manipulate.)
Sri Lankans, who have lost two of their three main political leaders within eight days, will be asked their opinion of the remaining politicians at provincial elections on May 17th.
A presidential election is due next year, and parliamentary ones in 1995.
The persistence of elections is perhaps odd.
Democracy might be expected to collapse under such pressure.
But Sri Lanka, which held its first general election with universal suffrage under the British in 1931, has stuck doggedly to the system.
Perhaps it is because Sri Lanka's politicians have, in the past, been people of some stature, and the army used to be kept small.
But the army has more than quadrupled in size during the war, from 26,000 in 1982 to 112,000 in 1992, and at least within the UNP, the stature of the politicians has shrunk.
Probably some politician or party will grow to fill the hole that Mr Premadasa has left.
But if the chaos continues, the attitude of the army will be worth watching.
Hello Dalai
THE Dalai Lama, Tibet's exiled spiritual leader, is on his travels again.
Last week he saw President Clinton in Washington.
During his two-week visit to Britain he is due to meet the foreign secretary, Douglas Hurd.
Curiously, China, which invaded Tibet in 1950, seems unperturbed by his friendly reception in the West.
A Chinese official questioned by a reporter shrugged his shoulders and merely said China did not approve of the meetings.
But when the Dalai came to Britain in 1991, the Chinese spat with fury about the visit.
One possible explanation for China's changed attitude is that previous protests only gave the Dalai publicity and made it look silly.
An alternative theory, and one which, if true, must sadden him, is that China no longer regards him as a threat.
Independence demonstrations in Lhasa, calling for the Dalai's return, are poorly attended.
A generation of Tibetans has grown up to whom the Dalai Lama, who since 1959 has lived in India, is a remote figure.
They are more excited by the pop culture which has permeated the Chinese empire from Hong Kong and Taiwan.
AMERICAN SURVEY
Freedom to hate
A MAN punches you in the face.
Is it worse if he shouts ‘Hey, honky!’ as he does so?
This is the question which, in recent days, has been preoccupying the Supreme Court.
Some lawyers argue that a crime, when racially motivated, also becomes an act of discrimination.
Others maintain that thoughts, however vile, cannot be criminalised.
The debate arises from a case in Wisconsin in which a white boy, Gregory Reddick, was battered unconscious by a group of young blacks.
The blacks had just seen a film, ‘Mississippi Burning’, in which Klansmen beat a black child to death.
Walking home afterwards, they spotted Mr Reddick across the street.
Todd Mitchell asked his friends whether they now felt like beating up white people.
‘There goes a white boy,’ he said.
‘Go get him!’
For an ordinary assault, Mr Mitchell would have got two years in jail.
But Wisconsin has a hate-crimes law, which doubles the sentence for attacks based on race, colour, disability, religion, ancestry or sexual orientation; so Mr Mitchell was given four years.
He has now served his time.
While he was inside, however, the Wisconsin Supreme Court struck down the state law, saying it violated the first-amendment guarantee of free speech.
The state immediately appealed.
Thirty states, and many smaller jurisdictions, have laws similar to Wisconsin's.
They seem a natural outgrowth of civil-rights law, and they are increasingly popular; but judges are wary of them.
In 1992 the Supreme Court unanimously struck down a hate-crime ordinance in St Paul, Minnesota, that was invoked after a cross-burning.
Justice Antonin Scalia, who wrote the opinion, said the St Paul law was flawed because it was selective; some thoughts could not be afforded less protection than others.
Four of his colleagues were not so sure, feeling that, in a society scarred by discrimination, the sheer nastiness of some forms of thought had to be taken into account.
The state of Wisconsin is basing its appeal on the fact that intent and emotion — passion, envy, fear — are often weighed in the balance in sentencing already.
It could be argued back, however, that intent is one of the hardest things to prove.
Mr Mitchell made his hatred plain.
But how many other crimes are based on bigotry that is unspoken, or go accompanied by racial taunts that come out merely in the heat of the moment?
Beside these confusions, the constitutional guarantee of free speech has an impressive simplicity.
A puzzled people
‘THE American people don't know very much about the Balkans.
They are puzzled by it.
It's not something that they followed until very recently.’
Thus Lee Hamilton, chairman of the House of Representatives Foreign Affairs Committee, speaking on CNN.
The signs are that he is right.
For most Americans the Balkans are a place far away, stocked with people who, for reasons that pass comprehension, delight in murder and mayhem.
This incomprehension applies to all parties: in a recent NBC News/Wall Street Journal poll, 58% of respondents thought that all ethnic groups in ex-Yugoslavia were equally responsible for the fighting, and another 21% were not sure who was responsible.
Only 16% blamed the Serbs.
This puzzlement feeds into a distinct unwillingness to risk American lives in the Balkans.
An as-yet-unpublished poll by Louis Harris shows mild support (52% to 42%) for sending United Nations troops, including some Americans, to help the Bosnian Muslims defend  themselves .
But the same poll showed more opposing than supporting the idea of bombing Serbian guns and supply lines.
As Mr Hamilton says, the figures are ‘all over the place’.
Is this confusion among the general public mirrored among what pollsters call ‘elite groups’?
Not quite; though that should not be surprising.
For 40 years, polls have consistently shown that wealthier, more educated Americans are more ‘engaged’ in foreign-policy debates.
That pattern does not mean that those Americans always favour intervention abroad; remember Vietnam.
But this time it seems to.
In the detail of most recent polls, better-educated and wealthier Americans clearly favour more intervention in Bosnia than poorer and less well-educated respondents would accept.
Yet even within the elite group there is no consistency of opinion (the flock of hawks in the editorial pages of the New York Times excepted).
Some notable Vietnam veterans, like Senator John McCain, for years a prisoner of war, are adamantly opposed to intervention.
Others who opposed the war in Vietnam are all for it.
Some, like Senator Joe Biden, who opposed the use of force in the Gulf call for it now.
Others, like Senator Phil Gramm, who supported the Gulf war want to stay out of Bosnia.
Some argue that the horrors of Bosnia call to mind the Holocaust, to which a memorial museum in Washington has just been dedicated.
Elie Wiesel, who acts as America's tireless conscience on the subject of the slaughtered Jews, himself made the parallel at the memorial's dedication.
A senior administration official has also said, privately, that it is impossible, this time round, to argue that the world does not know what ethnic cleansing means.
Yet the president himself has said, surely rightly, ‘The Holocaust is on a whole different level.’
There is no simple division between left and right, and little evidence to support the easy sneer that those supporting military action by a Democratic president would have opposed it by a Republican one: the Nation, the country's leading magazine of the left, is dead against intervention.
These divisions in opinion, so difficult to make sense of, are perhaps understandable, and not only because of the innate complexity of Bosnia.
Without the unity that the cold war gave to American foreign policy, every foreign crisis is going to be marked by unease, by a sense that the compass is wildly flapping around in its box.
The old truths no longer apply.
All this was visible during the run-up to the Gulf war.
Although, at the time, most attention was paid to the misalliance of old-left peaceniks and right-wing neo-isolationists who opposed the military build-up, there were some pretty strange pacts, too, among those who supported it.
Anyone who thought before 1990 that Richard Perle, Ronald Reagan's ultra-hawkish arms-control man, and Anne Lewis, a political consultant who has been a close ally of Jesse Jackson, would agree on policy towards Iraq would have been dismissed as mad: but they did.
Yet there is one great difference between the autumn of 1990 and the spring of 1993.
The president then was George Bush, and now it is Bill Clinton.
Mr Bush had just completed the most successful six months of his presidency.
His European diplomacy had been a triumph; he had sealed something very like a partnership with Mikhail Gorbachev; he had reason to think that a deal on the Uruguay round of the GATT would be completed by Christmas.
All this gave him the confidence to state clearly what America's interests were.
That does not mean he was always honest: remember the claim that Saddam was a new Hitler.
But he acted as if he remembered the phrase that Dean Acheson used in the spring of 1947, in those days of little sleep and many martinis when Acheson, George Marshall and Harry Truman had to convince a sceptical Congress to back containment.
The arguments, said Acheson, had to be ‘clearer than the truth’.
Clarity of this — or any — sort has eluded Mr Clinton so far.
Nobody in his administration has yet explained, simply and plainly, what America's interests and objectives in the Balkans are.
Perhaps we will soon know; perhaps the endless meetings on Bosnia in which, as one participant has said, everyone has changed their minds ‘at least once’ imply thoroughness of preparation.
But if, as seems increasingly likely, Mr Clinton will soon tell Congress and the public that American fighting men will have to be sent to Bosnia, he will have to do better than say that he has thought things over carefully.
He will have to tell a puzzled people, with no great desire to put its children in harm's way, why he is doing precisely that.
It is, by a long way, the greatest test yet of whether he is up to the job.
New York's school boards
A condom in your pocket
NEW YORK
‘THE culture wars are over, and our side lost.’
Thus Irving Kristol, the godfather of neoconservatism, in the wake of George Bush's humiliation in November.
To judge from the New York school board elections, which took place on May 3rd, Mr Kristol was doubly wrong.
The culture wars are as violent as ever, and the right is on the offensive.
At stake were nine seats on each of the 32 boards which govern the city's 800 elementary and junior high schools.
The election, the most fraught for decades, could have turned on any number of issues.
Corruption, for example: local politicians in Harlem and the Bronx use school jobs to reward their followers and board members dip their hands into school tills, even pocketing the proceeds of fundraisers.
In a recent case, a woman was videotaped trying to buy a school principal's job in the Bronx from a board member.
Academic results have been plummeting over the past decade, thanks largely to the expansion of the underclass and the influx of non-English-speaking immigrants.
And there is little accountability.
The current division of powers between the central Board of Education and the 32 local boards encourages buck-passing (problems can always be blamed on somebody else) without either reducing bureaucracy (the central board still employs almost 4,000 people) or devolving power to individual schools.
Despite all this, the election turned into a referendum on two explosive issues.
The first was how schools should deal with AIDS; the second, what attitude they should take to ‘alternative lifestyles’.
The debate started a year ago, when the chancellor, Joseph Fernandez, and the school board approved its ‘children of the rainbow’ curriculum.
The curriculum was pretty traditional by New York standards, emphasising the equality of all cultures and warning teachers against ‘judgmentalism’.
But it included two innovations: condoms were to be distributed to those adolescents who requested them, and homosexuals were to be included in the list of cultural minorities to be studied and appreciated.
The result was a backlash which startled the city elites, black as well as white.
Black ministers, conservative rabbis and Pentecostalist preachers (who enjoy booming support among Hispanics, and who, for the first time, showed eagerness to enlist in a political cause) all fulminated against the new curriculum.
Two religious groups swiftly manoeuvred to the front of the pack: the Roman Catholic church, led by Cardinal John O'Connor, and the Christian Coalition, a group of fundamentalists loyal to Pat Robertson.
Although it is a newcomer to New York politics, the Coalition proved startlingly effective, distributing more than 100,000 voters' guides, many of them through the Catholic church.
On May 2nd preachers squared off in pulpits around the city on the subjects of condoms and sex education.
Meanwhile, ACT-UP, a gay activist group, draped a banner over the Brooklyn bridge, ‘Queer vote saves schools’; and the Lesbian Avengers staged sit-ins outside the houses of prominent traditionalists.
Thanks to the number of school boards and the complicated system of voting, the final results will not be in for a couple of weeks.
But it is already clear that the right has won the school wars, and that the left made a mistake in thinking that racial and sexual minorities can be lumped together and used as footsoldiers in the war against the establishment.
Chancellor Fernandez will not have his contract renewed in June, thanks partly to his mishandling of the rainbow curriculum and partly to his boastful biography, ‘Tales out of School’, which included some tactless remarks about the Board of Education.
The left is putting up candidates for only a handful of school districts in bohemian areas like lower Manhattan; and even in these areas, few teachers are likely to have the courage to teach the rainbow curriculum.
Above all, the elections have provided a shot in the arm for the Christian right, proving, first, that blacks and Hispanics are more likely to listen to Baptist ministers and Pentecostalist preachers than the likes of Mayor Dinkins and Joseph Fernandez, and, second, that when it comes to gay sex, fundamentalists and Catholics are more than willing to co-operate with each other.
China policy
Mr Patten's message
WASHINGTON, DC
HE CHATTED to his old acquaintance Al Gore, and got on famously with Bill Clinton; and as Chris Patten, the governor of Hong Kong, left Washington, officials lined up to say what a fine fellow he was.
Plaudits are nice; this time, however, Mr Patten must have wondered if he was not being killed by kindness.
For even as he was being celebrated for standing up to China, Mr Patten was trying to transmit the message that there is a difference between trade and economics, on the one hand, and politics on the other.
His central point, as he put it before the National Press Club on May 4th, was that ‘you certainly can't help Hong Kong by hurting our economy.’
All this was said in the context of that annual spring ritual, renewal of China's most-favoured-nation (MFN) status under American law.
MFN status means that, in trade, China is treated as well as the ‘most-favoured’ of America's trading partners.
Mr Patten takes the view, as other governors have done, that since Hong Kong is intimately tied to the booming economy of southern China, removing MFN status would devastate the colony.
As in most recent years, a bill is before Congress that would renew MFN status only if certain conditions were met by China.
This year, the bill would renew MFN status until July 1994.
After that, it would be renewed only if the president indicated that China had adhered to human-rights commitments, stopped the export of goods made with prison labour and made ‘overall significant progress’ on a set of other matters, which range from ceasing religious persecution in Tibet to prohibiting the transfer of missile technology to Syria, Pakistan and Iran.
If the Chinese fail to meet the conditions, the low-level MFN tariff would be removed from all goods produced by a Chinese state-owned enterprise (as defined by the Treasury).
Many China-watchers say it is impossible to be as specific as that.
Similar legislation, sponsored by Democrats, passed Congress last year.
The difference is that last year George Bush promised to veto the bill, and did so.
This year there is a Democrat in the White House; and one, moreover, who has promised to be tougher on China than Mr Bush.
So everyone is in a bit of a fix.
The administration, sources say, is anxious that the annual battle over renewal of MFN status should not be the centrepiece of its China policy.
Democrats in Congress do not want to embarrass the president by forcing him to choose between a veto of their bill and a snub of China — to say nothing of wounding Mr Patten.
At the same time, many Democrats on the Hill very much want to show that a president of their party will deal with China in a different way from Mr Bush.
Hence the suspicion that a compromise is in the works.
Although Mr Patten's headline message was that no conditions should be attached to MFN at all, his actual text was more subtle.
In effect, he argued that the policy changes in China that Democrats want to see can be achieved through better mechanisms than attaching conditions to MFN status.
The question of the proliferation of missile technology can be attacked through laws against nuclear proliferation; supposedly unfair Chinese trading practices can be attacked through application of the trade laws.
And so on.
This leaves a chance for compromise.
Mr Clinton might say in June that he is renewing MFN until 1994; that he is looking at the application of other American laws to areas like weapons proliferation and trade abuses; and that he is starting some (as yet murky) process to ensure that the Chinese are discharging their obligations under human-rights treaties.
There is a decent chance that such an approach would satisfy his supporters on the Hill.
It would certainly cheer up his new friend in Hong Kong.
Inner cities
Day of the bulldozer
DETROIT
IF CORPORATE America can ‘downsize’, shifting assets to fit today's markets, why not America's worst-off inner city?
The proposal, from Detroit's ombudsman, has caused outrage — and a certain amount of thought.
Detroit's population has dwindled by half during the past four decades, to barely 1m.
Whole city blocks have no occupied houses.
Others have two or three.
Yet the city must provide the same services — street lights, rubbish collection, police and fire protection — as it does to bustling neighbourhoods.
The municipal budget runs at about $1 billion a year, of which $19m goes on the police department.
The city's ombudsman, Marie Farrell-Donaldson, is essentially suggesting that the most blighted bits of the city should be closed down.
(No names are mentioned, but they may be gathered from the black spots on the map.)
Residents would be relocated from dying areas to those that still had life in them.
The empty houses would be demolished and empty areas fenced off; they would either be landscaped, or allowed to return to ‘nature’.
By redirecting services to fully populated areas, the city could provide services for all at a cost it could afford.
The proposal, in this form, is new; but the concept of people-shifting is not.
City redevelopment often involves razing and eviction, even of healthy communities.
Only a decade ago, an area called Poletown in inner-city Detroit — a diverse, thriving place cluttered with shops, churches and small manufacturing — was destroyed to make way for a giant car plant offering 4,000 jobs.
People still argue about the costs and benefits of that development.
Writing off the gaps on the map will not involve evictions on the scale of Poletown, but then nothing is coming to take the place of the bulldozed blocks; and sealing one neighbourhood's coffin might lead to the decline of the other neighbourhoods around it.
So far, Detroit city officials have pinned their redevelopment hopes on projects like the Poletown plant.
More political clout attaches to cutting the ribbon on one big factory (or on grandiose developments like the Renaissance Centre) than on sponsoring 1,000 small businesses.
There are other ideas on the horizon; enterprise zones in blighted areas, a cut in the city tax rate to lure in new residents and businesses, squeezing the services budget (and municipal unions have already accepted wage cuts).
But as long as this incremental approach remains half-hearted, wholesale abandonment of parts of the city begins to make grim sense.
Sadly, the city cannot do what is most needed: join its suburban neighbours in a regional government that does away with redundancies and evens out the huge inequities in school financing and municipal services.
(Detroit spends almost $1,000 per pupil a year, while the wealthy suburb of Bloomfield Hills spends almost twice that.)
Only consolidation with the suburbs could help the city recover some of the people who have left.
But the almost all-white suburbs will have none of it.
They wish the inner city, which is three-quarters black, would just disappear.
Getting the measure of trade
WASHINGTON, DC
The Clinton administration is often accused of utter confusion over trade policy.
It is beginning to defend itself
ON APRIL 30th Mickey Kantor, President Clinton's trade representative, announced a set of decisions under American trade laws.
He claimed that Japan discriminated against American firms in its public-sector procurement practices, and announced that he was reviewing whether Japan had met the terms of a 1990 agreement with America to purchase supercomputers.
He revealed too that he was examining the records of 16 countries, no less, and of the European Community, to see whether they granted adequate protection to the American holders of intellectual property rights.
Mr Kantor's actions, as so often, raised eyebrows abroad, and reopened the question of whether the Clinton administration has a coherent trade policy.
In fact, in a series of speeches and interviews in the first week in May, members of the administration have started to give an answer.
‘Coherence’ in trade policy is an elusive quality, whether or not the president takes active charge of it.
(With the exception of preparations last month for the visit of Kiichi Miyazawa, the prime minister of Japan, President Clinton has still not chaired a high-level meeting on the subject.)
America's trade laws are fiendishly complex.
They divide responsibility between Congress and a variety of federal agencies; they invest broad discretion in a variety of officers.
Their bark is often worse than their bite.
The only certain outcome of the April 30th announcements is a paperchase of bureaucratic meetings and interagency reviews: and high dudgeon abroad.
In theory, the administration could decide simply to ignore all the laws that give America unilateral power to impose sanctions on its trading partners.
Yet even this could not grant total coherence, since many of the trade laws can be triggered by private companies or pressure groups.
Mr Kantor, speaking as the lawyer he is, thinks that a policy of self-denial would bring the laws into disrepute.
On May 4th, before a meeting of the Council of the Americas, he said that the only way he could build support for a system of open trade was to apply the laws that Congress had put in place, and to hold America's partners to agreements they have made.
Hence the challenge to Japan on the supercomputer deal.
Carla Hills, George Bush's trade secretary, used to use language like this.
It was she who spoke of using American law as a crowbar to open foreign markets, and who said that the administration, though it might not much like it, was nonetheless bound to apply the Super-301 trade-retaliation measure then on the statute book.
The prepared texts of speeches by Mr Clinton and Mr Bush on trade policy are indistinguishable from each other.
Mr Clinton talked tough to Mr Miyazawa last month about market access; but it was Mr Bush who took a group of America's most protectionist businessmen with him to Japan.
Mr Kantor, before the Council of the Americas, gave a speech committing the administration to implementing a North American Free Trade Agreement by January 1st 1994; on the same day, he set out the administration's determination to conclude the Uruguay round of the GATT by December.
Why, then, is the administration so misunderstood?
Part of the reason is that, off-the-cuff, Mr Kantor has not yet learned to speak the language of trade buffs.
On May 4th he said in answer to a question, as he has implied before, that he was an ‘agnostic’ on free trade, protectionism, managed trade or anything; all he wanted was an ‘open world trading system’.
That ‘agnostic’, which sounded fair enough to Mr Kantor, could have carried an explosive charge across the oceans.
Foreign suspicion is also fuelled by reports that the administration is deeply divided on trade policy.
Laura Tyson, the chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, who is meant to be on the protectionist side of this debate, flatly denies this: those who believe it, she says, are living in a ‘different reality’.
Ms Tyson may protest too much; but she could certainly argue that at no time in the previous two administrations did everyone involved in trade policy sing from the same songbook.
It is an error to rewrite history to pretend that they did.
How do members of the administration themselves think trade policy has changed?
On May 4th, Mr Kantor gave four examples.
First, he said, the administration was more actively engaged in trade policy than the Bush people used to be.
Second, he argued that Mr Clinton had tied trade policy to domestic economic policy directly.
Third, he said that America's economic strength was its best security; and fourth, he said that America was now committed to leading the world to global growth.
Not much enlightenment there; the same reply could have been given at any time in the past four years.
But the previous day, when the same question was asked of Robert Rubin, who heads the National Economic Council in the White House, a rather different answer was given.
The president, said Mr Rubin, believed that a ‘two-way process’ was necessary to expand trade, and that he wanted to see ‘measurable progress’on the removal of formal or informal impediments to trade.
So that the point would not be overlooked, Mr Rubin deliberately drew attention to the phrase ‘measurable progress’.
A few days before, in an interview with The Economist, Ms Tyson had made precisely the same point.
The administration's trade policy towards Japan, she said, was based on the idea that if it concluded trade agreements with the Japanese, it wanted measures of their success.
She said that there was a variety of such measures.
Sometimes the measure would be evidence that the Japanese had changed a regulation; sometimes that the number of distributors of foreign goods had grown, or the rate of acceptance of foreign bids for contracts.
Sometimes, she continued, the appropriate measure would be the rate of growth in American exports of particular goods or the achievement of a certain market share.
Particular sectoral discussions, she continued, would carry with them their own specific measures.
Ms Tyson has supported the Japanese-American semiconductor agreements, the last of which set a proposed share of part of the Japanese chip market of 20%; she says that not all sectors should be treated to the ‘market-share’ approach, but that the administration reserves the right to use it where appropriate.
Although there have doubtless been examples of such a ‘results-oriented’ approach before — the semiconductor agreements were concluded by the Reagan and Bush administrations — Ms Tyson's emphasis on the point is new.
In traditional trade theory, rules set a framework within which the market, and not governments, determines what amounts of goods and services are sold in any territory.
At the limit, it is difficult to see how an emphasis on measured results is consistent with multilateralism; it is not possible to imagine that the GATT could police hundreds of agreements, each with its own predetermined measure of success.
For that reason, when Ms Tyson claims that it is a ‘terrible exaggeration’ to say that her approach amounts to managed trade, traditional free-traders, wedded to the advantages of multilateralism, will wonder what else it could be called.
There will certainly be concern abroad that one measure in the administration's locker is the growth of American exports.
What happened to the idea that America's power to open new markets was meant to bring benefits to all the world's traders?
Ranch economics
Deaf men talking
BOZEMAN, MONTANA
THE old west, as the legend goes, was won with the three Gs: God, guts and guns.
The new west seems to live by the three Ds: data, dogma and disputation.
Only a lawyer can thrive on that.
Bruce Babbitt, the interior secretary, stepped into this fetid atmosphere on April 30th when he chaired the first of four meetings in the west to hear testimony about grazing on federal land.
Ranchers turned out in force to hear him; the crowd was a bobbing sea of black and white cowboy hats.
The fundamental question to be answered was this: what is the purpose of allowing 26,000 ranchers to graze their livestock on 280m acres of Forest Service and Bureau of Land Management (BLM) lands?
No one could begin to agree on the answer.
Ranchers, who see themselves as the guardians of the west, say that grazing generates economic stability and feeds the nation.
Environmental groups disagree.
They point out that most beef comes from private, not public land; that the taxpayer deserves the highest economic return from grazing allotments; and that the current fee for grazing on public land, $1.86 per AUM (Animal Unit Month: the amount of forage needed to feed one cow and its calf, or five sheep, for a month) is a scandalous subsidy.
Ranchers boast of their family-run operations, threatened by creeping urbanisation (‘condos galore by 2004’); environmentalists talk darkly of large corporations, indifferent to the condition of the land, who are well able to pay the market rate for private forage, about $1.00 per AUM.
Some common ground emerged.
Most people agreed that ranchers need greater financial incentives to look after the land, and that a BLM pilot programme, which reduces grazing prices per AUM if the land is kept in good shape, ought to be extended.
Both the leaseholder and the federal land manager, it was agreed, should be held accountable for the condition of the rangeland.
And since grazing leases are treated as property by the Internal Revenue Service and are taxed accordingly, who could pay for managing public lands if the cows were given the boot?
Few were sure that the bikers and campers would.
Everyone listened with sympathy to the complaints of the land scientists, the only people who really know the land and understand it.
Typically, field scientists spend two or three years studying why the range in eastern Montana is not like the range in western Montana, and explaining to Washington why it should be managed differently — only to be told by bureaucrats that all rangeland planning must be the same everywhere.
These points apart, each side twisted the available data to suit its own opinion.
This put Mr Babbitt in a quandary.
The grazing question ought to be one of firm public policy, stated from the top.
Bill Clinton put it there, making land-use reform a part of his economic plan; but then backed down with unseemly haste when western senators objected.
The Clinton administration now thinks dialogue is the answer: that people, in Mr Babbitt's words, should ‘talk, talk, talk about this issue, until we don't want to talk about it any more.’
As Bozeman showed, that way lies chaos.
INTERNATIONAL
Under the eye of the police
FROM OUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT IN THE CHAPARE
COCA, the pretty plant cocaine is made from, keeps Shinahota alive.
Farmers, allowed to grow only limited quantities of the plant legally, come to this town in Bolivia's Chapare valley to peddle their wares.
Dried leaves of the stuff lie in heaps on the floor of the open-air market, waiting to be bundled up in burlap sacks.
The farmers remember the lawless boom times a decade ago, when they grew as much coca as they could manage for the drug traffickers who came from the other side of the continent to their market town.
Nowadays, thanks to fierce enforcement by UMOPAR, Bolivia's drug police, the dealers prefer to buy their goods elsewhere.
So efficient is the American-trained force that when asked whom they fear more, the drugs police or the thugs from the cartels, farmers say UMOPAR, without hesitation.
Although tens of millions of dollars have changed hands in the coca markets of the Chapare, living conditions remain miserable.
Bolivians have the shortest life expectancy in the Americas; not even half of them have access to safe drinking water.
Against this wretched background, the United Nations Drug-Control Programme has done something to ease the region's poverty, providing hospitals and basic services.
But, as its name suggests, UNDCP's main objective is to stop the flow of drugs.
The group has supported attempts to improve policing and to strengthen Bolivia's judicial system, but most of its efforts have gone towards ‘alternative development’.
This has provided coca growers with the training and tools needed to switch from coca to tea, bananas and livestock.
The scheme has also provided for the building of roads to take the goods to market, and other projects to help ease the transition.
But even its supporters admit that, at present, alternative development is not enough.
So long as Americans pay outrageous sums for cocaine, traffickers will continue to let enough crumbs trickle down to the farmers to make growing coffee or citrus an unattractive alternative.
Sandro Calvani, head of UNDCP's Bolivian operations, defends his group's activities, pointing out that his organisation started relief work in an area that had long been shunned by most other international agencies as too dangerous.
He also notes that it is increasingly difficult to persuade donors that uneconomic development schemes (and the roads and sewers that have accompanied them) should be paid for with drug-control money.
As a result, UNDCP now intends to concentrate on its other drug-control measures in Bolivia, such as tackling the growing problem of drug-taking among local children, and will leave many of its alternative-development projects in the hands of other UN agencies.
American officials in Bolivia, who also run development projects through the Agency for International Development, provide a more vigorous defence of alternative development.
In combination with policing and eradication, they say, the strategy has reduced coca cultivation in the region.
They argue that this is evidence that the broader war on drugs in the Andes is winnable.
But they exaggerate.
Although the reduction in coca growing in this part of Bolivia has been significant, drug dealers in the Andes have the same easy access to coca today as they had five years ago.
The crop has simply been driven to less-policed regions.
Illicit coca cultivation has dropped in the Chapare but has taken off in Bolivia's Beni valley and across the border in Brazil and Peru.
The American ambassador in Bolivia, Charles Bowers, still believes in the wisdom of George Bush's attack on the supply of cocaine, and insists that Bolivia has won its war on drugs.
His new boss, Bill Clinton, seems to disagree.
Though he has not officially announced a drugs policy, all indications are that Mr Clinton will turn America's attention away from cutting off supplies in the Andes to reducing demand at home.
Already there is nervous talk in Andean countries about cuts in drug-control money.
A touching of fingertips
FROM A CORRESPONDENT IN WASHINGTON, DC
The ninth round of Arab-Israeli peace talks produced a newly hopeful tone this week.
Two reports: on the hints of progress in Washington and on the mixed reaction in Israel
WHEN the Middle East peace talks began in October 1991, an official of the American State Department remarked that negotiations usually have three phases: measuring and testing adversaries, taking the requirements of the other side into account, and cutting deals.
In their ninth round, the talks in Washington may have limped into phase two.
A political debacle laid the groundwork for progress.
To lure the Palestinians back to the negotiations they suspended after Israel's expulsion of some 400 Islamic militants last December, the government of Yitzhak Rabin, Israel's prime minister, allowed the return of 30 other activists deported between the 1967 war and the beginning of the Palestinian uprising, or intifada, in 1987.
The names of the returning deportees were announced triumphantly in Washington on April 28th by the Palestinians' spokeswoman, Hanan Ashrawi.
She hailed the homecoming as the first concrete achievement of the peace talks.
‘We have begun unravelling the whole policy of deportation,’ she said.
Palestinian negotiators asserted that the Israelis were at last beginning to appreciate the damage their punitive measures had done to popular support for the peace talks in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.
There has indeed been an obvious effort by Mr Rabin's government to bolster the Palestine Liberation Organisation at the expense of the Islamic groups that reject the notion of peace with the Jewish state.
While Mrs Ashrawi celebrated the return of the 30, the rejectionists' deportees — drawn mainly from Hamas and Islamic Jihad — continued to fume on their hillside in southern Lebanon.
Another Israeli concession was the presence at the negotiating table of Feisal Husseini, the unofficial lieutenant of the PLO leader, Yasser Arafat, in the occupied territories and a resident of Jerusalem.
On May 3rd the Israelis sat down with two Palestinian academics, Ahmed Khalidi from Britain and Camille Mansour from France, who belong to the diaspora of 4m or so Palestinians who live outside Israel and the occupied territories.
This, too, was a concession.
When Israel had a Likud government, it refused to hold bilateral talks with any Palestinian from Jerusalem (lest Israeli sovereignty over the city be challenged) or from outside the occupied territories (lest discussion should turn to the refugees' ‘right of return’).
There was also evidence of greater Israeli flexibility on fundamentals.
At their previous meeting in December, the Palestinians had derided Israeli proposals for interim self-government as ‘Swiss cheese — they get the cheese, we get the holes.’
This time, they said, there was something to chew on.
They especially liked Israel's affirmations that negotiations on the final status of the occupied territories would be based on UN Security Council Resolution 242, the 1967 land-for-peace document that all the Arab delegations regard as holy writ.
Israel's withdrawal from the West Bank and the position of its final borders are not yet formally on the agenda.
First, says Mr Rabin, there must be a period of Palestinian self-government under Israel.
But Nabil Shaath, the PLO's adviser to the Palestinian delegation, detected ‘a new willingness to admit the link between the interim and final phases.’
He said the Israelis had indicated that a body elected to govern the Palestinians for the five-year interim could have some legislative powers, a central Palestinian demand.
Before December's adjournment, Israel had offered nothing more than an administrative body.
Previously, the Palestinians refused to discuss details before determining an overall framework for a settlement.
This time they formed working-groups with the Israelis to discuss land and water, human rights and self-government.
This work promises to be arduous, especially when it comes to deal with Jewish settlements in the territories, the future of Jerusalem, and security.
Israel, having bent on other matters, continues to insist that the future of the settlements and Jerusalem cannot be discussed before the negotiations on the final status of the territories, which are not due to begin until the third year of self-government.
Despite their pleasanter tone, the talks may still founder on these issues.
The Palestinians refuse to draw the line between the interim agreement on self-government and the final determination of borders as sharply as Israel does.
They would like to extract a declaration of intent, making it clear that, when the time comes, Israel will indeed implement Resolution 242 by withdrawing from the occupied lands.
In the meantime, they want Israel to give them full authority over all the land in the West Bank and Gaza (except, temporarily, over the Jewish settlements); to yield control over the West Bank's water sources; and to allow an arbitration committee with members from Jordan, Egypt, Russia and America to oversee the interim period.
Until they get such promises, they will be reluctant to accept Israel's offer to hand over more or less immediate control of matters such as health, education, tourism and policing.
Doing so, they argue, would be tantamount to giving up the intifada and accepting the continuation of military rule, without a firm promise that Israel would eventually withdraw.
This is a tall order.
Yet both sides expressed satisfaction that the Israeli-Palestinian talks were finally catching up with the concurrent negotiations between Israel and its other Arab adversaries, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria.
The Israeli-Syrian track got off to the fastest start last year, when the new Rabin government promised to trade at least some of the Golan Heights for peace.
This week, however, the only progress was the addition of an adjective: the chief Syrian negotiator, Mouaffak Allaf, said Syria was willing to trade ‘full’ peace for full Israeli withdrawal.
Israel's negotiator, Itamar Rabinovitch, replied that he needed to hear in far greater detail what sort of peace Syria had in mind.
US ex machina
All sides spoke approvingly — it would have been tactless not to — of the more active role taken by the Clinton administration, which unlike its predecessor has promised to be a ‘full partner’ in the talks.
Under the Bush administration, State Department officials met the delegates only at the beginning and end of each round.
This time the Americans have been talking to negotiators as often as three times a day, sitting with one side and then another to explore positions on such controversial issues as the disposition of authority over West Bank land.
The Arabs' apprehensions that President Clinton's administration would be less ‘even-handed’(ie, more pro-Israeli) than George Bush's administration seem to be evaporating.
The Americans promised to give the Palestinians statistics on the extent of Jewish settlement in the occupied territories.
This was information the Palestinians sought in vain from the State Department during Mr Bush's presidency.
A meeting is planned between Mr Clinton and all the delegation heads.
So far, though, the Americans have not yet moved from the corridors to the negotiating table itself.
They may have to, if the Middle East's old enemies are ever to move on to phase three and cut a deal.
France and Africa
Francly silly
STARTLED is the unsuspecting visitor when he meets his first restaurant bill in one of the chic capitals of French-speaking Africa.
Prices, even for locally grown coffee or fresh lobster, are often not much lower than in Europe.
Compared with what the humble pound sterling can buy in neighbouring English-speaking countries, like Ghana, prices border on the outrageous.
The chief reason is the Communauté Financière Africaine (CFA) franc, a currency shared by 13 French-speaking African countries, which has been pegged to the French franc, without being devalued, for an impressive 45 years.
Like the ecu note Europe has never had, the CFA-franc note can be used anywhere in the zone, and the French guarantee to convert it at a rate of 50 CFA francs to one French franc.
Economists reckon that the real exchange rate of the CFA franc is now overvalued by anything from 20-60%, depending on the country.
There are growing rumblings in Africa and France that the arrangement has to change.
Until the early 1980s, the CFA zone gained from the relative stability and monetary discipline the CFA franc bestowed on its member governments.
Inflation was steadier and growth stronger than in the rest of Africa.
Yet, as the decade wore on, the bigger CFA economies — Côte d'Ivoire, Gabon, Cameroon and Congo — continued to live beyond their means, as if the booms in oil and commodities had never turned to bust.
Between 1986 and 1990, the CFA zone performed worse even than the rest of Africa.
In the past six years, living standards in Côte d'Ivoire, the CFA's giant, have dropped by a third.
In an effort to restore their competitiveness, the CFA countries have tried every trick in the book except one: devaluation.
The cost of keeping the CFA franc pegged so high has become more acute since non-CFA neighbours, Nigeria and Ghana, devalued their own currencies, making their exports more competitive.
This has hurt ex-French exporters, like Côte d'Ivoire, which sell the same crops.
More and more Nigerians also take advantage of the price differences to do a nice business smuggling goods across the border into the franc zone.
The economic case for a devaluation of the CFA franc is growing in strength.
Devaluing would not guarantee growth, but not devaluing has led only to economic stagnation.
At the World Bank and IMF, most of the people working on Africa are said to believe privately that there is no long-term alternative.
Internal studies argue this point.
Yet the two institutions continue to tip-toe around the subject in public, talking in bizarre code about ‘the need for certain measures’ to be taken ‘to restore competitiveness’.
Last year the Bank's director for French West Africa, an outspoken advocate of devaluation of the CFA franc, was moved to a less controversial job.
This sensitivity seems to stem from a fear of offending not French-speaking Africa, but France itself.
France sits on the board of the two West African central banks which manage the CFA currency, and the French would have to approve any decision by the 13 member states to devalue.
Yet French interests in the region, and hence in the value of the currency, range far wider.
For one thing, lots of big French companies do business in the zone, selling Africans cars or scent, building government offices or logging timber.
According to one recent estimate, half of the French aid budget to Africa flows back to France in contracts for French companies or consultants.
The value of French assets in Africa would shrink considerably if the CFA franc were devalued.
Many rich Africans also benefit from the status quo.
They like being able to afford French champagne, to send their children to schools in France or to take holidays on the French Riviera.
Because devaluation has been postponed for so long, the shock to living standards would rattle many civil servants (though export-oriented farmers would be better off).
This has heightened the political risk of doing it.
And since some French political parties get financial backing from certain French-speaking leaders, they have no clear interest in offending their friends by championing devaluation.
The line from Paris so far has been consistent: devaluation would do more harm than good, by fuelling inflation and upsetting stability.
At a Francophone African summit in Senegal last July, mutterings about the possibility of devaluation by some African leaders prompted a delegation of four of them to visit Paris to discuss the matter with President François Mitterrand.
The group decided, announced the president, that the best course was to keep the value of the CFA franc as it was.
The subject, however, has not gone away.
Newspapers in French-speaking Africa increasingly run stories about the need for a devaluation to rescue their economies.
Some opposition leaders, such as Abdoulaye Wade, a candidate in Senegal's presidential election earlier this year, have called for devaluation.
The World Bank has halted almost all structural-adjustment lending to the CFA zone, on the ground that the zone's members have not met all the conditions needed ‘to restore competitiveness’.
Meanwhile, the cost to the French Treasury of making up the budget deficits of its African friends is mounting.
A growing belief that a devaluation is inevitable has led to a damaging flight of capital out of the CFA zone.
Rich Africans have been spotted arriving in France with bags stuffed full of CFA franc notes, which they convert into French francs while the rate is good.
The new French government is said to be taking a fresh look at the matter.
Not before time.
Mozambique
Slowly may do it
FROM A SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT IN CHIMOIO
SPORTING blue berets and Uzi submachineguns as they hurtle along in their spanking new vehicles, 1,000 Italian soldiers have started to patrol the 300-kilometre (190-mile) road that runs from the Mozambican port of Beira westward to landlocked Zimbabwe.
The Alpine brigade from Turin is based in Chimoio, half-way along the route.
Surviving on imported pasta and freshly baked pizza, the Italians are a crucial part of the United Nations operation that has the job of maintaining the peace and running elections in a country emerging from 16 years of civil war.
The spectacle is one of peace.
Lorries, buses and taxis move freely along the Beira road, as well as on secondary roads that had been closed to traffic for years.
In the surrounding fields, men and women harvest maize, sorghum and groundnuts.
Hundreds of thousands of Mozambicans have escaped the grip of hunger thanks to the ceasefire, which took hold last November, and to the good rains that have at last broken a severe drought.
Unfortunately many of the millions of tonnes of maize pledged to Mozambique during the drought are only just arriving.
One hamlet outside Chimoio is said by a nutrition expert to have more maize than it can swallow, or even store.
Not only is the food aid late but it is depressing the market for peasants who produced surplus maize for sale (see box above).
Yet the government intends to ask for more food relief this year.
Aid workers say that hoes, fertiliser, blankets and clothes are badly needed, but that maize is not.
The region around Chimoio is swollen by 400,000 people who sought refuge from the civil war.
Across the country, more than 5m of Mozambique's 16m people have been displaced by the war between President Joaquim Chissano's government forces and the Renamo rebels.
Now, as the peace seems to hold, families are beginning to go home.
But most of them are keeping their options open, sending part of the family back to their traditional shambas or plots, but keeping some people in the city.
They want to retain their place of refuge should war break out again.
They are wise to do so.
Although things have gone well so far, the Mozambican peace process is far from secure.
The business of disarming the 20,000 Renamo rebels and the 40,000 government troops has barely started.
Several thousand government troops have assembled at a demobilisation camp just outside Maputo, the capital.
But most of the 49 designated assembly points exist only on maps; UN officials have so far surveyed only 20 of them and have not yet set up camps suitable for an organised demobilisation.
Afonso Dhlakama, Renamo's leader, says that his fighters will give up their arms only when the camps are ready to receive them.
He himself has declined to move to Maputo to take part in the joint commissions that are supposed to supervise the disarmament of troops, humanitarian assistance and the election.
He says that he will not go to Maputo until he receives the money that the UN promised to him and to other party leaders to start up their election campaign; the UN says that it is still waiting for the donors to deliver the money.
Everything is going slowly in Mozambique.
The UN does not mind too much: it is determined not to repeat the mistakes made in Angola when it was landed with an inadequate mandate and impossible timetable.
It was told to ‘verify’ the Angolan peace process with a few hundred unarmed observers, and given neither the instructions nor the resources to disarm the fighters.
When Jonas Savimbi, the Angolan rebel leader, did not win the election, he resumed the war.
In Mozambique things at least started right.
In December, after lobbying from Aldo Ajello, the Italian who is the UN secretary-general's special representative in Mozambique, the Security Council agreed to an ambitious peace plan including more than 7,000 people (4,000 soldiers and 3,000 administrators and monitors) and a budget of $132m.
Mr Ajello stressed that the election campaign would not begin until all army and Renamo troops had been gathered in the assembly points and disarmed, and a new national army put together from both sides.
The budget, now whittled down to $160m, has only recently been approved by the General Assembly committee that does such jobs.
The arrival of the Italian soldiers was held up for a time while the Italian government bargained for an Italian to command the UN forces (the commander is, as it happens, a Brazilian).
It is now hoped that the full peacekeeping force will be in place by the end of the month.
Mr Ajello's officials, who take up five floors of Maputo's Rovuma Hotel, are working on a new timetable.
The suggestion is that elections cannot be held until mid-1994.
For the moment all is quiet.
But further delay could be dangerous.
Like the peasants who hedge their bets, Mozambique sits uneasily between war and peace.
Overstuffing Africa
ALL too often in Africa, outsiders give charity with one hand and deliver a slap with the other.
Farmers are usually the victims.
Many African farmers who are helped by western aid agencies to improve their crops find that they cannot sell what they grow because local markets are swamped by cheap western imports — or by food aid.
Two reports published this week describe the destructive impact of such policies, one on farmers in Somalia, the other in West Africa.
Most aid specialists agree that, once the worst of a famine is over, the distribution of free food should be kept to a minimum to avoid flooding local markets.
In Somalia, says African Rights, a British human-rights group, this wisdom seems to have been forgotten.
* The price of cereals in Somali markets, it says, had fallen back to their seasonal levels even before American soldiers arrived last December.
Somali aid workers gave warning that, if imported food aid continued to flow in, local farmers would have difficulty selling their own produce.
The warnings were ignored.
By March this year the price of sorghum, wheat and maize in local markets had been depressed so far that farmers were complaining.
One farmer told the authors that it cost him 194,000 Somali shillings ($14) to grow 100 kilos (220lbs) of maize, which he could sell for a mere 55,000 shillings at the local market.
He said he would not start planting again unless prices rose.
Pushing down the high price of food during a famine is desirable.
But if prices continue to drop, because food aid continues to be pumped in, the fragile livelihoods of farmers can be harmed.
One logical solution recommended in the report would be to stop shipping in western grain and to start buying Somali farmers' crops instead.
Yet this would bump up against the western world's self-serving policy of subsidised farming, which explains a lot of its enthusiasm for shipping grain to Africa.
A second report, from Christian Aid, another British charity, shows how the West's policies of subsidised farming can inflict damage on African farmers in good times as well as lean.
** Cattle farmers in the poor countries of the Sahel walk for days to bring their animals to market.
Until the mid-1980s, merchants bought their cattle and drove them south, where the climate is less favourable to cattle rearing.
Nowadays, however, the merchants are gone.
This is because the European Community dumps low-quality beef, at great cost to the European taxpayer, on West African markets, where it sells at half the price of locally produced beef.
Naturally, Africans cannot compete.
In 1975, says the report, cattle from the Sahel accounted for two-thirds of beef eaten in Côte d'Ivoire.
Now it accounts for less than a quarter.
In 1991 alone, the EC dumped 54m tonnes of frozen and chilled beef in West Africa, much of it from France and Holland.
This impoverishes the 4m Sahelians, most of whom have no alternative to cattle farming.
It can also damage the health of townspeople in the south, few of whom understand the risks associated with defrosting frozen food.
The stuff dumped in Africa is of particularly poor quality: the EC offers extra subsidies for exports of the sort of fatty beef European shoppers increasingly turn their noses up at.
Some African countries have tried to fight back.
In 1991 Côte d'Ivoire slapped an import tax on frozen beef.
But European exporters simply thawed their beef before unloading.
Others shipped it to Ghana and smuggled it over the border.
West Africa, which includes the poor Sahelian countries, is a vulnerable target; the EC offers no special subsidies for beef exports to America, Japan, Latin America or other bits of Africa.
The absurdity of beef dumping is all the greater because the EC claims to be trying to support African cattle farmers.
At the same time as shipping packs of frozen fatty beef carcases to West Africa, it spends aid money on improving cattle breeds in Mali and Senegal, on refrigerating abattoirs in Burkina Faso and on fattening cattle in Côte d'Ivoire.
Rampant doves
FROM OUR ISRAEL CORRESPONDENT
ISRAEL'S prime minister, Yitzhak Rabin, this week upbraided his more garrulous cabinet colleagues for talking too doveishly about peace.
At a cabinet meeting on May 5th, Mr Rabin said ministers who expressed their willingness to withdraw from all of the Golan Heights, and to treat with the Palestine Liberation Organisation, had undermined Israel's negotiators in Washington.
But the cabinet doves seemed unperturbed.
Uzi Baram, the minister of tourism, said baldly that it was thanks to the PLO that the peace talks had now resumed after their long suspension.
He and Moshe Shahal, the minister for police, pronounced themselves in favour of a total withdrawal from the Golan in return for full peace with Syria.
Mr Shahal, moreover, has been discussing the creation of a Palestinian police force for the West Bank and Gaza.
This idea, called for in the 1978 Camp David accords, is anathema to the Jewish settlers there.
On May 3rd, in an imaginative charade played out before invited cameramen, a group of settlers dressed as ‘PLO Police’ set up roadblocks outside Jerusalem and pretended to stop and harass Israeli drivers.
But the public reaction seemed one of amused appreciation rather than of apprehension.
The gimmick's failure underlined the difficulties the peace talks are causing for the right.
The Likud party, in particular, has two problems.
One is that, when it was in government, it too backed the idea of Palestinian self-government.
This makes it harder to wax indignant at the ideas being canvassed in Washington.
The other is that Mr Rabin's decision to seal off the occupied territories — the closure is now in its second month — has made most Israelis feel a lot safer, and some of them a lot happier about giving up the territories altogether.
At a parliamentary caucus this week, Ronnie Milo, a former minister, argued that the Likud needed a big idea of its own.
His was the ‘Gaza-first’ policy, under which Israel would give the Strip self-governing powers unilaterally, even before an agreement was negotiated with the Palestinians.
On the Likud's opposite wing, Ariel Sharon and his followers advocate a repudiation of the entire autonomy scheme, and the annexation of large areas of the West Bank.
These hardliners argue that a clear-cut action of that kind would be easier to understand, and ultimately more popular, than the Likud's present policy of supporting Palestinian autonomy in principle while opposing it in practice.
Benjamin ‘Bibi’ Netanyahu, the recently elected leader of the dispirited party, is concerned above all to maintain unity, and has not yet shown his own hand.
He fulminated in the Knesset (parliament) this week against the government's ‘appeasement’, but stopped short of disavowing the Camp David accords and the Washington peace talks — both of which, after all, were entered into by Likud governments.
Ideological and tactical qualms gnaw at the settlers too.
On April 30th, a Golan resident proclaimed in a radio interview that he and his friends would open fire on Israeli soldiers if they were ordered to do so by the elected leadership of the 12,000-odd Golan settlers.
The settlers have been shocked at the ease with which the idea of withdrawal from some or all of the Heights has gained currency in mainstream politics.
Within a matter of months, such talk — formerly condemned by middle-of-the-road Israelis as defeatist and unpatriotic — has spread from the fringes of the left to the cabinet table.
Hitherto, the Golan leaders have been reluctant to join forces with the 120,000 West Bank settlers in the struggle against withdrawal.
They believed their own cause enjoyed wider public support, because of the Golan's obvious strategic value and also because the area is largely uninhabited, whereas nearly 2m Palestinians live in the West Bank and Gaza.
Now the West Bank settlers themselves are at a loss as to how best to present their case.
In an internal memorandum leaked this week, some suggested stressing the strategic and political danger that Palestinian self-government would cause if it led to the creation of an independent Palestinian state.
Others proposed the slogan, ‘You can't sell your own mother,’ with the message focusing on the religious and historical bonds between the Jewish people and the Biblical towns of Hebron, Nablus and Bethlehem.
But the truth, suddenly, is that everything looks negotiable.
BRITAIN
Private schools
SWOT or go under
AVAILABLE now: an unequalled business opportunity.
Long-established prestige products; state-run competition suffering battered brand-image and dreadful industrial relations; therefore, floreat Etona, and the other 2,446 British independent schools.
But these schools are not flourishing.
As boarding-school heads assembled at Ambleside in the Lake District for their annual conference on May 4th-6th, the 1993 census by ISIS, the independent schools information service, showed that the number of boarders continues to fall.
It was down by 6.2% between 1992 and 1993.
Taking day-pupils and boarders together, 1.5% fewer went to non-state schools in 1993.
This second year of decline followed eight years of modest growth; but over the long term independent schools have been losing market share.
They educated 7.7% of Britain's children in 1961, but 6.7% in 1991.
John Haden, headmaster of Wymondham College in Norfolk and chairman of the Boarding Schools Association, tried to get beyond dismal economics in his speech to the conference: ‘I want to move on this week from value-added to added values…we need confidence in the values, moral and spiritual, which our schools uphold and celebrate’, he said.
Yet values do not pay the bursar's (schoolese for finance director's) bills, unless they sell.
Nor does unemployment benefit: recession has meant problems for many parents.
Last year, the proportion of pupils getting help with their fees rose above 25% as schools switched from buying new computer labs to bailing out hard-up parents.
Useful advice to the heads is contained in a report by Michael Hay and Karl Spencer of the London Business School.
The secret of success, they say, is a SWOT analysis — Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, Threats — of each school's market position.
Does the school have the right balance of ages, abilities and genders?
Is the school being starved of resources to subsidise the sixth-form?
Are exam results good enough?
Private schools are doomed to adapt to a changing market.
Traditional sources of pupils are drying up: for example, the children of people in the armed forces.
The number of British children of boarding age will barely increase in the 1990s.
But there are new opportunities too: internationally mobile Euro-executives, the ambitious nouveaux riches from the Far East (Hong Kong is a great recruiting ground); the sons and daughters of two-career parents, and of the separated and divorced.
The schools' handicap is their prices.
Fees have outstripped both inflation and earnings (see chart).
A child at Harrow costs £11,925 ($18,600) basic a year; at Eton £11,610 and at Roedean for girls £11,655.
When better-off Britons were enjoying the tax cuts of the 1980s, they could cope with such hefty increases.
The 1990s are looking tougher.
And the government is bent upon gingering up the competition — the state's free schools.
Meanwhile, radical cost-cutting in independent schools has hardly begun.
Staff costs amount to 60-80% of total costs, yet redundancy remains rare.
Teacher-pupil ratios remain sacred.
Private-school staff resist performance-related pay, so the lazy and incompetent can earn as much as inspirational enthusiasts.
Headmasters and their bursars — often ex-military men, strong on values and traditions, weak on commercial instinct — must question such havens of their schools' values.
Otherwise private education will price itself out of its newly toughened market.
And on the seventh day…
ON A Sunday morning, the average Tory voter is as likely to be queuing at a supermarket check-out as at the communion rail.
This finding may explain why attempts to liberalise the archaic Sunday-trading laws of England and Wales (Scottish shops can open as they please) have split the Conservatives quite as deeply as the Maastricht Treaty.
Even Margaret Thatcher in her prime could not carry her party on the question of Sundays.
In 1986 Tory backbenchers lobbied by the Christian ‘Keep Sunday Special’ campaign joined with shop-worker-wary Labourites to defeat a government plan to allow Sunday shopping.
The government is now set to have a fresh stab at changing what all sides in the debate agree are murky laws.
Later this year, MPs will be allowed a free vote on three alternative reforms, ranging from the restrictive to the liberal.
To help them decide, a new study of 700 retailers and 1,700 consumers produced for the Home Office by London Economics, a consultancy, spells out the likely impact of each choice.
If the religious lobby has its way, Sundays will certainly be duller for the heathen.
Around 38% of shops currently stay open on a Sunday.
Under the ‘Keep Sunday Special’ option, which would keep most big shops shut, this would fall to just 5%.
There would be a rise of some 20,000 in the number of retail jobs — because more small shopkeepers could make ends meet — but shopworkers' average annual wages would fall by £170, for they would miss out on higher Sunday pay-rates.
A more liberal choice proposed by the Shop Hours Reform Council — allowing large shops to open for up to six hours on a Sunday, and small ones for as long as they wanted — would encourage almost half of all shops to do so.
Shop-workers' wages would rise by £50 a year, but there would be 5,000 fewer of them than there are now.
Under the third option — complete deregulation — almost two-thirds of shops would open and average salaries would rise by £135 a year, but 20,000 workers would lose their jobs.
None of the proposals would raise overall retail sales or have more than a tiny effect on prices.
The ‘Keep Sunday Special’ option has a lot of support among MPs.
In January 214 (31%) of them voted for a private member's bill based on it (which has little chance of becoming law).
But the Special brigade should take note of one last finding.
Around two-thirds of consumers polled had shopped on a Sunday in the preceding month, doing on average 5% of their weekly shopping on the sabbath.
Asked how much of their weekly shopping they would do on a Sunday if all shops were open, they answered, on average, 12%.
Shoppers in full-time work said 16%.
That inclination to Sunday-shop will take some stopping.
Do come in
IMAGINE.
A hot day in August.
Buckingham Palace has just been opened to the public, and several hundred people, ready to fork out the £8 ($12.50) admission charge, wait patiently.
The queen has graciously consented to open her London house to the public for two months every summer, and they want to sample royal glasnost before the offer expires, at the end of 1997.
They could not buy tickets in advance, so they queue like docile cattle.
The queue moves slowly, because of security checks.
Some would like a drink, but drinks are not allowed.
Some would like to smoke, but that is absolutely out: a fire at Buckingham Palace while it tries to raise money for fire-gutted Windsor Castle would not be amusing.
Other visitors badly need to experience the royal lavatories: nobody knows where they are.
Once in, the queue is moved on briskly, giving the visitors little time to tell their Vermeers from their Rubenses.
None of these imaginings will necessarily happen.
Yet cattle-pen queues, minimal information and a brisk trot past the attractions are problems common to many top British tourist spots, according to Holiday Which?, a magazine published by the Consumers' Association.
In its avoid-like-the-plague category Holiday Which? puts the crown jewels at the Tower of London (£6.70 admission charge; 1,923,520 visitors in 1991, 75% of them foreigners); and Stonehenge, Britain's biggest chunk of pre-history (£2.70 admission charge; 615,377 visitors in 1991).
It says Stonehenge is a disgrace: concrete underpasses, a café with nowhere to sit, rotting lavatories, and a cramped shop.
British tourism flourishes despite such shortcomings.
Britain is one of the world's top five tourist destinations.
Tourism adds £25 billion a year, or 3.4%, to Britain's GDP, and earns 4.2% of total exports.
In 1992 Britain had 18.1m visitors from overseas (a 9% increase on 1991); they spent £7.6 billion.
Not bad for a rain-soaked island somewhere off the northern coast of Europe.
But London hotels cannot expect to go on charging high prices when they cannot even be bothered to welcome guests in their own language.
Visitors balk at Britain's free-market ways if they first experience them in overpriced minicabs lurking at Heathrow airport and Victoria station, or in greedy moneychangers.
Just outside Covent Garden's underground station, the commission is 9.5%, with a minimum of £2.50; changing enough dollars to get you into Buckingham Palace would cost you a quarter of that money.
Imagine.
What might those tourist figures be if British charms such as Buckingham Palace were matched with Swiss or Austrian standards of professional hospitality?
House prices
From booms, deliver us
The despond in the housing market is fading.
It is time for the government to act to protect it from future ecstasy
RECENT headlines proclaiming that house prices will leap next year have brought cheer throughout Britain.
Most people reckon that a healthy housing market (by which they mean rising prices) will ensure a healthy economy.
But the belief that a rise in house prices is always good news is flawed.
The British obsession with betting on homes has been a prime cause of Britain's boom-bust cycles.
Green shoots are now sprouting all along Acacia Avenue.
The Halifax Building Society's house-price index jumped by 1.6% in April, after a 1.4% rise in March.
The Halifax says that mortgage applications this year are 40% up on 1992.
Estate agents also report a sharp increase in their business in the past couple of months.
In some areas of London, gazumping has returned, as buyers have found a shortage of good properties.
The strongest activity has been at the bottom end of the market, where there is considerable pent-up demand from first-time buyers who have delayed buying over the past few years, for fear that house prices would fall further.
Small wonder that first-time buyers are now returning: buying a home has rarely been cheaper.
Not only has the ratio of average house prices to average earnings fallen from a peak of 4.5 in 1989, to 3.2, but mortgage rates have tumbled to their lowest level for 25 years.
Add the two factors together, and the average mortgage payments of a first-time buyer have fallen from 30% of earnings in 1990 to 12% today — the lowest for more than 20 years (see chart on next page).
Britain has seen three house-price booms in the past two decades.
Will history repeat itself in the 1990s?
If asked this question last year, almost all economists would have predicted that the large stock of unsold properties (due to a record number of mortgage repossessions) would depress house prices for years to come.
House-price booms were seen as a thing of the past.
First, the gurus argued, this slump had produced the first fall in house prices since the early 1950s.
As a result, nearly 2m home-buyers were stuck with houses worth less than their mortgages (ie, with ‘negative equity’).
This, it was claimed, had profoundly shaken confidence in bricks and mortar as an investment.
A second argument was that Britain was entering a low-inflation era, reducing the incentive to buy a house as a hedge against inflation.
Lastly, the number of potential first-time buyers in their 20s was set to fall over the next two decades, reducing demand for homes.
Two of these arguments now look bogus.
Inflation is far from dead, and surveys suggest that most young people still want to buy a home of their own at some stage.
Moreover, the overhang of unsold properties is evaporating much faster than expected.
John Wriglesworth, the housing analyst at UBS, a Swiss bank, estimates that the stock of unsold homes has already fallen by a third over the past year.
He reckons it will disappear by the end of 1993, so increased demand will then spill over into higher prices.
Mr Wriglesworth expects no increase in house prices over 1993 as a whole, but he forecasts that average prices nationwide will rise by 7% in the year to the fourth quarter of 1994 and by as much as 10% in London.
Several other economists agree that there could be a bounce in prices next year.
But that does not necessarily make a boom.
The ambitions of many first-timers to buy a home may be frustrated by the more cautious attitude of lenders.
In the 1980s boom, 100% mortgages were available.
Today, 90-95% of a property's value is the maximum, and because of conservative valuations (often 10-15% below the purchase price), first-time buyers are having to find deposits as large as 20%.
Talk of a double-digit price boom is therefore premature, while the good news remains that house prices will rise in real terms next year.
But wait a minute.
Why are rising prices good news?
Those with negative equity clearly benefit from higher prices, but many others gain from lower ones.
First-time buyers can afford more than a broom cupboard, and those wishing to trade-up to a bigger house get better value for money.
It would be no bad thing if a more subdued housing market made Britons less obsessive about investing every last penny in their homes in the quest for easy returns.
Britain's high rate of owner-occupation (68%) has harmed its economy.
It restricts the mobility of workers and so keeps unemployment higher than it need be: people who own their homes are less willing to move to another area to find a job.
In Britain almost two-thirds of 25- to 29-year-olds buy their homes, compared with only 15% in Germany.
Britain has the smallest private-rental sector of any industrial economy, accounting for only 7% of all tenure, compared with 45% in Germany and 33% in America.
Britain's housing market also acts as an engine for inflation.
High home ownership and heavy borrowing give voters a vested interest in inflation, and exacerbate the economy's cycles.
The boom in house prices in the 1980s powered the subsequent surge in inflation, and hence the recession.
Today's house-price cheer has a good chance of fuelling tomorrow's repeat.
Rather than revel in the recovery in house prices, therefore, a bold government would act now to prevent the next house-price boom, and thereby help make the longed-for economic recovery more durable.
Its wisest move would be to encourage the renting of houses by scrapping the tax advantages that favour house-owning over house-renting — especially the tax relief on mortgage-interest payments.
Election blues
The Conservative party looked set to lose a by-election in Newbury — previously a safe Tory seat — narrowing its thin Commons majority.
There were 19 candidates, including anti-Maastrichters.
The Conservatives' best hope for the county council elections, held on the same day, was to contain losses.
Hard labour
Gordon Brown, the shadow chancellor, tried to flesh out his party's economic philosophy with a paper underlining Labour's break with public ownership.
He also accused the Tories of ‘double standards’ in enforcing a 1.5% ceiling on public-sector pay while bosses' salaries rise ever upwards.
Britain's best-paid businessman, Peter Wood, of Direct Line, a telephone insurance firm, nearly doubled his pay this year to £10m ($16m).
Since February sterling has risen by over 5% against the D-mark.
Manufacturers are starting to worry about their exports.
Fine mess
Kenneth Clarke, the home secretary, agreed to back down on some of the ‘absurd’ aspects of the government's criminal justice reforms.
Means-related fines, in particular, have aroused the ire of middle-income earners.
One man was fined £1,200 for dropping a crisp packet (cut on appeal to £48).
Sorely tested
Blows continued to rain on the government's education reforms.
Head teachers decided to obstruct school performance league tables; a second teachers' union voted to boycott the national curriculum tests; and Lord Skidelsky, a Tory member of the council which sets the tests, resigned.
He accused the education department of a ‘bunker mentality’.
Bird brains A Welsh rugby team had to play a Spanish soccer team during a tour, after a language mix-up in arranging the game.
The Welsh lost 8-4.
At soccer.
A pet budgerigar, lost half-a-mile from its home, was returned to its owner.
A passer-by had heard it squawk: ‘I live at No 7 Strawberry Close, Nailsea, got that?’
Maastricken Hurd
He was ashamed.
He glanced at the speech again and it, too, seemed leaden, hopeless.
He swallowed an Alka-Seltzer, lay on his bed and tried the thriller which he had brought with him…
Would a second Alka-Seltzer keep the Devil and damnation at bay?
He stumbled back to bed and slept uneasily.
A FLEETING snapshot, this, of the Douglas Hurd you never see, the minister tormented by doubt, safely if thinly disguised as a fictitious character, in one of the novelist British foreign secretary's self-revealing stories about a defence secretary forced to justify the sending of British boys to die in a Balkanesque quagmire called ‘Caucasia’.
The real Mr Hurd never lets such doubts show, at least in public.
But the suspicion grows that he is losing, ever so slightly, his customary assurance.
Are British foreign policy and its chief practitioner entering an Alka-Seltzer phase?
How fast the political wheel turns.
A month ago, the smart press echoed with I-told-you-so reminders that Mr Hurd, the classiest act in the government, would have been a better prime minister than Mr Major.
Never underplay the Tory party's ruthlessness towards a limping leader, we were told.
Do not forget Mr Hurd's record for soothing nerves and conciliating Tory antagonists.
Remember how smoothly he glided from Edward Heath's hip-pocket to Margaret Thatcher's handbag and on to Mr Major's glass of warm beer.
This man has the safest pair of hands in the party.
Perhaps, mused the pundits, he is needed now — at the very top.
He has been in serious office since 1979, in cabinet for nine years.
But he goes back a lot further — writing key speeches in Number Ten during the Heath government two decades ago.
Even earlier, as a diplomat in Beijing and at the United Nations in New York in the 1950s, then as a high-flyer at the elbow of two heads of the Foreign Office, he was marked for big things.
More recently, he has been singled out as just about the only member of the cabinet blessed with the combined talents of toughness, intellect, experience and unsullied reputation.
‘Hurd's shares,’ wrote Sir Alastair Burnet in late March, ‘have been rising conspicuously.’
Yet, a few weeks on, Mr Hurd, at 63, looks depressed and frustrated: entangled in legal thickets, trapped in diplomatic elephant holes, waiting ignominiously on the Americans, watched warily by continental Europeans, outpaced by events.
In other words, expect whispers that he is ripe for voluntary retirement in an autumn reshuffle.
The talk of replacing Mr Major has evaporated.
He is cagey about his plans post-Maastricht — whenever that may be.
He ritually denies wanting out.
It would be uncharacteristic of him to go in mid-term.
But Maastricht and the Balkans are taking a toll.
Most MPs still reckon he has been a fine foreign secretary since his switch from the Home Office in 1989.
He arrived on the crest of a wave.
Communism was collapsing.
He nudged Mrs Thatcher towards acceptance of a unified Germany.
He performed well in the Gulf War, helping to glue the coalition.
The Americans were jogged back into seeing Britain as their sturdiest ally.
At the same time, with the fall of Mrs Thatcher, Mr Hurd quickly made Mr Major cosy up to Germany.
Post-Thatcher relations with France could only get better.
Mr Hurd looked every inch the professional, a man of gravitas who understood history and foreigners, an authoritative performer in parliament and on television, the sort of unflappable figure essential at the side of an untried leader as new abroad as Mr Major.
Then, last year, trouble began.
The Balkans and the anti-Maastricht Tory rebels turned the statesman into an exasperated headmaster.
From seeming above the fray, he had to twist and slither.
The fickle opinions of the Foreign Office's legal eagles and those of the attorney-general grew in importance as global vision clouded over.
On Bosnia, he explains repeatedly why Britain can do nothing.
His standing at the dispatch box stays high, but rarely did he intervene during months of Maastricht debate.
For the Euro-sceptics, he is Neville Chamberlain, or, worse, the lacklustre, appeasing British apparatchiks of the 1930s.
He is a clever trimmer, they say, a closet federalist, unchanged at heart from his Heathite days, still a Foreign Office bureaucrat to the core.
Lady Thatcher, furious at his reluctance to save the Serbs with British blood, says he is an accomplice to massacre.
Lord Tebbit calls him Mr Kohl's messenger boy to Copenhagen.
To the more landed sceptics, he is the worst sort of priggish Etonian: ‘an honorary Wykehamist’.
Overwhelmingly, however, Tories and — if they are honest — most Labour members still defer to his skills.
‘Rolls-Royce mind’ is the standard bouquet.
Most MPs back his Balkan non-intervention.
He has made a string of good speeches, written — unlike those of most ministers — mainly by himself, charting the future for Britain and its beleaguered Foreign Office.
He has eloquently explained why Britain should and can still ‘punch above its weight’.
If anyone can defend Maastricht, he does.
He argues that rather than just ‘shift sovereignty’ to Brussels, the treaty in fact reasserts the rights of member nation-states through the subsidiarity principle.
More adventurously, he argues that the tide is flowing Britain's way: towards a wider community and away from centralisation.
The French and Germans are creeping closer to Britain's open-market version of the Gaullist Europe des patries.
Wishful thinking may inform this Hurdian case.
But he makes it manfully.
‘We have found our role in the world,’ he says, rebutting Dean Acheson's well-worn phrase.
‘We have destroyed the Downhill Fallacy,’ he insists — the myth dominating the Foreign Office when he was one of its functionaries, that Britain was irredeemably destined to decline.
Maybe, for the time being, he is right.
But in the end such hopes depend on Britain's shaky economy providing the ability — let alone the will — to deploy a large army when global crises arise.
As soon as America dithers, Britain's foreign policy look puny.
‘He's like a beautiful jockey,’ says a fellow minister.
‘However bad the horse, he still looks bloody good on it.’
Fair enough.
But when the horses are called Bosnia, Maastricht and the British Economy, it becomes almost impossible for any rider to sit pretty.
These days, Mr Hurd looks like a man in need of Alka-Seltzer.
Cornered by the Speaker
The British Parliament has been ridiculed.
The public is baffled.
The government is in knots.
The argument over Europe is producing no winners
RARELY has the House of Commons witnessed such a muddle.
Rarely has so important a constitutional bill staggered towards enactment so inelegantly.
Rarely has a government been so hard-put to explain why a bill will benefit Britain.
Rarely has division within a ruling party been so bitter.
Rarely have the tactics of the opposition — to ‘improve’ a bill without scuppering it — been so contorted.
Rarely have Madam Speaker and the obstreperous MPs under her glare been so glad to see the back of it all.
But have they?
Alas, not quite.
The simple answer is that, yes, the Maastricht Treaty will still probably be ratified by both Houses of Parliament and become law in late summer or early autumn.
But with the government forced, this week, to remove all reference to the parts of the treaty that deal with workers' rights, the exact form of what gets ratified remains in doubt.
The next hurdles are the House of Lords; the Danish people, whose views will be tested in a referendum on May 18th; and — little noticed — the German constitutional court.
Some peers, led by Baroness Thatcher, are keen for a referendum, which the Commons has already turned down.
Nevertheless the odds, in the upper house, remain against one.
The chances are that the Lords, with the same rigorous three-stage scrutiny of the bill as in the Commons, but squeezed into less than a month, will give the treaty the nod.
So, say the polls, will the Danes.
But these days few pundits dare bet on it, because each turn of the Maastricht maze reveals another apparently dead end.
For a more comprehensive, if almost certainly incomprehensible, answer to the question ‘What has changed?’, consult your lawyers.
Even if, as expected, the main Maastricht bill is passed by both houses, probably by the end of July, a separate debate, on whether John Major's prized opt-out from the treaty's Social Chapter remains intact, will then take place.
As a result of this week's ruling by the Speaker, Betty Boothroyd, the opposition, together with the Liberal Democrats, assorted Celts and the Tory rebels, has forced the government to delete the opt-out.
But chastened ministers will stoutly maintain that it does not affect the treaty.
A judicial review would then be called.
A series of judges may take a month or two to opine.
The case could, ironically, go to the European Court.
The government says its own view will be upheld.
Maybe.
When lost deep in a maze, whistle bravely.
The government and, to a lesser extent, the Labour opposition, have been at sixes and sevens over interpretation and legality for months.
This week saw the nadir of confusion.
On Tuesday night, panicky government whips scurried to and fro through the usually dignified members' lobby, just outside the chamber, like mad hares.
A clutch of Tory Euro-rebels in pinstripe suits, led by Bill Cash, huddled conspiratorially with anti-Maastricht MPs from Labour's hard left, such as the black campaigner Diane Abbott and Dennis Skinner, the vituperative ‘beast of Bolsover’.
Tristan Garel-Jones, the minister in charge of Europe, who is keen to leave office, rolled his eyes.
Why such a strange meeting of minds?
The right-wing Tory rebels want to stymie the Social Chapter opt-out because, if they do, Mr Major says he will drop the entire treaty.
Left-wing Euro-haters follow the same logic.
The mainstream Labour left thinks it can call Mr Major's bluff: he would rather swallow the Social Chapter, they guess, than lose the whole treaty.
By Wednesday the government was back to its pretend-nothing-serious-has-happened mode.
Yes: Parliament would debate inclusion of the Social Chapter later.
No: Maastricht would not be touched by the outcome.
Three months ago Mr Garel-Jones, on the say-so of Mr Hurd and his Foreign Office lawyers, was telling everybody that the bill would be ‘wrecked’ if various of the 400-plus amendments under discussion were passed.
Then, on February 15th, the attorney-general, Mr Nicholas Lyell, conveniently popped up to say, quite contradictorily, that if one of the offending amendments were carried ‘it would have no effect on our ability to ratify the treaty’.
The same logic is being applied to nullify a vote on the separate Commons debate on the Social Chapter opt-out.
So what was the point of discussing any of the myriad amendments over the past six months if so many of them could be shrugged off as ‘ineffective’?
The government has yet to explain.
Tory MPs mutter about ‘double negatives rendering the opt-out untouched’.
Simple, really.
EUROPE
End of the line in France
FROM OUR PARIS CORRESPONDENT
‘THINK of the man, because there is a man in this affair, a man with a human heart.’
So cried Léon Blum, then prime minister of France, in defence of his interior minister, Roger Salengro, in November 1936.
Salengro, having angered France's far right by issuing a decree outlawing ‘seditious’ groups, had been accused of desertion and collaboration with the enemy during the first world war.
In fact, he had been taken prisoner after going behind enemy lines to retrieve the body of a friend.
The accusations against him were unfounded; all but 63 of his fellow deputies accepted that, in a vote on November 13th 1936.
Too late.
A few days later, Salengro committed suicide.
Many people have drawn a parallel between Salengro's death and that of Pierre Bérégovoy, until recently France's prime minister, who committed suicide on May 1st.
Mr Bérégovoy's's friends claim he had been horrified by accusations of impropriety in accepting an interest-free loan of FFr1m ($190,000) from a shady business friend, who was later charged with insider trading.
A man of humble origins with little formal education, Mr Bérégovoy had always taken pride in his reputation for integrity.
On being appointed prime minister in March 1992, he had made it one of his priorities to ‘lance the abscess of corruption’.
But revelations of new scandals involving the Socialist Party continued, unabated, throughout the 11 months of his administration.
Then, in the middle of the election campaign, he suddenly found himself among the accused.
The people of Nevers, the town of which he was both mayor and deputy, returned him to parliament on March 28th.
But, as with Salengro, their vote of confidence was not enough.
Five weeks later, Mr Bérégovoy shot himself.
Was he hounded to death?
President Mitterrand seemed to say he was, in his emotion-charged funeral oration in Nevers on May 5th: nothing, the president declared, could ‘justify throwing a man's honour — and ultimately his life — to the dogs.’
Mr Bérégovoy did not leave a suicide note, so his true motives remain unknown.
But there was probably no single reason for his decision to take his life.
The press coverage of his interest-free loan was extensive but not excessive, certainly not by British or American standards.
Perhaps Mr Bérégovoy feared further revelations in the trial, due to start next month, of his former assistant, Alain Boublil, and eight others charged in connection with the insider-dealing affair that involved Roger-Patrice Pelat — who, two years earlier, had given Mr Bérégovoy his FFr1m loan.
But Mr Bérégovoy had other reasons to feel depressed.
It must have seemed that everything he had ever worked for was falling apart.
The Socialist Party had not only suffered its worst election defeat in 25 years but also given every appearance of being in the process of disintegration.
Its leaders were at each other 's throats.
The policy of austerity and a strong franc, which he had so staunchly defended for the best part of a decade (and which had earned him such praise abroad), was being blamed within France for recession and for the record level of unemployment (it broke through the symbolic 3m mark the day he handed over the reins of government).
Mr Bérégovoy, who so prided himself as a good manager, had to hear Edouard Balladur, the new prime minister, describe the economy as being in its worst state since the second world war.
An independent audit, drawn up at Mr Balladur's request, is said to show public spending heading for a record deficit this year of over FFr400 billion, 6% of GDP, double the forecast of Mr Bérégovoy's's government at the end of last year.
Mr Bérégovoy found both his world and his reputation in ruins.
Friend and foe alike had turned on him.
At the age of 67, he probably felt it was too late to try to pick up the pieces.
The tributes showered upon him since his death have come too late.
He was a loyal supporter of President Mitterrand, but his end may mark the end of the Socialist Party Mr Mitterrand founded 22 years ago.
Italy
A slender reed
FROM OUR ROME CORRESPONDENT
THOUGH the huge vote for reform in last month's referendums showed the cleansing of Italy's corrupt political system would be popular, it did not suggest it would be easy.
Nor is it proving to be.
Hours after swearing in his clean-up-the-mess government on April 29th, the new prime minister Carlo Azeglio Ciampi lost four ministers: the three members of the Democratic Party of the Left (PDS)— Italy's ex-communists — and the leader of the Greens.
All resigned in protest at parliament's decision not to lift the immunity from prosecution of the former Socialist leader, Bettino Craxi.
The sudden resignations looked like a fatal blow to Mr Ciampi at the start of reform.
But il governatore, as the former governor of the Bank of Italy is still known, is proving a determined prime minister.
He replaced the defectors with four technocrats.
And he won, or so it seems, benign neutrality from the PDS and the Northern League by promising to stake his government's survival on the swift approval of electoral reform.
That is the first of three tasks he had been picked to do to pave the way for Italy's first post-reform elections.
On the question of which electoral system should replace Italy's purist form of proportional representation, Mr Ciampi will back whichever proposal has broadest support.
That is likely to be British-style first-past-the-post rules for both houses of parliament — the system that 82% of voters backed in the referendum, though their only alternative was the existing system.
It is enshrined in draft legislation sponsored by Mario Segni, who championed the cause of electoral reform.
And it is a proposal with wide parliamentary support, including from the powerful Northern League, which has much to gain from an electoral system favouring strong local parties.
On the second task — to cut inflation, the budget deficit and Italy's vast public debt — Mr Ciampi must rely on his reputation as a defender of sound money to overcome opposition from populist politicians with everything to lose at the next general election.
The third task is to stop the abuse of Italy's system of granting deputies immunity from prosecution for many crimes unless parliament votes to lift it.
In the past, such ballots have been secret.
But after the vote on Mr Craxi, parliamentary leaders agreed to take all such decisions by a show of hands.
That rule will probably be extended to the upper house, where a vote on whether to lift the immunity of Italy's former prime minister, Giulio Andreotti, is likely soon.
In short, the third task is being tackled.
But at a cost.
The vote on Mr Craxi has speeded up the disintegration of Italy's scandal-tainted parties.
Giorgio Benvenuto, the leader of Mr Craxi's Socialist Party, has threatened to resign unless his party's national executive suspends all members under investigation for corruption.
In an attempt to break with the past, he says he wants a grand realignment of the left.
The two biggest parties are also in trouble.
Mino Martinazzoli, the leader of the Christian Democrats, has seen his leadership challenged by parliamentary deputies and, despite his attempts to clean the party up, faces the possibility that impatient reformers will quit.
Meanwhile Achille Occhetto, the leader of the PDS, is having difficulty holding his party together.
Its left wing accuses him of collaborating with scandal-tainted parties, after he agreed that PDS members should join Mr Ciampi's government.
All this means that Mr Ciampi can count only on the same thin majority that sustained his predecessor.
That will make it hard to push through such an ambitious programme of reform.
West European socialists
Drift and division in Germany
FROM OUR GERMANY CORRESPONDENT
Left-wing parties are in trouble all over Western Europe.
Reports follow from Germany, France and Spain
LIKE chewing gum, the scandal is bland and forgettable.
And like gum, it has stuck to Björn Engholm's shoe.
As leader of Germany's opposition Social Democrats, he should have been rallying his party for battle against a tired, 11-year-old government in a general election in 1994.
Instead, Mr Engholm spent most of this spring dodging questions about a murky state election he won in Schleswig-Holstein six years ago.
Last week the questions caught up with him.
Mr Engholm admitted that he had lied in 1987 to a committee investigating a dirty-tricks campaign mounted against him by the Christian Democrats.
Under pressure from fellow Social Democrats alarmed by the drift and division at the top of their party, Mr Engholm resigned on April 30th from all his posts: premier of Schleswig-Holstein, chairman of the Social Democrats and their candidate for chancellor next year.
A leader with more authority might have brushed off the so-called ‘desk-drawer affair’.
But even before it came to public notice earlier this year, poor Mr Engholm was having to struggle to impose himself on a fractious party.
To judge from the polls, he was failing to persuade voters that he was chancellor material.
The drawer in question belonged to Günther Jansen, a friend of Mr Engholm's, who resigned in March as Schleswig-Holstein's minister of social affairs.
Six years ago, the drawer (said Mr Jansen) happened to contain DM40,000-50,000 ($15,000-32,000) of his own money, which he gave to a Christian Democratic aide as a thank-you for tipping off the Social Democrats about a dirty-tricks campaign against them.
Mr Engholm had thought of resigning after the Social Democrats' battering at local elections in Hesse last March.
His morale then steadied, partly because of the lack of obvious alternatives.
His replacement will be named by the party's 12-member executive committee and approved by its standing council; he or she must then be confirmed at a full congress in November.
Whoever it is will be the Social Democrats' fifth candidate in 11 years.
Since Willy Brandt, the party's post-war giant, and Helmut Schmidt, who was chancellor from 1974 to 1982, the party has had no success.
Mr Brandt died last autumn after a long, awkward retirement.
At the grand age of 74, Mr Schmidt has appointed himself Germany's agony-aunt and scold, dishing out advice to politicians left and right.
Beside these two, ‘Willy's grandsons’, as the present generation of Social Democrats are known, are a pallid lot.
Oskar Lafontaine, the gadfly premier of Saarland, was buried by Chancellor Kohl's unity-landslide in 1990.
Hans-Ulrich Klose, a lawyer and former Hamburg mayor who leads the parliamentary party, lacks the drive and common touch to lead a successful campaign.
That leaves Gerhard Schröder, the bustling premier of Lower Saxony (who would break noses to get the job), Rudolf Scharping, the Rhineland-Palatinate premier (who hides his ambition better), and Renate Schmidt, the Social Democratic leader in Bavaria (who would start with a strong base in a party committed to 50% representation for women).
But feeble personalities explain only part of the Social Democrats' woes.
The party seems to be suffering ailments common to many of the parties of the parliamentary left throughout Europe.
The Greens have stolen their fire on the left.
Social Democrats now cannot decide whether to offer new policies or simply conservative ones better managed.
Mr Engholm (and most of his rivals) favour the second course.
But it is hard to persuade voters that you have managerial skills if you have been out of office for 11 years.
Nor does it help if your party's leaders (mainly state premiers), parliamentary deputies and grass-roots bodies all pull different ways on issues like immigration, the use of force abroad and social-spending cuts.
The Social Democrats' most startling failure has been eastern Germany.
As the chancellor of unity, this was Mr Kohl's territory in 1990.
Now he seldom sets foot there for fear of boos and rotten vegetables.
Yet the Social Democrats are not benefiting.
They are scarcely more popular in the new Läder than the conservatives are.
Nor, in the western part of the country, does disgruntlement with Mr Kohl mean gruntlement for Social Democrats.
All of which helps to explain why Mr Kohl's chances of winning re-election do not look as bad as a shrinking economy, growing budget deficit, and foreign-policy gridlock might lead you to expect.
Not so united in Spain
FROM OUR MADRID CORRESPONDENT
THE general election in Spain on June 6th will be the first since 1979 in which the winner has not been known in advance.
At each of the past three, it was universally, and correctly, assumed that the Socialists would win.
It will also be the first since 1979 in which none of the parties is expected to gain an outright majority.
Polls have disagreed on whether the Socialists or the conservative People's Party enjoy more support.
All of them, though, put the leading party at least 23 seats short of a majority in the 350-seat Congress of Deputies.
One other group is expected to get more than 23 seats — and therefore to hold the balance of power.
This is the United Left, a Communist-dominated group which looks likely to win between 24 and 30 seats.
It seems to have everything going for it.
Spain's political centre of gravity lies on the left, to judge by the way Spaniards vote and what they tell pollsters.
The Socialists who have ruled this left-leaning country since 1982 have drifted right.
That might be expected to benefit others on the left.
Voters tell pollsters that the electoral outcome they most favour is a coalition of Socialists and the United Left.
To top it all, the ‘co-ordinator’ of the United Left, Julio Anguita, earns a higher rating in the polls than the leader of the People's Party, Jose Maria Aznar, though he is still behind the Socialist prime minister, Felipe Gonzalez.
So does the United Left enter the fray with its prospects as promising as its hopes are high?
No.
Within sight of power, the group has had a public bust-up likely to reduce its appeal in the forthcoming election.
United Left was always an inappropriate name for a coalition that includes the Communist Party of Spain, a breakaway socialist party known as the PASOC, and assorted republicans, independents, feminists, greens and pacifists.
With the collapse of communism, moreover, a split opened up among the Communists.
One group wanted the United Left to become a proper party in which the Communist Party could be dissolved.
The other wanted the Communist Party to go on as before.
Whereas in Italy, where the Communist Party also split, the reformers outnumbered the old guard, in Spain the reformers found themselves in a minority.
It was the unreconstructed Communists who continued in charge.
The reformers, however, led by an eloquent aristocrat, Nicolas Sartorius, found common ground, such as enthusiasm for the Maastricht treaty, with some of the non-Communist members of the United Left, notably the leader of the PASOC, Pablo Castellano, and a witty feminist lawyer, Cristina Almeida.
Together, the three formed a faction whose parliamentary members last October defied orders from their leadership and voted in favour of Maastricht.
This little rebellion annoyed the orthodox Communists, but maybe not the voters: the three rebels, all well known, provide voters with an assurance that the United Left is more than just a front for unreconstructed Communists.
They remain crucial to the United Left's chances of electoral success.
Or rather they did.
At the end of April, all three withdrew from the election after being placed low down in a kind of primary contest held among the United Left's Madrid rank-and-file to help decide who should go where on the list of candidates put before the capital's voters (a candidate's position is crucial to his chances of a seat).
The trio claimed that the leaders had manipulated the contest to ensure that the list was dominated by orthodox Communists — a charge denied by Mr Anguita, who points out that the second and fourth places on the list were occupied by followers of the slighted trio.
Maybe.
But the new-look candidates he pointed to are virtual unknowns.
Hopes that the rebels might put their party's interests first and hold their peace until after polling day faded when they urged supporters to campaign for the leadership's overthrow.
Many a voter now thinks there is no way to vote for the left without voting for old-fashioned communism.
The left at a loss
IN THE early 1980s, well before the collapse of communism, dogmatic socialism fell into disrepute in Western Europe.
Where socialist parties came to power — in France, Spain or, in coalition, in Italy — they quickly realised they had to be modernising parties ready to put market economics ahead of old ideology.
In opposition, they likewise shifted right (Britain) or, if they started nearer the centre (Germany), just waited for the inevitable disillusionment with conservatism to set in.
A decade later, they — and the left in general— are in disarray.
In France, the Socialist Party has been all but destroyed by crushing defeat in the general election in March.
In Germany, the leader of the Social Democrats has resigned.
His successor will be the party's fifth leader in 11 years.
In Spain, the party still propounding old-fashioned socialist policies — a coalition called the United Left, not the Socialist Party itself — is tearing itself acrimoniously apart.
And in Italy opinion polls suggest the Socialist Party has lost a larger share of support since the election a year ago than any other party.
In each country, special circumstances play their part.
In Germany, the Social Democrats' caution about reunification has been punished by an enthusiastic electorate.
In Italy, Bettino Craxi's party was the first victim of the corruption scandals that have hit all the mainstream parties.
In France too, corruption has played a part, though so has the ennui that follows more than a decade of rule by one party.
But so wide are the left's woes — in the past few years, they have affected socialist parties from Britain at one end of Europe to Greece at the other — that it is worth considering the possibility that something else is at work, too: the body of ideas that socialists used to represent has lost so much electoral support that socialist parties, at least in their old guise, are doomed.
That thought has been made plausible by the rejection of communism in Eastern Europe.
This has discredited the idea of widespread government involvement in running the economy and undermined those arguing for extensive redistribution of incomes on grounds of fairness.
Meanwhile, the exigencies of balancing the government's books in hard economic times have everywhere called into question the future of the welfare state.
Europe's trading rivals, especially in Asia, do not bear the costs of expensive health and welfare programmes.
The longer that socialist parties held on to the old orthodoxies, the worse they have suffered.
In Spain, for example, the orthodox communists and old-fashioned socialists of the United Left changed little.
On the eve of Spain's election, their group has split.
Britain's Labour Party, though it has moved right, has not moved enough to win power.
On the other hand, parties that jettisoned old-fashioned socialism have fared better.
Spain's Socialists junked dogma when they came to office in 1982.
Even after 11 years in office and in mid-recession, they are neck-and-neck with the conservatives in the opinion polls.
This shows a decline from their levels of support in the 1980s, but hardly counts as a rejection by the electorate.
True, jettisoning old-fashioned views alone does not guarantee success.
Germany's Social Democrats were a modern party in the 1960s and 1970s under Willy Brandt and Helmut Schmidt.
They are now sometimes hard to distinguish from the Christian Democrats.
Their problems suggest something else is at work.
In countries where socialists have been in government, that something may be corruption.
Socialists in France, Greece, Italy, Spain and even Germany have all been damaged by scandal.
Where they have not been in government (eg, the ex-communist Party of the Democratic Left in Italy), they have profited, being relatively scandal-free.
In recent opinion polls, the ex-communists have emerged as Italy's largest single party.
The example of Greece suggests that socialists can bounce back even after being thought corrupt and incompetent.
Recovering from the scandal of the Bank of Crete and dumping the policies that caused Greece's public debt to triple as a share of GDP during the 1980s, the Socialists now lead the opinion polls.
As before, the left is reinventing itself.
This involves changing its policies — rejecting government intervention, accepting the operations of a market economy, but paying attention to those whom free markets fail.
But no socialist party has yet found an agenda that is both electorally appealing and distinctively socialist.
The next stage may be more concerned with reorganisation than with ideology.
In Italy, the leader of the Socialists called this week for the dissolution, in effect, of his own party into a new left-wing alliance with the ex-communists.
In France, Michel Rocard usurped the leadership of the Socialist Party after the election, having called for a realignment of the left and the creation of a social-democratic party.
Although socialism looks shattered now, the voters will not remain loyal to conservatism for ever.
In some places, it could take only a small shift to bring socialists back to power.
In the French election in March, though the Socialists saw their share of seats in parliament collapse, their share of the popular vote hardly budged.
In Britain, Italy and Greece, the left tops the opinion polls.
There's life in the old dog yet — even if it has trouble learning new tricks.
Reds and browns
FROM OUR MOSCOW CORRESPONDENT
A MAY Day demonstration turned into a riot, leaving one policeman dead and almost 600 people injured.
It was the worst violence Moscow had seen since the failed coup of August 1991.
Undeterred, the demonstrators' arranged another confrontation for May 9th — Army Day, when ex-servicemen march to celebrate Germany's defeat in 1945.
The men who attacked the police on May 1st were members of an organisation set up earlier this year by something called the National Salvation Front.
This is an alliance of neo-fascists and communists known by most Russians simply as ‘the reds and browns’(browns after ‘brown plague’, the term for the xenophobic hysteria that swept through Russia in the late 19th century).
The Front has been linked with several dubious organisations.
True zealots, for example, can join the Russian National Legion, a paramilitary organisation, which has sent mercenaries to fight in Moldova and Bosnia.
The extremists' muscle power is reinforced by control of the largest faction in parliament, Russian Unity.
An alliance of four parties, Russian Unity has 303 of the 1,033 members of the Congress of People's Deputies, Russia's highest legislative body.
Like the Front, it wants to get rid of Mr Yeltsin by fair means or foul.
The reds and browns do, however, have a problem.
Most Russians loathe them.
Vladimir Isakov and Sergei Baburin, two prominent leaders of Russian Unity, were humiliated in the referendum held on April 25th.
In the district that Mr Baburin represents in parliament, 68% of those who voted pledged support for Mr Yeltsin.
In Yekaterinburg, which is Mr Isakov's constituency, 86% were for the president.
In March 1991, more people there voted to recall him as their deputy than had voted him into office in the election a year before.
Mr Isakov simply ignored the vote to be recalled and carried on.
The extremists' behaviour helps Mr Yeltsin because it convinces voters who do not much like him that they have to vote for the president in order to keep out people like Messrs Baburin and Isakov.
The man who suffers from their behaviour is Ruslan Khasbulatov, the speaker of parliament.
After the referendum, Mr Khasbulatov needs all the friends he can find.
He has blamed the police for causing the May Day riot, siding with the Front.
But the reds and browns are not sure if they want him on their side.
The day after the riot, one of their leaders announced that it is time the Russian parliament had a Russian speaker.
Mr Khasbulatov is not, ethnically, Russian.
Bosnia's Serbs against the world
FROM OUR CORRESPONDENT IN PALE
As Bosnia pulls back from the brink of peace, we look at why the Bosnian Serbs rejected the Vance-Owen peace plan, at what the West might do next, and at the possibility now raised of a wider Balkan war
BY VOTING overwhelmingly to reject the Vance-Owen peace plan — 51 votes against, two for, with 12 abstentions — the Bosnian Serb parliament is defying its own leaders in Bosnia, its own mentors in Serbia and almost the whole outside world.
Given the Bosnian Serbs' previous actions, their defiance may not seem surprising.
But now they are defying their own interests too.
The Bosnian Serbs objected to the original Vance-Owen plan for four reasons.
First, they said, by splitting the country into ten cantons — three predominantly Muslim, three predominantly Croat, three predominantly Serb, with the capital, Sarajevo, neutral — it would sustain the fiction of the state of Bosnia & Hercegovina.
They hope that this state is a lost cause.
Second, because the Serbs' provinces under the plan were not contiguous, it would have made their dream of a Greater Serbia impossible.
Third, the Serbs had to give up more territory than Croats or Muslims (see maps below).
Fourth, they argued, Muslim and Croat forces would have moved into the areas their own forces had vacated.
For these reasons the Bosnian Serb deputies had already rejected the Vance-Owen plan twice, before the fateful meeting of May 5th at a hotel in their mountain headquarters in Pale, just north of Sarajevo.
Hours before the second rejection, on April 26th, Serbia's President Slobodan Milosevic had urged them to sign.
He noted that a big change had been made in the plan: Serbs in areas from which the Serb army withdrew were now guaranteed UN protection.
This would stop Muslim and Croat forces moving into the areas vacated by Serbs, and so meant that the fourth objection to the plan had been removed.
This was a big concession by Lord Owen, which went practically unnoticed at first.
In insisting that no changes had been made to the original plan, his team was being economical with the truth.
The concession to the Serbs was, in one sense, justifiable.
The areas in question, especially in the north and east, have been ‘ethnically cleansed’ of Muslims and Croats who once made up most of their populations.
If armed Muslims and Croats returned, vengeance could be expected.
A peaceful demilitarisation, even after the deployment of the proposed UN peacekeeping force of up to 70,000 troops, would have been impossible to enforce.
The Bosnian Serbs' latest No came despite intensive diplomacy.
The means were provided by Greece's prime minister, Constantine Mitsotakis.
On May 1st, all the players in the Yugoslav drama gathered at a seaside resort near Athens.
The two men who mattered most were Serbs: Mr Milosevic and Radovan Karadzic, the leaders respectively of the Serbs of Serbia and the Serbs of Bosnia.
Conference officials chuckled when they heard Mr Milosevic yelling at Mr Karadzic behind closed doors.
And yet Lord Owen's concession had in fact given the Serbs a lot: a way to prevent the return of Croats and Muslims to the areas captured by Serbs, and — unless checked by the UN — to keep the dream of a Greater Serbia alive.
Unless the UN proved much tougher in Bosnia than it has been in Croatia, the Owen concession would have meant that, from Serb-held territories in Croatia through Serb-held territories in Bosnia to the border of Serbia itself, Serbs would remain in control, whatever the peace plan said.
The deployment of UN troops in Serb-held territories in Croatia has in practice helped the Serbs to consolidate their control there.
Not a single Croat refugee has returned.
Armed with this concession, and under pressure from Mr Milosevic, whose own country is beginning to buckle under international sanctions, Mr Karadzic duly signed, subject to parliament's approval.
So, as the deputies gathered in Pale, the message Serb leaders tried to drum into their heads was simple: sign the plan for Serb victory.
As the veteran Serb nationalist and president of rump-Yugoslavia, Dobrica Cosic, said: ‘The dilemma is not war or peace.
It is losing the war or winning through peace…
This is the route to victory.’
Mr Mitsotakis told them that they had won 90% of what they wanted, not the 60% they had won before.
Since 100% was impossible, he argued, and the peace of the Balkans lay in their hands, they should sign.
Their refusal to do so had more to do with a laager mentality than with calculations that by spinning out the conflict they could buy time to mop up more territory.
They mistrust the UN, and fear that if the Vance-Owen plan were properly implemented they would not be able to achieve ‘victory through peace’.
But, as Mr Milosevic railed, ‘I really don't know what more you want.
[The Muslims]lost the war.
Their last little hope is to provoke more war and that is what you are offering them.’
Mr Cosic added: ‘We no longer have the means to make war, we must make peace to win.’
And now?
The Bosnian Serbs have changed their minds once.
They could do so again, especially now that they are in conflict not only with the West but also with their own leaders and with their mentors (and military suppliers) in Serbia.
Remember, too, that the Croatian Serbs wanted to fight on after Mr Milosevic had decided he wanted peace.
He, not they, prevailed.
The Bosnian deputies have given themselves a let-out by calling for a referendum on the peace plan on May 15th and 16th.
But the West cannot count on that.
This had been, its leaders had said, the ‘last chance’ for the peace plan.
They must now decide whether to go ahead with military action, and, if so, of what kind.
And they must do that as the possibility increases that they might be sucked into a wider Balkans war.
The West's options
FROM CORRESPONDENTS IN BELGRADE AND BRUSSELS
THERE is, alas, more unanimity among the 51 Bosnian Serb politicians who rejected the Vance-Owen peace plan than among the four permanent members of the UN Security Council who are involved in the Bosnian conflict — America, Britain, France and Russia.
They are now left struggling to decide what course of action to take.
Before the vote, Lord Owen said bravely that rejection by the Bosnian Serb parliament of the plan that he and Cyrus Vance had drafted would be only ‘a temporary setback’ and that planning for the deployment of up to 75,000 peacekeepers would go ahead.
Planning, yes.
The Bosnian Serbs have changed their minds before and may again, focusing attention on NATO's ambitious plan for UN blue helmets once more.
Yet there is limit to the world's patience, or so those wanting tougher measures hope.
At Brussels, where America's secretary of state, Warren Christopher, was on May 6th in urgent talks with NATO allies, the focus shifted abruptly once more from keeping peace to something starker.
But what?
America, Britain and France do not see eye to eye.
The Americans favour force, direct or indirect, against the Serbs but have ruled out sending ground soldiers into a war.
The direct kind includes most obviously bombing Serb targets in Bosnia.
Bombing could destroy some, though not all, Serb heavy gun positions from which Muslim cities have been shelled.
Its more political purpose would be to show Bosnia's Serbs that the world's threats to use force are not empty and that they must change their minds and return to the peace table.
America could strike alone or with its reluctant allies.
It would probably not feel obliged to seek further authorisation from the Security Council.
But that might be desirable.
Bombing could put UN troops in Bosnia at risk.
The British and French each have about 2,500 troops in Bosnia protecting aid convoys.
For the indirect course — letting the Bosnian government get arms — approval from the Security Council would be needed.
The year-old UN arms embargo applies to all the states in former Yugoslavia.
The British, French and Russians, each of whom have a veto in the Security Council, have deep misgivings about lifting it.
If the Muslims get arms, they believe, any shred of hope for a negotiated settlement would vanish and the world could expect at least one more round of slaughter.
They worry also about the possibility that war could spill out into the so-far peaceful bits of the Balkan neighbourhood (see below).
Though not currently fighting, Serbia and Croatia are still technically at war.
When it comes to force, the British, French and Russians worry more generally about two things: who is the target and what is the political purpose.
Nothing Serbia's president, Slobodan Milosevic, does should be taken at face value.
But there are reasons for thinking his pleas to the Bosnian Serbs to accept the peace plan were sincere.
As economic pressure has been tightened up against Serbia, the French and the Russians have argued for carrot as well as stick: the prospect of an easing of sanctions in return for Serbian pressure on their Bosnian brothers to make peace.
A quite different military course, favoured at times by some French politicians and soldiers, is to create safe havens for the wretched civilians who are the main target in this war.
That, though, would require sending in ground troops — something the West will not do unless there is a peace agreement first.
Neighbours at risk
The rejection of the peace plan, and the possibility that the West could find itself in military confrontation with the Bosnian Serbs, raises the threat of a more general Balkan war.
A glimmer of good news: steps have already been taken to make it less likely that such a war would spread to Macedonia.
At the end of last year this seemed all too probable.
Fear was palpable in the Macedonian capital, Skopje.
The question on most people's lips was not whether there would be war but when it would it break out.
The so called‘four wolves’— Greece, Albania, Serbia and Bulgaria — were said to be circling their prey, ready to pounce and rip the then unrecognised country to shreds.
The fear was that Macedonia's large ethnic-Albanian minority might strike for confederation, a codeword for ‘greater Albania being the next step’.
If this happened and fighting broke out it was assumed that, against their will, Albania, Bulgaria, Serbia, Greece and even Turkey might get sucked in.
A riot in Skopje in November helped concentrate minds.
The Macedonian government was able to press its claim for recognition, which had been blocked by Greece, by threatening that war was around the corner.
Since then several crucial things have happened.
A compromise over Macedonia's name has been reached.
Greece had argued that an independent nation called Macedonia would imply that the new state had territorial designs on Greece's northern province, also called Macedonia.
So Macedonia entered the United Nations under the temporary name of ‘the former Yugoslav republic of Macedonia’.
Greece has always stressed that it had no designs on Macedonian territory and it has succeeded in getting its neighbours to say the same.
But the most significant development is that UN troops are now on Macedonia's borders with Albania and Kosovo.
This is the first example of the ‘pre-emptive action’ that was suggested in the UN secretary-general's ‘Agenda for Peace’.
The early pre-emptive presence of the blue helmets is an earnest of the world's desire not to see the Bosnian war repeated in Macedonia.
Kosovo is another potential tinderbox.
This southern province of Serbia is an overwhelmingly ethnic-Albanian region, whose people crave independence.
The UN has ruled this out; the argument is that, as Serb areas in Bosnia and Croatia can never be part of Serbia, Kosovo is and must remain part of Serbia.
All is quiet, if unhappy, for the moment.
The Serbian government is unlikely to start problems in an area it already holds with an iron fist.
BUSINESS
And your mother dresses you funny
BEAUTY may be in the eye of the beholder, but the aim of much television advertising is to convince him that it is also within his grasp.
Rare is the commercial, even for the most drab products, in which the cast is not prettier than most people.
The unspoken promise is plain: our brand can make you beautiful too.
This fantasy is compounded in ads for sports shoes by Nike or Reebok, in which the superstars' looks are almost as spectacular as their talent.
What kind of child wouldn't whine until he got a pair of $150 trainers that will let him play basketball — and look — like Michael Jordan?
Converse, a Massachusetts sneaker firm, hopes it has an answer: the kind who identify with a new advert being broadcast in America and Britain for its Chuck Taylor All Star brand.
It features one of the least-pretty pitchmen in advertising history:
There are a lot more whatchacall ugly people in this world than beautiful people, and there's a growing sense of strength in our collective ugliness.
And it's frightening to some people.
But we refuse to accept the standard television definition of what beauty is.
We don't want to live in a beer commercial.
We don't have permanent dramatic shadows that make our plain faces pretty.
We don't have perfect airbrushed bodies, and we don't want ‘em.
The point isn't to be beautiful.
The point is to be yourself.
The idea of mass-marketing individualism may be paradoxical, but it is not new.
Even so, few companies have embraced it with the down-and-dirty relish of Converse — another spot features a girl getting the brand's logo tatooed on her bottom.
Old-fashioned and low-tech (made of canvas, in fact), All Stars are well suited to this funky formula.
In the early part of the 1980s footwear-as-fashion boom, the brand carved out a niche among those who value retro style over ‘high performance’ or sneaker-status.
American college students were crazy about ‘Chucks’; so were Italian teens who wouldn't have known a basketball if one had knocked them off their mopeds.
But recently the fad has faded.
Sales in Britain have fallen by half since 1989; America, Converse's main market, has been hard going too.
Now the company is hoping that iconoclasm is coming back into style — and a certain sort of iconoclasm at that.
It is one thing, after all, to tell your customers they are different; quite another to tell them they are ugly.
Converse seems to have taken to heart a wave of stories about the burgeoning 14 to 24-year-old market, dubbed ‘Generation X’ by Douglas Coupland, a novelist.
Xers are hooked on ‘grunge’, a scuzzy sensibility that involves wearing ripped lumberjack shirts and Doc Marten boots, and listening to noisy, talentless bands from Seattle.
Converse is not alone in following this anti-fashion fashion: the latest adverts for Subaru, a Japanese car company, try something similar.
The trouble is that one of the defining characteristics of twentysomethings is their cynicism towards advertising.
Indeed, one of the chapters in Mr Coupland's book is titled ‘I am not a target market’.
Privatisation in Russia
Bargain debasement
YEKATERINBURG
Russian industry is going for a song.
That may be all it is worth
ANYONE with $130m to spare could do something sensible, like buy Cray Research, an American supercomputer maker, or Vickers, a venerable British engineering company.
On the other hand, for this sum you could instead pick up roughly half of Russia's manufacturing industry.
A sign of the country's plight is that it is hard to say which would be the better investment.
The price put on Russian industry comes from the government's programme of mass privatisation.
At the end of last year each Russian citizen received a privatisation voucher with a face-value of 10,000 roubles, worth approximately $15 when they were issued, but only $12 at today's exchange rate.
The owners of these vouchers could either sell them for cash on the secondary market; or use them to buy shares in the privatisations of 6,000 medium-to-large companies due this year.
Each voucher can buy 10,000 roubles-worth of assets in the privatisations.
At first sight, this could turn out to be the bargain of the century, because the asset-values are calculated on 1991 prices, even though Russian prices rose by a vertiginous 2,600% during 1992.
(The government feared that Russia's rampant inflation would make repeated attempts to fix asset prices so clumsy that privatisation could be postponed indefinitely.)
What makes the privatisations even more attractive is that vouchers on the secondary market now sell at a discount of over 60%.
In theory, you could pick up every voucher issued for only $130m.
The real question is whether any bits of the former Soviet Union's industry are worth having?
A look at Uralmash, a jewel in its industrial crown, suggests not.
Uralmash, short for the Urals heavy machine-building factory, is based in Yekaterinburg, a grimy industrial city where the last Tsar and his family were shot and Boris Yeltsin began his career.
In its heyday in the early 1980s, Uralmash employed 50,000 workers.
The company makes giant machinery for industry: steel mills and iron foundries; oil-drilling equipment and massive bulldozers.
Under the direction of Nikolai Ryzhkov in the early 1970s, Uralmash diversified disasterously into just about everything from sawmills to washing machines.
As one of the last prime ministers of the Soviet Union under Mikhail Gorbachev, Mr Ryzhkov went on to do even worse damage to the Russian economy.
Uralmash had a difficult time last year.
Production fell by almost 30%, to 145,000 tonnes of machinery — a classic Soviet way of measuring output.
Viktor Korovin, who was elected director of Uralmash by its workforce last summer, says that its ‘financial situation is very complicated’, by which he means that few of the company's heavy-industrial clients can afford to pay for the machinery that has been delivered to them.
The workforce has been cut in half to 24,000 and still there is not enough work to go round: some production lines work only a 3-4-day week.
Unpaid (and involuntary) leave is common.
Average shop-floor wages of 10,000-15,000 roubles a month are low, even by Yekaterinburg's dismal standards.
Mr Korovin's has come up with a two-pronged strategy to save the company.
First, he is privatising it.
Uralmash was converted into a joint-stock company at the end of 1992 with 1.8m shares.
A nationwide auction to swap 514,000 of these shares for vouchers began on April 2nd and closed at the end of the month.
Second, he hopes to use blocks of Uralmash shares to cement joint-venture agreements with foreign partners.
This is an area in which the director has some experience.
On his return to Uralmash from a business course in West Germany in 1988, Mr Korovin set up a joint venture with an Austrian company to make equipment for the continuous casting of steel.
Uralmash is now negotiating with Caterpillar to make oil-drilling equipment fitted with American engines.
Uralmash's faith in foreign joint ventures highlights the fundamental weakness of Russia's industrial dinosaurs: foreign partners are their only likely source of new capital; and they are the best source of new designs and technology.
And yet Uralmash's workers seem far from convinced by these grand plans.
One engineer says that, when electing a new director last year, he and his colleagues were blinded by Mr Korovin's relative youth and German training.
He now thinks they should have remembered how Mr Korovin built his career: as first secretary of the local young Communists' league.
While the deal with Caterpillar has yet to be finalised, the Austrian venture has produced few orders.
Sergei Nazarev, who has set up a business-information consultancy in Yekaterinburg, fears that foreign investment is no guarantee of success.
Even if the old monopolies such as Uralmash do modernise their designs, ‘its customers with access to hard currency — in the oil industry, for example— would still rather buy foreign equipment, because it is more reliable and easier to operate.’
He believes that Uralmash has a future only if it shrinks to a fraction of its present size and concentrates on making machinery that is likely to be in big demand, such as small bulldozers.
There is, however, a second ‘Uralmash’, which is expanding healthily.
The Uralmash gang is one of the most feared underground operations, even in a city with a reputation as a centre for organised crime.
The gang was founded by Konstantin and Grigory Tsyganov in the 1970s, and made its fortune from blackmarket deals with Uralmash foremen.
Grigory was shot dead last year, but the gang still owns a restaurant and sportswear shop near the main factory.
It also controls Uralmash's sports club, the preserve of mafia bodyguards.
Organised crime is one of the few economic activities in Russia that is growing.
The moral is compelling, if unsavoury — after all, crime is already privatised.
Computer software
Windows pain
CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS
THE draught from Microsoft's increasingly popular Windows is giving rival software firms a crick in the neck.
The speed with which personal-computer users have abandoned programs based on the clunky old MS-DOS operating system — the internal software used to make personal computers tick — for prettier versions based on Windows has taken even the nimblest software firms by surprise.
The world's largest software company, Microsoft Corporation of Redmond, Washington, is the sole supplier of both MS-DOS and Windows.
As such, Microsoft has been able to manipulate the pace of change, and pre-empt rivals with its own Windows versions of popular MS-DOS applications (spreadsheets, word-processors and the like).
Roughly 25m PCs are now equipped to run Windows: one out of five of all PCs in the world, and over half of all new ones.
Microsoft has used its monopoly power over the PC makers as the main supplier of operating systems to help give Windows an explosive start.
Most new users find the Windows software, which has friendly picture-book instructions rather than arcane codes, already loaded on their computers when they buy them.
Windows-based applications now account for nearly half of all PC-software sales.
Microsoft has gone on to use the success of Windows itself to attack rivals who have made their names selling applications built around the old MS-DOS regime.
A year ago, Jim Manzi, president and chief executive of Lotus Development of Cambridge, Massachusetts, the industry's number-two software supplier, predicted a 20% surge in sales during 1992.
With revenue for the year of $100m, Lotus achieved less than half this forecast growth.
During the first quarter of 1993, Lotus's revenue remained flat at $127m.
Net profits slumped by 41% to $12.3m compared with the same period a year ago.
Meanwhile, Microsoft's net income for January to March jumped by 36% to $143m as sales soared by 40% to $158m.
Lotus has been badly bruised by the sudden switch to Windows.
As recently as 1990, the Cambridge company had almost 70% of the $1.2 billion a year spreadsheet market with its 1-2-3 flagship program.
Rushing belatedly to launch a Windows edition of 1-2-3, the firm released a faulty version of the program and the firm has seen its share of the lucrative spreadsheet business slip to 48%.
Meanwhile, Microsoft's Excel, one of the first Windows-based spreadsheets, has more than doubled its market share to 42% in the same period.
Faced by a similar difficulty, WordPerfect, a closely held software supplier based in Orem, Utah, that dominated the word-processor market in the MS-DOS realm for almost a decade, has made even bigger mistakes.
Like Lotus, the firm has clung to its popular MS-DOS program for too long.
But, unlike Lotus, WordPerfect is not noted for its innovation.
Because its new Windows-based word-processor has been disappointing, many loyal customers have opted instead for Microsoft's Word or Lotus's AmiPro (acquired along with Samna Corporation for $15m in late 1990), which have more polish and slicker features.
In desperation, WordPerfect has let Borland International, a Californian rival, bundle its word-processor into a software package.
This, say some, could be the prelude to a merger.
Lotus, the great innovator, is hitting back with technology, rather than marketing.
The firm has recently launched a string of clever Windows-based products to rave reviews.
Two of them, cc:Mail and Notes, work together on office networks, letting employees collaborate as they shuffle documents around electronically — a market growing by 60% a year.
The other leg to Lotus's new ‘groupware’ strategy is to rethink the entire spreadsheet concept.
One approach takes the technical humdrum out of financial modelling; another lets groups of office workers keep track of all the ‘who-what-why-and-when’ changes made to a spreadsheet during its lifetime.
The first of the new spreadsheets, called Improv, which builds spreadsheets using simple English commands rather than manipulating clumsy grids of rows and columns, should sell 500,000 copies before June, when the price goes up from an introductory $19 to the full $195.
The worry is that Improv may cannibalise sales of Lotus's existing program.
As a precaution, Lotus will include some of the new tricks in its 1-2-3 for Windows this summer.
With luck, these two new Windows-based spreadsheets should help Lotus hang on to the 40% of the market it currently controls.
The firm badly needs this market share to buy time, so it can fully adapt to the new Windows world and carve out a place for itself in the growing groupware market.
Someone, after all, has to be around to keep Microsoft up to the mark.
Investment in Asia
The yen block breaks open
JAKARTA, BANGKOK AND MANILA
AFTER Japanese investment poured into South-East Asia in the late 1980s, observers began to refer to the area as a ‘yen block’.
But as the South-East Asian boom has gathered pace, so the area has become something more than simply Japan's backyard.
The Japanese have not lost interest — indeed, Asia's share of total Japanese investment continues to climb.
Nevertheless it is not financially troubled Japan, but Asia's tigers who are leading the next wave of investment in the region.
Taken together, the four Asian ‘tigers’— Taiwan, Hong Kong, Singapore and South Korea — easily surpass Japan as investors in South-East Asia.
Japan's share of new investment in the fastest-growing members of the Association of South-East Asian nations (ASEAN)— Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia and the Philippines, collectively known as the ASEAN-4 — reached a peak of 35.6% in 1987.
At that stage, the tigers accounted for only 19% of the money flowing into these countries.
By 1991 the rankings of investing countries had changed dramatically.
According to figures compiled by Jardine Fleming, an investment bank, Japan accounted for 15.2% of investment in the ASEAN-4 in 1991, compared with 15.4% for Taiwan alone and 29.5% for all four tigers.
Some attribute this surge of investment to ties of family and culture which helped Chinese living in Taiwan and Hong Kong to invest in countries like Indonesia and Thailand, where ethnic Chinese dominate commerce.
For investment in China, the accusations ring even louder.
One Bangkok stockbroker says that ‘when people make investments because they want to see their name on a school in their home village, they are heading for trouble.’
But atavism cannot be the whole story.
After all, Korean investment in South-East Asia soared too.
In fact the tigers' investment decisions have probably been shaped more by economic forces than by ethnic Chinese solidarity.
Taiwan and Korea have had to cope with a decline in competitiveness like the one Japan experienced as the yen soared against the dollar during the 1980s.
Between 1985 and 1992, the Taiwanese dollar rose by 50% against the American dollar.
As exchange-rate movements made exports less competitive, costs were also rising because of labour shortages and the increasingly wealthy tigers' loss of trade privileges.
All in all, manufacturers had to choose between moving upmarket or moving offshore.
Many chose the second.
This need to cut costs has persisted.
Korean owners of low-margin textile and shoe factories in Indonesia have gained a reputation for being harsh employers who pay low wages.
(The Japanese, who once provoked riots, tend to invest in higher-tech operations and are seen as relatively generous.)
Costs are also driving businessmen from the tigers to move on more quickly than the Japanese in search of cheaper workers.
Taiwanese investment in the ASEAN-4 fell off sharply during 1992 as costs rose in countries like Thailand and Malaysia.
Instead, the Taiwanese turned to impoverished Vietnam, and the Koreans have become the most conspicuous foreign investors in Myanmar.
Thus a second wave of South-East Asian investment is mounting.
Its effect could be far-reaching.
As the ASEAN-4 see the tigers exploring Vietnam and, in particular, China, they fear that they will lose out.
Foreign investment fell in Malaysia and Thailand in 1992, while China enjoyed a remarkable boom, with over $10 billion of investment pledged to the country.
And so the ASEAN-4 are following in the tigers' footsteps.
As well as simply receiving investment from abroad, these countries are also home to fledgling multinationals of their own which are, in turn, themselves now investing in the rest of the region.
On April 20th, Andres Soriano, the boss of San Miguel, the biggest company in the Philippines, announced that his firm was planning to build a brewery in Vietnam.
His decision was based on a prediction that South-East Asia's economies will grow at 6.9% a year for the next four years.
‘The international market beckons with awesome possibilities,’ he says.
As one might expect, the target of most ASEAN-4 investors has been China, where a series of massive deals have been announced in the past year.
Charoen Pokphand of Thailand has said that it will invest $1 billion in a petrochemical complex in Linpoh.
Bangkok Land is investing a further $1.4 billion in three massive housing complexes in Beijing.
The Kuok Group of Malaysia has property development projects in Beijing and Shanghai worth $130m.
All told, some 10-15% of the foreign capital going into China is coming from ASEAN countries.
Chemical pollution
Hong pong
HONG KONG
A TERRIBLE stench drifts from the high-rise buildings that line the backstreets of Kowloon.
They are factories, each packed with 60-100 tiny firms.
Most operate in highly polluting industries: bleaching and dyeing, electroplating and printing circuit boards.
The floors of these little hellholes are awash with stinking chemical waste, through which workers slosh around in rubber boots.
Chemicals gurgle down a drain straight into Hong Kong's sewers.
The muck rots the pipes and poisons the harbour.
Every so often, the fumes from an unpredictable cocktail of effluents asphyxiates a luckless sewer worker.
To clean up this mess, a spanking new chemical-waste treatment plant, capable of handling up to 100,000 tonnes of waste a year has just been built by Environpace, a group owned mainly by a subsidiary of Waste Management, an American company.
The plant, which will be easily the biggest in South-East Asia, is due to be opened by Hong Kong's governor, Chris Patten, in June.
But the government is still arguing furiously about how to recoup the HK$1.3 billion ($168m) that the colony's new chemical-waste treatment plant cost to build and the HK$100m-300m a year that the plant will cost to run.
Two years ago a report by ERL, a British consultancy firm, said there were two possibilities: direct charges on those using the plant, or an indirect levy, a tax on chemicals, say.
The direct charge would fall on those who caused the pollution, but an indirect levy was better, because it would be easier to administer.
Yet when the government proposed a 0.75% tax on chemical imports, there was uproar.
Multinational chemical companies complained that many chemicals imported into Hong Kong were exported again; manufacturers protested that they would be penalised, even if they disposed of their chemicals responsibly.
The government backed down.
A second report, from another set of consultants, has now recommended direct charges instead.
Civil servants, each with their own special concerns, are still arguing about what to do.
The finance branch simply wants charges that are high enough to recoup the costs of building and running the plant.
Trade officials worry about the impact of charges on the colony's competitiveness.
Environment officials care about stopping companies pouring toxic chemicals down the sewers.
If companies have to pay much, they may carry on as usual, and the cost of repairing the drains may exceed the revenue that charges bring.
Some of Hong Kong's biggest companies want their waste properly treated, to please corporate customers in greener-minded countries.
But the government may have to let Kowloon's shadowy firms go on polluting.
With the Chinese border so close, a rise in costs might persuade many of them to move there, where wages are lower and filth tolerated.
Rocking the boat
American Telephone & Telegraph has opted for a closer partnership with its trade unions to boost productivity and the quality of its services.
The experiment has already run into trouble
THE decline of America's labour unions has been greeted with relief by most big employers.
Unions now represent only one in six American workers, down from one in three in 1955.
The causes of the unions' fading influence are complex, but one of the most potent has undoubtedly been the participatory methods adopted by American managers in imitation of Japanese practice.
As quality circles and the use of worker-manager teams on all sorts of other shopfloor issues have spread, union representation has seemed less relevant to growing numbers of American workers.
Until recently, this trend seemed as pronounced at American Telephone & Telegraph (AT&T) as at any other big company.
Even as AT&T decentralised and halved its hourly workforce from the size it was when the government gave the firm its present shape by breaking up the Bell system in 1984, AT&T has set up hundreds of worker-manager committees — on quality control, re-engineering its operations and a host of other issues.
The company's two main unions, the Communications Workers of America (CWA) and the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers (IBEW), have played no role in the worker committees, though, taken together, both unions represent 85% of the hourly paid staff.
As it cut jobs the company was hit by strikes, in 1986 and 1989.
Both MCI and Sprint, its two biggest domestic rivals in the long-distance telephone market, are not unionised.
So too are the American subsidiaries of foreign-based competitors in the telecom-equipment business, such as Northern Telecom and Siemens.
After narrowly averting yet another strike last year, AT&T might easily have decided to treat its relations with the unions as little more than an exercise in damage control.
Instead, the firm changed tack.
It offered to give the unions a large role in the proliferating machinery of worker participation and to consult top union officials on a range of business issues.
The firm even enshrined this commitment in its 1992-95 labour contract, in which both AT&T and the two unions promise to create something called ‘the workplace of the future’.
A campaign to rally support for this was launched in March.
Robert Allen, AT&T's boss, and other top managers are convinced that as a service business, the firm needs a highly motivated workforce.
Nothing new in that.
Far more controversial is their calculation that the best way to motivate workers is to involve their unions at virtually every level of the company's business.
‘Business-unit planning councils’ bring together the top managers of strategic business units and the local presidents and top officials of the unions, perhaps four or five times a year.
The meetings are not meant to serve as glorified works councils, hammering out grand agreements on petty feuds.
Instead they are supposed to discuss future business strategy.
AT&T has more than 20 business units.
Three have already set up councils and another dozen are expected to do so by December.
At the same time, senior union officials will meet regularly with top executives to chew over the future of the entire company.
AT&T says the deal amounts to a fundamental change in its managerial style and will take years to prove itself.
Contact between union officials and top business-unit managers is supposed to encourage far more co-operation between unionised employees and the company's 150,000-strong professional and supervisory staff.
Morty Bahr, the CWA's president, has presented the deal to his members as an unprecedented chance for the union to have a hand in corporate decision-making; he wants the CWA to be a model for other American unions.
So much for the theory.
It is already clear, though, that cosying up to each other involves sizeable risks for both AT&T and the unions.
‘It will put big constraints on what management can do, as well as on what the unions can demand,’ admits Bill Ketchum, AT&T's head of labour relations.
In fact, the unions are determined to exact a high price from the management in exchange for their co-operation: they want control over which employees will sit on the hundreds of worker committees that the company has already established.
AT&T's managers have been disappointed to find the unions turning a clean sweep of the committees into a test of the company's good faith.
Managers had hoped that closer co-operation with the unions would make the committees a place for consultation, not turn them into a battleground.
Though dismayed, senior managers and the company's labour-relations staff have conceded the point.
The snag is that many local managers are refusing to agree to this concession.
Having spent the past two or three years setting up their committees, they are reluctant to unravel them now.
Moreover, AT&T's labour-relations department has less influence than it once did, before decentralisation swept the company.
At the same time, many local managers are still inclined to see the unions as adversaries, though they are willing to consult workers and even share decision-making with them.
‘There is a strong culture of control at AT&T that goes back an awfully long way,’ observes Charles Heckscher, a labour-relations academic who has advised AT&T on its ambitious plan.
Meanwhile the unions have problems of their own.
Jim Irvine, the official in the CWA's Washington headquarters with direct responsibility for relations with AT&T, insists that, so far, co-operation with the company has exceeded the union's expectations.
But of the dozen district vice-presidents on the CWA's governing council, four are publicly opposed to the AT&T deal.
Mr Irvine has much the same difficulty within AT&T as the management does.
The top union officials at the company are ready to take a softly, softly approach: the worker committees, they say, can be ‘transitioned’ into the unions' care.
But local union officials want to shut down all the existing committees and begin again from scratch.
The optimism which greeted the ‘workforce of the future’ may have faded, but both the union and the company are pressing on with it.
‘When you get down the path far enough, there's no going back,’ says Mr Ketchum.
Brave talk.
But surely someone at AT&T is beginning to question whether the company's grand deal with the unions will lead to more co-operation from its employees, or less.
Armoured autos
WHAT with car-jackings, smash-and-grab raids and bombs going off in the car park at the World Trade Centre, no wonder American motorists are turning to Bill O'Gara.
As president of O'Gara-Hess & Eisenhardt Armoring, Mr O'Gara claims to be the world's largest maker of armoured passenger cars.
It is not a new business.
The company has strengthened the limousines of every American president since Harry Truman.
Mr O'Gara's warehouse beside the Ohio River contains a Cadillac limousine ordered by Saddam Hussein before the Gulf war.
Sanctions kept it where it is.
Now Mr O'Gara has decided to go mass-market.
The greatest fear of American motorists is car-jacking, the latest fad among the country's enterprising villains in which they steal an occupied vehicle, all too often shooting the driver first.
The National Criminal Justice Referral Service says that the number of car-jackings rose from 19,000 in 1991 to 25,000 last year.
After lots of requests, the company decided that it was time to develop an armoured car for the average American.
When it modifies a diplomat's limousine, O'Gara-Hess & Eisenhardt fills the petrol tank with fire-resistant foam, and adds about 1,800lbs of high-strength steel and glass that is 1.5 inches thick.
All in all, it is enough to protect the occupants from an assault rifle or the shrapnel from a grenade.
Mr O'Gara says that the cost of conversion is well above $100,000, and can run as high as $100,000.
For the mass market the firm has developed its Personal Security Vehicle, or PSV-2 — the ‘Armor lite’ of the motoring world.
The firm adds 300-500lbs of bullet-proof glass and steel: enough to stop a slug from a 9mm handgun or an Uzi.
The cost is $10,000-70,000 — though customers must provide their own cars (which need to have engines powerful enough to pull all that extra weight).
Demand for the new car is strongest in large urban areas like New York city, Los Angeles and Miami, where bombings, riots and car-jackings fill the news bulletins.
Until recently, government sales accounted for roughly 90% of O'Gara-Hess & Eisenhardt's turnover of $10m a year.
Mr O'Gara now expects that proportion to shrink rapidly as sales of the PSV-2 more than double this year.
Because the firm finds it hard to keep pace with demand, other conversion shops around the country may soon be licensed to do the job.
There is even talk of a deal with Chrysler, which would offer the O'Gara treatment as a factory option.
In a country whose violence is matched by nothing except its litigation, Mr O'Gara's only real worry must surely be America's product-liability laws.
Clean, not laundered
BERLIN
CORRUPTION is common because the rusty machinery of international business calls out for lubrication.
Corruption's beneficiaries are rich-country companies and officials of third-world — and, increasingly, East European — governments.
Its victims are usually poor folk made poorer by the white elephants their leaders have inflicted on them.
With everyone that counts stacking up on the same side, only an optimist would fight for honesty.
One such individual is Peter Eigen, a former official at the World Bank who is disgusted by the corruption he witnessed in Latin America and Africa.
Pay-offs raise the cost of development projects and, worse, encourage governments to choose the wrong ones.
African leaders have some $10 billion on deposit in Swiss banks, according to one estimate; Mr Eigen thinks that dud projects built as a vehicle for bribes may account for up to a third of developing-country debt.
So Mr Eigen has founded a group called Transparency International (TI) which held its inaugural meeting in Berlin on May 4th-6th.
TI will coax companies to stop paying kickbacks and bribes and officials to stop receiving them.
Mr Eigen plans to wage his war diplomatically.
After all, TI's prospective members are companies and governments that may well be guilty of the very misdeeds the group is pledged to fight — including the bribe-assisted export contracts financed by some rich-country governments.
Mr Eigen admits that TI ‘will not be a club of angels.’
Members of TI will promote ‘standards of conduct’, though they will not have to keep to them from the start.
The aim is to target and then monitor reform-minded governments — Ecuador might be the first — and create ‘islands of integrity’: countries whose officials abjure bribery in the hope of shaming others into doing the same.
Even with his easy-does-it approach, Mr Eigen may have trouble finding recruits.
Although several American companies have agreed to help fund TI, most German companies he approached showed ‘no real enthusiasm’.
Developing-country governments have been more willing to join the cause.
Some notoriously corrupt ones have inquired about membership — but they are probably more interested in good public relations than in good government.
With allies like these, Mr Eigen's faith in self-regulation is heroic, to say the least.
The International Chamber of Commerce has had rules against bribery and extortion since 1977, but most people ignore them.
America's anti-bribery law is more effective, though it is hardly fool-proof.
European and Asian countries, where companies have few scruples about exploiting their American rivals' legal handicap, could pass anti-bribery laws of their own and TI says that it will lobby for such legislation.
Europe's discount dogfight
PARIS
Cut-price food retailers are already sniping at supermarkets in continental Europe.
The next battle will be for Britain
THEY may be cheap, but Europe's discount food stores have plenty to be cheerful about.
While most supermarket chains in Europe have been (or are about to be) battered by recession, discounters like Germany's Aldi and Denmark's Netto are flourishing.
Precise figures are hard to come by, because many European discount chains are privately owned, but no one doubts that they are taking a growing share of the $140 billion or so that Europeans spend on food each year.
In Germany, where discounters have a long history, they control a quarter of the market.
This should give Europe's big retailers pause for thought.
They are following a path that leaves them vulnerable to just the type of discount-retailing that has flourished in Germany.
In many countries, big food chains are busy opening stores offering the convenience of one-stop shopping in giant, out-of-town sites with their own car parks and restaurants.
As well as piped music, in-store bakeries and high-tech scanners at the check-outs, these retail Meccas offer a choice of thousands of different products, some of which carry the chains' own brands.
In return for premium service, such retailers charge premium prices.
The so-called ‘hard’ deep-discounters turn this logic on its head.
Theirs is a distinctive type of cut-price retailing that emerged in Germany after the second world war and is subtly different from its American cousin.
Instead of building massive shops which can be reached only by car, they rent small, cheap sites on street corners in order to get as near to customers as possible.
They are stingy when it comes to overheads: in most discount stores, there are few staff in sight and goods are sold out of the boxes they come in.
This means that operating costs are a fraction of those at a typical full-price supermarket.
Germany's hard discounters can undercut supermarkets' prices on some products by up to 40%.
But the real key to the discounters' success is the way they manage their day-to-day business.
By sticking to a small range of products, they simplify distribution.
By concentrating on only the fastest of fast-moving consumer goods, they keep their stock at a minimum — often selling it before having to pay suppliers.
And by working closely with manufacturers, they help to design own-label products that are cheaper to transport, stock and sell than cut-price branded goods.
The most successful discounters ‘have a business system that works like a Swiss watch,’ says Philippe Kaas, a Paris-based managing partner of OC&C, a strategy consultancy.
Having perfected their methods — and made fortunes — at home, German discounters such as Lidl & Schwarz and Aldi looked to the rest of Europe.
First they moved to surrounding countries: Denmark, Holland and Belgium.
In Denmark discounting took food retailing by storm, creating local Danish discounters, such as Netto, as it did so.
Then came France, and now even Spain — which, like other Mediterranean countries, still has a strong tradition of small local shops.
Now the target is Britain.
There, even a home-grown ‘soft’ discounter called Kwik Save, which offers a slightly wider product-range at higher prices than true hard discounters, has become a firm favourite with retail analysts.
Kwik Save's return on capital is the envy of Britain's supermarkets (see chart on next page).
The firm has over 800 stores in Britain.
It plans to open one new store a week and is investing heavily in new technology as competition gets stiffer.
Kwik Save's success has acted as a magnet to continental European discounters: ‘Three years ago there was only really Kwik Save,’ says Henrik Gundelach who is in charge of Netto's British business.
‘Now there are at least 13 players in the discount market.’
Netto, which already has 46 stores in northern England, plans to expand into the midlands and into Scotland soon.
France's Carrefour is also setting up shop in Britain.
In January, a Carrefour subsidiary opened a Europa Discount store in Kent.
And last month Rewe, a German retailer with a discount arm, paid £23.5m ($17m) for a 26% stake in Budgens, a small British chain.
All this is a fine test of how easily the cut-price formula can be exported from one country to another.
Sceptics say discounters have flourished in Germany only because of tight planning restrictions on supermarkets and the limited opening hours of German shops.
Big British food retailers are also dismissive.
J. Sainsbury, Britain's biggest food retailer argues that discount shops have received only a temporary boost from the recession.
The firm reckons that discounters will eventually end up cannibalising each other 's market share rather than damaging the bigger chains.
Against that, many of the pile-'em-high-and-sell-'em-cheap stores that took advantage of falling property prices to expand in Britain are convinced they can grow at the expense of existing supermarket chains even when good times return.
Netto's Mr Gundelach points out that the average operating margin of big British food retailers is around 6.5%; the figure for discount stores is around 1%.
That leaves plenty of room for discounters to prosper, recession or no recession.
After all, in France cut-price stores blossomed while the country's economy was still growing strongly.
So far, most discounters have stuck to selling food, though Aldi does use one-off promotions of clothing to attract customers.
But price wars could soon spread outside food retailing too, with the arrival of warehouse clubs, which allow members paying an annual fee to buy goods at wholesale prices.
Both Costco, America's third-largest warehouse-club chain, and Nurdin & Peacock, a British wholesaler, are planning to open clubs in Britain.
How can full-price food retailers beat the discounters?
One possibility is to join them.
France's Carrefour did just that by setting up a hard-discount subsidiary, Erteco, in the mid-1980s.
Erteco now has almost 400 stores and its sales leapt by a third last year to FFr4 billion ($155m).
Asda and Gateway, two British retailers, are experimenting with their own discount formats.
But start-ups can be costly.
Erteco, for example, broke even for the first time only last year.
Rather than setting up their own discount arm, food retailers could simply sell cut-price brands in their superstores.
However a new range of cheap, in-house brands could put pressure on retailers to lower prices on their existing own-label products too, leaving them worse off.
That would be little short of disaster for the likes of Tesco and Sainsbury, which have invested fortunes building a high-quality image for their own-label goods.
Whatever its other consequences, the spread of discounting in Europe is already helping to transform the parochial world of food retailing.
Cross-border mergers, acquisitions and alliances in EC food-retailing, almost unknown a few years ago, are already growing (see table).
They could soon soar as companies seek pan-European economies of scale in areas like logistics as a response to cut-price competition.
Those that stand still could find themselves right in the discounters' sights.
FINANCE
Selling the world
International equity offers are booming.
In time, their success will transform domestic new-issue markets too
THICK and fast the issues come.
A $1 billion tranche of shares in Repsol, a Spanish oil company, was sold in March.
A similar chunk of Argentaria, a Spanish banking group, will be sold to the world's investors next week.
A third issue of Britain's BT, worth up to $1.5 billion, will be made in mid-July.
Other big sales in the pipeline include those of Singapore Telecom and East Japan Railways, and a string of privatisations in France and Italy.
International equity issues are all the rage.
Several trends have contributed to the growing attraction of peddling a new share issue in a number of markets simultaneously.
Cash-strapped governments are being pushed into privatisations that are too big for domestic stockmarkets to absorb at prices that are acceptable to the seller.
Less often, a company also needs more than its home market can provide; frequently, however, firms that trade globally are seeing the merits of a global shareholder-base to match.
And investing institutions, which control a growing share of private savings, are becoming ever keener on diversifying their portfolios across national borders.
Investment banks, hungry for the fat fees that go with global equity offers, have done their bit to rev up interest in them.
The big firms are competing fiercely for mandates.
Most are going to American houses such as Goldman Sachs, lead manager for Repsol and Singapore Telecom, and Morgan Stanley, lead manager for Argentaria.
Merrill Lynch, Lehman Brothers and Credit Suisse First Boston are other prominent international-equity sponsors.
Invigorated by a boom in new issues on Wall Street, these firms are hoping to conquer the rest of the world too.
Their biggest non-American challengers are Britain's S.G. Warburg, lead manager for BT-3, and France's Paribas.
Japanese houses have dropped out as the sinking Tokyo stockmarket drags down their capital; Nomura also lost face when the issue that it lead-managed last year for GPA, an Irish aircraft-leasing firm, fell through.
The business is highly concentrated.
In the past five years, a barely changing group of half a dozen firms has won two-thirds of all mandates for international equity issues.
Why the American dominance?
One reason is the growing weight of American investors.
A few years ago, the biggest buyers of global equities were in Japan or Britain.
Now America is the hottest market; institutions that find Wall Street overvalued are waking up to the attraction of overseas investment.
In both 1991 and 1992, net American purchases of foreign equities totalled around $10 billion; in the early 1980s the figures were negligible.
This naturally gives an advantage to the institutions' closest advisers: American investment banks.
Foreign houses have not built up American ‘distribution’— ie, strong links with big investors.
Many European houses are anyway more used to peddling bonds to investors whose main interest is price, than equities to investors who must be convinced about the health and prospects of a specific company.
Another reason for American houses' strength is the spread of ‘book-building’ as the preferred way of selling international equities.
Investment firms solicit bids for a new issue at indicative prices and then, when their book is complete, price and sell the issue in a single day.
This is standard practice in the American market.
European intermediaries are accustomed instead to fixed-price offers that are underwritten by domestic institutions a few weeks in advance.
European shareholders have ‘pre-emption rights’ which entitle them to first call on secondary offerings; and underwriting is common practice for new issues, too.
Both approaches have their merits.
A fixed-price offer gives issuers greater certainty and intermediaries lower fees.
In a volatile market, an underwritten offer may be the only way a company can raise money.
But underwriters demand a discount — often 10-20% — against the chance that share prices will shift while the fixed-price offer is outstanding.
So issuers who want to get the most for selling their shares tend to prefer book-building, even though fees are higher.
Britain's National Audit Office last year concluded that book-building for BT-2 had yielded a better price than underwriting would have done.
In America, companies that launch underwritten secondary issues see their share price fall further than those which choose book-building, reckons Morgan Stanley (though firms that seek underwriting may be in worse shape anyway).
As book-building becomes more transparent, it is growing more attractive to companies that want to spread their equity widely among stable, long-term shareholders.
Lead managers now run a computerised book of bids, which (unlike in the past) they share with the issuer.
The open book also makes it easier for the seller to encourage investors to bid early and high, by promising to allot more shares to them.
International book-building puts a premium on intermediaries' experience and ability to sell to 300-odd investing institutions around the world.
That is why so small a group of internationally powerful banks are repeatedly chosen as lead managers.
The spread of global issues is slowly opening the business of managing new share issues to outside competition — years after stockmarkets have been liberalised.
In the book-building for BT-3, Warburg has decided to allow the 11 members of its global selling syndicate to pitch to any big institution anywhere, dispensing with national or regional tranches reserved for national firms.
The idea is to make powerful syndicate members compete as never before; but it also restricts non-syndicate members to selling only to small investors.
Four European banks, in protest at this restriction, dropped out of the BT issue last week.
There is plenty of resistance both to the American investment banks and to their book-building technique.
German companies have on occasion preferred to give business to the big universal banks that are their biggest shareholders than to more competitive foreign firms.
New issues in Paris remain largely the preserve of French houses.
Pre-emption rights reinforce the status quo— but they are increasingly being waived.
In France and Spain, for instance, several secondary issues in the past two years have included a 25% international tranche sold through book-building.
The pressure to get out from under pre-emption rights is growing elsewhere, too.
Zeneca, a new drugs firm spun off by Britain's ICI, is about to make a £1.3 billion ($1 billion) rights issue.
It is no secret that Zeneca would have liked to launch a straightforward international equity issue, to increase its receipts.
Instead, blocked by pre-emption rights which require it to offer the shares first to existing shareholders, Zeneca is resorting to a curious wheeze: Warburg will buy the rights to a block of Zeneca shares in the market, in order eventually to place the equities with investors abroad.
In five years time, such roundabout measures are unlikely to be needed.
Italian savings banks
Fewer jobs for the boys
ROME
LEGEND has it that when Benito Mussolini took control of Italy's savings banks by decree in 1938, it was to settle a dispute with a local fascist leader over who should be the boss of Cassa di Risparmio di Venezia.
Since then, the power to appoint savings banks' top managers has shifted to the Treasury and the ruling political parties, which wasted no time in introducing the savings banks into Italy's system of lottizzazione — doling out plush jobs to politicians' pals.
Italians voted to end all that on April 18th.
Among the eight reforms in that day's referendum, one to cancel Mussolini's transfer of appointment power was approved by 90% of the voters.
The change will transform Italy's 65 or so savings banks.
Set up last century by charitable foundations to support local cultural activities and to combat usury, they have become big business.
Cariplo, with its 538 branches concentrated in Lombardy, one of Europe's richest regions, is the largest savings bank in the world and one of Italy's most important financial institutions (see table).
Together, the savings banks control 27% of the country's deposits, lending to businesses as well as to individuals.
Located mainly in Italy's wealthy north, most act as regional banks, but many operate nationally and even internationally.
In the past two years almost all have become joint-stock companies, with a view to raising capital by floating on the stockmarket one day.
The charitable foundations remain their largest shareholders, however.
Will the system really be cleaned up?
That depends on who snatches the power of appointment from politicians in Rome.
In an attempt to pre-empt the banking-reform referendum, the Bank of Italy and the Treasury rushed a bill through the Senate in March.
The legislation is now likely to prove the basis for implementing the referendum it failed to forestall.
It proposes packing foundation boards with regional cultural and professional bigwigs, in fixed proportions to local politicians, and letting them choose the savings-bank bosses.
For most observers, despite the continuing influence of politicians, this is a step in the right direction.
‘It depends on the region, but most of these local and professional groups are relatively unpoliticised.
There would be less lottizzazione,’ says Senator Filippo Cavazzuti, an economist and influential member of the Party of the Democratic Left.
‘Furthermore, if the power to nominate is widespread, it will be more difficult for the parties in Rome to control all the top posts.’
Yet even in these heady times, reform in Italy has its limits.
If the Senate bill becomes law, the Treasury will reserve the right to choose who chooses the bosses of the biggest savings banks.
And the April referendum applied only to savings banks.
Most of the big commercial banks are owned by the state, either through IRI (Credito Italiano, Banca Commerciale Italiana) or through the Treasury (Banca Nazionale del Lavoro).
Their leaders will continue to be found among the ranks of the political faithful — at least until privatisation, or political reform, moves forward.
Philippine stockmarket
Upwardly mobile
MANILA
With Japan closed for Golden Week holidays, investors have paused to ponder nearby markets.
The next two articles look at places where share prices have exceeded expectations: the Philippines and South Korea
A CONSPICUOUS basket-case in a region of economic miracles, the Philippines offers investors a strange paradox.
The Manila stockmarket is at an all-time high; yet electricity power-cuts in the country last an average of eight hours a day.
The paradox is all the stranger because the power shortage has had predictably grave consequences for economic growth.
The Philippines' GDP will probably grow by 1% this year at best, less than the government's latest (reduced) forecast of 3.2%.
This will be the third year running in which the economy has hardly grown, or even shrank.
Yet the stockmarket has rewarded those investors brave enough to venture in.
The Manila composite index rose by 77% in 1991 and by 9% in 1992.
So far this year it is up by 32%, in heavy trading: the index closed at 1,654 on May 5th, an all-time high.
Foreign investors have played a big part in pushing up share prices.
Allowed to buy only ‘class B’ shares, which account for 40% of stockmarket capitalisation, foreigners now own about 30% of the market.
Last year they bought a net $151m-worth of shares.
In recent months foreigners have accounted for almost half of daily trading.
The market's exuberance in the face of ‘brown-outs’ may seem odd.
But buyers are not completely mad.
First, the government is tackling the power problem by building ‘fast-track’ generators.
Jojo Gonzales, who is both director of research at Jardine Fleming in Manila and less congenitally optimistic than most Filipinos, thinks that, by next spring, power cuts will average only two hours a day.
This seems more likely than that everything will be back to normal by this autumn, as the government claims.
But Mr Gonzales reckons that even the delayed improvement should allow the economy to grow by 4% in 1994.
A second reason why bulls have taken heart is that, after a two-year IMF programme which ended in March, the government is now going for growth.
The rewards of virtue are evident.
Inflation is now 8%, compared with 20% two years ago.
Interest rates have collapsed with inflation; three-month Treasury bills yield 10.2%, the lowest in six years.
Falling interest rates have had their usual effect.
Cash has flowed out of the money markets into the stockmarket, well before there is any clear sign of economic recovery.
And there are signs that the central bank is now deliberately easing monetary policy.
The money supply is growing more quickly this year than last, and stiff bank-reserve requirements have been relaxed.
Local observers think that interest rates may fall by at least another percentage point.
All this makes the IMF a little nervous.
It worries that the Philippines could quickly forfeit the gains made during two years of austerity.
Fund officials fear that the budget deficit may swell this year from 37 billion pesos ($1.5 billion) in 1992 to 75 billion pesos, or 6% of GDP, which might push up interest rates again.
They are right to be cautious.
With an 8% inflation rate, the Philippines anyway finds it hard to compete with most of its successful neighbours.
And the lack of reliable electricity deters investment in plant and machinery.
Whatever the economic uncertainties, growing hopes of political stability give stockmarket investors a third cause for optimism.
Former general Fidel Ramos, elected president last year, seems not only to have won over former coup plotters but also to show deregulatory promise.
Foreign-exchange controls have been largely abolished.
Laws on foreign direct investment have been liberalised.
All this raises hopes that the Philippines will cast off the legacy of crony capitalism and two decades of decline.
Folk are beginning to remember that in the late 1950s the Philippines was the wealthiest country in the region.
The stockmarket may already have discounted much of this good news, however.
It is certainly not priced for any surprise setbacks.
Mr Gonzales is wary of those brokers who suggest that the market is due for an imminent ‘re-rating’.
Indeed, such talk probably means that it is time to sell.
The shares in the composite index are selling at 16 times prospective earnings.
They are thus almost as dear as they were at the end of 1989, when the p/e ratio peaked at 18 before a nearly successful coup sank the stockmarket and all who sailed in her.
Nor is there any sign of a pick-up in corporate earnings this year.
Asia Equity, a securities firm, expects earnings to increase by only 1% in 1993, though it is looking for 16% growth in 1994 after the lights come back on.
And there are other reasons for near-term caution.
Many investors have profits to take and are looking for a reason to sell.
The peso, strong for so long under the IMF's high real interest rates, has begun to slip, from 25 to the dollar throughout 1992 to 27 now.
It is likely to slip further, as exporters delay converting foreign exchange into pesos in the self-fulfilling expectation that it will.
Many expect the peso to hit 28.5 to the dollar before the end of the year.
Another concern is that, if foreigners do start selling, the index could fall quickly.
The Manila stockmarket is not particularly deep or liquid.
Of the 169 companies listed, five make up 85% of the value of the composite index.
And six shares account for 70% of the whole stockmarket's capitalisation, of $17.3 billion.
These, naturally, are the shares that foreigners tend to own.
Equities also face two stiff rivals as a destination for domestic investors' capital.
The first is the dollar; Filipinos are now allowed to buy the American currency, and more will do so if the peso continues to slide.
The second is real estate.
Manila had no property boom in the 1980s and is now about the only significant capital in South-East Asia that is not overbuilt.
The office-vacancy rate in the Makati central commercial district is just 5%, and properties there yield nearly 10%.
Stagnant for three years, property prices are beginning to move.
A long-sighted contrarian might now dump equities for buildings.
Bank of Italy
Antonio's turn
WHEN he left the central bank to become Italy's new prime minister last week, the Bank of Italy's governor, Carlo Ciampi, abandoned one of the most important seats in Italian public life.
On May 4th the Bank's governing council recommended that it be filled by Antonio Fazio, one of the Bank's two deputy directors-general.
Moody's took the shine off the news almost at once.
On May 5th the credit-rating agency downgraded Italy's foreign-currency debt and highlighted the country's economic problems.
Before dealing with these, Mr Fazio must first heal the wounds within the Bank that have been caused by the behind-the-scenes battle to succeed Mr Ciampi.
Traditionally the Bank of Italy's governor has been replaced by his second-in-command.
On this occasion, however, the council decided against Lamberto Dini, the Bank's deputy governor, and chose the 56-year-old Mr Fazio instead.
Italy's president and cabinet have still to approve the appointment.
Why Mr Fazio?
Mr Dini has more international experience.
Among other jobs, he has been Italy's representative at the International Monetary Fund.
Also well known abroad is Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa, the Bank's other deputy-director general and a prime candidate to replace Mr Ciampi; he was a member of the committee of great and good that first sketched Europe's path to monetary union in 1988, for example.
Mr Fazio, by contrast, has spent most of his 30-year career at the Bank's head office, mainly in its research department.
He is thought to be a good economist, but a back-room boy.
Mr Padoa-Schioppa's main handicap was that he was only number four in the Bank.
Mr Dini, for his part, was reckoned too political.
In an institution which prides itself on keeping politicians at arm's length (a rare achievement in Italy), Mr Dini's contacts with the former government of Giulio Andreotti were unpopular.
Mr Fazio seemed a safer choice, and no doubt he had Mr Ciampi's blessing.
Yet Mario Monti, the rector of Milan's Bocconi University and a respected economist, has raised doubts about Mr Fazio's ability to safeguard the Bank's independence as successfully as his predecessor.
In an article in Corriere della Sera, an Italian newspaper, Mr Monti praised Mr Fazio's personal qualities, but pointed out that in 1984 Mr Fazio believed the central bank would be wrong to resist government pressure to finance its deficit.
The article by Mr Monti, who had been touted as a possible external candidate for the governorship, may simply be a case of sour grapes.
Central-bank insiders point out that Mr Fazio's views have changed considerably since 1984, and that safeguards against political meddling with the Bank have been considerably strengthened.
If it becomes law, a bill now before Italy's parliament will in any case forbid the Treasury from making the Bank of Italy print money for its debts.
Even this legislation may not be enough to convince Moody's, however.
When it downgraded Italy this week, the rating agency said it feared that future governments might fail to pursue the tough policies needed to bring Italian public spending under control.
Under Mr Ciampi, the Bank of Italy failed to curb the politicians' profligacy, but it never gave up trying.
Will Mr Fazio be as tough with the man who helped get him his job?
The shareholder's friend
THE Cadbury report, published in May 1992, was supposed to usher in a new era in British company management.
Non-executive directors would keep executives on a tight rein.
Both would kowtow to shareholders.
A new survey released this week suggests just how necessary that new era may be.
Questioned by MORI, an opinion-polling company commissioned by Egon Zehnder, an executive-search firm, only 13% of a 100-strong sample of chief executives from Britain's 500 biggest firms suggested that representing shareholders was among the top five contributions that outside directors could make to good corporate governance.
Only 20% of a similar sample of non-executive directors thought it might be.
Or rather, those are the notions they volunteered unprompted.
When MORI presented both bosses and outside directors with a list of possible ways in which non-executives might play a useful role, most respondents spotted what they were supposed to say.
A thumping 83% of both bosses and outside directors said, ‘represent shareholder interests’— way ahead of any other function.
The questionnaire turned up some other useful insights — some predictable, several less so.
More than four-fifths of non-executives thought it was undesirable for one person to be both chairman and chief executive.
So did fully two-thirds of the chief executives.
Outside directors and company bosses disagreed most strongly over whether non-executives should help develop business strategy, and over the sort of decisions in which they should have the final say.
Half of the non-executives thought that they should choose the chairman; unsurprisingly, only a quarter of chief executives agreed.
A quarter of non-executives believed they should have the last word on mergers (10% of chief executives agreed) and a fifth (compared with 3% of the bosses) thought they should approve major borrowings and loans.
More surprising than any of the above is that not only outside directors but also chief executives strongly supported rewriting company law to enforce some of the Cadbury recommendations.
Four-fifths of chief executives favoured legislation requiring companies to have a remuneration committee dominated by outsiders.
Almost as many thought that an independent audit committee should be legally required.
The Cadbury report itself suggested that these changes should be voluntary.
South Korea's stockmarket
Better than billed
SEOUL
South Korea, too, has offered investors and their intermediaries richer returns than many expected.
For how much longer?
FEW foreign brokers in South Korea thought they would see profits in 1992, the year in which South Korea inched open its stockmarket to outside investors.
Yet they did — and some reckon they will double their earnings this year.
Most are banking on two things: that the finance ministry will raise the limit on foreign ownership of Korean firms from 10% to 15%, and that the current bull market will continue.
The stockmarket rally that started in the last quarter of 1992 pushed up the composite share index from a low point of 459 on August 21st to 678 at the end of the year, up 11% from 12 months earlier.
On May 4th the index closed at 720, up another 6%.
Foreigners have been instrumental in chasing share prices higher.
In the first three months of 1993, they bought a net $1.2 billion of South Korean shares, more than half as much as they invested in the whole of 1992.
Foreigners now own 3% of all listed shares (nearly 5%, if indirect ownership through funds is included).
Over 80 listed companies have hit the 10% ceiling on foreign ownership — so foreigners can buy more shares only from other foreigners, usually at a hefty premium.
Many are reluctant to do so; they harbour hopes that the government will raise the 10% ceiling.
Yet that change may be slow to come.
The sudden inflow of foreign capital worries the South Korean monetary authorities.
What comes in can easily go out.
They fear that unexpected turmoil on the peninsula could easily trigger massive capital flight from South Korea.
The administration seems determined to press on regardless with financial deregulation, but the 10% ceiling may well be raised only gradually.
Bright economic prospects should further underpin the Seoul stockmarket, the world's 14th biggest by market capitalisation.
Lower interest rates, fewer strikes, smaller wage increases and the strengthening of the Japanese yen against the Korean won should all bolster corporate earnings.
The Bank of Korea forecasts that GDP will grow by a real 6.3%-6.8% this year, up from 4.7% in 1992.
Daewoo Research Institute, a private think-tank, says that pre-tax profits for the 350 companies it analyses may jump by 14.3% in 1993 and 26.4% in 1994.
Foreign investment banks have so far made a big chunk of their profits from earning high interest on the 10 billion won ($12.6m) they must deposit to do business.
Further deregulation, and a strong stockmarket, should spur earnings this year.
The British houses are concentrating on agency broking, while American firms cover the whole range of securities business.
Citicorp Scrimgeour Vickers, for example, is licensed for stockbroking, trading and underwriting: most of its profits (200m won in the year to March) came from buying bonds.
Other American houses managed new issues.
Salomon Brothers, which arrived in Seoul in 1989, has underwritten over $1.5 billion of South Korean issues abroad, including asset-backed securities being sold by Hyundai Motor Finance Company.
The Americans' route may soon be followed by others, for an increasing number of South Korean companies are resorting to offshore finance.
By the end of 1992, they had issued $1.2 billion-worth of equity-linked paper in the Euromarkets; $100m of Yankee bonds; $153m of Samurai bonds; and $120m of Eurobonds.
The number of deals will grow as the finance ministry eases restrictions on raising capital offshore.
And the fees to the mostly-foreign investment bankers that arrange the issues are juicy.
That is tempting enough.
But some foreign bankers also expect South Korea to develop into a regional financial centre second only to Hong Kong on the Asian mainland.
That looks dotty.
But eight foreign securities firms are already operating in Seoul.
Britain's Barclays de Zoete Wedd will set up shortly.
And 27 foreign firms have representative offices in Seoul.
As financial liberalisation proceeds, competition among the foreign houses will intensify.
Stockbrokerage commissions are still fixed, at 0.5%; but foreign brokers retain only 0.35%, as they have to split the fee with local brokers who are members of the Korea Stock Exchange.
So some foreign houses are joining forces with local brokers.
Dongbang Peregrine Securities, a joint venture between the Hong Kong-based Peregrine and South Korea's Dongbang, opened in December 1992.
Its return on equity is running at 20%.
As a local company, it can sell shares directly to South Korean punters.
There is money to be made in helping South Koreans invest abroad, too.
Korean companies with a turnover of more than $100m are now allowed to own foreign equities.
A financial-market reform that will increase their freedom and that of foreign investors in South Korea is due soon.
South Korean financial deregulation is moving at a glacial pace.
The bond market, for example, may not be opened to foreign competition until 1995.
But if they are prepared to bet and wait, foreign investment banks that offer a wide range of services should do well in South Korea.
For, partly because deregulation has been so slow, they have few credible domestic rivals.
Banks as insurers
American dream?
FEW things make American bankers look enviously at their European counterparts.
One of them is bancassurance, a nasty 1980s neologism which describes banks' efforts to sell insurance products, mostly life and savings policies to retail customers.
European banks have already made big inroads into their life and general insurers' markets (see table on next page).
America's banks, keen for fee income now that loans are no longer growing, would love to do the same.
One of the country's biggest banks recently hired a European consulting firm to advise it on how best to sell life insurance.
Others are interested in storming insurers' broader domain.
Might they succeed?
Logic is on the banks' side.
Their retail branches are a fixed cost, so the more business they put through them the better.
An obvious ploy is to offer customers a wide range of products.
If it makes sense to sell investment products such as annuities and mutual funds (which banks increasingly do), why not insurance?
And banks reckon they can distribute life products much more cheaply than big insurers, which have costly and old-fashioned national sales networks.
According to Christian de Juniac, of the Boston Consulting Group, banks' experience in Europe suggests that they also have other advantages over insurers.
Their employees learn faster and are less likely to leave for a rival.
Because customers choose to come to them when they visit branches, they have a higher hit-rate.
In Britain, employees at TSB, a small retail bank, sell nearly four times as much insurance as rivals at the big insurance firms.
A study of a small savings bank in Massachusetts found that its branch-based salesmen sold more than three times as many policies as agents hired by the bank to do the same job, and five times as many as agents working directly for an insurer.
Even if they are persuaded by these arguments, America's banks face two big obstacles.
First, a confusing jumble of federal and state laws makes it hard for most banks to sell insurance, and almost impossible to underwrite it.
That is a frustrating problem, but not an insurmountable one.
Banks have little desire to underwrite — it is risky and demands lots of precious capital.
Selling someone else's insurance is much more attractive, and there are plenty of loopholes in the laws to permit it.
According to the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, some 75 banks have the right to sell insurance in small towns across 25 states.
One of them, KeyCorp, based in New York state, recently announced that it planned to concentrate on selling investment products, including insurance, in its 875 branches.
It wants fees from these products to contribute a fifth of its earnings by 1997.
A few big banks have ventured into more dangerous territory.
Two years ago Norwest, a Minnesota-based bank, bought Crophail Agency, a specialist broker of farm insurance.
Others have dabbled in general insurance, though most have preferred to swim in the safer waters of life insurance.
Last year, however, California's reform of car insurance gave banks a window through which to grab the power to sell general insurance.
In response, Bank of America set up a state-chartered bank expressly to sell insurance policies through its branches.
In mid-1990 a law was passed in Delaware that enabled banks incorporated there not just to underwrite and sell insurance, but also to conduct reinsurance business.
Thanks to that law, Chase Manhattan got into insurance, using external investment advisers provided through a joint-venture with GNA Corp, an annuity and insurance broker-dealer.
After a successful experiment selling annuities and mutual funds, the bank began offering life insurance in 1992 and now sells policies in 380 branches across four states.
Doug Williams, a manager in the bank's insurance group, says the operation has been profitable for the past two years and is already seen as a significant part of Chase's retail service.
Bankers Trust and Citicorp also took advantage of the Delaware law.
Both are reluctant to talk about their plans, for fear of attracting unwanted attention from the insurance industry.
But analysts reckon each is interested in doing a bit of reinsurance as part of long-term plans to broaden their wholesale finance operations.
Before setting up its Delaware operation, Bankers Trust already had small reinsurance subsidiaries in offshore financial centres such as Jersey.
It is thought to be exploring how insurance risks compare and fit in with the other financial risks it already manages routinely for customers.
The second obstacle faced by American banks is even more daunting.
Insurers have one of Washington's best-organised lobbies, as persuasive as it is litigious.
It ensured that the Delaware law was partly scrapped in November 1991, and is still trying to reduce the banks' remaining powers, particularly in reinsurance.
When Congress was debating wide-ranging banking reform in 1990-91, insurers suggested imposing nationwide limits on banks' insurance powers as a trade-off for allowing interstate branching.
That deal fell through along with broad banking reform, but insurers hope to see their aims fulfilled in another way.
The Supreme Court is soon to deliver a verdict in a case brought by the Independent Insurance Agents of America.
It could remove banks' existing right to sell insurance in small towns.
But bankers may have good grounds for hope.
While insurers have been effective at repelling banks as a group, they seem to be less successful at denying individual banks access to their turf.
And each breach at state level makes it harder to justify the national ban, particularly if banks can show that their presence is giving consumers a better deal.
It may take a few years yet, and some unlikely cohesion in banks' own lobbying.
But insurance could end up being a mainstay of American banks' non-interest income.
The way we were
In the mid-1980s a proposal to tie the dollar, yen and D-mark together in a system of exchange-rate target zones received a lot of attention.
With Europe's currency system in disarray, this discussion is worth revisiting
JOHN WILLIAMSON, of Washington's Institute for International Economics, fathered a strand of applied economics in the 1980s that grew into an academic industry.
In a paper in 1983 he proposed a system of exchange-rate target zones for the world's principal currencies*.
In 1987, in an article co-written with Marcus Miller, he extended the idea to include rules for managing domestic demand in a consistent way**.
The aim of this grander scheme was to enable policy-makers to combine stability in real exchange rates with steady, non-inflationary growth.
During the days of the Plaza and Louvre accords in 1986-87, Mr Williamson's ideas were much discussed.
After the stockmarket crash of 1987, governments lost interest.
Before long Bill Clinton, who is keen on grand visions, may rediscover these ideas and start trying to apply them once more to the global economy.
For the moment, however, they seem more relevant to Europe, which has been having a spot of bother with its own system of exchange-rate target zones.
Mr Williamson's scheme differs from Europe's exchange rate mechanism (ERM) in four main ways:
A criterion for the target rate.
Under the ERM, exchange rates on entry, or after realignments, are matters for negotiation, with no clear rules.
Mr Williamson prefers to calculate ‘fundamental-equilibrium exchange rates’(FEERs)— loosely speaking, rates that are consistent (according to some underlying economic model) with a readily financeable current-account position.
Continuous realignment.
In its early days, the ERM allowed weak currencies to devalue from time to time.
Gradually, it became more rigid.
By the early 1990s, governments resisted realignments even though, on measures such as Mr Williamson's FEER, currencies were sometimes badly misaligned.
Under the Williamson scheme, such misalignments are guarded against — first by setting the central rate at the FEER, and then by keeping it there.
The crucial point here, though, is that the FEER is defined in real (ie, inflation-adjusted) terms.
If a country has a higher inflation rate than its partners and its nominal exchange rate is constant, its real exchange rate is appreciating.
To hold the central rate steady in real terms (thus maintaining competitiveness and, it follows, a financeable current-account position), it must be devalued in nominal terms — just enough to offset the inflation-rate differential.
For this purpose, Mr Williamson favoured small and frequent realignments — every month, say, as inflation figures become available — to big infrequent ones.
On top of that, if shifting ‘fundamentals’ alter the FEER, further realignments would take place.
Broader exchange-rate bands.
The narrow band of the ERM allows currencies to vary by plus or minus 2.25% from their central rates; sterling's broader band was plus or minus 6%.
The Williamson scheme envisaged bands of plus or minus 10% around the FEER.
Soft buffers.
In the ERM, currencies are not allowed to move outside their bands.
At the limit, governments are obliged to defend their currencies with interest-rate changes and potentially unlimited intervention.
The Williamson scheme allows governments, under certain circumstances, to cease defending the zone, pending a decision on realignment.
In his 1987 paper, Mr Williamson included a version of the table shown here, which summarises the properties of different exchange-rate systems.
In adapting it, we have altered one of the cells.
For the ERM, Mr Williamson said yes to ‘exchange-rate changes as an adjustment tool’.
That was true in 1987, but not so true by the early 1990s; by then governments had come to frown upon the idea of occasional realignments.
That aside, the table shows two key differences between the effects of Mr Williamson's proposal (exchange-rate zones with money-GDP targets) and the effects of the ERM.
First, the anti-inflation properties of the ERM depend on Germany, which anchors the system; whereas under Mr Williamson's scheme, governments must shoulder that responsibility for themselves.
Depending on the government, this may be a good or bad thing.
The reason for the difference is that the ERM sets, and attempts to maintain, nominal exchange-rate targets, thus squeezing inflation down to that of the most slowly inflating country.
This discipline is missing from the Williamson scheme; inflation has to be controlled by setting targets for money-GDP instead.
To many proponents of the ERM, that is the biggest defect of Mr Williamson's approach.
Second, in the ERM, freedom to pursue a domestic counter-cyclical policy (ie, a policy to achieve ‘internal balance’) is limited; in the Williamson scheme, internal balance is more easily achieved.
The main reason for this difference is the width of the target zones.
The ERM's narrow bands limit the use of monetary policy to the pursuit of exchange-rate stability.
Mr Williamson's broader bands leave more room for monetary policy to respond to domestic conditions.
In either case, however, fiscal policy would be available for that purpose.
A third difference, not shown in the table, is especially relevant just now.
All of the ways in which the design of the Williamson scheme differ from the design of the ERM serve to make the former more durable — largely, it must be admitted, by making it less ambitious.
All four of the properties described above make it less likely that central banks would ever have to defend parities that the markets had come to regard as indefensible.
Surprisingly, reform of the ERM appears to be on no government's agenda.
If that should change, the Williamson scheme would be a good place for the discussion to start.
What next?
BRITAIN'S Serious Fraud Office (SFO) is nothing if not accident-prone.
The flight of Asil Nadir on May 4th has destroyed the fraud case it spent more than two years and oodles of money building against him.
That Mr Nadir skipped Britain's biggest-ever bail aboard a chartered aircraft bound for northern Cyprus — his native land, from which Britain has little hope of extraditing him — may not be the SFO's fault, although it had apparently been tipped off.
But there are lessons to be learnt.
The first concerns bail.
The SFO argued that it should be denied to Mr Nadir.
Though the agency seems justified by events, it was in fact wrong.
The SFO has earned its reputation for bringing cases to trial with glacial slowness.
It is also famed for losing them.
What court could agree to keep a defendant behind bars when he stood a fair chance of leaving jail, three years later, an innocent man?
If a defendant can post bail and presents no physical threat to the community, he should be allowed to await trial at home.
But bail should be set at a level which effectively deters flight.
The court thought it had nailed Mr Nadir's feet to the floor by making him post a record-breaking £3.5m ($1.5m).
Although Mr Nadir is bankrupt in Britain, this is likely to be a small fraction of the assets he can call on.
The former boss of Polly Peck, a textile-to-foods group which is now in the hands of administrators, has wealth beyond Britain's reach.
A large part of his wealth is in a country with which Britain does not have diplomatic relations.
Mr Nadir faced trial in September on charges of theft and false accounting.
He had every motive to leave town, plenty of opportunity to do so and paid only a relatively small price.
One tempting remedy would be to speed up the SFO's act.
Faster prosecutions would help a bit; but even if current delays were halved, they would still be too long to justify preventive detention.
Winning cases matters more.
Of the five big recent City fraud cases, only one was satisfactorily concluded (the first Guinness case), and only two are still in the land of the living.
The SFO itself blames past failures in part on its habit of bringing too many complex charges.
That must change if prosecutions are to succeed in the BCCI and Maxwell cases that lie ahead.
The fact that, though they had been pared, no fewer than 13 charges still awaited Mr Nadir is discouraging.
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
New magnetic materials
Clear thinking
ENGINEERS are attracted by the idea of transparent magnetic materials.
They might, for example, be mixed with pigments to make magnetic inks for colour printing.
But most existing transparent magnets — which are usually made of iron borate — are not actually all that magnetic.
And those which are work only at temperatures close to absolute zero.
Ronald Ziolo, a chemist at Xerox's Webster Research Centre near Rochester, New York, thinks the answer lies with a new version of boring old iron oxide — better known, in slightly different forms, as the magnetic coating on audio and video tapes, and as rust on cars.
Dr Ziolo's new material is a version of the gamma ferric oxide found on recording tape.
The difference is that his compound is a nanocomposite — the crystals from which it is made are between two nanometres (two millionths of a millimetre) and ten nanometres across.
That is many times smaller than crystals of conventional ferric oxide, and about one ten-thousandth the diameter of a human hair.
Working with scientists at Cornell University and at the State University of New York in Buffalo, Dr Ziolo and his team grow their nanocrystals by adding iron salts to a polystyrene ion-exchange resin — the sort used in household water-softeners.
Iron is repeatedly added and then oxidised, gradually increasing the material's magnetic strength.
When the process is completed, Dr Ziolo's nanocomposite is more than ten times as magnetic at room temperature as iron borate.
And while conventional gamma ferric oxide absorbs light at room temperature, the new nanocomposite lets some through.
The Xerox team is not entirely sure why, but Dr Ziolo reckons that sodium ions from the resin are creeping into the crystal lattice and making it more permeable to light.
Improved transparency is not the material's only intriguing property.
Because its crystals are so small, they are ‘superparamagnetic’— they cannot be magnetised permanently at room temperature and are thus only magnetic in the presence of an outside magnetic field.
This means they will not stick to each other, which could make the composite useful as a high-definition toner for colour photocopying machines.
The material's ability to be easily magnetised and demagnetised may find it another application unrelated to its transparency — refrigeration.
When something is magnetised, it dumps heat into its surroundings.
Demagnetise it and it sucks the heat back again.
Suck in one place and dump in another, and you have the basis of a refrigerator.
Today's magnetic refrigerators themselves require a lot of refrigeration — they work only at temperatures below about 20K (20 above absolute zero).
Magnetic materials made up of nanocrystals ought to be better because their magnetism can be switched on and off more swiftly.
Dr Ziolo reckons that such materials could, in principle, be used to make a magnetic refrigerator that worked at room temperature — perhaps, say, a car air-conditioner.
Refrigeration and printing would require the magnet to be delivered in liquid form (a ferrofluid).
An advanced ferrofluid could also find applications ranging from medicine (perhaps to guide drugs to different parts of the body) to mechanics (for instance, as a leak-free sealing compound).
Dr Ziolo and his team have already managed to develop their discovery into a pale orange, water-based ferrofluid.
This compares favourably with today's commercially available (and dark brown) ferrofluids, which are often based on hydrocarbons rather than water.
Grinding down their much-bigger crystals for suspension in the fluid can take months.
Dr Ziolo's version can be manufactured in a day.
It is also less prone to coagulation than other water-based ferrofluids.
The most tantalising potential use for the new material, though, is solid: data storage.
Each crystal in the magnetic nanocomposite could, in principle, be used to store one bit of data, offering, according to Dr Ziolo, up to 10,000 times the capacity of existing magnetic data-storage devices.
There are, however, two snags.
The first is figuring out how to talk to each crystal individually.
The second is that superparamagnetic materials have no magnetic ‘memory’ at room temperature.
At present, Xerox's material regains its memory below 58K — a temperature, says Dr Ziolo, which probably can be raised by modifying its composition.
Until that is done, the worlds of magnetic nanocomposites and data storage will remain poles apart.
Lung cancer
Peek-a-boo
IN THE 19th century, cancer of the cervix was so common and so deadly that it was known simply as ‘the woman's disease’.
Today, its name rarely appears on death certificates.
Partly this is due to better treatment, but the lion's share of the credit must go to the invention of the smear test, which means that small growths can be picked up and destroyed before they get out of hand.
Sadly, few cancers are susceptible to this sort of test.
Most are still able to keep themselves hidden until they have taken an irreversible hold on a person's body.
Until now.
If Branko Palcic, Stephen Lam and their colleagues at the Cancer Research Centre in Vancouver have their way, the deadliest cancer of the 20th century may be about to share the fate of its 19th century predecessor.
Lung cancer kills about 1m people a year.
Once diagnosed, a patient is lucky to survive for five years for, unlike cervical cancers, lung cancers are usually spotted too late for doctors to be able to destroy them.
X-rays can detect only big tumours, and bronchoscopes — flexible fibre-optic cables which relay pictures from the inside of the lungs to the outside world — only see those that have spread far enough to wrinkle the lining of the lung.
In either case this means they are already out of hand.
But if the bronchoscope could see cancers before they became lumpy, that might change.
The Canadians have shown that it can.
They made their discovery while experimenting with photosensitive drugs.
These substances, which tend to accumulate in tumour cells, turn from relatively benign chemicals into killers when they are exposed to red light.
This makes them useful for destroying tumours while leaving surrounding tissue unharmed.
But they have another property — ultraviolet (UV) light makes them glow.
Many people, including Dr Palcic and Dr Lam, have tried to use this property to detect lung cancer by injecting photosensitive drugs into a patient and shining UV down the bronchoscope in the hope that the drug-rich tumours will shine back.
They have had little success.
During their researches, however, the Canadians made an important discovery.
They found that you do not need drugs to make body cells light up.
All cells have a pale red glow in the presence of UV, and healthy cells also emit green light.
The trick is to spot the difference.
A few years ago Dr Palcic, Dr Lam and their colleagues started a company called Xillix to build machines to do just that.
The results, which they have dubbed ‘LIFE’(lung-imaging fluorescent endoscope) machines, are about to be tested in a number of American hospitals.
Creating LIFE was not easy.
The distinction between healthy and cancerous cells is difficult to detect.
The glow is weak, and needs to be amplified 30,000 times to be visible.
And although a green glow that is weaker than it ought to be might mean that some of the cells in the area are turning malignant, it might also mean that the operator has the end of the bronchoscope too far from the target, or pointing at an awkward angle.
The physicists in the team got round this by taking rapidly alternating snapshots of the area in red and green light.
The red background then provides a reference point which allows the computer to correct for angle and distance.
If both red and green images are weak, the problem lies with the position of the lens.
If the green is weak compared with the red, trouble is afoot.
The computer turns its interpretation of what is going on into a television picture — healthy tissue is coloured green, tumours show up red.
This image is created in real time, so the doctor who is operating the bronchoscope can use it to manipulate his tool.
Early tests suggest that LIFE can pinpoint cancers as small as a tenth of a millimetre across.
Such cancers are easily treatable with, for example, the photosensitive drugs that prompted the research in the first place: shine red light down the bronchoscope and only the area with the tumour need be zapped.
Such drugs are effective.
The first of them to be approved for use in Canada offers a cure rate of over 90%.
One question remains: who should be tested?
Bronchoscopy is a time-consuming, hospital-bound procedure; ideally the technique should be limited to high-risk patients.
So Dr Palcic and his team are developing a second test to help decide who might benefit from their first test — they are trying to determine whether a patient might have signs of lung cancer by looking at cells coughed up in his sputum.
The new test depends on picking up subtle differences in the way that DNA is distributed around the nuclei of cancerous cells.
Such changes are imperceptible to even the best-trained eye.
To find them reliably you must resort, once again, to a computer.
But even the computer needs a little help.
Ordinary video cameras ‘throw away’ half the image they are looking at in order to make transmission easier.
Human brains can be relied upon to fill in the gaps when they reconstruct the image on the television screen in their visual cortexes.
But computers are not so co-operative.
They need every bit of information that they can lay their chips on, so Xillix had to redesign the video camera with which the computer looks down its microscope.
If, using this enhanced image, the computer detects signs of cancer, a patient can be recommended for bronchoscopy to determine exactly where the tumour is.
After all, when it comes to cancer, half-measures will not do.
The ghost in the machine
WRITERS of science fiction love the idea that computers might one day have souls.
That day may be closer than they think.
For those who believe in the soul or, at least, in some spiritual ‘self’ that exists independently of the body, near-death experiences (NDEs) represent rare empirical evidence.
NDEs come in two forms: out-of-body floating (where a person claims to have been able to see himself from above) and swirling tunnels of light.
They are, indeed, reported by people who have been brought back from the edge of death — though mundane scientists tend to attribute them to the effects of oxygen starvation on a failing brain.
But it now looks as though something similar can happen in a failing computer.
Artificial neural networks are a special type of computer processor.
They mimic natural nerve-nets (of which brains are particularly sophisticated examples) by linking together lots of identical elements.
These elements (the equivalent of nerve cells) may be tangible silicon chips or they may exist only in the cyberspace of a working computer program.
But, like a brain, a neural network can be be taught to do things — recognising patterns, for example— by changing the strengths of the connections between its elements.
Stephen Thaler, a physicist who works for McDonnell Douglas in St Louis, Missouri, uses neural networks to help control the experimental diamond-growing processes he runs as part of his day job.
But in the evenings he has become adept at destroying them.
When he does so, funny things happen.
Breaking the connections in an untrained network produces what you might expect: nonsense.
But if a network has been taught a task, disconnecting its elements causes it to ‘fantasise’, reliving its experiences and churning out results which have the semblance of sense even though its circuits have been scrambled.
As it approaches death, the duration of these fantasies increases; seen from the network's point of view, time seems to slow down.
Whether the emergence of this phantom ‘reality’ has any wider meaning is unclear, but it might.
Dr Thaler thinks that it happens only in trained networks because, as a network learns, its elements organise themselves into colonies that respond specifically to different features of the environment.
The regions of the brain which interprete inputs from the senses are organised in a similar sort of way.
Destroying the connections in a computer tends to isolate these colonies and leave them vulnerable to stimulation by spurious signals.
Destroying them in a brain might do the same.
Another result of training is that the different signals arriving at an element often have similar values, except that some are positive and some negative.
If those that are knocked out have opposite signs, what remains may be close enough to what was expected for the element to ‘guess’ what it is supposed to do.
No one yet knows if this sort of thing happens in a dying brain, but if it does, it might actually explain how many angels can dance on the head of a pin.
Amaizing stories
BOSTON, MASSACHUSETTS
The civilisations of the Old World grew up around single crops — wheat in the west, rice in the east.
Research is filling in the tale of their counterpart in the New World — maize
YOU are, so the saying goes, what you eat.
But to Nikolaas van der Merwe, an archaeological chemist at Harvard, it is more than just a saying.
Dr van der Merwe studies old bones, and the chemistry of those bones can tell him what their owners ate when they were alive.
It can, in particular, tell him whether they ate a lot of maize.
Maize (corn to Americans) is a curious plant.
Wheat, rice and barley are all recognisable descendants of their ancestral grasses.
Maize is not.
Its origins are disguised by its huge cob, and only in the last few years has genetic analysis teased out the whole truth about its humble cereal ancestry.
It also depends upon a curious form of photosynthesis when it makes sugar from carbon dioxide, water and sunlight.
Temperate plants are relatively unambitious in their organic chemistry.
As a first step in turning out a molecule of sugar (which has six carbon atoms in it) they are content to link three CO2 molecules together into a proto-carbohydrate.
Tropical grasses like maize are often in more of a hurry — their sugar-precursors have four carbon atoms.
This chemical haste means that maize sugars are slightly richer in the rarer, heavier version of carbon (known as carbon-13) than are sugars made by temperate plants.
Eat a lot of maize and you, too, will contain more of the heavy carbon, and your bones, if fed into Dr van der Merwe's particle accelerator, will betray your diet.
Dr van der Merwe's bones or, rather, those of the Crow Indians of the Ohio valley, are helping to trace the spread of maize across the Americas and establish how, by the time that the conquistadores arrived, it was powering not only the imperial civilisations of Mexico, but the modest villages of what was shortly to become New England.
The crop from Hell
Powering is not, perhaps, the word.
As you tuck into your corn flakes, with all those added vitamins, spare a thought for those who lived before such luxuries were dreamed of.
Maize eaters tend to be short, scrawny and have cavities in their teeth.
Untreated maize is reluctant to give up its B vitamins, particularly its niacin.
Eat too much of it and you will end up with pellagra.
Why, then, was it so successful?
Work by Dolores Piperno, at the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute in Panama, shows that maize has indeed been around a long time.
Dr Piperno studies phytoliths — small pieces of silica that plants lay down in their tissues to discourage animals that might want to eat them.
Phytoliths vary in shape from species to species, making them easy to identify.
They also tend to survive burial in conditions that destroy the rest of the plant.
Dr Piperno's results show that maize has been cultivated for about 2,000 years longer than previously suspected.
It is generally agreed that maize was domesticated in Mexico and that its ancestor was a grass called teosinte, which grows in the hills to the south-west of Mexico City.
Work by John Doebley, at the University of Minnesota in St Paul, suggests that, despite the superficially enormous distinction between the plants, the chromosomes of maize and teosinte differ by only five genes.
But though the oldest evidence for maize in Mexico dates back 5,300 years, Dr Piperno's earliest phytoliths fell to the ground (or, rather, blew into a lake) around 7,000 years ago.
This work, which suggest that much still remains to be uncovered in Mexico, is backed up by excavations to the north of the Rio Grande.
James Schoenwetter, of Arizona State University in Tempe, has been digging in New Mexico.
He has been looking for pollen, the other standby of people who study ancient plants.
Maize pollen is not so resilient as its phytoliths, but New Mexico is drier than Panama, and pollen survives well there.
Dr Schoenwetter has found it in a layer of soil 6,000 years old — younger than in Panama, but still older than in Mexico.
It was, however, slow to spread further.
The journey from New Mexico to the eastern seaboard took around 4,000 years; its acceptance as a staple, almost a thousand years longer.
This is shown by Dr van der Merwe's analysis of the Crow bones.
Before 800AD, bones dug up in the Ohio valley are relatively poor in the heavier form of carbon.
Ohio-valley dwellers of this time were farmers, and pollen tests show that they grew the crop.
But, evidently, they did not eat it very much.
Between 800 and 1100, though, the heavy-carbon levels increased.
Maize consumption rose, populations grew and there was a substantial increase in the complexity of the culture.
This is the key to maize's success.
Four-carbon photosynthesis means it grows fast and yields well.
You get more food per acre planted.
But relying on it is a Faustian bargain.
Once hooked, you cannot go back.
Your people may be unhealthy, but they are numerous.
Other crops cannot sustain the increased population, but you can build empires on maize.
In this, the spread of maize farming is like the spread of agriculture itself.
It, too, displaced a society whose individuals were healthier but less numerous — the archaeological and anthropological evidence suggests that hunters lead longer, healthier and happier lives than farmers, at least than the sort of farmers who live or die by the sweat of their brows.
But once embarked upon, the journey from hunting to farming was one from which there is no return.
And so is the journey from a Mexican hillside to the breakfast tables of the world.
SPECIAL
Rot at the core
NEW YORK
New York's city government has too much on its plate, too big a budget, too many employees, too powerful labour unions — and too few politicians with the guts to do anything about it
THE city of New York has had its government reshaped a couple of times with- in the past century.
Its five boroughs were first cobbled into one municipality in 1898.
Then 40 years later a rejigging of the system ensured a lasting concentration of executive power in the hands of the mayor in City Hall.
Now a third basic restructuring is urgently due.
Without it, any 100th-birthday binge in 1998 may not find New Yorkers in much of a party mood.
The need for change hinges on the state of the city coffers.
On May 3rd the current mayor, David Dinkins, presented his final budget proposals for the fiscal year starting on July 1st.
Planned spending amounts to a whopping $11.4 billion.
In real terms, the figure has risen almost 25% in ten years.
For the coming year, though, Mr Dinkins, despite a hefty rise in money terms, has had to bring projected real-terms spending down.
Even so, City Hall's finances look stretched to the limit.
An air of crisis hung over the closing stages of the 1993-94 budget process: the rejection of Bill Clinton's stimulus package and a last-minute shortfall in grants from the state government in Albany left a $100m hole that suddenly forced fresh cuts on City Hall (which, unlike the federal spendthrifts, must by law balance its budget).
And the recession of 1989-92 has weakened the city's finances in ways that no cyclical recovery seems likely to mend.
New York has lost nearly 400,000 jobs, and the municipal revenues they brought, in four years.
Fewer jobs and more poverty in turn constantly invite more public spending.
The obvious answer would be higher taxes.
But New York has already been taxed beyond its means — as its politicians have tacitly acknowledged by freezing most taxes since January 1992.
City Hall has raised local taxation almost to an art-form over the past 20 years — not least, to plug the gaps left by a fall since the early 1980s in the share of spending covered by grants from state and federal sources.
There are steeply progressive income taxes (up by a third in 1990-91), as well as property taxes that blatantly bleed companies to subsidise home-owners.
No one seriously contests any more that a hostile tax climate has hurt New York's economy.
Large gaps in its commercial life — and empty buildings in many poor neighbourhoods — show where most of its manufacturers cut and ran years ago.
New York used to house the head offices of scores of top companies; they have been leaving in droves.
Now the city's service companies are squealing, even on Wall Street.
Shiny new office blocks across the Hudson in New Jersey are a constant temptation.
The official line on all this often sounds remarkably complacent.
True, the men at City Hall admit, belts have had to be tightened since a recessionary squeeze in 1991.
The latest shortfall, for 1993-94, caused by yet more Republican mischief-making, is regrettable.
But Wall Street had a record year in 1992, which will help pay plenty of immediate bills.
And a bounce in the region's economy over the next few years will soon have the city on the mend.
Really?
Neither Wall Street (with all its labour-saving gadgetry) nor the foreseeable regional recovery seems likely to do much for jobs in New York.
The port authority's latest annual review of the local economy reckons the city will lose another 32,000 jobs in 1993.
And record years on Wall Street do not come along like the Staten Island ferry.
In short, New York is stuck with a tax base that looks too narrow to support the city's budget in anything like its present form.
Something will have to give.
Overloaded, overstaffed
What?
Just possibly, the politicians might begin debating that as they campaign for November's mayoral election.
More probably, they won't.
Debates on the economy usually happen only when panic has set in — which, so far, it hasn't.
Rival candidates will work up a lather over racial tensions, law and order, and the latest agenda of the gay-rights movement for the city's schools.
But that may be all.
If so, on past form only a third of the electorate will bother to go to the polls.
And a crucial link between the budget malaise and the city's political system will go on being ignored.
For a start, the political system is hopelessly overloaded by the scale of New York's spending.
City Hall has clung to its paternalist traditions — which go far beyond the municipal norm in America — and has wound up enmeshed in the social problems of a city of 7.3m people in constant turmoil.
Most American cities have a municipal hospital or two; some dabble in public housing.
New York's public sector embraces 15 large hospitals and 45,000 apartments.
It spends more on housing than all other cities in America combined.
The resulting budget process is a nightmare.
The billions flow in through 28 taxes and countless smaller exactions; they flow out through 19 mayoral agencies and scores of less exalted offices.
The paperwork would strain the resources of any company in America.
City Hall has a bureaucracy that seems to leave most private-sector people who brush with it utterly dispirited.
At a deeper level, the problem is far more than a kind of glorified managerial challenge.
Until the 1950s, those who ran City Hall were backed up by hefty party machines.
(Eight executives are voted into office: the mayor, the city comptroller, a vice-presidential equivalent called the council president, and five borough presidents.
Only the first two matter much.)
The party machines were crooked, but at least they provided for the to-and-fro of political patronage in ways that left the mayor, as chief executive, relatively free to run the city.
But the machines have been overwhelmed since the 1960s, not least by the impact of mass media and by demographic upheaval: New York's non-Hispanic white population dropped from 77% of the total to 43% between 1960 and 1990.
Meanwhile, most of the city's administrative strings still have to be pulled from City Hall.
To make life there still harder, the mayor and other politicians — the city has a 51-member council — face an ever more fragmented society of single-interest groups.
Few of these feel bound by any enduring loyalties: they judge City Hall by the funds it can deliver.
So deliver them it does, in a political forum as intensely commercial as any private-sector marketplace.
And almost every budget item is politicised accordingly.
Investigating the city's politics on behalf of the state governor in Albany, a judge 60 years ago handed out a famous verdict:
Every subterfuge is availed of to furnish excuses for the spending of money, not because the spending thereof is necessary, or even desirable, in the public interest, but because of the opportunities for graft incident thereto.
Today the old-fashioned kind of graft mostly gets stamped on by a fiercely nit-picking bureaucracy.
But the corrupt version has been replaced by a new, authorised kind of graft: jobs and influence in exchange for political support.
This permeates New York's sprawling public sector, with a nomenklatura class to guard it.
Not for nothing is New York mocked by some as Moscow-on-the-Hudson.
The city government itself is New York's largest employer.
Its direct workforce of 240,000 accounts for 7% of all jobs in the city.
Another 88,000 work in public-sector health and transport, run by semi-autonomous bodies heavily subsidised by the city.
Perhaps $1 billion a year is handed out to about 3,000 independent non-profit organisations; their staff numbers are unknown.
Cutbacks in the budget have done nothing to curb chronic overstaffing: any official above teaboy needs a full supporting cast.
Total health and social-services head-counts in the city have jumped 14% and 18% respectively since April 1989, against a drop of 11% in the private-sector workforce.
Top officials like Norman Steisel, the deputy mayor in operational charge of the city, are proud of City Hall's financial management.
Its disciplined four-year plans, they say, are streets ahead of the budgeting in most other government bodies.
They can also point to real improvements made in the past few years: a rationalisation of economic-development agencies, say, or a tightening up of Medicaid billing procedures.
Mr Steisel says annual savings of over $100m have been achieved in recent years.
Yet still the budget has gone up.
Why it can't be done
The need for a fundamental rethink looks glaring.
But the men at City Hall, sniffing at anything too ideological, insist that big cuts are just not practical.
For this they offer three main reasons.
First, the scale of New York's social problems leaves City Hall no choice but to go on spending or face disaster.
Second, much of the budget is bedrock personnel expenses, entrenched in union contracts.
And third, huge spending programmes are dumped on the city by the state and federal governments, leaving City Hall with discretionary power over less than half the money it spends.
All three excuses, almost a creed for the nomenklatura, contain some truth.
As an apologia for New York's fiscal tangle, though, they say as much about the nomenklatura as about the inevitability of $10 billion budgets.
Take welfare spending first.
It is the biggest difference between New York and other cities.
Steven Craig, an economist formerly at Hunter College in New York, published a comparative study in 1991.
He found the city's total welfare bill amounted to $162 per citizen — as against an average of $174 elsewhere in New York state, and similar sums even in troubled cities like Cleveland and Los Angeles.
The bill for all social and medical services provided by New York in the current fiscal year, says Mr Steisel, will total about $14.5 billion.
The pressures to spend are solid enough.
The city has about 1.1m people on public assistance.
Around 10,000 homeless people sleep in public shelters every night.
The public hospitals sag under the weight of the AIDS epidemic.
The schools are run down.
In many parts of the city, family and community structures have all but collapsed.
But the city this year is handing out less than $1 billion directly for recipients to spend.
That leaves $11.5 billion to be handled by umpteen intermediaries.
How effectively these do it no one really knows.
Countless watchdogs prowl around the budget-making process.
But once the money is disbursed, only anecdotal evidence offers much of a clue whether the city is getting value for money or not.
Probably not.
Bushwick is a neighbourhood about as far removed from flashy mid-town Manhattan as it is possible to get.
A half-hour subway ride into Brooklyn, it has the third-highest incidence of drug-related crimes in America.
The population, much of it aged under 18, is 26% black, 15% white and 56% Hispanic.
All immovable objects (and some moving ones too) have graffiti sprayed on them.
Whole blocks are still burned out from serious rioting in 1977.
Most shops display no name, just a description of their goods.
Bushwick has no swimming pool, no family community centre, no green park.
If it ever gets them, it will probably be thanks to the Geographic Targeting Taskforce, a local activists' group that is now beginning to make an impact on the area.
Another group, the Ridgewood-Bushwick Senior Citizen Council, has been around for years without promising amenities like that; one of Bushwick's biggest employers, it has stuck to various welfare and housing services.
The taskforce is one of about 16,500 non-profit organisations (Bushwick alone has almost 30 of them) that receive little or no taxpayers' money.
It gets about $100,000 a year from its one large sponsor, the New York Community Trust, a leading private-sector charity.
Meanwhile the Senior Citizen Council, heavily political and apparently fully wired up to the city budget, spends over $10m a year.
Pork fat for organised labour
Few organisations, though, are better wired in to City Hall than the municipal labour unions.
As a power in the land, America's unions have been fading fast since the 1970s.
Not in New York.
They control every arm of the municipal workforce.
The last strike was in 1981, in public transport.
Taxpayers have paid heavily for peace since then, through labour contracts that are meticulously rubbished in booklets from private lobbying groups such as the Citizens Budget Commission (CBC).
For example, New York's firemen oppose any attempt at flexible rostering; they commonly stand by for duty over a 48-hour period each week, and then moonlight on other days.
New York is the only big city in America whose police still insist on two officers in every patrol car.
Its rubbish-collectors extracted a pay rise in January as a reward, in effect, for giving up a nonsensical collection schedule that they had foisted on the city in 1989.
The city's bus company, the third-largest such public-sector undertaking in the country, pays thousands a full-time wage for a part-time job.
Calls are growing for a tougher stand against direct labour costs, which amount to about $15 billion a year.
There is even talk of making big city departments tender for work (a few tiny ones do it already) against bids from commercial competitors.
The Chamber of Commerce and the New York City Partnership, an independent ginger group, have a joint taskforce on privatisation, which plans soon to publish its ideas.
Mr Steisel says City Hall has been in close contact with it from the start.
Some new auditing ideas were laid out in 1989.
A procurement-policy board, for example, has at last begun to scrutinise all supply contracts for incompetent spending, or worse.
But the independent budget office proposed as a non-political watchdog inside City Hall has not been set up.
The courts last month insisted it should go ahead; the politicians cannot decide who should run it, or with what sort of budget.
Peter Vallone, who heads the 50 Democrats (out of 51 members) on the city council, regrets that so few New Yorkers appear to appreciate the significance of a change in City Hall's procedures since 1989: committees of the council, says Mr Vallone, have brought new muscle to bear in the monitoring of mayoral agencies' budgets.
Look hard and you may spot the results.
But all this stops far short of acceptance of the need for a root-and-branch reform of spending.
Officials insist, for example, that the scope for privatisation is exaggerated.
Insiders reckon the notion of slimming the government machine carries even less credibility within City Hall now than a couple of years ago — and even then it was only talk.
Political reality explains why.
The unions influence millions of votes.
They pour money and staff time into the politicians' campaigns.
They have links with the state government in Albany as well as City Hall, which adds hugely to their clout.
And the idea of nibbling at the perks of city employees earning (on average) under $10,000 a year, while millions are made on Wall Street, plays poorly on the hustings.
Value-for-money initiatives that upset union leaders are rarely deemed worth the political candle.
Crude spending cuts at the margin are the preferred alternative, when funds are short.
Inevitably, the least-unionised activities get clobbered hardest.
(New York's vast range of cultural activities is perhaps 30% financed by the city; proposed arts-budget cuts have sparked some of the bitterest rows.)
In a new book —‘Power Failure: New York City Politics and Policy Since 1960’, put out by Oxford University Press — Ray Horton and Charles Brecher, leading lights of the CBC, have shown how arrangements to simplify bargaining with the unions have ended up locking the city into deals that halt even the best-laid plans for change.
Blame someone else
The third main excuse for New York's overspending is the way new tasks have been dumped on it by Albany and Washington.
The extent to which city spending is mandated by others is often exaggerated, according to Mr Craig.
Nonetheless, the budget's apologists are on firmer ground in this area.
For example, the city's welfare spending has to cover 25% of Medicaid bills, at a cost of about $1 billion a year.
In other states, cities can pass on all or nearly all of these bills to the state government.
And New York's slice of the state's educational budget is maybe $100m shy of a strictly pro-rata share.
Posting some of the city's bills to another address —‘load-shedding’, as it is called — is a remedy that appeals to New York politicians.
But arguing that Albany should take over certain categories of spending is one thing; expecting the state to pour the same sums into them is quite another.
In time, load-shedding will have to come; but when it does, the load will turn out to have shrunk.
And once it arrives, city officials ought to be held far more accountable than they are today for what they spend and how.
Some people would like to see load-shedding trigger a sweeping change in New York's whole relationship with the surrounding region.
They include Felix Rohatyn, an investment banker, who, as chairman of the Municipal Assistance Corporation, led a rescue of the city's finances in the 1970s.
He now regrets not giving changes in the structure of local government a higher priority in that rescue.
Some kind of regional tax base for the city, and a drastic reduction in the role of City Hall, are inevitable, says Mr Rohatyn.
He thinks another fiscal crisis like the one he was called in to deal with can be expected to force the issue within a few years.
If so, this November's mayoral election ought to be timely.
But few expect the incumbent Mr Dinkins to say much about slimming his own government.
His challengers — and especially Rudolph Giuliani, the Republican front-runner — must decide soon whether to try grabbing the issue as their own.
The only politicians to have said much about it so far have been presidents of the individual boroughs.
They are muttering about having City Hall's powers decentralised in their favour.
That would be less than a complete solution.
But as a slogan to round off 100 years of New York history, it would be hard to improve on the neatness of ‘Power to the Boroughs’.
BUSINESS THIS WEEK
Not so fast
The Bosnian Serb parliament rejected the Vance-Owen peace plan even though its leader, Radovan Karadjic, had signed it at a peace conference in Athens.
The parliament promised a referendum.
Lord Owen called that a waste of time.
Boris Yeltsin's planned visit to Japan was postponed, for the second time in less than a year.
At the funeral of Pierre Bérégovoy, François Mitterrand criticised those who had ‘thrown him to the dogs’.
The former French Socialist prime minister shot himself five weeks after his party's crushing defeat in parliamentary elections.
As a mark of respect, Edouard Balladur, the new prime minister, postponed a report critical of the Socialists' term in office.
Carlo Ciampi managed to form a new Italian government.
His previous attempt failed when four members resigned in protest at parliament's refusal to lift the immunity of Bettino Craxi, a former Socialist leader widely suspected of involvement in corruption.
The current Socialist leader suggested his party form part of a new grouping of the left.
Germany's Social Democratic leader, Björn Engholm, resigned.
He had been caught lying about inside knowledge of a dirty-tricks campaign against his own party.
Britain's ratification of the Maastricht treaty looked set for further delay, following a successful amendment by Parliament's Euro-rebels.
May Day saw the worst violence in the streets of Moscow since the attempted coup of August 1991, as neo-communist demonstrators clashed with riot police.
Rebel members of Spain's United Left coalition, third in opinion polls before next month's election, called for the overthrow of the coalition's leaders.
Asian turbulence
Police investigating the assassination of Sri Lanka's president, Ranasinghe Premadasa, on May 1st, are blaming the Tamil Tigers for his death.
The method of killing — explosives strapped to the body of a suicide killer — is the one the Tigers used to kill Rajiv Gandhi.
They deny involvement.
A train was blown up in Cambodia's Battambang province in the latest of a series of attacks believed to be carried out by Khmer Rouge guerrillas.
At least 13 civilians died.
In another attack, Siem Reap, a tourist centre, was briefly overrun by Khmers Rouges and troops loyal to Prince Sihanouk.
Seventeen people died.
Guerrillas also killed a Japanese policeman in an ambush.
The attacks are designed to disrupt plans for an election on May 23rd.
At least 16 people were killed in India in Hindu-Muslim riots in the north-eastern state of Manipur.
Police said Hindus attacked a Muslim village and burned 50 houses.
Fair chance
At a meeting with Chris Patten, the governor of Hong Kong, President Clinton said he favoured maintaining China's most-favoured-nation trading status, but that China had to demonstrate responsible behaviour.
Bill Clinton's aides promised that his next 100 days would be characterised by discipline, a sharper focus and more trips outside Washington.
In Texas, a Republican, Kay Bailey Hutchison, won the race for the Senate seat vacated by the treasury secretary, Lloyd Bentsen.
David Koresh, the leader of the Branch Davidian cult, was found to have died from a bullet wound to the head.
President Carlos Menem announced a medium-term economic plan for Argentina.
He promised to bring inflation down to 4% a year from its current 12%, and to create 1m jobs in the next two years.
His plan includes cuts in corporate taxes, and subsidies designed to spur industrial investment.
Wish you were here
Egypt announced that its earnings from tourism fell by more than 50% in the first four months of the year, following a terrorism campaign by Islamic fundamentalists.
President Husni Mubarak says the campaign is being orchestrated by Iran and supported by Sudan.
A retired South African general boasted that he could mobilise scores of thousands of soldiers to create a separate homeland for Afrikaners, if South Africa established majority rule.
Meanwhile four policemen were killed in an ambush in Soweto.
The United States officially handed over control of the relief operation in Somalia to the United Nations.
American soldiers will serve for the first time under a non-American chief, a Turk.
A special security court in Algiers began trying 58 suspected Muslim militants.
Some are accused of bombing the airport last August and many face the death penalty.
Their defence lawyers stayed away in protest at the toughening of Algeria's tough anti-terrorist law.
Going down
Manufacturing in America contracted in April, the first time it has done so since last September.
There was also a decline in the government's index of leading economic indicators.
In March it dropped by a full percentage point, its biggest drop for more than two years.
Some of that was blamed on bad weather.
Nevertheless, combined with last week's plunge in GDP growth, it prompted the government to say the recovery is ‘not solid’.
Germany's six biggest economic institutes rebuked the Bundesbank for not cutting interest rates fast enough.
Though they are predicting that the German economy will shrink for the year, they expect growth to resume in the fourth quarter.
They also criticised the government for its planned increases in taxes and for failing to curb public spending.
Industrial output in western Germany in March fell 0.6% from February and was down 10.5% from March last year.
Making demands
The European Commission agreed not to claim back a DM175m ($111m) loan from Klöckner-Werke, a German steel and engineering group, saving it from bankruptcy.
But the commission demanded deep cuts in capacity in return for its support.
The company had already obtained agreement from most of its creditors to forgive around half its DM2.7 billion debt.
A big American clothes maker, Levi Strauss, which operates in 40 countries, said it will not invest in China and will phase out use of Chinese subcontractors because of the country's record on human rights.
By contrast, Unilever, an Anglo-Dutch conglomerate, announced it would expand its Chinese operations further with two new joint ventures, to make ice cream and detergent, at an initial cost of $10m.
Nearly 30,000 East German steel, metal and electrical workers walked off the job in the region's first big strike since unification.
The stoppage was called to protest against the cancellation of wage agreements which would have boosted pay in eastern Germany by up to 26% to achieve parity with wages in western Germany.
Unions have threatened to call out 300,000 workers in coming weeks.
Employers claim that hard-pressed firms in eastern Germany cannot afford the pay rises.
Lou Gerstner, the new boss of IBM, hired Jerry York, Chrysler's chief financial officer and respected cost-cutter, to the same (vacant) post at the loss-making computer giant.
Attempts by British Telecom to find a partner in America foundered again when talks with Electronic Data Systems, America's biggest computing-services company and a subsidiary of General Motors, were called off after disagreement on how much control BT would have over EDS.
Net profits at Philips Electronics fell in the first quarter by 36% to 103m guilders ($16m) from 162m guilders in the same period of 1992.
But this performance was better than expected, and its share price jumped.
After failing to raise new equity and facing $120m in bond repayments, GPA has abandoned its current efforts to restructure.
The world's biggest aircraft-leasing firm will now try to squeeze concessions from its hapless bondholders.
Asil Nadir, the former head of Polly Peck, an electronics-to-fruit group which was once Britain's fastest-growing company, skipped £3.5m ($1.5m) bail while awaiting trial for theft and false accounting concerning £30m.
He turned up in northern Cyprus, declaring himself happy to be home.
The British government said it would try to get him returned to Britain.
Shake-up
The biggest group of Lloyd's of London agencies, Sturge Holdings, unexpectedly closed eight poorly performing syndicates, including two of the market's biggest.
In what appears to be the start of a long overdue shake-up at Kleinwort Benson, the British merchant banking group's chief executive, Jonathan Agnew, is leaving.
It is thought his replacement will come from outside.
Eastman Kodak's shares plunged 10% following the sudden departure of its new chief financial officer.
Independent directors issued a statement supporting Kay Whitmore, the chairman.
But they added that the company's performance ‘must be improved significantly’.
Half of all mergers and acquisitions in Britain fail, concluded Coopers & Lybrand, an accountancy firm, after studying 50 acquisitions worth a total of £13 billion ($10 billion).
Management clashes between merged companies were blamed, as was failure to do enough homework beforehand.
Going like a rocket
Matra-Hachette of France and British Aerospace said they were close to a 50-50 merger of their missile businesses.
The rationalisation is one of several going on between various European defence companies in a shrinking market.
Production of luxury cars at Jaguar rose by 56% in the first four months of the year, largely due to increased demand in its biggest market, America, where sales in the first four months were 27% higher than a year ago.
But the company, a subsidiary of Ford, is still making losses.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL INDICATORS
CATASTROPHE INSURANCE
Last year natural disasters cost the world's insurers (excluding governments) almost $13 billion, according to A.M. Best, a firm of insurance analysts.
This is by far the biggest annual payout ever.
It crowns a long-term rise in catastrophe losses, even though the number of major disasters was below its mid-1980s peak.
Between 1983 and 1992, for instance, disaster-payouts were about 12 times as big in real terms as in the 1960s, reckons Munich Re, the world's biggest reinsurance company.
Most of the costliest disasters in recent years were storms.
Hurricane Andrew alone, which blasted Florida last August, cost insurers around $16 billion.
Because the size of potential losses is growing so fast, many insurers now reckon that providing catastrophe cover has simply become too risky and have quit the market.
TRADE, EXCHANGE RATES AND RESERVES
Australia had a visible-trade deficit of $102m in March, its first for eight months.
This cut the 12-month visible-trade surplus to $1.1 billion, from $1.8 billion in February.
Australia's current-account deficit widened to $10.9 billion in the year to March, its biggest 12-month deficit since October 1991.
The Australian dollar fell 2.5% in trade-weighted terms over the week.
WORLD BOURSES
Share prices in Tokyo climbed by 6.2% during the week to a new 1993 high, on hopes of an early economic recovery.
Sydney fell by 2.4% after the release of worse-than-expected trade figures for March.
Wall Street edged up 0.9% and the world index gained 1.2%.
MONEY AND INTEREST RATES
Germany's money-market interest rates have fallen again as the Bundesbank slowly eases its monetary policy.
Dutch and Italian banks cut their prime lending rates.
Switzerland's broad-money growth slowed to 4.1% in the year to February.