

LEADERS
Fat of the land
Made in Europe, dumped in Africa
AFRICA, the world's poorest continent, is not short of western well-wishers.
Every year the rich world pumps in billions of dollars of aid to try to breathe life into Africa's listless economies.
The countries of the European Community alone spend more than $1 billion helping Africans build roads, plant saplings and fill bellies.
Yet Africa stays poor.
One reason — just one — is that as the rich world gives with one hand so it takes away with the other.
The EC is the main offender.
On May 25th EC development ministers met to discuss a new ‘special Africa initiative’— yet another proposal to create a pot of money for Africa, this time to help countries that have been battered especially hard by war or drought.
The aim is noble, and deserves applause.
With so many new demands on the rich world's purse from Russia and Eastern Europe, Africa needs all the help it can get.
It does not, however, get it from another EC special Africa initiative, one that sends cheap European beef to West Africa.
Ostensibly designed to help poor African consumers, the beef programme is really aimed at helping rich European farmers.
They produce beef that no one will buy at the price at which they want to sell it, so they are subsidised by the European taxpayer to dump it in West Africa, where it destroys the livelihoods of poor farmers.
Thanks to the tsetse fly, the countries in which this beef is dumped — Côte d'Ivoire and Ghana — rear few cattle of their own.
But these countries have long enjoyed a thriving trade with cattle farmers in the Sahel — Mali, Burkina Faso, Niger, Chad — directly to the north.
Traditionally, herdsmen used to walk their animals, often for days, to markets in the Sahel where merchants bought them and drove them to markets in the south.
Since the mid-1980s, however, when the EC started dumping beef, the merchants have increasingly given up.
European beef can be bought in West Africa at half the price of that produced in the Sahel.
The amount of frozen and chilled beef dumped by Europeans has leapt seven-fold in seven years.
The Sahel cattle farmers cannot compete.
Their climate can support few alternatives to cattle farming.
They are among the most vulnerable in a continent of paupers.
It is no surprise that the beef destined for West Africa should not be wanted in Europe: it is low-quality, fatty stuff.
The fattier the beef, the more the EC pays farmers for it.
Africa happens to be a particularly unchoosy market for fatty beef that the EC has to get rid of somehow.
But it is not, from the European Community's point of view, a big part of the solution to this problem.
West Africa buys less than 0.5% of all beef reared in Europe each year.
Below the belt
The EC is spending large sums on projects expressly designed to support cattle farmers: building refrigerated abattoirs in Burkina Faso, improving cattle breeds in Mali and fattening cattle in northern Côte d'Ivoire and Ghana.
So far the Community has not even conceded that these projects are undermined by its own beef-dumping policy.
It does not want to recognise this specific clash because it does not want to recognise that the entire common agricultural policy rests on a bigger fraud: systematic overproduction of food in Europe, paid for by Europe's taxpayers to please a powerful lobby, Europe's farmers.
Alas, the distortions, and therefore the costs, extend far beyond Europe and even West Africa.
They extend worldwide.
The next welfare state
Instead of tinkering, Britain's government needs to rethink the case for public spending
THERE is nothing like an election in mid-recession to wreak havoc with public finances.
Last year's British election duly wreaked it.
The Conservative government signed cheques with abandon in the run-up to the 1992 polls, and over the coming year will have to borrow £1,000 for every citizen.
The prospect of a deficit of 8% of GDP has driven the Treasury to look for new cuts in public spending.
Michael Portillo, a young Treasury minister with a reputation to make, is determined to be radical.
Others in the (now reshuffled) cabinet are not (see page 30).
The gradualists say this is an awkward moment, and they are right: it always is.
They hope the deficit will anyway shrink rapidly, and they have reason to think so: unemployment is falling more quickly than in previous recessions.
Finally, they say the government is too weak to push through brave reforms that would upset public opinion: that, too, looks plausible.
But confessions of impotence simply will not do.
The demand for public services rises remorselessly.
If that demand is not to be accommodated (with ultimately ruinous results), the government must risk unpopularity.
This can be done in three ways.
The government can seek greater efficiency; it can squeeze expenditure across the board; or it can ask hard questions about what the state should be doing, and try to eliminate whole categories of spending.
Since 1979 it has done the first (seek efficiency) and the second (pare everything) but never the third (redefine the welfare state).
Today's gradualists hope to rely on cheeseparing — which will mean worse services of all kinds, including those which the state should be providing.
To each according to his needs
Awkward or not, it is time for the government to turn to the neglected task of redefinition.
This is where it can find a post-Thatcher purpose — and, if it keeps its nerve, votes as well.
Sometimes, the state is the best provider.
In health care, government can pool risks and use its muscle to keep down costs better than any private provider.
There is a compelling public interest in state provision of primary and secondary education: everybody gains if all children receive schooling of a quality that parents may be unwilling or unable to pay for.
British voters are rightly suspicious of attempts to save money in these areas.
The government's praiseworthy efforts to improve efficiency in health and education have been undermined by too little cash.
The big savings that are needed will have to be sought elsewhere — by finding tasks the state should abandon.
Good targets are two ‘universal’ benefits: child benefit (paid tax-free to all parents regardless of need) and the state retirement pension.
If these benefits were aimed at the poor — the people who really need them — instead of at everybody, public spending and the taxes required to finance it could fall sharply.
The pension is easily the biggest single cash benefit.
It accounts for almost half the yield of income tax.
A transfer on such a scale, from those who work to those who do not, may be manageable today; it will be less so in the early years of the next century, when the number of workers per pensioner will start to fall sharply.
With half the workforce already paying contributions to a private pension scheme, a growing number of old folks will be able to draw on pensions from their employers.
More and more old people will also have capital tied up in a house.
Many argue that pensions represent a social contract between each generation and its children, whose terms are hard to alter except over many years.
In fact, the terms have already been rewritten.
For 15 years the basic state pension has been uprated in line with prices, not earnings; as a result, the living standards of the poorest old people have been drifting down against those of people in work.
That trend will continue: no mainstream political party seeks to raise the basic pension.
But it is a miserable way to make a necessary adjustment.
The elderly poor need more income from the state; many elderly non-poor need none at all.
Instead of paying everybody the same state pension, the state should protect those in need adequately, and leave the rest to look after themselves.
Changes such as this cannot be introduced overnight.
But that is no reason to delay the first steps towards a more selective, and hence effective, welfare state.
Child benefit could be made taxable, or could be restricted to women whose children are not yet of school age.
The government could also be tougher on benefits for invalidity and long-term sickness, whose claimants have multiplied even though national health has improved, and on payments to lone parents, who have too little incentive to look for work once their children reach school age.
All such measures should be presented as part of a thought-out programme to recast the welfare state.
Because that will take time, there can be no quick fix for public spending.
If the recovery fails to cut the deficit sharply, a rise in taxes will be needed, preferably including an end to mortgage-interest tax-relief and broadening further the coverage of value-added tax.
However, for 14 years this government's thinking on fiscal policy has concentrated on short-term remedies.
Long-term remedies are needed.
Are changes such as means-testing child benefit and state pensions simply unthinkable?
Political immutables do mutate.
Less than a decade ago, no Tory minister dared threaten the tax break on mortgage interest.
This week the Sun newspaper, tabloid touchstone of Tory values, denounced it as a ‘costly hangover from the days when people needed an incentive to buy a home’.
Quite right.
If only the government would think as deeply about these matters.
The Bosnia decision
The West has opted for letting it happen rather than making it happen
IT WAS admittedly a hard choice.
On the one hand, a half-promise to save a new-born country, and to show that one lot of people may not dispossess another lot merely by virtue of being better armed; on the other hand, a growing realisation that this could not be achieved without a fight in which an unknown number of young Europeans and Americans would be asked to die in the name of misty-sounding things like compassion and principle.
The argument will go on for a long time.
The choice, however, has been made, in the decision about Bosnia announced in Washington on May 22nd (see page 39).
The democracies must now measure its consequences.
One consequence is that, almost certainly, the Serbs will keep possession of most of Bosnia, in addition to the third of Croatia they already control.
Most of the ‘safe areas’ offered to Muslims in fragments of Bosnia will not in fact be at all safe.
The number of foreign soldiers who may be sent to watch over them — probably less than a battalion per enclave, except in the Sarajevo area — is not enough to stop even a half-serious attack.
Air power will not make much difference; aircraft can work wonders in a high-tech modern war, but preventing a sudden sprint out of the trees is not one of them.
Anyway, most of these Muslim enclaves are not durable.
They are small towns with a patch of surrounding countryside, hugely over-populated by refugees.
Either the Serbs will let the refugees go back to their original homes, which is hard to imagine, or the ‘protecting’ soldiers will sooner or later have to escort them out, to look for new homes somewhere else.
It is possible that one enclave — Sarajevo and the area to its north — will survive.
The Bosnian Serbs may be persuaded to give back a little more land elsewhere, if President Milosevic of Serbia judges that this will speed the removal of the sanctions the world has imposed on his country.
Otherwise the course of events is more or less predictable.
There will be more fighting.
At the end of it the Serbs will hold a fairly compact stretch of ex-Bosnian and ex-Croatian territory whose separation from pre-1991 Serbia will look increasingly theoretical.
The Croats will take what consolation prizes they can.
The Muslims will have little or nothing.
The other consequence will come outside ex-Yugoslavia.
It is wrong to suggest that, because the Serbs have made ethnic expansion work, the same phenomenon will instantly break out in many other places.
Other people tempted to rearrange borders for ethnic reasons (Hungarians looking at western Romania, Greeks eyeing southern Albania, Russians glaring this way and that) will have to go on making their own calculations about how much they really want that bit of the country next door, how tricky seizing it might be, and so on.
Nevertheless, one factor in all their calculations — how the West might react — will now change.
They will note that Europe and America have decided not to risk a fight with a Bosnian Serb adversary whose army is probably no bigger than the equivalent of three or four rather ill-equipped divisions.
This does not make it certain that the West will do nothing about other ethnic cleansers; but it does raise the cleansers' hopes.
Even Saddam has been watching
The reassessment of western willpower is not confined to ethnic expansionists.
There are others who need to work out how dangerous it would be to do something that America and Europe do not want them to do.
North Korea's Kim Il Sung must soon decide whether to make a nuclear bomb.
Saddam Hussein is wondering whether he can get away with an assault on the Kurds of northern Iraq.
To all such people, the Gulf war made a quarrel with the West look hazardous.
The Bosnia decision, the culmination of 23 months of dithering, does not.
These consequences have to be faced because the governments of the West were understandably fearful about the cost of a military intervention.
The enforcement of anything like a just peace in Bosnia and Croatia would indeed not have been easy.
It could almost certainly not have been done by air power alone.
A fight on the ground against gunmen familiar with their local hills and woods can be a bloody business.
And yet, since the start of May, there has been reason to think it would have been less bloody than had previously been feared.
A month ago Serbia's Mr Milosevic formally turned against the Bosnian Serbs, and said he would let no more military help get through to them.
If that promise had been promptly enforced — by putting a guard on the bridges over the Drina and Sava rivers, with aircraft to watch the roads that lead to the bridges — the size of the intervening soldiers' task would have been sharply reduced.
The Bosnian Serbs, by themselves, are not a huge opposition; they do not have many modern weapons; their supplies of ammunition and spare parts would have been running out.
It is hard to believe they would have been too much for the North Atlantic alliance.
It is not quite accurate to call what happened last weekend ‘appeasement’.
The appeasement of Hitler in the 1930s was a failure of will.
Most people had come to understand the danger posed by Hitler's Germany; but they decided to delude themselves into believing that giving him Austria and Czechoslovakia would buy him off.
The failure with ex-Yugoslavia is a failure of understanding.
Most people in America and Western Europe still see what is going on there — no farther away from this summer's holidaymakers in Venice or Tyrol than Lyons is from Paris, or York from London — as a largely irrelevant struggle in an obscure corner of the world.
It is not.
It matters to the democracies because it is a battle about ideas they believe in, because it is on their doorstep, and because the rest of the world has been watching to see what they would do about it.
New brooms in Latin America
Sweeping clean involves more than just staying clean
THE tale of Carlos Andres Perez contains a caution.
When he became president of Venezuela in 1989, he inherited a bankrupt country.
Venezuela's petro-economy had been knocked into stagflation by falling oil prices and by his predecessors' free-spending ways.
He courageously liberalised the economy, with both painful and fruitful results.
Now he has stepped aside, accused of corruption — much as Fernando Collor, another economic liberaliser, had to step aside before being driven out of office in Brazil last year.
A coincidence?
Or are there special perils for reforming presidents in Latin America?
Mr Perez was unpopular long before the current corruption charges were made.
Though Venezuela is traditionally considered Latin America's most secure democracy, soldiers tried not once but twice last year to force him out of office.
And the nation cheered when the Supreme Court and the Senate voted last week to impeach him.
Whether or not he is convicted, most Venezuelans already consider him guilty.
Their certainty owes something to a sense of betrayal.
Venezuelans elected Mr Perez in 1988 with fond memories of his first presidency in the 1970s, a golden era to which he promised a return.
His about-face once in office pleased economists, but robbed him of his mandate: the voters no longer believed he was the man they had elected.
They have dismissed even the manifest economic growth generated by his policies, certain that any wealth created must have gone straight into his or his cronies' pockets.
All of this must seem familiar to Brazil's ex-President Collor, another economic reformer, also forced out on corruption charges.
Mr Collor breezed into office, beguiling the voters with his good looks and grand talk of clean government.
But his party had neither a national nor an ideological base, and was used by the president merely as a vehicle for his political advancement.
As his corruption became evident, usually tolerant Brazilians flooded on to the streets and drove him out.
The downfall of Mr Perez and Mr Collor may in fact owe less to their corruption — real or imagined — than to their general unpopularity and especially that of their economic reforms.
Other Latin American presidents have been able to bring in economic change without the encumbrances of democratic politics.
Augusto Pinochet, for instance, liberalised the Chilean economy unhindered by squeals of pain because these were muffled by his dictatorship.
When the grumbling grew too loud for Alberto Fujimori in Peru, he simply shut down democratic politics.
It is tempting to think that economic reform in Latin America is incompatible with democracy.
It is not.
Argentina and Bolivia have shown that presidents do not have to be dictators to be reformers.
These two countries may, however, be special in another way: both had suffered hyperinflation that had shattered not only their economies but also their political oppositions.
The new presidents therefore had a relatively free hand to implement reforms.
So maybe the proposition merely needs adjustment: reform is possible in Latin America only when the force of might, or the horror of economic chaos, numbs the populace into acceptance.
Another way in Mexico
Fortunately, the success achieved by Carlos Salinas in Mexico suggests an alternative.
He has managed to remain popular and reformist — despite criticism from a vocal, if not powerful, opposition — by getting ordinary people involved.
His Solidarity scheme, based on help for those who help themselves, has provided schools and sewers for those who might otherwise have waited years for benefits to trickle down.
Critics say such efforts are just for show.
Public relations is certainly part of their purpose.
Yet they have helped persuade a suspicious population to accept Mr Salinas's much-needed reforms.
As Mr Perez will attest, that is no small accomplishment.
London's regulatory mess
New legislation is needed to clear it up
FINANCIAL regulators are never short of critics.
On one side are those who pounce on any scandal as evidence that they are unable to stop crooks.
On the other are (mostly) honest firms and markets groaning at the continuously mounting burden of regulation.
No system can satisfy everybody.
Even so, Britain has made an unusually bad fist of the regulatory structure set up under the 1986 Financial Services Act; the outcome has been cumbersome and ineffective.
Now, as many times before, the City is missing a chance to put the system right.
The chance has come in a review conducted by Andrew Large, chairman of the Securities and Investments Board (SIB), the body that sits at the apex of Britain's regulatory structure.
The government commissioned the review after Robert Maxwell's unchecked theft from his companies' pension funds; the manager of those funds was regulated by IMRO, one of the self-regulatory organisations (SROs) supervised by the SIB.
Mr Large also studied other regulatory failures, such as market-rigging at London's Futures and Options Exchange and widespread mis-selling of retail products like life insurance.
Many of the changes Mr Large suggests in the report published on May 25th are sensible — and overdue.
He wants to define the jobs of the SIB and the SROs more precisely, making it easier to see who does what, and to hold each accountable.
Mr Large envisages the SIB chiefly as a regulator of regulators, with the SROs handling day-to-day rule-making and supervision.
He calls this a two-tier system.
To make it work means pulling the SIB itself out of direct regulation and tightening its leash on the SROs.
That should be simpler if a planned new single regulator dealing with the small investor, the personal-investment authority, replaces three existing SROs.
Mr Large also proposes to set clear standards and performance measures for all the regulators — numbers of visits to regulated firms, speed of response to complaints and so on— that can be easily monitored by the SIB and by the investing public.
He stresses the need for top-class recruitment and training that would make a stint with a regulator an attractive choice for a City high-flier.
He favours careful risk assessment, which should enable regulators to concentrate on those (like Maxwell) who look most likely to step out of line.
He hopes to achieve all this without extra resources; indeed he suggests a monitoring unit to review the costs and benefits of regulation.
These pragmatic reforms have much to commend them — especially to a government that is ready neither for new legislation nor for big increases in regulatory costs.
Having interpreted his remit in a correspondingly narrow way, Mr Large was rewarded with instant approval of his conclusions from the Treasury.
Yet he could have brought in most of these changes without a year-long study and without the Treasury's imprimatur.
It is hard to see how he can improve regulatory standards without extra resources.
And it was not necessarily praiseworthy to kowtow to the government's desire to avoid legislation.
The terms of reference for his review explicitly allowed Mr Large to call for a new act.
He should have used that opportunity; especially as new laws will anyway be needed before 1995 to implement European Community directives on investment services.
Time for a British SEC
New laws are needed now for two reasons.
One is to sort out anomalies that, as Mr Large concedes, undermine the effectiveness of his two-tier system.
The SIB, for instance, has no powers to fine; it has no direct powers at all against firms authorised by SROs.
Without such powers, the SIB is unable to create a climate of fear in the financial markets; and without that, it will find it impossible in practice to control the SROs.
Legislation is needed, too, to remove firms' ability to register directly with the SIB — a right that has muddied the boundary between it and the SROs it oversees.
It is not enough for Mr Large and the Treasury to say that they are ready to legislate if present powers prove inadequate.
They are plainly inadequate; the legislation should be drafted now.
The second, more pressing reason for new laws is to beef up enforcement, which is the backbone of any effective regulatory system.
Britain has been notoriously ineffective in dealing with offences like financial fraud, market manipulation and insider dealing.
That is largely because responsibilities are too widely dispersed, among such organisations as the stock exchange, the Serious Fraud Office, the Crown Prosecution Service, the trade department and the SIB.
It is also because the system lacks the option of civil proceedings, which require a lower standard of proof than criminal cases.
Civil powers would facilitate plea-bargaining with suspects as well.
Both these proposals draw on the experience of America's Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).
Mr Large himself is impressed by the SEC, though he warns that a single regulator could be a bureaucratic juggernaut.
That has not stopped other European countries (such as France) from installing regulators that resemble the SEC more than the SIB.
Mr Large says in his report that the SIB, too, would be happy to be armed with enhanced civil powers, and to ride out against financial wrongdoers.
The government should take him at his word.
Banks retool
In naming an industrialist to a top job, Citicorp departed from big-bank tradition.
With luck, it has launched a new one
NOT so long ago, it was bankers who were telling businessmen what to do.
Financial engineering was all the rage.
Main Street looked to Manhattan for clever and not-so-clever ways to finance leveraged buy-outs, or hedge their revenues and balance sheets.
Now, it seems, bankers are growing keener on importing ideas — and bosses — from industry.
Last week Citicorp, America's second-biggest bank, announced that Christopher Steffen would be joining in June the five-man team that runs the bank.
Mr Steffen has helped turn Chrysler and Honeywell around, and more recently appeared in a cameo role as Eastman Kodak's chief financial officer.
Banks (and especially Citicorp) have tapped outside talent before.
In the 1960s and 1970s computer experts from manufacturing and other industries showed banks how to turn a chain of paper into a string of digits.
A little later, when bankers tried to become retailers of financial services, they raided consumer-goods marketeers.
But, for the most part, these men and women were hired to fill more junior roles than Mr Steffen's.
Banks are used to thinking of themselves as special.
They provide services that are crucial to the whole economy.
Yet in insisting, as many bankers do, that outsiders cannot grasp their special business, bankers themselves are missing a chance to understand it better.
This matters more as their monopoly of these vital services wanes.
Banking is becoming a business like any other — except, as a rule, less well-managed.
This is so, with honourable exceptions, because the cold winds of competition reached banking relatively recently.
International trade in goods was liberalised far sooner than that in financial services.
Fully-fledged domestic rivalry among banks is also quite modern.
That is not to say that banks faced no competition; but because it came from mutual-fund companies, savings banks or manufacturing firms' finance arms, they were slower to spot it and restricted by regulators in reacting to it.
Non-banks, by and large, have accepted for longer that they must be cost-effective and efficient to survive.
With their shareholders lulled by the regulatory safety net strung under them and lured by the prospect of fat and easy profits, many banks in the 1980s went for growth instead.
All this changed when recession threw debtors into receivership and many fast-growing banks into or near the red.
This turn of the economic cycle occurred just as banking was substantially deregulated in most big countries.
Banks see little room for growth in revenue.
All are looking for new ways to raise profits.
What can manufacturers, especially, teach them?
Smokestack schoolroom
Two things, basically.
The first is the hard-slog lesson of restructuring, cost-cutting, shrinking, upgrading controls, living by simple disciplines.
This road Citicorp has had, perforce, to tread already.
Keeping costs on the straight and narrow, as well as improving the bank's still-sloppy internal controls, are Mr Steffen's avowed mission.
The second lesson is more positive, and more intriguing.
Citicorp's boss, John Reed, is fascinated by ‘business-process re-engineering’— as management gurus call the job of fundamentally redesigning the way a firm does what it does.
Process redesign may have generated more hype than light, but at its core is the imaginative use of today's computing power in ways that can be peculiarly useful to banks.
It requires firms to stop thinking in terms of discrete groups of people and products, and start thinking of continuous flows.
One of banking's central problems is how to streamline and collate millions of different transactions each day.
Heavy consumers of technology, most banks have so far used it more to automate existing ways of doing things than to invent entirely new ones.
Increasingly, however, bankers are pushing back the limits of technology-inspired redesign.
Citicorp has pursued it more energetically than most.
Mr Steffen, whose brief includes responsibility for the bank's productivity programmes, may well bring fresh ideas from manufacturing.
Such thinking is further advanced in America than in Europe.
By no coincidence, however, two big European banks whose calamitous go-for-growth strategies in the late 1980s much resembled Citicorp's are looking for bosses.
Barclays Bank in Britain has been casting about for months for a chief executive.
France's new centre-right ruling coalition will want to replace the head of state-owned Crédit Lyonnais.
Bringing in an outsider might help both banks conduct a badly-needed rethinking of their business.
Time to retool.
China belongs to me
IT WAS recently on the cover of Time, described as ‘the next superpower’.
It also recently reached Business Week's cover, praised as an ‘emerging economic powerhouse’.
And once again China is on The Economist's cover.
To anyone used to watching cycles of economic growth, investment and speculation, the conclusion should be obvious: such collective euphoria is the clearest possible sign that China's extraordinary economic boom will shortly turn into a bust.
The likelihood is that a bust will come, perhaps later this year or early next year.
Alongside the world's fastest economic growth rates (real GNP rose by 12.8% last year, an annual 14% in 1993's first quarter) has come accelerating inflation.
Nobody knows the true measure of that inflation, but in the cities it is something in the region of 15–20% a year, and rising.
China's shift from a planned economy towards a market system has involved the dismantling of old controls but not their replacement with new ones.
For that reason, the gradual restraint of inflation and cooling of this overheated economy look impossible.
It is likelier that the coming attempt to restrain the economy and prices will be harsh.
The same thing happened in 1988–89, and June 4th will mark the fourth anniversary of its political consequence: the Tiananmen Square massacre.
That prospect needs to be borne in mind as the rest of the world ponders how to deal with China.
The most immediate ponderer is Bill Clinton, who is about to offer a grudging renewal for a further year of China's ‘most favoured nation’ trading status with America — jargon which means simply that China is treated as well, or badly, as most other countries.
He will attach conditions to be met before subsequent annual renewals, probably about China's behaviour on human rights.
Others look at China's economic renaissance and quake with fear, about wages one-tenth of those in industrial countries, and about political ambitions that it might soon be able to afford.
China is negotiating, rather slowly, to join the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT); those outsiders who favour binding China into international trading rules are roughly matched by those who would prefer to keep it outside and thus retain their present freedom to retaliate against its exports.
How should China be treated: with fear or favour?
A billion Chinese capitalists
The best answer is: with delight.
Whether or not there is a bust this year, in the long term China's prospects are excellent, which could prove the best economic news the world has had for at least a century, and the best news China's people have ever had.
A country with a population of 1.2 billion and which shut itself off from world trade and investment is rushing to join the market economy.
In this, China is but the largest part of a wider trend.
For upwards of half a century, the world economy was a misnomer.
The Soviet Union and its East European satellites opted out because of communism.
So did China.
India shut its doors through a mixture of state socialism and post-colonial pride.
Central and South America chose xenophobia, import substitution and authoritarian government.
Altogether, more than half the world's population was outside the market economy.
Now those countries, totalling 3 billion people or so, are trying to return.
They are doing so at differing speeds, faced by differing problems and with differing chances of success.
But nevertheless they are all saying ‘stop the world, we want to get back on’.
A world economy that in practice involved only two-thirds of its population — at best, and that included poor Africa — is gaining 3 billion new members.
It is hard to overestimate the potential gains from this process, if it is allowed to happen.
Trade and the free flow of capital are the winds that pull domestic economies along.
For instance, it has become a cliché to describe Asia-Pacific as the world's most dynamic economic area.
Yet until recently that dynamism existed despite two huge holes in Asia's midst: China and India.
Partly for that reason, Japan and the Asian tigers of South Korea, Hong Kong, Singapore and Taiwan became prosperous through trade with America and Europe, not within Asia.
These days, snazzy products are traded worldwide, almost regardless of geography; but for most things geography still matters.
That is why Canada is the biggest trading partner of the United States, why America is Mexico's biggest partner, and why the countries of the European Community trade more with each other than with anyone else.
A market economy in China promises to mean that over the next decade Asia's geography can reassert itself.
Last year China was the world's 11th largest trader, with exports and imports totalling $165 billion.
Given economic growth and open markets, that figure could easily double in the next five years, and again in the next five, putting China into the top rank of the world's traders and helping maintain the growth rates of its Asian neighbours.
Most of all, however, it will be the Chinese themselves who benefit.
China's rush to capitalism is also a rush towards individual liberty: the chance to choose not just fancy clothes and fast cars but how to live, where to live and who to be ruled by.
China remains a repressive place, in fearsome ways and absurd ones — as, last winter, when Beijingers were banned from burning coal in order to reduce pollution during a visit by the International Olympic Committee.
But economic reform is passing power from central government to the provinces, and from repressive institutions to individual enterprises.
The further this empowerment goes, the harder it is to reverse, and the more the role of the communist party fades.
The coming economic bust will subject this process to its biggest test yet.
As that test looms, the West's main interest lies in fostering China's march to capitalism.
Any weapon — Mr Clinton's trade sanctions, GATT membership, or whatever — needs to be wielded with that march in mind.
If there is a specific negotiating target, such as China's adherence to agreements it has already signed on missile sales, or its help in enforcing the nuclear non-proliferation treaty, then the use of targeted trade sanctions can be effective.
But to use broad-brush protection (which is what the withdrawal of MFN status would be) for a vague target such as human rights makes less sense.
Capitalism and economic growth will not guarantee the Chinese people their human rights.
But they do make abusing them steadily harder.
The transfer of power to the market and to the individual, and away from the state and the party, offers a billion people the best possible chance of better lives.
After all, tomorrow's China belongs to them.
LETTERS
Ban the bomb
Your leader ‘Ban the tests?’
(May 15th) contains a number of statements with which I take issue.
Most significantly, it states that one reason not to have a comprehensive nuclear-test ban is that it is almost impossible to distinguish small underground tests from earthquakes and conventional explosions.
This is not true.
It is certainly difficult to distinguish very small tests (a few hundred tonnes) from earthquakes, but new technologies have made this much easier.
However, the point is that if there were a complete test ban, there would be no nuclear tests allowed.
Verifying a ‘zero-option’ would obviously be a much easier and more straightforward task.
No large-scale drilling would be allowed without on-site inspections; any large commercial explosions would have to be notified and inspected; a highly sensitive seismic and radiation-detector network would pick up seismic activity all over the world (useful for earthquake prediction too) and satellites would keep a close check on suspect areas.
I am increasingly convinced that a comprehensive test ban would be a big step to take in curbing proliferation.
It would give a clear message: that the nuclear-weapon states have stopped developing new nuclear weapons.
Only that change in attitude and culture will convince others not to make the bomb.
There is now a real risk that nuclear weapons will spread to several other countries.
Everything that can be done to stop that has to be done.
Clayoquot Sound
‘Tree mischief’(May 15th) contains several inaccuracies about the land-use decision on Clayoquot Sound on the west coast of Vancouver Island in British Columbia.
The decision comes after ten years of uncertainty and often acrimonious debate.
It balances the need to protect this picturesque environment with the need of families to make a living and to provide the area with a stable economy.
Four of Clayoquot Sound's big unlogged watersheds (including the largest untouched watershed on Vancouver Island) and virtually its entire outer coastline, will be permanently protected.
This trebles the amount of protected merchantable forest — large trees that are of interest to conservationists and the forest industry — from 12,500 hectares to 39,100 hectares.
It also ensures that 30% of the unlogged merchantable forest will be protected.
It is important to note that 33% of the sound's total land area will be protected.
This far exceeds the Bruntland Commission recommendation of 12% protection and represents a substantial increase in protection as compared to before the decision, when just 15% of the area was preserved.
The decision also requires a change in forest-harvesting practices.
The Forest Service, the Ministry of Tourism, and the Ministry of Environment, Lands and Parks are working to develop strict guidelines that will use smaller cutblocks, alternate harvesting systems, and fewer forest roads.
This decision was not an easy one.
There are no easy land-use decisions left.
It does, however, represent a balance between environmental, economic and social interests.
Eclectic and middle-aged
Your article on the United Nations volunteers in charge of supervising Cambodia's elections (April 24th) calls them young: the average age of the volunteers is 37.
You state that they come from all over the world, ‘though the bulk is from the Indian sub-continent’.
They come from 46 countries, half industrialised and half in the developing world — 33% are from Bangladesh, India, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka, many drawn from their national electoral commissions.
In a truly patronising vein, you suggest that it was technology, the offer of a shiny card with their photo, that attracted Cambodians to register as voters.
Did you stop to think that there is more than enough going on in Cambodia to make people reflect pretty carefully about participating in the election at all— and that the fact that 4.7m of them registered (for which they received nothing whatsoever in material terms) might just suggest that they really would like to exercise the vote?
Prado disperso
Your article on ‘Homeless masterpieces’(May 1st) seems to accept what appears to be the norm in art circles, that bigger is better, and once you get your hands on a painting never let go.
Curiously, though, in your first paragraph you hit upon the solution to the problem of too many paintings and too little space.
It lies in extending the possibilities of the Prado disperso, in which paintings are lent to embassies, universities, and so forth.
The Prado should establish, say, 20 mini-collections comprising 500 paintings, each with a varied selection of the many treasures hidden in its vaults.
These collections should be displayed in 20 medium-sized cities and rotated among them, say, annually.
Consequently, 20 smaller cities and their surrounds, which would not normally have access to world-class exhibitions, would have a permanent, but changing, Prado exhibition.
After 20 years, new generations would see the repeat of the cycle.
This would still leave the vaults of the Prado in Madrid with approximately five times the number of paintings that it can display at any one time.
Health warning
Lexington refers to me in ‘Young King Clinton’(April 10th), as a friend of the president who is ‘so steeped in foreign policy that [I]would not know an HMO from a hole in the ground.’
I am a faithful reader of your newspaper.
I rely on you for my information on domestic American politics, on which, admittedly, I am not an expert.
Health-care reform is currently the most important issue in American politics.
So if I know less about it than I should, whose fault is that?
BOOKS AND ARTS
A trip down the black current
HIS is a story of arts (albeit ancient), books (though not yet written), and sports (of sorts).
Tim Severin, a renowned adventurer and author, set off on May 13th on a ‘China voyage’ which is taking him from Hong Kong to California on a bamboo raft, and will produce a book of that name, published by Little, Brown, in October 1994.
As Boys' Own adventures go, this looks like being a grand one.
But does it have a serious, scientific sort of purpose?
Mr Severin would say Yes.
His voyage is based on similar ones which, he believes, were carried out by Chinese in the third century BC, and which made possible the great civilisations of Central and South America.
Like others before him, he has noted that some aspects of Mayan and other Mesoamerican civilisations bear an uncanny resemblance to artefacts from the great dynasties of China.
The Indians, it is surmised, must have had help from the Chinese.
Mr Severin has support from a highly respected historian of Chinese science, Joseph Needham, who has said that ‘there is no other satisfactory explanation for the cultural similarities between the continents’.
A nice idea; what a pity it is bad history.
Mr Severin's voyage is reminiscent of that undertaken by another great but misguided adventurer, Thor Heyerdahl.
Mr Heyerdahl could explain the great stone statues on Easter Island in the south Pacific only by insisting that South Americans must have gone there.
He proved that he could make that journey on a primitive craft.
But anthropologists proved his theory was wrong; the islanders came from the western Pacific.
One reason why Mr Severin's books are usually impressive is that he spends so much time discussing the historical evidence for his theories.
This time there was plenty of evidence that could have saved him the trouble of the trip.
Some of the similarities between the East Asian and the pre-Columbian American civilisations can be explained by the fact that people may have moved across the bridge of land which connected north-east Asia to north-west America 15,000 or more years ago.
Other common features are the result of the shared experiences of humankind.
Pyramids are found in both the Middle East and the Americas, perhaps because men reflected that mountains were closer to the heavens, where the gods were said to live, so they built the pyramids as their own mountains.
The same two civilisations also developed mummification, having discovered how long bodies could be preserved in their dry air.
But no one seriously suggests that American Indians taught the Egyptians about civilisation, or vice versa.
Perhaps the biggest problem with the Severin thesis is that recent work in Mesoamerican archaeology, and the deciphering of Mayan hieroglyphic codes, make it clear that the classic Mayan civilisation (AD300 to AD900) had precursors going back to the Olmecs in 1000BC and earlier.
Carvings of Olmec lords sitting on jaguar thrones are a preview of one of the main themes of Mesoamerican art.
Jaguars, which prefer watery environments, were associated in pre-history with rain, fertility and the power that comes with control of the water supply.
Similarities in calendars also link the Olmecs and the Mayans.
There is no need to cross the Pacific to explain the Mayan civilisation; there is a perfectly simple explanation closer to home.
Farther south, the Andean civilisation had more similarities with Mesopotamia than with China; so the idea that its shaping influence came from across the Pacific seems especially far-fetched.
Of course, there are those who persist in believing that only creatures from outer space can explain some features of the Andean civilisation.
Art historians and archaeologists explain that only persistent contact between civilisations is likely to produce far-reaching changes of direction.
Of course, in those long-ago days some human beings probably did drift across the sea from China and Japan to the Americas; but that was mostly accidental and unsustained tourism.
China's legendary lack of curiosity about other civilisations is the result of the success of its own.
The Chinese never felt that they had to go anywhere much beyond their own frontiers to acquire knowledge or to find riches; to the extent that they did go abroad, it was to the west, by land or by hugging the coast.
Chinese fables spoke of the abyss that lay in the waters to the east.
Some Chinese even believed that a Kingdom of Women lay to the east.
The suggestion that the Chinese made American civilisation says more about the myths of the modern age (especially the one which says that the Confucian world will dominate the 21st century).
Even if his history is half-baked, there is nothing amateurish about Mr Severin's voyage.
In the great tradition of British travel writers, he has already sailed the Atlantic in a leather boat trying to prove that Irish monks could have reached America 1,000 years before Columbus.
He has taken a reconstruction of a Bronze Age galley along the coasts of the Aegean and the Black Sea in search of the routes used by Ulysses and by Jason and the Argonauts.
On his ‘China voyage’ he plans to spend from May to October sailing the 4,500 miles up the coast of East Asia and riding what the Japanese call the kuroshio (the black current) to North America.
If he is still up to it, he will then sail another 2,000 miles down to Acapulco by early December.
His 60-foot bamboo raft will have a crew of five or six people.
If it capsizes, it cannot be righted.
But have no fear: the raft has a computer, modern means of communication, and an exclusive deal with the The Times of London.
You will be hearing more, a lot more, about ‘The China Voyage’.
Doolally in Delhi, cushy in Campbellpur
CATS, wrote London's Daily Star, ran up the curtains when the BBC broadcast too realistic a warning to pet-owners against the use of fireworks.
And dogs went doolally.
Doowhat?
Johnson knew the word, but supposed it 50 years dead.
You can guess the meaning.
But the source?
The answer lies in the British empire; to be precise, a transit camp at Deolali, near Bombay, where British troops went out of their minds with boredom on their way to and from the service of the Raj.
The Raj?
Another word from India: British rule there.
A genuine Indian word this, though not quite in this sense.
In its own land, raj simply means rule.
The Raj, specifically that of the British, is their invention — oddly, unknown to those Britons who actually did the ruling: it reached English long after the troops came home in 1947, and thanks, mainly, to the BBC.
The two words, the one 19th-century soldiers' slang, the other Sanskrit, exemplify the multiple enrichments of our language by those of the subcontinent.
Most of Europe is in debt to Sanskrit (raj, rex, reich, regal).
Three thousand years later English traders and soldiers repaid the debt, and brought fresh borrowings back.
The 18th-century nabob — the Englishman back home with his ill-gotten fortune from Bengal — began life as the Indian nawab, a Muslim ruler.
His son perhaps stayed on in a bungalow there, moving his goods by dinghy.
Far to the south, Britons tucked into curry and mulligatawny soup, both transliterated more or less straight from the language of Madras.
Many words joined imperial English, but faded as the empire did: the sepoy, the Indian soldier; the syce, the groom, of his British officer.
Others survive as (ex-army) slang.
The Englishman's cup of char began as a Chinese word for tea, but came west via north India's chai.
Cushy describes the trooper's dreamed-of easy life there.
Buckshee (‘unwanted’ or ‘for free’) was born as baksheesh, a tip.
The Briton may take a dekko, north India's ‘Look!’(just as, from British rule in Egypt, he may take a shufti — though one who takes a butchers has gone no further east than Bow bells and the cockney rhyming slang of a butcher's 'ook).
The enrichment has not been one-way.
Just as Macleodganj and Campbellpur joined the subcontinent's geography, its vernacular speech may be studded with English words and phrases (ek real badmash — a bad lot — wolf sheep's clothing meh).
Indian English preserves others in aspic: tiffin, a light lunch; stepney, a spare wheel; culturable, dated by the Oxford dictionaries back to 1796 and who in England ever used it since?
Bombay's Parsees have turned English into surnames, such as Contractor and Engineer.
They even have a Sodawaterwala fire-temple.
Indian English has developed a syntax and vocabulary of its own: the Bombayite who wants to be sure that ‘You live in Colaba, don't you?’ is likelier to ask, ‘You are staying Colaba-side, isn't it?’
Slang too.
Eve-teasers figured in India's press long before America's had heard of harassment.
A 420 (four-twenty) is a cheat, from that article of the penal code.
The British may yet have cause to renew their debt.
At its purest, Indian English also preserves an elegance that many Britons have forgotten.
And who can doubt the strength of Indo-Anglian writing?
Ask the publishers of Vikram Seth's ‘A Suitable Boy’, Britain's latest best-seller and, for once, rightly so.
The cold war's end
Present at the burial
TURMOIL AND TRIUMPH.
By George Shultz.
Scribner's; 1,198 pages; $10.
Maxwell Macmillan; £25.95
WHEN Al Haig's brief and troubled spell at the State Department came to a sudden end in June 1982, Ronald Reagan's inspired choice to replace him was George Shultz.
It would not have been everybody's choice.
Mr Shultz had been an economics professor, the Nixon administration's man in charge of labour and then the economy, and subsequently a top executive at the Bechtel Corporation, an international construction giant.
Yet he proved to be the right man in the right place at the right time.
In 1982 the enfeebled Leonid Brezhnev still clung to power in the Kremlin, detente was dead, the end of the cold war nowhere in sight.
That was still true after Mikhail Gorbachev took over in March 1985.
Most of official Washington entertained little hope of an early improvement in East-West relations.
Caspar Weinberger's Defence Department and William Casey's Central Intelligence Agency foresaw only bigger Soviet threats and bigger American arms budgets.
Most of the State Department's Sovietologists appeared to agree.
From his first days in office, George Shultz had a different view.
With President Reagan's support, the new secretary of state was convinced that the crumbling Soviet Union had little choice but to negotiate a new relationship with the democracies.
‘Turmoil and Triumph’ is Mr Shultz's account of how his — and Mr Reagan's — persistence ultimately paid off.
From the first Reagan-Gorbachev summit at Geneva in November 1985, through all their later encounters, this book gives the inside story of American-Soviet relations at the top, with page after page of who-said-what-to-whom, based largely on Mr Shultz's copious records and those of his associates.
It is diplomatic history at its liveliest.
Before he became president, and while he was in the White House, Mr Reagan was widely denounced as a trigger-happy warmonger.
In fact, as Mr Shultz points out repeatedly, few people pushed harder for serious talks with the Soviet government, and none was more earnest in the attempt to abolish nuclear weapons.
Still, the road to the end of the ‘evil empire’ was anything but smooth.
It took Mr Gorbachev a year or two to perceive that he held a hopelessly weak hand — that the Soviet Union could not possibly match the enormous economic and technological resources Mr Reagan commanded and was prepared to employ, including the much-maligned Strategic Defence Initiative, which Mr Shultz strongly supported.
Back in Washington, Mr Shultz faced powerful opposition from the formidable Mr Weinberger, the duplicitous Casey and many others.
On several occasions he was driven to the point of resignation.
But the president knew better than to let him go; Mr Shultz stayed the course.
Mr Shultz makes no effort to disguise manifold embarrassments, from Beirut to Bitburg.
He is unsparing in his criticism of the arms-for-hostages operation (though he is disappointingly brief about the linked support for Nicaragua's contras).
Here, Mr Shultz writes, was ‘a staff con job on the president, playing on his very human desire to get the hostages released.
They told the president what they wanted him to know…
A responsible staff…should have called his attention to the violations of his own policies and warned that the intelligence about Iran was fragile at best and obtained from parties with strong interests and biases of their own.’
All the same, Mr Shultz gives the president high marks as a leader.
Mr Reagan, he writes, ‘was ever changing, on the move, ever evolving in new and surprising ways.
He was a doer, a pragmatist…[but]beneath this pragmatic attitude lay a bedrock of principle and purpose…
He was a fervent anti-communist who could comprehend and believe that people everywhere would choose to throw off the communist system if they ever had the chance.
And he worked hard to give them that chance.’
About the larger meaning of the Reagan-Shultz years — the approaching end of the age of anti-democratic revolution — the secretary of state is equally certain: ‘The years of the Reagan presidency were, in the sweep of history, a turning point, building on the ideas and institutions put in place in the critical period right after world war two.
For the bigger part of the century, the world had witnessed a titanic struggle between two visions of the future…
When…our Soviet rivals recognised they could not match us…and as their own system indisputably failed the Soviet people even as it abused them — then came the turning point.’
As a history and an explanation of how the cold war ended, Mr Shultz's memoirs are unmatched.
Like Dean Acheson's ‘Present at the Creation’, which describes the cold war's start, this book will remind readers whose memories may already be fading of some essential truths about America and world politics in the 20th century.
The Chernobyl reality
Not terminal
ABLAZE: THE STORY OF CHERNOBYL.
By Piers Paul Read.
Secker and Warburg; 458 pages; £18.50.
Random House; $15
TWO years to the day after Chernobyl blew up, Valeri Legasov hanged himself from the balustrade in the stairwell of his Moscow house.
Legasov was one of the most symbolic of Chernobyl's victims.
In his career were mingled the hubris and the fall of both nuclear power and communism.
Son of a head of ideology on the Communist party's Central Committee, Legasov became a chemist and rose rapidly to become deputy head of the Kurchatov Institute of nuclear science — and a friend of the powerful.
When the accident happened at Chernobyl he was at a party meeting in Moscow.
He was immediately dispatched to the scene, where his energy, intelligence and presence of mind made him the chief decision-taker in the first days after the explosion of reactor number four.
It was he who recommended that the fire be extinguished by dropping sand mixed with boron and lead on to the reactor.
Four months later it was Legasov who led the Soviet delegation to the Vienna conference on the disaster, and it was the forcefulness of his opening five-hour speech that established the conventional wisdom about Chernobyl: that it had been caused by human error among the operators, that the measures taken to protect the population had been adequate, and that the Soviet Union had nothing to hide.
Yet Legasov was soon a disillusioned man.
‘I told the truth in Vienna,’ he said to a friend, ‘but not the whole truth.’
The operators had pulled the trigger, but the gun had been left loaded.
The type of reactor used at Chernobyl had a design flaw, which meant that dropping in the control rods to avert a surge in power briefly exacerbated the surge.
The flaw was known, but not to the operators on the fatal night; in allowing the reactor's power to rise with too many control rods withdrawn, they were unwittingly playing with fire.
Before long, Legasov was using glasnost to think aloud about the design flaws in communism, about the dissipation of accountability and initiative in the vast bureaucracies that ran the country.
Nobody yet wanted to listen.
Legasov was humiliated into eventual suicide.
His is one of many stories told in this absorbing book.
Piers Paul Read has exhaustively tracked down the actions and thoughts of all those close to the accident.
He employs a thorough, impartial descriptive style.
He definitively recounts the events at Chernobyl and the consequences for everything from Ukrainian nationalism to medical knowledge.
Chernobyl was undoubtedly a setback for nuclear power, but it grows increasingly hard to see it as its death knell.
It was just about as bad an accident as can happen to a nuclear-power station — an explosion and a fire that scattered fissile fuel all over the site and sent radioactive smoke and dust across thousands of square miles.
The stories of what it was like there in the hours that followed, and of the lingering deaths of 31 of the most exposed people, make the hair stand up on the back of your neck.
But Legasov's reassurance at Vienna was not as mendacious as many believed.
The worst predictions of Chernobyl's consequences have failed to materialise.
The Soviet measurements of population doses and effects have essentially been proved accurate by every later test, whatever western greens and Ukrainian nationalists say.
The likely deaths from cancer caused by radiation are still small: 0.1% extra cancers among those affected in 40 years.
And the damage to health caused by alcoholism and stress among Soviet citizens moved from their homes was probably greater than that caused by released radioactivity.
Politicians
A just deflation
TIRED AND EMOTIONAL.
By Peter Paterson.
Chatto & Windus; 308 pages; £20
GEORGE BROWN in his day was one of the most famous men in Britain, and one of the most popular.
In an age when most politicians affect a drearier-than-thou respectability, Brown, even when he ran the Foreign Office in the late 1960s, was an unabashed publicity-seeker.
He danced.
He drank.
He flirted with chambermaids and other men's wives.
His fruity tenor boomed above the hubbub at rowdy election meetings, at Labour Party conferences, even at formal banquets.
Ernest Bevin, Brown's great predecessor as foreign secretary, described himself as ‘a turn-up in a million’.
George Brown might have said the same.
Peter Paterson says that at first he was reluctant to write this biography.
Like Brown, he comes from a poor background and ‘in an utterly priggish way’(his phrase) he had felt that Brown's antics reflected badly on the working classes, including himself.
Brown was constantly letting the side down.
Fortunately, when he started work on the book, Mr Paterson found himself viewing his subject in a more favourable light.
The odd thing is that the resulting book will have precisely the opposite effect on most readers.
George Brown emerges from these pages not as a charming if wayward leprechaun, a well-meaning and decent man who occasionally got carried away by his own exuberance, but as a neurotic monster — vain, rude, self-absorbed, utterly insensitive to the feelings and even the common humanity of those around him.
‘Tired and Emotional’, Mr Paterson's title, is now the standard English euphemism for drunk.
It was originally invented to apply to Brown.
Appropriately, when the old man died in 1985, it was of cirrhosis of the liver.
‘Tired and Emotional’ is largely a catalogue of George Brown's misdemeanours.
Many of them were cruel.
The reader begins by being faintly amused at their sheer improbability; but after a time the response turns into pained embarrassment.
At a banquet for the president of Turkey at Hampton Court Palace the entertainment was to be provided, at the president's request, by students from the Royal Ballet School.
As soon as the young people started dancing, Brown turned to his guest and said loudly, ‘You don't want to listen to this bullshit — let's go and have a drink.’
On another occasion he publicly told the wife of Britain's ambassador to France that she was ‘not fit to be an ambassador's wife’.
He demanded to know of another ambassador's wife, no longer young, what kind of impression an old and unfashionable woman like her must give of Britain abroad: why couldn't she look as attractive as the young woman opposite?
The worst sufferer was his wife, Sophie.
A shy and unpretentious woman, she was dominated by her husband, who expected her to organise his home life, act as his hostess, show a picture of domestic bliss to his constituency, listen to him rehearse his speeches, endure his frequent absences, cope with the bruised feelings of those he had insulted and be prepared to be woken up in the middle of the night to hear his account of his part in great events: ‘Wake up and listen, what I'm telling you is history!’
Mr Paterson is at his best in conveying the feelings of those Brown tormented; but oddly, given his professed admiration for his subject, he is less good at capturing the qualities that made this former fur salesman and trade-union official the deputy leader of his party and a powerful cabinet minister taken seriously even by those who disliked him.
In 1963 he fell only 31 votes short of being elected Labour leader; he might have become prime minister.
When not drunk or nursing a grievance, Brown was capable of being a big man, honest, courageous, intelligent, prodigiously hard-working and with an unclouded view of Britain's proper place in a changing world.
The author's failure to capture Brown's dynamism probably owes something to his apparent lack of interest in the substance of issues.
Whatever else Brown was, he was an issues man.
He was far more concerned about getting the policies right than about self-advancement.
For instance, he was the principal author of Security Council Resolution 242 which, 26 years later, is still meant to govern the terms of any Middle East peace settlement; but Mr Paterson has almost nothing to say about how the resolution was drafted and passed.
He devotes more space to a subsequent altercation between Brown and an Israeli journalist.
Mr Paterson is neither psychologist nor novelist, and the personality that dominates these pages remains strangely elusive.
What accounts for the fatal flaws?
Brown's humble origins and lack of formal education are said to have induced his insecurity and lack of confidence; but Bevin, whose origins were at least as humble, laboured under no such handicaps.
Somehow Mr Paterson fails in imagination; he does not get inside his subject's skin.
He is much better with Sophie.
Although ‘Tired and Emotional’ is a good (if frequently embarrassing) read, George Brown still awaits a truly sympathetic biographer.
Exit another myth
ACCORDING to Clarence Wyatt's ‘Paper Soldiers’ *, being sent to wartime Vietnam was at first about as agreeable a job as a reporter could hope for.
He might tell his loved ones that it was all hell out there, but the reality was different.
‘You can jeep to the front, 25 miles away, of a morning,’ observed a New York Times man based in Hanoi, ‘and return in the evening to a dinner of onion soup, grilled pigeon, chocolate soufflé and champagne.’
That was when France was trying to hold on to Vietnam.
But even when the French were beaten, the country was divided and the Americans moved into South Vietnam, life in Saigon could be quite pleasant.
With its exotic sights, sounds and smells, this was the most alluring city in South-East Asia.
There was dependable French cuisine, and eating well was cheap for those on western pay.
Young Vietnamese women seemed to have a fragility that foreigners found irresistible.
Graham Greene, who lived in Saigon before the French left, and wrote articles on the war for a number of papers, describes in his novel ‘The Quiet American’ life with a remarkably accommodating Vietnamese mistress, which was perhaps based on his own experience.
Alas, there was work to do.
But, cheer up, the work did not have to be too hard.
At first the Americans tried to restrict news of their involvement in Vietnam.
But, once they had arrived in large numbers, they tried to make a reporter's life as easy as possible, providing basic material about the country and the war, easy access to military experts and well-protected trips to watch the fighting.
There was of course a price.
Even in Vietnam there was no free déjeuner.
Reporters were expected, in the words of an American admiral, to ‘get on the team’.
Not all did.
A few reporters, shunning the handout, gave an impression that the American press was opposed to the war, and indeed played a large part in bringing it to an end, an impression that journalists have since been content to foster.
By examining the coverage of the war over 20 years, Mr Wyatt convincingly disputes this view.
The Johnson administration, which did most to Americanise the war, was adept at ‘packaging and distributing’ information ‘in ways of its own choosing’, he says.
‘The press was more a paper soldier than an anti-war, anti-government crusade.’
His verdict is a cruel blow to the self-esteem of American journalism.
When 1 plus 4 = less than 3
English cricket isn't what it used to be.
But then, was it ever?
‘ANOTHER damned fat book, eh, Mr Wisden?’
Another English spring has damply arrived, and the English have begun another cricket season, reminding themselves yet again that it was they who created the world's most civilised form of sport.
They also created ‘Wisden’, named after the man who in 1864 founded the best-known annual of cricket.
Other sports have attracted famous writers — Bernard Malamud (baseball), Henri de Montherlant (bullfighting), Joyce Carol Oates (boxing).
Cricket has yielded one or two good novels, some marvellous journalism, and ‘Wisden’ *.
‘Wisden’ is widely hailed as the cricketers' bible, but it has barely progressed beyond Chronicles (the match reports) and the Book of Numbers (the records section).
Cricket, an old and complex game, naturally lends itself to statistical analysis.
But there is still a certain English insouciance about some of the statistics.
To be sure, ‘Wisden’ is not to blame for the absurd quarrel over the number of centuries — 99 or 100 by the end of the England tour of India?— scored by England's present captain, Graham Gooch.
But it is disquieting that the date of the start of the English county championship is still in dispute; some say the 1860s, some the 1890s.
And surely J.H. Hodges should have been unmasked earlier.
The man hitherto thought to have played for Australia in the first two test (meaning international) matches on record, at Melbourne in 1876–77, now turns out to have been quite another Hodges.
This year the record section of ‘Wisden’ acquires a new interest.
A period of English cricket history has come to an end, and a new period has started.
It is deeply unlikely that any batsman will ever again score 3,000 runs in first-class matches in an English season, as 28 batsmen did between 1899 and 1961.
No bowler may ever again take 200 wickets.
It is doubtful whether anyone will again do the double of 1,000 runs and 100 wickets, achieved only twice since 1967.
Why?
Partly because of the invention, in 1963, of the one-day county game.
Cricket in the 20th century has pulled in large crowds only in the aftermath of the two world wars; after such horrors, people needed the spiritual balm of this most philosophic of games.
By the 1960s the cricket authorities therefore wanted a better crowd-drawer than the old three-day games between counties that made up the county championship.
(Needless to say, this being an English sport, only a minority of England's counties belong to the championship — and, until very recently, none of the majority could ever hope to force its way in.)
The first one-day-game tournament was an immediate success, and the habit spread.
As a result the number of three-day games declined, from 26 per county per year in the late 1940s to 20 in 1972.
(It has gone up a bit since then, but not back to the post-1945 level.)
Since one-day cricket does not count as first-class stuff — quite rightly, in the view of growling conservatives — there are no longer enough playing days for a man to pile up those 3,000 runs or those 200 wickets.
The other cause of the upheaval, which sounds a contradiction of the first, is the arrival of the four-day game.
The essential financial underpinning of English cricket remains the five-day test match against other cricket-playing countries; tests still bring in big crowds, and the money they earn helps the financially struggling county teams.
But England has not done well in test matches lately — partly, the experts say, because neither one-day nor three-day games are a proper preparation for five-day tests.
Enter the four-day county championship match, which this season becomes the norm.
A century of three-day games is over.
Each county will play 17 four-day matches in 1993.
But each match will still consist of just two innings per side, so the chance of huge totals of wickets taken or runs scored by individual players during the season is further diminished.
The editor of ‘Wisden’ deplores the emergence of two radically different kinds of cricket.
No doubt he is right.
But there is another sense in which cricket was two separate games even during its 19th-century and early 20th-century prime.
The year before the first one-day tournament took place, 1962, saw the end of the distinction between amateur and professional cricketers, between gentlemen and players.
It had long been a nonsense.
The patron saint of English cricket, the great amateur W.G. Grace, demanded and received £1,500 — worth £49,000, or $15,000, today — to tour Australia in 1873–74.
Nevertheless, the amateur ethic had ruled the game for a century and more.
‘Wisden’ itself bore witness to the cult of the amateur.
Well into the 1930s the section on cricket at public (meaning private) schools preceded all other match reports.
The same influence could be seen in its early-20th-century chat-pieces, trumpeting cricket's role in strengthening the bonds of Britain's empire.
Some English cricket-lovers still see the end of the amateur as the end of one graceful aspect of county and test cricket.
(The local game, in villages and suburbs, is still almost wholly amateur.)
Others will tell you that it showed cricket's ability to absorb change, an ability it now has another chance to demonstrate.
Still others, being English, feel both things at the same time.
The same thing may explain the cricket establishment's ambivalent attitude towards the one-day matches that have shoved themselves on to the scene.
Although crowds mean money, the rulers of cricket have never been quite happy about them.
When Warwickshire unexpectedly won the county championship in 1911, the number of people coming to see its matches doubled.
This did not please ‘Wisden’: ‘Such sudden enthusiasm’, it wrote, ‘suggests rather too much the spirit of Association Football.’
Early photography
Black and white
HERE were already several thousand professional photographers at work in the United States in the late 19th century.
The uniqueness of Henry C. Norman lies in the fact that from 1870 until his death in 1913 he painstakingly recorded almost every corner of Natchez, a town in Mississippi (and model for the musical ‘Showboat’).
Thousands of his negatives were rediscovered in the early 1960s, and a selection of over 200 of his photographs is being exhibited at London's Barbican Centre between May 28th and June 25th.
His curiosity about the American South equalled that of Mark Twain, who saw in Natchez both the ‘drinking, carousing, fisticuffing…riff-raff of the river’ and the agreeable life of the cotton-rich people who lived in Natchez-on-the-hill.
His pictures bring to life the Grecian-style mansions with their over-plush interiors, the seated ladies with their black female servants standing decorously behind them, the elegant members of the town's prosperous, post-civil-war black middle class.
He also captured tradesmen posing nonchalantly outside their stores and ragged black labourers awaiting hire to unload steamboats.
Children of all classes, black and white, came to his studio.
They ranged from poor orphans in modest white dresses (worn by both sexes) to sailor-suited scions of white-collar families and rich little Lord Fauntleroys.
How relentlessly grown-up and unsmiling they appear to us today.
One Consuela Bailey, who went on to become a Broadway actress of note, is seen as a child actress in Natchez, even then with an alarmingly haughty stage presence.
One of the most poignant studies is of a graceful ten-year-old girl who drowned a few years later in a Mississippi boating accident.
What Twain called the ‘old Mississippi days of steamboating glory and grandeur’ dominate the exhibition.
The photographs of black cotton pickers, including young children, are reminders of the harsh reality underlying the glory.
The steamboats which took the cotton north are beautiful craft.
You see them being loaded and unloaded, sailing piled up to the funnel with cotton bales or wrecked by tornadoes.
Norman also pictured the almost unbelievable sumptuousness of the luxury steamboat liners, with their relaxed passengers at cards or dinner, a waiter for every passenger.
His best pictures have a telling eye for multi-layered detail.
A steamboat excursion in the early 1900s has smartly dressed white revellers, boaters on their heads, laughing and dancing on the promenade deck while in the bowels of the ship squat the exhausted, begrimed black deckhands.
Cannes Film Festival
Revenge is Sweetie
CANNES
HER 1989 entrant in the Cannes Film Festival, ‘Sweetie’, was booed.
But this year Jane Campion, a New Zealand-born director, was deservedly a joint winner of the Golden Palm with ‘The Piano’, an ambitious period study set in the Antipodes in the 1850s.
It concerns a mute Scottish widow (Holly Hunter) and her obsession with her piano and the two men in her life.
From the haunting opening sequence of the party landing on a stormy sea-shore strewn with luggage (plus the piano), Miss Campion maintains a tense, hallucinatory atmosphere.
A landowner, played by Harvey Keitel, demands sexual fun in return for piano lessons.
Mysterious violent encounters occur in the forest at night as jealousies rage.
Together with these dark, Gothic passions, ‘The Piano’ provides beautifully textured photography and a lively portrait of the local community.
Several of the other outstanding films came from Asia.
The biggest surprise was Tran Anh Hung's ‘The Smell of Green Papaya’, the winner of the prize for the best first film.
It has a Vietnamese cast and is about a timid servant girl who influences the lives of a large household.
Technically it is an extraordinary achievement.
It was shot entirely in a studio near Paris.
Interlocking rooms, each with its own atmosphere and meticulous set decoration, are contrasted with the street life outside, seen mainly through windows.
The camera tracks back and forth from bedroom to kitchen as the servants go about their chores.
As the years pass, the lighting scheme moves from darkness into brighter colours.
Chinese-speaking entrants provided fresh, forthright views on the damaging consequences of the Cultural Revolution.
Chen Kaige's ‘Farewell to my Concubine’, the other joint winner of the Golden Palm, finds its climax in great demonstration scenes, but deals mainly with two artists growing up within the Peking Opera.
The film's opening sequences, with extraordinary scenes of the vicious training methods employed, have the sweep and grandeur of ‘The Last Emperor’.
Again like ‘The Last Emperor’, the film has a melodramatic and soggy middle section.
Even so, its vibrant rhythms and gorgeous costumes make it Mr Chen's most accessible film so far.
Tian Zhuang Zuang's ‘The Blue Kite’ ends with the Cultural Revolution.
This film's great achievement is to place political betrayals and inter-family conflicts within the ambience of daily life.
Its tragic revelations are presented in a quiet, conversational style which hides deep emotions.
The British entries received a mixed reception: enthusiasm (but not from this correspondent) for ‘Naked’, a study in ‘gritty realism’ which won Mike Leigh the prize for best director; some revulsion over Peter Greenaway's ‘The Baby of Macon’, which is for strong stomachs; and mild pleasure for Kenneth Branagh's ‘Much Ado About Nothing’.
The British came to Cannes with some pomp and ceremony and, for a disintegrating industry, made a bigger splash than might have been expected.
In a festival so studded with star directorial names, it was fascinating to discover who was up and who was down.
Manoel de Oliveira, a Portuguese director, made a good comeback with ‘Le Val Abraham’, a tense love story.
The Taviani Brothers renewed their love affair with period subjects in ‘Fiorile’.
The biggest disappointments were Akira Kurosawa's ‘Madadayo’, a boring film about a teacher and his irritating pupils, and ‘Far Away, So Close’, a long and pretentious film directed by Wim Wenders which undeservedly took the Grand Jury Prize.
ASIA
Shock in Cambodia —
nobody killed
FROM OUR SOUTH-EAST ASIA CORRESPONDENT
PHNOM PENH
Despite threats from the Khmers Rouges, the Cambodian election has passed off peacefully.
That may be because the guerrillas see a political prize ahead
FOUR hours before the polls opened this week in Cambodia, the air was filled with the sound of dull explosions and the night sky was lit up by flashes of light.
Across the country, anxious United Nations workers awoke to the thought that the long-awaited Khmer Rouge offensive had started.
The crash of torrential rain a few minutes later set minds at rest.
When voting began at eight in the morning in Kompong Cham, the country's most populous province, thousands of damp Cambodians were already outside the polling stations.
Election workers had been issued with flak jackets and the polling sites were guarded by Sikh soldiers in turbans of UN blue.
But the only real problem was controlling the crowds of voters pressing forward to cast their ballots.
Cambodians may have taken to democracy, but queueing is still an alien concept.
If the success of the election hinged on any one province, it was Kompong Cham — the home of Hun Sen, the prime minister of the Phnom Penh government and the area from which one in six of the members of Cambodia's constituent assembly will be returned.
Khmer Rouge soldiers, who were present in less than half the provincial districts last November, had established a foothold in almost every district by polling day.
Using radio broadcasts and posters, they had warned the locals that they would be shot if they turned out to vote.
Almost 30% of the province's polling stations were closed for security reasons and the UN was expecting trouble.
It did not happen.
Violence in Kompong Cham was limited to occasional incidents of shelling near polling stations.
Elsewhere in the country, one polling station in the south was occupied for a time by Khmer Rouge troops, who eventually stole a UN car and left.
Shells landed near several other polling sites around the country.
But generally the level of violence in Cambodia during the election was lower than during the campaign.
Three days into the election, when the main polling stations closed (leaving another three days for mobile ones to travel around the countryside), 85% of the 4.7m registered voters had gone to the polls.
Many voters in areas occupied by the Khmers Rouges, where there were no polling stations, walked to the nearest voting site.
And in some places the Khmers Rouges themselves turned up to vote.
Why, after a campaign punctuated by sporadic Khmer Rouge attacks, was the election allowed to proceed relatively peacefully?
It may be that some of the campaign violence was independent activity by local commanders, not the result of orders issued by Khmer Rouge headquarters.
That would square with UN workers' various experience of the Khmers Rouges: in some areas local commanders were friendly, in others they murdered UN workers.
Were the Khmers Rouges as an organisation incapable of carrying out their threats?
That seems unlikely.
A few grenades chucked into the crowds outside polling stations would have quickly spread panic.
It seems more likely that the Khmers Rouges decided not to disrupt the election, perhaps for good reason.
Despite killing more than 1m of their countrymen between 1975 and 1979, and despite refusing to submit themselves to the vote, they still have a chance of being invited into the government after the election.
The key to their hopes of inclusion lies with Prince Sihanouk, who is still the country's dominant political figure.
Every major political group, including Mr Hun Sen's Cambodian People's Party, says that it wants to see Prince Sihanouk installed as president.
The prince for his part seems to be working on a deal to give the Khmers Rouges a role in the political system.
Such a deal will be all the easier if Funcinpec, the party he founded, emerges from the election as the leader.
Soundings among voters suggested it was likely to.
Chinese diplomats, who have long been close to both the prince and the Khmers Rouges, have outlined the shape of a possible deal to some of their western counterparts.
They claim that Prince Sihanouk has offered the Khmers Rouges a role in the future government of Cambodia, in return for a promise not to disrupt the election.
The prince has suggested two possible constitutional mechanisms to achieve this end.
The first would be to create an appointed senate, which would allow Khmer Rouge leaders to be given an official role.
The second would be to hold by-elections in areas that were excluded from this week's election because they were controlled by the Khmers Rouges.
Such ideas would not be easy to implement.
Prince Sihanouk is notoriously unreliable.
His suggestion that his intervention persuaded the Khmers Rouges not to disrupt the voting may be an attempt to give himself some importance.
The prince has come in for a lot of criticism from the UN and the West for spending most of the past few months in China.
In the aftermath of the election, the prince seemed to be retreating from the idea of including the Khmers Rouges in government.
Even if he does make them an offer, it is not certain they would accept it.
Though the Khmers Rouges have made it clear that they would consider taking part in a coalition government, they have remained silent on the question of giving up their weapons.
The Khmers Rouges are not the only armed faction that could destroy the hopes raised by Cambodia's election.
The Hun Sen government has a large and ramshackle army under its command.
Mr Hun Sen has pledged to be ‘a good sport’, no matter what the results of the election.
But some of his colleagues in the People's Party and in the Cambodian army may be less magnanimous.
If the People's Party does badly in the election it may well reject the result.
One senior UN official fears that Cambodia might then face ‘a perfect replication of Angola’, where a smooth election last year was followed by renewed fighting because the losing party refused to accept the result.
Stoning the press
FROM OUR SOUTH-EAST ASIA CORRESPONDENT
THE Vietnam war was a glorious time for the world's press (see page 118), and in its collective memory Indochina remains permeated with glamour, blood and drugs.
So for many foreign journalists, the Cambodian election was a bit of a let-down.
Only the last ingredient was available.
The appearance during the campaign of characters featured in the film ‘The Killing Fields’ sharpened nostalgia for the 1970s.
Dith Pran, the main Cambodian character, turned up.
So did Jon Swain, one of the journalists in the film.
More baffling was the appearance of Julian Sands, the actor who played Jon Swain.
Perhaps the most startling figure was Al Rockoff, a photographer also portrayed in ‘The Killing Fields’.
Mr Rockoff now sports a long grey beard and was often in evidence, smoking fat cigarettes.
The doyen of the ex-Vietnam set is Tim Page, a photographer whose frequent brushes with death are the stuff of legend among the press corps.
The night before the election, a party was held to mark Mr Page's birthday.
Its main feature was a large pot of soup containing enough marijuana to fell a herd of oxen.
The brew was so potent that several journalists, who had planned to be ‘upcountry’ watching the metal fly, instead spent most of the first day of the election in bed.
Some of those who actually made it to the polling stations could not disguise their disappointment.
At a polling station in Kompong Cham, a photographer confronted by the sight of hundreds of voters rather than piles of corpses, spun on his heels and announced, ‘This whole thing is a farce.’
Coverage of the UN operation was coloured by memories of Vietnam.
The UN's spokesman, Eric Falt, was often economical with the truth — a failing common to spokesmen around the world.
But everything he said was treated with almost obsessive distrust.
Journalists christened his daily briefings ‘the Falt follies’, a self-conscious reference to the American briefings in Vietnam which came to be known as ‘the five o'clock follies’.
Mr Falt could be forgiven his smirk when, on election day, he was able to report not a body count but a remarkable turnout of voters.
Australia
Whose land?
FROM OUR CANBERRA CORRESPONDENT
THE aborigines are back, this time before Paul Keating, the latest prime minister to grapple with one of the trickiest problems in Australian politics: aborigines' rights.
The problem, which has long troubled white consciences, has come to the fore now because of a decision by the High Court that in one case aborigines have a legal claim to lands where they hunted before the white man came.
The case, which concerned three small islands in the Torres Strait, came before the court last year.
But worries about its outcome have been growing as mining companies and others have woken up to the fact that their lands may be claimed by aborigine groups.
Mr Keating is being urged to act quickly to avoid years of uncertainty while new claims are fought through the courts.
On May 22nd, during a visit to New Zealand, he was asked if Australia would follow the example of the Kiwis: in 1840, under the Treaty of Waitangi, Maoris were promised land rights.
No such all-embracing promise was ever given to Australia's aborigines, and Mr Keating gave no hint that one would be given now.
He spoke vaguely of a new opportunity for reconciliation between aborigines and other Australians.
The assumption that aborigines had no right to the land dates back to 1770 when James Cook — Captain Cook, the explorer of much of the Pacific — claimed Australia on behalf of George III.
The doctrine of terra nullius (no man's land) was accepted by the courts until Eddie Mabo brought his case to the High Court last year.
The court found that in some ill-defined circumstances aborigines had ‘native title’ over some land in the islands where Mr Mabo and his group live.
Aborigines elsewhere have now started making claims for land, relying in part on the Mabo judgment.
Past treatment of the aborigines has been shameful, but these days efforts are made to respect their customs and traditional homelands.
An act of 1975 forbids discrimination against anyone on the ground of race.
But for aborigine campaigners gestures have not been enough.
The Mabo judgment gives them clout.
Lawyers seeking to interpret the judgment believe that land held under freehold title cannot be claimed by aborigines, but that vacant Crown land can be.
The judgment leaves a large grey area and much scope for argument.
Most land likely to be in dispute lies in remote areas of Western Australia, the Northern Territory and Queensland.
If the courts were to try to settle each claim on a case-by-case basis, it could take for ever.
Most people therefore accept that the government has to do something.
Mr Keating is expected to put the government's proposals to a meeting of state premiers on June 8th.
It is likely that he will set out to make a deal with the aborigines, offering compensation in return for legislation that clarifies their rights over land.
The compensation may come from Treasury coffers, or, as mining companies fear, from a levy on users of the land.
North Korea
Oops, apocalypse
THE world's strongest nuclear power, America, is to open formal talks with the world's most worrisome nuclear renegade, North Korea, in New York on June 2nd.
The Americans hope to persuade the North Koreans to cancel, or at least suspend, their withdrawal from the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), due to take effect from June 12th.
How North Korea will react is anybody's guess.
The meeting itself takes care of one North Korean demand.
It wanted talks with America, not just with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) or the United Nations.
Parallel talks will open shortly between North and South Korea.
The North has meanwhile proposed that the ‘Great Leader’, Kim Il Sung, should meet South Korea's president.
But that is not all that Mr Kim and his influential son, the ‘Dear Leader’, are demanding.
It claims the annual American-South Korean military exercises, known as Team Spirit, are a threat to the North; that the Americans still have nuclear weapons in South Korea; and that the South has not been inspected for nuclear bases.
The North also complains of supposed American manipulation of the IAEA.
American satellite pictures seem to support suspicions that North Korea has produced more plutonium than it owns up to.
The agency's inspectors have the right to use information provided by its members to check suspicion of wrong-doing, and are likely to continue to do so.
They are particularly interested in two suspected nuclear sites found by American satellites.
By agreeing to talks with the North, the Americans won China's abstention when the UN Security Council passed a resolution this month calling on the North to stay in the NPT.
If the American gambit fails, the next move would be for the UN — China willing — to impose sanctions on the North.
If North Korea is ready to return to the NPT fold, America is prepared to be flexible.
Team Spirit might be scaled down, even scrapped, if tension eases between the North and the South.
As for American nuclear weapons in the South, these have almost certainly been removed.
Reciprocal inspections between the North and the South are already envisaged in a joint agreement on denuclearisation.
If North Korea is determined to have a bomb, then no amount of reassurance by America or South Korea will be enough to get the inspectors back in.
If it merely has a few extra grammes of plutonium squirrelled away (something explicable as an oversight — or the ‘oops’ factor), then it might be ready to end its quarrel with the rest of the world in return for a deal that could even bring diplomatic recognition from America, together with trade and aid from South Korea and Japan.
North Korea's economy is miserable.
The country is without a real friend in the world, even China.
So it has a lot to gain.
But the outside world has a lot to lose.
Sometime this year the North will start unloading and replacing spent fuel from a large reactor at Yongbyon.
The IAEA wants to be there to check whether fuel rods have been removed in the past, and to ensure that the spent fuel is not diverted for military purposes.
Expect North Korea to drive a hard bargain.
Tibet
The prisoner that won't stay silent
CHINA'S most troublesome prisoner is Tibet.
When Tibetans protest, their cries are heard around the world, as they were this week from the demonstrations in the capital, Lhasa.
Reports in American newspapers and on television ensured that they were heard in Washington just as President Clinton was considering whether to tie trade with China to questions of human rights.
Tibet's cries are unlikely in themselves to influence the president one way or another; he is looking at the broad picture of conditions throughout China.
But they were an embarrassment to the Beijing government, already bothered by the recent cordial meeting between the president and Tibet's personable spiritual leader, the Dalai Lama.
China's loss of face was its own doing.
It had been expecting some trouble on May 23th, the anniversary of China's annexation of Tibet in 1951.
Police stood by to quell any pro-independence demos, but the day passed quietly.
The next day, instead of counting their blessings, officials apparently decided that this was the moment to announce the ending of price controls for oil and grain and new taxes.
Several hundred Tibetans, already worried by inflation, took to the streets to protest at the new measures.
They were soon joined by Tibetans calling for independence, turning the demonstration into what police said was a ‘counter-revolutionary activity’.
Government buildings and police cars were stoned.
The protests continued the following day.
Tear-gas was used against the demonstrators, a few were arrested, and tourists were ordered to stay in their hotels.
The protests were smaller than those of March 1989, when police opened fire on marchers and martial law was imposed.
But the protests could probably have been avoided altogether had officials been sensitive to Tibetan worries.
Last autumn the area around Lhasa was made a special economic zone.
Han Chinese have since been pouring in, lured by promises of jobs and entrepreneurial opportunities.
Only the Chinese, it is said, are allowed to run the new shops being built in Lhasa.
Tibetans fear they will become an oppressed minority in their own country.
But at least they can still shout and be heard.
Central Asia
The battle of the som
FROM OUR CENTRAL ASIA CORRESPONDENT
TASHKENT
THE five republics of ex-Soviet Central Asia are like Siamese quintuplets: when they emerged squawking into the world nearly two years ago, all shared bits of each other 's industries and infrastructure.
Their borders were meaningless and arbitrarily drawn.
Separation was bound to be painful, and the republics are now in the middle of their most serious tiff since independence.
Kirgizstan's decision last month to pull out of the rouble zone has infuriated the other four.
They intend eventually to introduce their own currencies but all five had agreed, as members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, to keep the rouble for the time being.
Then Kirgizstan suddenly announced it was introducing the som, gave people a week to exchange their roubles at 200 to the som, and made most rouble transactions illegal after May 17th.
Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan took fright at the prospect of millions of Kirgiz roubles flowing into their territory, buying scarce goods, and fuelling already fiery inflation.
There were 55 billion roubles in circulation in Kirgizstan, President Islam Karimov said in Tashkent on May 24th.
Only 6 billion had been exchanged for som.
‘Where do you think the remaining 49 billion roubles will go?’ he asked.
By this time the Kirgiz had rushed out to buy consumer goods while their roubles were still any good, and Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan were fearing that their own rather empty shops would be cleared as well.
Uzbekistan stopped all bank transfers with Kirgiz banks and brought in regulations to allow sales of goods only to Uzbeks.
Kazakhstan also introduced banking restrictions; goods and money were stopped at the Kirgiz border.
Sadiq Safaev, the Uzbek foreign minister, expressed another worry.
‘We don't know the real value of the Kirgiz som.
We prefer hard currency for transactions.’
So Uzbek gas supplies to Kirgiz parts of the Fergana valley, tucked between the Tien Shan and Pamir mountains, were halted, leaving Osh, Kirgizstan's second-largest town, short of fuel.
Flights from Uzbekistan to Kirgizstan have been cancelled until further notice.
Negotiations are under way to work out a new method of payment.
Locals look elsewhere in the ex-Soviet Union and Eastern Europe and fear what may happen if the row accelerates.
Central Asia's ethnically based republics were invented after the 1917 revolution, their artificial borders drawn up in the 1920s and 1930s, leaving thousands of Uzbeks, Kirgiz, Kazakhs and others in the ‘wrong’ republic.
The Fergana valley is divided between three republics; the town of Osh, although in Kirgizstan, is populated mostly by ethnic Uzbeks.
Inside Kirgizstan, the som has brought little joy either.
Supplies of the currency have been restricted to keep up its value, and people in remoter parts of the country have been unable to get enough.
According to an industrial lobby, the Union of Producers and Consumers, the new currency is not reducing inflation and is not proving to be convertible.
Industries, say the businessmen, cannot buy raw materials; quite soon, the factories will stop working.
Pakistan
Turned upside down 
FROM OUR PAKISTAN CORRESPONDENT
‘ALMIGHTY Allah has vindicated us,’ Nawaz Sharif told the crowds waiting outside Pakistan's Supreme Court on May 26th: the court had just reinstated him as prime minister.
‘Down with the dog Ishaq,’ yelled the crowd, passing judgment on the president who had sacked him a month earlier.
Even by the standards of Pakistan's lively politics, it was an unusual event.
The Supreme Court decided, by ten votes to one, that the dismissal of April 18th was ‘without lawful authority and of no legal effect’.
Its view was that the president's decision to sack the government contravened a section of the constitution upholding fundamental political rights.
So the general election called for July is cancelled.
Mr Sharif held his first cabinet meeting two hours after the court's decision, and the National Assembly was reconvened for May 27th.
Pakistan's judges have not in the past stood up to presidents.
In 1988, when Mohammed Khan Junejo's government was dismissed by Zia ul Haq, the court declined to uphold the legality of the decision, but agreed that an election should be held.
In 1990, when Benazir Bhutto's government was dismissed by President Ishaq, the court upheld the order in its entirety and an election followed.
So what has changed?
The attitude of the army, in part.
In 1988 Zia was the army chief.
In 1990 his successor, Aslam Beg, leant on President Ishaq to get rid of Miss Bhutto.
This time the army has gone out of its way to make it clear, publicly, that it has no views on what has been going on.
Views of the president have changed, too.
Since 1990 he has been tarnished by his machinations first to keep Miss Bhutto out of power, then to prevent Mr Sharif from taking power away from the presidency.
Family scandals have not helped.
The president's term is up in November, and his re-election was already in doubt.
The judges may have seen him as less powerful than he once was.
For the moment, Mr Sharif is on a high, more popular after his resurrection than ever before.
Punjab, the country's biggest province, is pleased: he is a Punjabi, whereas Mr Ishaq is from the North West Frontier Province.
Businessmen — of whom Mr Sharif is one — are delirious.
They have done well under his government.
President Ishaq has made a dignified statement about his enthusiasm for upholding the constitution.
He seems determined to stay until November.
And he will probably try to rally the formidable and disgruntled forces of the opposition to destabilise and unseat Mr Sharif.
A vote of no confidence in both the prime minister and the speaker of the National Assembly, and therefore much disagreeable horsetrading, cannot be ruled out.
The provincial assemblies, all of them controlled by people or parties hostile to Mr Sharif, are also likely to give the prime minister trouble.
If the provinces refuse to co-operate with the federal government, or decide to resign en masse, the president could say that government had broken down and he had grounds for sending Mr Sharif packing all over again.
There are also worries about the army's attitude, if politics gets grubbier still.
The army has made it endlessly and publicly clear that it does not want to get involved.
But, according to a senior officer, ‘We might get sucked in.’
For the moment the mood, among those not directly opposed to Mr Sharif, is cheerful.
Pliant judges have been one of Pakistan's problems in the past.
Judges who thumb their noses at presidents are thought to be good for democracy.
AMERICAN SURVEY
The worst of months
WASHINGTON, DC
‘THE majority party passes this bill or admits it can't govern’, said the Washington Post on May 26th.
After some of the most tense days in the capital in recent years, a vote on Bill Clinton's economic plan was scheduled to take place in the House of Representatives on May 27th.
As The Economist went to press, it was impossible to predict whether Mr Clinton would get the 218 votes he needed.
Indeed, there was still a chance that, terrified they might lose a crucial test of confidence in the chamber that Democrats have controlled for four decades, the president's managers on Capitol Hill would seek to delay the vote.
How did things get so nerve-wracking?
In February, when he presented his plan to cut the deficit by $196 billion over five years to a joint session of Congress, Mr Clinton was on top of the world.
He had proposed real cuts; he had jettisoned his campaign promise to cut taxes on the middle-class; he had soothed the financial markets.
Some of his supporters on the Hill told him to press on further with deficit reduction while he had a fair wind.
Instead, the administration first tried to get a $16 billion stimulus package through Congress.
Twice, Senate Republicans thwarted Mr Clinton.
Then Congress took a break for Easter.
In retrospect, that was the turning point.
Democrats found in their districts that Republican charges that Mr Clinton was a ‘tax-and-spend liberal’ had hit home.
When members of Congress returned to Washington, not only did the Senate Republicans stand firm a third time, but conservative and moderate Democrats were emboldened to seek further cuts in spending, together with modifications to Mr Clinton's energy tax.
In the House, where not a single Republican vote was expected in favour of the president's plan, rebel Democrats concentrated on measures to cap the growth in ‘entitlement’ spending on pensions, health care and the like.
On the morning of May 25th, in one of scores of meetings between the administration and House Democrats, Mr Clinton said he would countenance some form of entitlement caps.
As the vote approached, it seemed likely that the favoured version would not actually stop spending if it went over a cap, but merely require a special vote to approve or disapprove it.
That seemed unlikely to win over the malcontents, but it may have been just enough to get the president home.
If Mr Clinton had offered more, it would have got him into trouble elsewhere.
Although they have been quieter than their conservative  counterparts , liberal Democrats, and especially the members of the black caucus, have been deeply unhappy at the way policy has developed during the spring.
They wanted the stimulus package, much of which would have been spent in inner cities.
They dislike entitlement caps.
So far, they have been prepared to trust the administration.
But they will expect rewards for their loyalty later, which augurs badly for forthcoming debates on both the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), which many liberals oppose, and on welfare reform.
In fact, it is just starting to dawn on Washington that neither NAFTA nor substantial welfare reform can pass Congress without Republican support.
Yet, so far, the Clinton administration has failed to reach out to Republicans.
This was not what the president promised.
He said, last year, that he would put together an administration that would include both Republicans and supporters of Ross Perot, the billionaire populist from Texas.
Perhaps Mr Perot was impossible to satisfy.
The Texan is spitting bile at the president.
In a new television interview, he calls Mr Clinton a person without the background or experience for the office.
But there are Republicans in both the House and Senate who wanted to work with the president towards deficit reduction.
So far, they feel they have been spurned.
It is not just the sense that this is a partisan administration that is worrying Washington.
There is concern, also, that this is not an administration of ‘new’ Democrats at all, but, in many small ways and some large, a throwback to the radical party of the 1970s.
One of the president's earliest and most loyal supporters on the Hill says, privately, that those among his constituents who, until 1992, had not voted for a Democratic presidential candidate for 16 years think they have been tricked.
The bellwether here is the nomination of Lani Guinier to be assistant attorney-general for civil rights.
Ms Guinier, a law professor at the University of Pennsylvania and an old friend of the Clintons, has the misfortune to follow to Washington Roberta Achtenberg.
Ms Achtenberg is an avowed lesbian who has just been confirmed as an assistant secretary in the department of Housing and Urban Development.
Many Democratic senators, especially from the south, took heat back home for voting for Ms Achtenberg.
They are now being asked to support in Ms Guinier a nominee whose writings on voting-rights are radical.
She seems to favour not only schemes that guarantee groups like blacks access to fair voting procedures, but also ones that are skewed to make the achievement of ‘group’ political goals more likely.
That way, say her critics, lies political balkanisation.
Three Democratic senators, all supporters of Mr Clinton, told The Economist this week that Ms Guinier could not be confirmed.
To cap it all, the administration has been shown to be not just partisan, not just radical in some of its instincts, but alarmingly accident-prone.
It is one thing, though no doubt foolish, for the president to hold up air traffic while he gets a haircut from a high-priced snipper on the tarmac of Los Angeles airport.
But the saga of the White House travel office is a lot more than foolish.
At the behest of Harry Thomason, one of Mr Clinton's Hollywood friends, who has an interest in an air charter firm and wondered why charters were not submitted to tender, the White House started to collect dirt on the travel office some months ago.
On May 19th seven civil servants were fired (though, in one of many farcical moves, five have now been unfired) among muttering that there may have been criminality in the office.
For a few days an Arkansas travel firm which organised the travel arrangements for the Clinton campaign last year was put in charge, working under a 25-year-old cousin of the president.
Then, after cries of cronyism, the agency was dropped.
On May 26th a full-blown review of the matter was announced, but it has left a bad smell of abuse of power.
Mr Clinton and his vice-president, Al Gore, have both denied knowledge of anything to do with the travel office fiasco: it was, they say, a ‘staff thing’.
One senator is telling his colleagues that Mr Clinton also denies having anything to do with Ms Achtenberg's appointment.
None of this does any good; it just makes Washington wonder what exactly Mr Clinton is in charge of.
Granted, if his deficit-reduction plan eventually gets through Congress relatively unscathed, he will be able to claim that he has done more good in an important area of policy than either of his predecessors.
But this can be only the start.
President Clinton had a lousy May, in both domestic and foreign policy.
He needs more than one victory to win confidence in a town that has never much loved him; and he cannot afford even one more tiny slip if he is not to convince Washington that Mr Perot's cruel judgment of his talents was right.
Texas schools
A tale of two districts
HOUSTON
DEER PARK and North Forest are two independent school districts.
Both are in Houston, a mere 15 miles apart.
There the similarity ends.
The two districts, one rich, one struggling, exemplify the difficulties in providing equal money for Texan public schools.
A federal court has ordered that this must be done by June 1st; voters have already turned down one plan.
The harried state legislature hops from one Robin-Hood scheme to the next.
The oil industry underpins Deer Park.
The area, down by the Ship Channel, is full of large petrochemical plants (Shell, Occidental, Rohm & Haas), producing millions in tax revenue each year.
Its 11,000 schoolchildren are 78% white, 13% Hispanic and 1% black.
Academically, this is one of the country's top school districts.
Its schools are set in green-lawned campuses, and for years its teachers have been among the highest-paid in Texas.
Crime and drugs are virtually unknown.
North Forest school district, with 13,000 students, is another world.
The wooded area is nice enough but the schools have a long history of desegregation problems, and are now 88% black and 10% Hispanic.
Nearly 60% of the district's students are ‘economically disadvantaged’(the state average is 42%).
North Forest has a history of administrative instability, near-insolvency and crime; one high school was partly burnt down.
The FBI has been summoned several times to tackle problems the local police could not handle.
Things are looking up a bit at the moment.
A new, no-nonsense superintendent, Carrol Thomas, has been appointed.
Thanks to the interim school-financing plan, North Forest is not burdened by a large deficit.
Leaking roofs have been repaired, and there is no longer a shortage of school supplies.
Several big companies — including Exxon and Southwestern Bell Telephone — have set up links between schools and business.
North Forest starting salaries ($13,100) are approaching those of Deer Park ($14,650).
Yet much has not changed.
Property taxes in North Forest remain among the highest in the state, discouraging industrial development.
Drugs remain freely available, and teenage pregnancy is widespread.
Test scores are still well below the not-too-high state average.
Current spending per student is $1,600 a year, against $1,470 at Deer Park.
At Deer Park, the affably polished superintendent, David Hicks, worries out loud what five years of more equal school finance could do to his budgets.
Two years ago, the Texas supreme court declared that money had to be spread equally between rich districts and poor, and that rich schools should send some of their revenues to the state to be shared out.
Under the interim school-financing plan, Deer Park already provides $12m, out of its budget of $12m, to go to poorer schools.
What will happen if more money has to be found?
Pupils are still pouring into Deer Park, and parents are nervous.
It is unclear, too, whether any plan would satisfy the poorer districts.
On some issues, residents of both Deer Park and North Forest agree.
Neither wants any kind of school-district consolidation, a dreaded policy leading to loss of local control.
Deer Park, which has already lost tens of millions of dollars in academic revenue sharing, will reluctantly give up a bit more.
Otherwise, it wants no part of North Forest's manifold problems.
There is little contact between the two districts.
Administrators meet from time to time.
But the students rarely do, except occasionally for athletic contests.
Fiscal equality is not expected to reduce racial isolation.
Arizona
Glittering prizes
PHOENIX
THE Turf Paradise racetrack, outside Phoenix, does not have much turf to recommend it.
The course is lined with dusty palm trees; between races, a lorry sprays the sand track; and past the finishing line the poor horses, slavering in 100 degrees, are doused with buckets of water until their sides foam.
Patrons not wishing to burn their legs on the metal benches watch from an air-conditioned tier heavy with the reek of cigarettes and beer.
This, according to the race-track owners, is a scene that is about to disappear in Arizona.
Gambling has become too competitive.
Casinos are spreading.
And, in Arizona as elsewhere, Indian reservations are luring in the gaming crowd with bingo and slot machines.
Horse racing, as any punter will remind you, is for the experts; it has a ‘long learning curve’ characterised by intensive study of breeding and form.
Conversely, any fool can sit down at a slot machine.
Studies in Minnesota have shown that once machines come in, racetracks lose 20–30% of their business in the first year.
By the third year, most are bankrupt.
Robert Walker, the prosperous-looking president of Turf Paradise, can see his doom approaching from 20 miles east.
There, cars file in an endless stream into the Fort McDowell Recreation Centre, pride of the Fort McDowell tribe and salvation of its economy.
Those same elderly men and women, in pastel slacks and tennis shoes, who play the machines on the Fort McDowell reservation could also be losing their money at Turf Paradise, or at the greyhounds down the street.
The Arizona legislature has just opened a special session to hear what the racetrack owners want.
In brief, they want slot machines of their own: 500 each for Turf Paradise and the Phoenix Greyhound Park, 250 each for the smaller tracks.
They reckon that if each machine brought in $192 a day (a claim the Las Vegas experts call unrealistic), and if the owners let the state pocket 90% of it, the state could earn more than $196m a year; and it could put the money towards education.
The deal is startlingly altruistic, and the racetrack owners are always generous with their political contributions; but Arizona's Republican governor, Fife Symington, thinks there is already more than enough gambling in his state.
This is not Louisiana, and especially not next-door Nevada; the ethos is Protestant, quite strongly Mormon, and — despite the carefully crafted cowboy image — surprisingly strait-laced.
When, two years ago, law-makers were caught accepting bribes to bring in legalised gambling, the outcry was huge; but some outsiders thought the smallness of the bribes ($1,000–5,000 to buy a vote) suggested innocence rather than corruption.
The governor's life is also complicated by his past dealings with the tribes.
The Indian Gaming Regulatory Act of 1988 requires states to reach agreements with their tribes, which are sovereign nations, to determine what sort of gambling, and how much of it, is allowed on reservations.
Mr Symington had reached compacts with some of the tribes, allowing them 250 machines each, when the larger tribes took him to court to try to get more.
On February 15th a federal judge ruled in their favour.
This reopened negotiations on all Indian gaming claims; and the governor, struggling to get the upper hand again, quickly passed a law banning all casino gambling in the state.
The Indians considered they had been double-crossed.
For a time, the two sides did not talk.
But a compromise has just been worked out between the governor, the tribes and Bruce Babbitt, the ex-governor of Arizona who is now interior secretary, under which casino gambling would be restricted to the reservations, and the tribes would be given slot machines in proportion to their population.
The smallest tribes would get 250; the largest, well over 1,000.
The Indians could not install table games like baccarat and poker; but they could introduce any other sort of gambling already allowed outside the reservation, including off-track betting and, if they could afford it, live races round a track.
This would control the gambling, for a time.
Yet it will be hard to contain it for ever.
It is not only track-owners who want machines; it is any community that wants to tap into tourism, or (especially round desert retirement cities) into the boredom of senior citizens puttering from one amusement to the next.
Mr Symington, who proudly describes himself as one of the last supply-siders, has cut taxes for the past two years.
But, like all governors, he needs money.
With the resilience of his Scottish roots, he might hold out.
But all around him, voices are clamouring to know why it should be Indians who have all the luck.
The Indians can scarcely answer this themselves.
At Fort McDowell, Clint Pattea, the elderly president of the tribe, shyly admits that the ‘casino’, now a decade old, brings in $1m-5m gross a month.
Little of it seems to show.
The tribal offices, all new wood and glass on the outside, display inside the usual shabby carpet, naked wiring and desultory groups of jobless Indians, eating snacks.
The reservation houses, half-hidden in cactus and mesquite, are solidly built, the jeeps new; an enormous four-lane highway sweeps past the gamblers' den.
But the tribe has not yet started anything new with the money.
There is an impression of slight panic, of trying to think straight, before the miracle disappears.
It must fade before long.
Even if the race-track owners lose their bid, neighbouring tribes will get the machines too.
It is a matter of a few years.
Almost all the tribe's adults, 600 of them, now work in the casino.
What else could they do?
Mr Pattea talks of a shopping centre with an Indian theme along the highway, of a hotel, of a golf course.
Yet it seems out of character.
Beyond his office, where the desert stretches for miles to the Mazatzal mountains, a few fields have been scraped clear.
No, he laughs, they will not build a race-track.
But they are looking into olive groves.
‘I'm told that an olive tree’, says Mr Pattea wonderingly, ‘will produce for 400 years.’
Beer
The man at the counter
ST LOUIS, MISSOURI
THE bars of America were packed at the end of last week, as viewers gathered in suitably drunken fashion to salute the end of ‘Cheers’.
This series, set in a Boston bar, had become the most popular television comedy of recent years; and no character was more loved than the mop-headed Norm, whose seat at the corner of the bar seemed the only home he knew.
With Norm's demise, America's beer-drinkers have lost both a role-model and a soulmate; but, as it happens, the week also brought them good news.
The Clinton administration had floated the idea of increased ‘sin taxes’ on beer, spirits and tobacco to help pay for its health-care reforms.
The proposal ran smack into the powerful beer lobby in Congress, including Richard Gephardt, majority leader of the House of Representatives, whose district in St Louis includes the giant Anheuser-Busch brewery.
The beer industry, which had already absorbed a doubling of the federal tax in 1991, flooded Congress with dire predictions of misery for the nearly 1m Americans who make or sell beer.
Anheuser-Busch even threatened to close its St Louis plant if the tax measure passed, though nobody believed that.
In the end, the proposal was dropped more out of fear of ‘Joe Six-Pack’, and the awful electoral revenge he might take.
But beer-drinkers are a mixed bag these days, and so is the stuff they drink.
Miller recently introduced a clear beer that looks like mineral water in a beer bottle, and is said to taste not unlike it.
Clear beer is an extension of a general fad for see-through products, such as soft drinks, detergent and shampoo, that convey the image of being healthier and lighter.
Other imbibers have gone over to the dark side of beer, rejecting the pasteurised lager produced by the breweries.
Microbreweries across the country reproduce the rich textures of English, German, Belgian and Czech beers for which many Americans have acquired a taste.
In five years, the number of microbreweries has more than doubled and brewing capacity has increased more than fivefold.
Brew-pubs (restaurants that make and sell a house beer) were largely unknown five years ago; now there are more than 200 of them.
They are the natural descendants of the local breweries that were common to most American towns at the turn of the century, and whose cellars still lie beneath many a sober-looking street.
Home-brewing is also making its biggest comeback since Prohibition.
Perhaps a million or more Americans now make their own brew, which is tax-free for the first 200 gallons a year.
Mail-order houses and stores sell simple or elaborate equipment, ingredients and bottles to home-brewers, who often experiment with exotic flavours and extracts.
Zymurgy, the journal published by the American Homebrewers Association, lists 243 home-brewing clubs across the country.
As home-brewing returns, some groups are striving to bring back a milder version of Prohibition.
As well as pushing for higher taxes to discourage consumption, the neo-prohibitionists advocate banning beer advertising and placing warning labels on cans.
One college athlete, testifying before Congress, recently called beer a ‘gateway drug’ for young people.
But for every anti-beer crusader, there are dozens happily carrying on the legend of Norm.
Inner cities
Exit, disgusted
LOS ANGELES
AFTER barely a year in the job, Peter Ueberroth — famous for giving Los Angeles a profitable Olympic Games in 1984 — has resigned from the Rebuild Los Angeles (RLA) commission.
Mr Ueberroth was appointed, with high hopes, after the riots that devastated the city's South Central district in April 1992.
He left, on May 21st, with barely concealed disgust.
At the time, his appointment seemed a stroke of genius by Tom Bradley, Los Angeles's weary mayor of 20 years.
Mr Ueberroth was enlisted to help rebuild South Central even before the ashes had ceased glowing.
His role was to drum up contributions from friends in big business.
He spoke enthusiastically at the time of co-opting the help of government, community groups and business — a troika that would transform downtrodden parts of the city into gleaming new shopping malls and day-care centres and rebuilt factories and office space.
The prospect was dazzling.
A year into RLA's planned five-year life, Mr Ueberroth and his colleagues had arm-twisted $100m-worth of promises from the corporate world.
Toyota joined up with the Los Angeles Urban League to open a $1m training centre in the charred Crenshaw district.
The Pacific Bell telephone company led a consortium to build a downtown factory and make $1m-worth of purchases from it annually.
The mayor's office reckons that the $100m of private investment collected by Mr Ueberroth and his colleagues should translate into 5,000 new inner-city jobs — an unprecedented achievement not only for Los Angeles, but for blighted neighbourhoods anywhere.
Yet a study done for RLA last summer suggested that $1 billion and more than 75,000 new jobs were needed to prevent the city's riot zone from going up in flames again.
The commission had barely begun to make a dent in the problem.
Worse, many of its successes were illusory.
While Hughes Aircraft, for example, was offering $18m in goods and services for the rebuilding effort (its boss, Michael Armstrong, was an RLA board member) Hughes's parent, General Motors, was shedding 2,600 local jobs and closing its last remaining car plant in the area.
Mr Ueberroth got still less help from officialdom.
The assistance that George Bush had promised Los Angeles immediately after the riots had evaporated by the year's end.
The state government in Sacramento was no better.
Facing an expected $10 billion shortfall in revenue, Pete Wilson, the governor of California, kept his hands firmly in his pockets.
Meanwhile, Mr Bradley and his friends in City Hall were bent on playing politics.
Mr Bradley, who is black, was said to have threatened to withdraw his support for RLA if Mr Ueberroth appointed to the board the mayor's Latino rivals.
For reasons of political correctness, RLA finished up with 80 members on its board.
But Mr Ueberroth invited criticism.
As a white millionaire Republican from the leafy groves well to the south of the city limits, it would have been remarkable if he had not.
The black Democratic officials and community workers on the front line of Los Angeles's gruelling urban warfare greeted his arrival with understandable suspicion.
It was inevitable, too, that Mr Ueberroth would become the lightning rod for all criticism gathering round RLA itself.
Mr Ueberroth may have spoken a bit too bluntly for his own good — and was not known for his sensitivity in dealing with the urban poor.
Yet such problems could have been (indeed, were being) overcome.
What could not be adjusted was Mr Ueberroth's entrepreneurial vision.
The corporate power-brokers who dominated Los Angeles a decade ago when the Olympics were about to be staged — the oil moguls, the aerospace kings, the old movie-studio emperors — have now mostly left the scene: their firms broken up, in the hands of bureaucratic managers or wholly owned by foreigners.
A decade of merger-mania has changed the face of Los Angeles.
According to Joel Kotkin, an economist at Pepperdine University, Mr Ueberroth ‘never truly adjusted his strategy to the fading fortunes of the old elite.’
No one was there to capture the new elite — newcomers in biotech, health care, environmental engineering, entertainment software and the like — who are busily remaking Los Angeles in a different image.
The new mayor of Los Angeles, to be elected on June 8th, may well seek to revive RLA by picking a replacement for Mr Ueberroth from such a quarter.
The betting, however, is that he will not.
The prince of Sacramento
AT ONE end of Willie Brown's magnificently furnished Speaker's office in the California state capitol stands a statue of a purposeful Martin Luther King; at the other, behind a great Victorian desk, sits a badge saying ‘Old age and treachery will overcome youth and skill.’
This is the court to which any and every politician hoping to influence the California legislature must come and pay his respects.
Now Mr Brown, who is 59, is talking about running for governor.
Already, he is arguably the most powerful elected black politician in American history (he was chairman of the 1988 presidential campaign of his unelected peer, Jesse Jackson).
The leading Democrat in Sacramento for almost 13 years, he has run rings round a couple of wooden Republican governors — first George Deukmejian and now Pete Wilson.
In the meantime, he has taunted a small army of investigative journalists with his Ferraris, Italian suits and youthful girlfriends.
Mr Brown can make a room full of burly firemen howl with laughter at Mr Wilson, and then dazzle a bunch of Sacramento bureaucrats with legislative detail.
Last November he trounced Mr Wilson at the ballot box, both defeating a budget initiative sponsored by the governor and increasing the number of Democrat assemblymen.
Mr Wilson's hopes that the new group of freshmen Democrats would remain immune to the Speaker's charms have already been dashed; last month they lined up behind Mr Brown to defeat a Wilson nominee for superintendent of schools.
Such cut-and-thrust politicking has always been Mr Brown's speciality.
However, this year the Speaker has also been reaching outside his Sacramento stronghold: convening an economic summit in Los Angeles to examine the state's recession; pushing laws to reform California's hated workers'-compensation scheme; leading a team of legislators to Washington to plead for the state's interests; putting himself forward as a mediator in a fractious dispute over teachers' pay in Los Angeles.
Mr Brown has even been sounding a little more conciliatory towards Mr Wilson over this year's budget, when the state will have to close a $10 billion deficit.
Needless to say, cynics in Sacramento can find a political reason for every one of Mr Brown's good works.
Now, by allowing his name to be put forward as a candidate for governor, the Speaker seems to be providing a pretext himself.
A close supporter is seeking signatures to persuade the ‘reluctant’ Speaker to run for the Democratic nomination.
Mr Brown says that he will consider it only if 500,000 people sign up.
Mr Wilson is weak, and Mr Brown's speeches have begun to sound increasingly like campaign ones.
And yet, if Mr Brown does pitch his hat into the gubernatorial contest, he will start with a handicap.
He has been at the centre of California politics too long to escape responsibility for the state's deeper sicknesses.
This, after all, is a place where scorning government has been taken to new extremes; where voters have boxed in their politicians with ballot initiative after ballot initiative.
Last year's budget debacle, in which Mr Brown and Mr Wilson slugged it out for 64 days, took all the state's politicians to new lows in popularity.
Ask Mr Brown about Proposition 13, the 1978 ballot initiative that crippled local government, and he will say that it should be reformed; but he has hardly been spotted on the barricades shouting that cause, let alone trying to tackle it directly in the legislature.
The question of Mr Brown's achievements has become more pressing because of a Californian term-limits law (yes, another initiative) which will eject him by 1996 from the assembly where he has sat for 27 years.
That is an uncomfortably close date for a power-broker; and his opponents have noted that the threat of political execution seems to be concentrating his mind wonderfully.
In the end, virtually nobody in Californian politics believes the Speaker will dare run for governor.
The superficial reason is Kathleen Brown, the popular state treasurer, whose hat is in the ring already.
Despite a slight shortage of new ideas, she remains the strongest candidate the Democrats have fielded for some time.
She rarely wows crowds in the way the Speaker does, but she oozes charm and competence and her family connections (particularly her father, Pat Brown) associate her with a happier era.
If Speaker Brown launches a campaign against his namesake, Democrats worry that Mr Wilson will gain most.
One leading Republican says that ‘he would go out and stuff envelopes for Mr Brown’, if he entered the race.
It is also true that Mr Brown, despite his political prowess, has never run in a statewide race.
His comment about ‘that cat Wilson not being able to handle approval ratings like mine’ can also be turned the other way round.
When asked what his biggest weakness would be he replies, with a great laugh, ‘My record.’
True enough.
For every Sacramento insider with an uproarious ‘Willie’ story, there is another asking ‘What has Willie done?’.
Mr Brown's supporters reel off a list of bills that the Speaker has influenced; but even they have to admit that many of his greatest victories have been stopping ‘evil’ Republican laws rather than creating good Democratic ones.
And there is the rub.
The gubernatorial trial balloon may well fall back in the Speaker's face because, quite simply, there is not enough air in it.
That leaves Mr Brown, like many an ageing master-courtier before him, still stuck without a strategy for a graceful exit; and, more important, without the legacy that his long period in power deserves.
Crime
A knock on the door
BATON ROUGE AND TOKYO
SOUTHERN Louisiana still has a frontier feel about it.
Hunting is the favourite pastime; at the start of the season, high schools close as whole families go off in pursuit of everything from squirrels to wild boar.
Most people keep a gun or two in the house; some carry them around with them, or stow them in the glove compartments of their cars.
At the same time, crime is soaring, fuelled by the influx of drugs from Florida and the Gulf coast.
The area can boast its own teenage gangs, named after the Los Angeles Crips and Bloods, who carry Uzis and specialise in shooting from the windows of moving cars.
Baton Rouge has seen 40 murders so far this year, compared with 19 in the whole of 1991.
Against this background, a local jury decided on May 23rd to acquit a butcher, Rodney Peairs, of the murder of a Japanese exchange student who knocked on his door by mistake last year, looking for a Halloween party.
The student, Yoshihiro Hattori, was five houses out.
Mrs Peairs, in a panic, told her husband to get his gun: Hattori was ‘bigger than me…and his skin was a darker colour.’
Armed with his .44 Magnum, Mr Peairs opened the door and ordered the boy to freeze.
Hattori, whose English was poor, smiled broadly and said, ‘We're here for the party.’
He was shot in the chest.
Louisiana has a ‘shoot the burglar’ law, which allows householders to kill intruders if they think they are a threat to themselves or their families.
The jury did not need much persuading.
But many people wondered why Mr Peairs had used quite so powerful a weapon, and why he had not simply fired it into the air; or why, living as he did in a relatively safe middle-class suburb, he had been so scared.
In contrast to the frenzy in Louisiana, Japanese press reaction has been remarkably restrained.
The case has received decent, but not front-page, coverage.
The Japanese seem baffled, rather than angry, that America should allow people freely to carry handguns (which are banned in Japan), and to shoot intruders.
Masaichi Hattori, the victim's father, has gathered more than 1.6m signatures in Japan for a petition asking the American Congress to adopt stricter gun-control laws.
Stars in their eyes
WASHINGTON, DC AND LOS ANGELES
THE role of Harry Thomason, Friend of Bill and TV producer, in the Case of the White House Travel Office (see above) has given new edge to a month-long spat between Washington and Hollywood.
The row started when a bevy of movie stars appeared at the White House correspondents' dinner on May 1st.
The dinner, a rite of the Washington spring, has always had its share of visitors from the west coast; they tend to be more fun at your table than a deputy assistant secretary in the Veterans' Administration.
This year, however, there seemed to be more of them than usual, and one star, Barbra Streisand, stayed in town for a few days and had dinner with Janet Reno, the attorney-general.
Cue for another collective Washington sneer at Los Angeles.
Hollywood was full of ‘nitwits’, ‘bubble-heads’, ‘airheads’, who were presumptuously marching on the nation's capital to dictate policy.
Jonathan Yardley of the Washington Post made merciless fun of Ms Streisand's claim that historian Arthur Schlesinger had ‘turned her on’ to The Economist, which, claimed Mr Yardley, had ‘all the erotic punch of a state of the union address.’
Now Hollywood has counter-attacked.
In the Los Angeles Times, Danny Goldberg, an executive at Atlantic Records, has attacked the Washington media's ‘smug superiority’.
Ms Streisand, in the same paper, claimed that the press would be happier if she spent her free time shopping, and pointed out, quite fairly, that she and the others at the correspondents' dinner had been invited there.
Privately, some in Hollywood admit that a few of their number — Mr Thomason and his wife among them — are asking for it.
They are making altogether too much of their Washington connections, even writing people notes on White House stationery.
Yet in Los Angeles the more telling criticism is reserved for Bill Clinton and the youngsters in the White House.
They, say some Angelenos with contempt, are plain starstruck.
What Washington needs is a bit of discrimination.
Many Hollywood denizens are businessmen who have been involved in politics for years.
Michael Medavoy, the chief executive of Tri-Star Pictures and a Friend of Bill before it was fashionable, is a case in point.
Warren Beatty may not be everyone's idea of a role model, but this film star has been involved in Democratic Party politics since most male White House staffers were singing soprano.
On the other hand, some contacts with Hollywood spell trouble.
John Kennedy was accused of treating Los Angeles as part-bank, part-fraternity brothel.
Anyone who heard the late-night television jokes after Mr Clinton's meeting with Sharon Stone knows that a little bit of this year's sex goddess goes a long way.
And while we're giving the president advice, there is one other area where he might discriminate in his contacts with the stars.
Don't use their barber.
Use Ross Perot's.
INTERNATIONAL
El Salvador
Still fragile
FROM OUR CENTRAL AMERICA CORRESPONDENT
FOR the first time since peace was signed in El Salvador more than a year ago, blood has been spilled on the streets of San Salvador, the capital city.
On May 20th the police are alleged to have shot dead two people, both veterans of the country's long civil war, who had been demonstrating in favour of more money for the wounded.
Until its grim conclusion, the demonstration had shown El Salvador's more encouraging side.
One of the victims was an ex-guerrilla from the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front (FMLN), the other an army veteran.
Former fighters from both sides had chosen to march together, arms linked, down the streets of the capital.
After the shooting, Joaquin Villalobos, an FMLN leader, was quick to denounce the police, saying that ‘this is the kind of thing we thought was over.’
Yet the incident may have been deliberately provoked: some of the demonstrators were armed, and fired back at the police.
Either way, the clash left Salvadoreans wondering how durable their peace agreement was.
‘It's not quite peace in the strictest sense of the word, rather the absence of war,’ pronounced Ruben Zamora, vice-president of the National Assembly and leader of the leftist alliance, Democratic Convergence, on a visit to Washington in April.
The durability of the peace will soon be tested as the political parties choose their candidates for the general election due in March 1994.
Indeed, for a country struggling to emerge from years of war, the election may be a mixed blessing.
Although they are supposed to have put aside violence, the FMLN and ARENA, the ruling Republican National Alliance party, are still bitter and unreconciled enemies.
ARENA's thinking has changed little since the war ended.
The party's convention in March paid special tribute to its founder, Roberto d'Aubuisson, the man most closely associated with the death squads that killed thousands of people during the civil war, who himself died of cancer last year.
The same month, a United Nations commission, set up as part of the peace agreement, said that it was d'Aubuisson who had arranged the murder of Archbishop Oscar Romero in 1980.
The commission, which accused both sides of atrocities, has been criticised from left and right.
But it laid the worst crimes at the door of the army, and recommended the dismissal of 40 serving officers.
The army has flatly rejected these findings.
This places President Alfredo Cristiani in a vice.
He found it hard enough to persuade senior officers to go along with the peace settlement.
Now, despite having made his Congress pass an amnesty for everybody implicated in the UN report, he faces near-rebellion inside the armed forces and the ruling party too.
But he is also being squeezed by the United States: the American Congress has suspended payment of $11m in military aid until the officers named in the report, including the defence minister, are sacked.
On May 24th 146 American congressmen, over a third of the House of Representatives, sent a letter urging him ‘to clearly exercise civilian authority over the armed forces’.
Mr Cristiani has promised to remove all guilty officers from command posts by June 30th and from the armed services by the end of the year.
But recalcitrant Salvadorean officers will have observed the ease with which soldiers in neighbouring Guatemala reasserted their power on May 25th (see previous story).
‘We have to avoid pushing the armed forces towards the most extreme right-wing sectors of the country,’ says Mr Villalobos, the most pragmatic of the FMLN commanders.
‘The danger is that our military could develop the syndrome of the German army after the first world war.’
Many Salvadoreans fear something like this.
A new civilian police force has been created, with equal numbers of ex-soldiers and ex-guerrillas in its ranks.
It already operates in the country's three most conflict-ridden provinces.
More than 2,000 policemen, including 500 FMLN veterans, are being trained in the police academy.
But the police are already complaining about their poor pay and the fact that they are armed only with handguns.
It would take more than pistols to counter a new challenge from the army.
South Africa
Dawn swoop
FROM OUR SOUTH AFRICA CORRESPONDENT
WHEN police swooped on the Pan Africanist Congress on May 25th, arresting 70 of its members, including seven members of its national executive, the man who suffered most embarrassment was Roelf Meyer.
President F.W. de Klerk's chief negotiator at the talks on South Africa's new constitution had not been told about the pre-dawn raids.
He had to endure the accusing stares and hostile speeches of those PAC negotiators who had not been arrested.
The arrests were only marginally less disconcerting for the chief negotiator for the African National Congress, Cyril Ramaphosa: the swoop, coming in the middle of the talks, strengthened the PAC's claim to be more vigorous than the ANC in opposing apartheid.
Benny Alexander, the PAC's secretary-general, claimed that the government's action was motivated by a desire to force his organisation out of the negotiations and so smooth the way for an agreement that would be amenable to the ‘white settler regime’.
Fraternal black feeling made it inevitable that the ANC would speak out in defence of its rival.
Mr Ramaphosa suggested that the government timed the arrests in order to delay the talks precisely when they were at last poised for a breakthrough.
If so, the plan may have gone wrong.
The first reaction of the leader of the PAC's negotiating team, Gora Ebrahim, was to call for a suspension of the negotiations, not to withdraw permanently.
Most of the delegations taking part in the talks said they wanted to press ahead regardless, subject to a special debate on the arrests.
Conspiracy theories of every kind flourish in South Africa.
The truth is that the government may have had little choice but to move against the PAC.
By the time the PAC had returned to the negotiating table in April, after boycotting an earlier round of talks within the framework of the Convention for a Democratic South Africa, it had adopted a highly equivocal stand on violence, committing itself to a negotiated settlement but asserting its right to continue the ‘armed struggle’.
In recent months the PAC has refused to condemn attacks on white civilians by its underground force, the Azanian People's Liberation Army (APLA).
It continued to parrot its incendiary slogan, ‘One settler, one bullet.’
And it has repeatedly bragged that its fighters have been responsible for the mounting attacks on policemen, 226 of whom were killed last year.
To justify its policy of simultaneous killing and talking, the PAC argues that APLA is ‘operationally independent’.
But on May 22nd, two days before the arrests, its national organiser, Maxwell Nemadzivhanani, let the mask slip.
Speaking at the funeral of an APLA fighter killed by police, Mr Nemadzivhanani proclaimed that white farmers were ‘legitimate targets’.
This remark may well have triggered the arrests.
Mr Nemadzivhanani's funeral oration came shortly after the capture of eight alleged APLA men on suspicion of having murdered Sandra Swanepoel, a farmer's wife, near the Transvaal town of Tzaneen.
It coincided with growing anger among white farmers at the violence.
In the first four months of this year, 108 attacks have caused the deaths of 28 people on farms.
In several cases farm animals were also maimed, a practice reminiscent of Kenya's Mau Mau insurgency in the 1950s.
Had the police done nothing, farmers might have taken the law into their own hands.
This could, in turn, have had repercussions in the security forces.
Links between soldiers and farmers are close.
Many farmers are members of the army's rural commando system.
Two farmers — Dries Bruwer, president of the Transvaal Agricultural Union, and Constand Viljoen, a former head of the armed forces — are leading lights in the Afrikaner People's Front, the new right-wing alliance dedicated to promoting Afrikaner ‘self-determination’.
All of which suggests that the government's decision to pounce on the PAC was a reaction to threat and counter-threat rather than a conspiracy to undermine Mr de Klerk's own negotiations.
Besides, Mr Ramaphosa's claim that the negotiations would otherwise have been on the threshold of a breakthrough is questionable.
Everyone awaits the date of an election, and the establishment of the promised transitional executive.
But a report prepared by a technical committee on constitutional issues, which was to have been discussed on the morning of the arrests, emphasised that significant differences of detail and approach had still to be resolved.
Angola
Talks end, war goes on
FROM A CORRESPONDENT IN ABIDJAN
WHEN the Angolan government delegates flew back last week to Luanda from Abidjan, capital of Côte d'Ivoire, few were mourning the abortive six-week peace talks they had left behind.
Beer and whisky flowed freely, amid much back-slapping and bonhomie.
The cause for celebration was the Clinton administration's decision to recognise Angola's government, which came just 48 hours before the talks had broken down.
Recognition was a blow, though by no means a fatal one, to the UNITA rebels, who have been fighting government soldiers since January, having lost to them at the election in September.
But the suspension of negotiations was on the cards even before the Americans' decision.
When the United Nations tried to hold peace talks in February, UNITA did not even turn up.
Then the rebels captured Huambo, Angola's second-biggest city, in a battle that claimed thousands of lives.
So when UNITA arrived in Abidjan last month, fresh from victory at Huambo, it was determined to get a much better deal than the agreement in May 1991 which supposedly ended Angola's decade and a half of civil war.
Throughout the talks, the leader of the UNITA delegation, Jorge Valentim, had insisted on a settlement that ‘corresponds to the new reality in Angola’— a settlement, in other words, reflecting the fact that the rebels now claim to have won control of three-quarters of the country.
He demanded top cabinet posts for UNITA and a form of ‘decentralisation’ that would assure its dominance in the provinces.
UNITA also asserted that it would not start demobilising its troops until a 12,000-strong UN peacekeeping force was in place.
There might, indeed, have been scope for compromise on some of these issues.
The fact that the government was willing to sign a new peace agreement was its concession.
The real sticking-point was UNITA's refusal to remove its soldiers from any of the areas it now controls.
UNITA maintained that this could be done only if there were a reciprocal withdrawal by government troops, and if the process were supervised by the UN.
Observers from Russia, Portugal (Angola's former colonial master) and America, who had spent much of the six weeks drafting and redrafting endless versions of the ‘Abidjan protocol’— the peace agreement that never was — worked until the last minute trying to reformulate this point to make it acceptable to both sides.
UNITA's final refusal to sign was greeted with frustration, but not complete surprise.
It had been hoped that the Americans' long-delayed decision to recognise the government might have obliged UNITA to co-operate.
Throughout the 1980s America had provided the rebels with arms and expert advice; their leader, Jonas Savimbi, had been feted in Washington.
America's desertion of its former protégé, in favour of its former enemy, sent a clear signal of its impatience with UNITA's behaviour.
But recognition has probably come too late to influence Mr Savimbi.
Had the Americans acted sooner, they might have been able to squeeze concessions from UNITA.
Now that the rebels control such a large amount of territory, their demands are harder to refuse.
This week UNITA dealt the government its most serious blow since the fall of Huambo.
It captured Soyo, a city that produces about a third of Angola's oil.
This will deprive the government of revenue, and also strengthen UNITA's hand in any future negotiations.
The rebels are keeping up their siege of several provincial capitals: Luena, Huige, Kuito and Menongue.
In Luena UNITA attacked a refugee camp, killing 46 people.
The UN has suspended food-relief flights.
Government forces have mounted a campaign in Lunda Norte province in an attempt to recapture the diamond mines that earn UNITA $100m a year.
The outlook is bleak.
Fighting will continue for as long as UNITA can smuggle in supplies, most of which are thought to reach the rebels by way of Zaire.
The Abidjan protocol would have provided for a greatly expanded UN mandate.
But this depended on a ceasefire.
There is now nothing of the kind.
After eight months of dogged peacemaking, wholly unrewarded and largely unappreciated, the UN's representative in Angola, Margaret Anstee, is said to want to give up.
Her successor faces an unenviable task.
Aid for Africa
If you're good
‘DURING the long cold-war period,’ Warren Christopher, America's secretary of state, said on May 20th, ‘policies toward Africa were often determined not by how they affected Africa, but by what advantage they brought to Washington or Moscow.’
He promised that the Clinton administration would make a clean break.
Henceforth ‘an enduring commitment to democracy and human rights’ would be at the heart of America's relations with Africa.
Aid would be allocated accordingly.
Sounds familiar?
With Mr Christopher's speech, America is merely catching up.
Three years ago France's president, François Mitterrand, made a similar speech about Africa at La Baule.
Britain also stressed the link between aid and ‘good governance’.
But the Anglo-French experience since then suggests that this policy is easier to describe than to implement.
It is one thing to ditch protégés-turned-scoundrels, such as Zaire's dictator, Mobutu Sese Seko, or Jonas Savimbi of Angola's UNITA rebels.
Most cases are much harder.
France and Britain have indeed punished several African countries by suspending aid.
Britain withdrew aid from Malawi last year, and from Sudan the previous year, in protest at the way those countries treated their citizens.
France halted aid to Togo in February to protest at the killing of pro-democracy demonstrators by soldiers loyal to President Gnassingbé Eyadéma.
And countries that have experimented with free multi-party elections, such as Zambia, Benin and Madagascar, have received their due reward.
Once South Africa holds multi-racial elections, it will join the list.
Elsewhere, however, the democratic test has been more loosely applied.
Britain and France joined other western creditors 18 months ago in halting aid to President Daniel arap Moi of Kenya to force him to hold democratic elections.
Though he did so last December, the election was not deemed completely ‘free and fair’ by western observers.
Mr Moi's human-rights record still leaves much to be desired.
Yet Britain and France now appear ready to accept Mr Moi's democratic efforts as adequate, and to resume aid once the IMF approves his economic reforms.
Real improvements in human rights seems to be a harder test to apply than the holding of multi-party elections, however flawed.
Uganda, Kenya's western neighbour, seems to have dodged the democracy test altogether.
Its popular president, Yoweri Museveni, appears to have persuaded Britain that unbanning opposition parties would, for now, be an unnecessary distraction.
Ghana does not have an unblemished record on human rights, but did hold a multi-party presidential election last year.
Although the opposition boycotted the subsequent legislative election, in protest at alleged irregularities during the presidential election, Ghana remains the darling of British aid overseers, getting more aid than any other African country except Zimbabwe.
The French have had just as much trouble sticking to the principles enunciated at La Baule.
Last October Paul Biya won Cameroon's presidential election, in a vote that observers said was fraudulent.
Two months later France gave Cameroon FF600m ($110m) in new loans.
Earlier this month Mr Biya was welcomed in Paris by both Mr Mitterrand and the new French prime minister, Edouard Balladur.
In Rwanda soldiers loyal to President Juvénal Habyarimana have been responsible for atrocities against Rwanda's Tutsi minority.
Yet Mr Mitterrand continues to help the regime.
If there is a muddle, it is because the end of the cold war has not stripped western countries of their other interests in Africa, notably economic ones.
Nor is it easy to decide which expectations are realistic.
In a continent where economic successes are rare, authoritarianism may seem a lesser evil than abject poverty.
Besides, some western and African leaders enjoy close personal bonds.
Charles Pasqua, interior minister in France's new government, is a personal friend of both President Biya and President Omar Bongo of Gabon, and is on good terms with President Eyadéma.
The distribution of America's annual $1.8 billion of development aid to sub-Saharan Africa is already shifting.
In 1980 the leading beneficiaries were Sudan, Somalia, Kenya and Liberia — a pretty unpleasant foursome.
Topping the provisional list for 1993, however, is South Africa, followed by Ethiopia and Mozambique.
Zaire, Liberia and Sudan get nothing.
French and British aid policies are constrained by interests in former colonies.
With less at stake, America may find it easier to preach democracy.
Unfinished business
MAYBE only the Middle East could produce such an improbable sequence of events.
On May 25th Iranian military aircraft flew 100 kilometres (62 miles) inside Iraq to drop bombs on two alleged bases of Iranian dissidents.
The following day Iran wrote to the United Nations underlining its respect for Iraq's ‘sovereignty and territorial integrity’.
Meanwhile Saddam Hussein massed troops in northern Iraq in apparent preparation, said the United States, for an attack on the ‘safe haven’ set up there for the Iraqi Kurds.
What is going on?
The unfinished business of two wars, that's what.
The eight-year Iran-Iraq war, which ended in 1988, did not put an end to the hostility between the two countries.
To this day they have unresolved arguments about the repatriation of prisoners-of-war, about the ownership of the Iraqi fighters that flew to shelter in Iran after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, and about the hostile groups each country harbours on its territory.
Shia refugees from Iraq's Sunni dictatorship mount attacks on Iraq through the marshland at the head of the Gulf.
Iraq reciprocates by extending its hospitality to Iran's internal enemies, the rebel group known as the Mujahideen e-Khalq.
This last was the ostensible cause of Iran's air raid.
The Mujahideen had lately mounted a number of successful attacks inside Iran (though not, they insist, from their bases in Iraq).
The Iranian government, influenced perhaps by its approaching presidential election, thought this the moment to take muscular action against the irritant.
But its air raids, it told Boutros Boutros-Ghali, the UN secretary-general, were ‘brief, necessary, proportionate…and purely defensive.’
If Iran was provoked, why did it also go so publicly out of its way to stress its respect for Iraq's territorial integrity?
And why, at the same time, did it release a batch of Iraqi prisoners-of-war in a unilateral goodwill gesture?
Mainly because of the aftermath of that second Gulf war, the American-led rescue of Kuwait in 1991.
Iraq nearly won the Iran-Iraq war.
But the war for Kuwait left Iraq's territorial integrity in double jeopardy.
In the south the enforcement of a no-fly zone by western aircraft has raised the possibility of a Shia secession.
In the north several million Iraqi Kurds have been building the sinews of an independent homeland, most but not all of which is protected by another no-fly zone.
The Iranians might welcome a secession in Iraq's south, especially if the Shias who detached themselves from Baghdad chose later to attach themselves to their co-religionists in Tehran.
They are much less happy about the emergence of an independent Kurdistan in northern Iraq, which might then become an inspiration for Iran's own Kurdish separatists.
So Iran continues to uphold the territorial integrity of its old enemy at the same time as bombing it.
Although this involves a delicate piece of balancing, it is not Iran's only such balancing act.
The regime continues to feel that it has two chief enemies: Iraq locally and the United States, the Great Satan, farther off.
Yet these two enemies are also enemies of each other, which poses a question.
In what circumstances, if any, ought Iran to befriend the lesser enemy in order to make matters worse for the greater one?
Right now, Iran benefits from being part of the UN's siege of Mr Hussein.
It sells oil to the countries Iraq is no longer allowed to supply.
It buys weapons while Iraqi arms purchases are embargoed, and while UN inspectors prowl the Iraqi desert destroying chemical weapons and looking for the places where Mr Hussein may still be trying to build nuclear ones.
But there is one sense in which Iran and Iraq could make common cause.
Both want to thwart American designs in the Middle East.
And the best way to do so may, one day, be to co-operate with one another.
As it happens, America has just given both countries a reason for wondering whether that day is nigh.
In Washington in mid-May, Martin Indyk, Middle East guru in the White House's National Security Council, gave a talk on the Clinton administration's thinking on the Gulf.
He said the United States was changing its historic policy in the region.
In the past the Americans had tried to use the power of Iraq to counter Iran, and vice versa.
From now on America would accept that both regimes were fundamentally hostile to its interests.
Both would in future be opposed, as part of a policy he called ‘dual containment’.
Given the errors caused by the previous policy — over-dependence on Iran's shah, the puffing up of Mr Hussein before his invasion of Kuwait — the change of approach is overdue.
But its implementation will be tricky.
Iraq is already a pariah state, blockaded under international law.
Iran is in a different category.
The Iranian policies that frighten its neighbours and the wider world are said to include the promotion of international terrorism, attempts to obstruct peace between Israel and the Arabs and a burning ambition to acquire long-range missiles and weapons of mass destruction.
But, unlike Mr Hussein, Iran has not yet stepped brazenly outside the law.
If Iran is cheating on nuclear weapons, the International Atomic Energy Agency has yet to catch it at it.
For the moment, concerted UN action against Iran is out of the question.
According to Mr Indyk, America is therefore advising Russia, China, Europe and Japan not to help rearm Iran, and not to pursue normal commercial relations with it.
In the wider Middle East, he says, America hopes that the loyalty of American friends —— Egypt, Israel, Saudi Arabia, the Gulf emirates and Turkey — can maintain ‘a balance of power in our favour’.
Perhaps.
America's powers of persuasion are indeed considerable.
But its newly minted dual-containment policy may reckon without the Middle East's rare talent for opportunistic alliances.
Iran itself once bought weapons from the hated Israelis.
Why should the Saudis, still terrified of Mr Hussein, needlessly antagonise Iran, just after Iran's foreign minister, Ali Akbar Velayati, has visited the kingdom?
And how ironic it would be if dual containment ended up by pushing Iran and Iraq, two enduring enemies, into each other 's arms.
Guatemala
Why did he do it?
FROM OUR CENTRAL AMERICA CORRESPONDENT
WAKING up to the rhythms of marimba music on the radio seems a pleasant enough thought.
But when Guatemalans hear these melodies in place of the normal morning news, distinctly unpleasant thoughts spring to mind.
After years of military rule, they know that it usually means just one thing: a military coup.
In the early hours of May 25th, the music played on, until interrupted soon after dawn by President Jorge Serrano, who declared that there had been no coup.
He had instead ordered a civilian suspension of constitutional rights, the dissolution of Congress as well as a ban on press coverage and other emergency measures.
It was, in other words, an autogolpe, or self-coup, similar to the successful power-grab by Peru's President Alberto Fujimori a year ago.
Mr Serrano's actions caught most people by surprise.
The United States responded by cutting off its $17m of aid.
Guatemala's ambassador to Washington, Edmond Mulet, resigned in disgust, calling his boss a dictator.
Rigoberta Menchu, who won the Nobel peace prize in 1992 for fighting for the rights of Guatemala's indigenous people, defiantly called for public protests in Guatemala city.
Mr Serrano's motives are still obscure.
Political conditions in Guatemala have not been ideal recently, but then they never were.
The president said he needed to act because the country had become ungovernable; he blamed civil disorder and corruption, fuelled by drug money, for making his intervention necessary.
He complained in particular of recent student riots over price rises and cuts in subsidies.
‘I had to put a stop to it,’ he told Mexican television.
The president is a zealous evangelical Christian, obsessed of late by what he calls a ‘plot’ by a ‘mafia’of drug traffickers to take over the country.
He says drug corruption is now so prevalent that it has tainted the assembly, the courts, and press and television.
This does not quite ring true.
Drug money has certainly had a baleful impact on Guatemala, but there is nothing particularly new about it.
Officials in Washington had been sounding the warning for over four years, noting that Guatemala is a trans-shipment point for Colombian cocaine and heroin heading north to the United States and Mexico.
They have also accused the army of being involved in the traffic.
Besides, if drug-trafficking was the president's target, why was the house of Ramiro de Leon, the human-rights ombudsman and an outspoken critic of the army, surrounded by troops as the coup began?
Mr Serrano claimed the soldiers were sent for protection.
Mr de Leon says that 30 armed police broke down his door and threatened to take him away.
He managed to escape to denounce the coup from hiding: ‘With protectors like that, who needs enemies?’
It may be that the president was simply lured by power.
But even his critics admit that he is not a man of great ambition.
Most expect that he will, as he promised the nation after the coup, stay ‘not one day more’ than his presidential term, which expires in January 1996.
He has also called for an election to a constituent assembly to be held within two months, to restore ‘institutional democracy…as soon as possible.’
A better explanation may come from Mr Serrano's growing cosiness with the armed forces, combined with declining personal popularity.
He has lost ground since his election two years ago, although his small MAS party did gain seats in recent municipal elections, albeit in a turnout of less than 40%.
As his political stature has shrunk, he has grown correspondingly more dependent on the army.
Another aggravating factor was the breakdown in talks in early May between the government and the guerrillas of URNG, the Guatemalan Revolutionary National Union.
The president had hoped to negotiate an end to the country's long-running, though much weakened, left-wing insurgency.
A mediator from the Catholic church had threatened to pull out of the talks, blaming both sides for intransigence.
Lately Mr Serrano had also come under fire on human rights.
In the early 1980s, the army slaughtered thousands of Guatemalans in a brutal counter-insurgency campaign.
Thousands of Indian peasants fled across the border to Mexico.
A week before the coup, Amnesty International accused the government of ignoring serious abuses by the army, including death threats against peasant leaders and unexplained disappearances.
Fearing new repression, several Indian peasant leaders fled the country in the early hours of the coup.
Those who remained can only hope that Mr Serrano, while snuffing out democracy, will at least control the soldiers.
Uganda
No democracy here, please
FROM OUR EAST AFRICA CORRESPONDENT
KAMPALA
A SIGN taped to the wall above the lavatories in the Ministry of Constitutional Development in Kampala politely asks visitors not to expectorate in the sinks.
A similar forbearance is asked of Ugandans towards their constitutional development.
They show it.
Most of them refrain from spitting at their one-party state — so long, that is, as President Yoweri Museveni stays in charge.
Ugandans have been promised elections for a constituent assembly by the end of the year.
The assembly, charged with drawing up a new constitution, could pave the way for political pluralism.
But while much of Africa is clamouring for multi-party elections in the hope of replacing indifferent or corrupt governments, the prospect of political freedom is met with apprehension in Uganda.
The acceptance of Mr Museveni's National Resistance Movement as the country's only legal political entity amounts to a massive act of faith.
One explanation is that Uganda's two most prominent leaders in the recent past were Idi Amin and Milton Obote, both of whom set worldwide standards for venality and corruption.
A second reason, expressed by small businessmen, market women and clergymen, is the feeling that the economic growth and stability enjoyed during the seven years of Mr Museveni's presidency should be allowed time to bear fruit, before the country is divided along party lines.
Mr Museveni's movement is broadly based.
A country-wide system of ‘resistance councils’ is responsible for security and local administration.
What is the need for political parties, asks a businesswoman, when through the resistance councils ‘the smallest individual can be heard in parliament?’
Similar arguments do not wash with donors to such countries as Malawi and Kenya.
Yet Uganda continues to get about $100m a year in foreign aid.
Why is it treated differently?
Support for Mr Museveni, who presides over an administration still blighted by corruption, seems to stem from a belief in his personal sincerity and integrity.
‘The bottom line’, says one western ambassador, ‘is that he is one of the few leaders on this continent who appears to care about his people and we therefore trust him to do the right thing.’
So far he has.
Mr Museveni would have been unable to stay in power were it not for the economic success unfolding around him.
The country has boasted yearly growth of about 6% since 1987, when he took the IMF's bitter economic-reform pill, and eliminated 30,000 civil-service jobs.
He has allowed the Ugandan Asians, whom Idi Amin expelled in 1972, to return and reclaim their businesses.
This has brought an influx of foreign exchange, badly needed skills and an instant rejuvenation of industry.
Foreign investors in search of an East African base, who would once have looked at Kenya, are now increasingly looking at Uganda.
The main pressure to accelerate the introduction of democracy comes from the discredited parties of the old regime: the Uganda People's Congress (a largely Protestant organisation which was Milton Obote's party) and the Democratic Party (dominated by Catholics).
For the moment these parties are not officially banned, merely prevented from carrying out any political activity.
The president stands a good chance of surviving multi-party elections.
He has won favour with a wide range of interest groups.
His latest coup was to give permission for the coronation of the kabaka (king) of Buganda, the ancient kingdom that lies within Uganda, to go ahead this July.
The kabaka-to-be, Ronald Mutebi, a former double-glazing salesman who grew up in Britain, will not get any political power; his activities will be strictly cultural.
But, at little cost, Mr Museveni has won the hearts of most of his people, the Baganda.
Tolerating a one-party state because of the personality of its leader does, however, carry risks.
It would be a disaster if Mr Museveni were to be knocked down by the proverbial bus.
For this reason, says the head of a big aid agency in Kampala, the constituent assembly may try to force political pluralism through sooner than the president would like.
BRITAIN
Timex
Dundee's dispute
A FADED poster at a ‘Back to the 1960s’ exhibition in Dundee's city centre reads: ‘Using high precision machines, advance techniques and native Scottish skills, Timex has established Scotland as watchmaker to Great Britain and many overseas countries.’
Times have changed.
Timex's plant in Dundee has stopped making watches (it now produces printed circuit boards), and its workforce has dwindled from over 4,000 to a few hundred.
Only native Scottish skill is still abundant — perhaps too abundant.
When 343 workers were sacked last February for going on strike over lay-offs and cuts in benefits (80% were women, some with 35 years of service), 270 others rushed to take their jobs.
The dispute that followed is the most acrimonious in Britain since 1986 when Rupert Murdoch dismissed his printers and moved his newspapers to Wapping.
Timex was set up in Dundee in 1946.
Its American parent makes watches in Little Rock, Arkansas, whose favourite son wore a Timex ticker when he gave his State of the Union address.
For years, Timex enjoyed good relations with its workers, who in 1990 were made shareholders.
Things soured when Peter Hall — a 41-year-old Englishman the local unions consider a deadly mix of Thatcherite policies and American management style — was put in as chief executive in 1991.
Late last year he announced cutbacks in staff to respond to falling demand.
When the workers took a ballot, went on strike and refused to accept a peace plan (which by then included a wage freeze and a cut in certain benefits), he says he was left with no choice: ‘I dismissed the old workforce and hired a new one.
Timex is a sub-contracting company and our clients could decide to get their products elsewhere.’
The dispute took a nasty new turn on May 17th, when a crowd of several thousand people gathered in front of the factory gates.
In the clashes that followed, 38 people were arrested, and 12 police officers injured.
A new mass rally is planned for June 12th.
Meanwhile a tense routine has set in.
Outside the plant, middle-aged women who once worked in it spend their time methodically abusing every car, van or lorry that drives through the gates.
The abuse rises to a crescendo twice a day, at 7.30am and 4.30pm, when double-decker buses carry the new recruits to and from work, their faces covered with balaclavas and newspapers in order to conceal their identities.
Mr Hall says Timex produces more goods now than before the strike, and he has received ‘a fair number’ of job applications from workers sacked at the beginning of the dispute, who could find no other job in recession-hit Dundee.
John Kydd, divisional organiser for the engineering union, says that the first statement is a lie and the second is a provocation.
He expects that sacked workers will occupy their factory, sooner or later, ‘so that this farce, orchestrated from the United States, will be quickly brought to an end.’
At last, the knife
Shaken up, but will the cabinet stir?
AFTER weeks of wondering, most ministers were put out of their misery.
On May 27th John Major sacked his chancellor of the exchequer and reshuffled several of his other 21 cabinet members.
His hope: to ‘refresh’ his tired and horribly accident-prone administration.
Replacing Norman Lamont at the Treasury with Kenneth Clarke, drafted in from the Home Office, may improve the government's image.
More questionable is whether this dainty twirl of the merry-go-round will do much to change the nation — or this government's ill-fortune.
The ideological balance of the cabinet is roughly as before.
The ebullient Mr Clarke — combative, frank and untainted by the shamelessly cavalier manner of Mr Lamont — has a better chance of persuading Britons that things are getting better.
Despite his reputation as a political bruiser, in social policy Mr Clarke is a lot‘wetter’ than his erstwhile rival for the chancellorship, Michael Howard, who may bring a less breezy touch, as new home secretary, to matters of law and order.
There are promotions for David Hunt to the employment department, for Gillian Shephard to agriculture and for John Redwood, the Thatcherite and cerebral local-government minister who joins the cabinet for the first time as Welsh secretary.
These are unsurprising rewards for competence.
All told, government policy across the board will clearly stay much the same.
Tory backbenchers and the nation at large will give Mr Major about a year before deciding whether the helmsman or his crew are mostly to blame if the nation's ills refuse to blow away.
Now he has a team more of his own making rather than inherited from his fearsome predecessor, Lady Thatcher.
He has a new chance to put his stamp on policy.
He hopes, as all prime ministers do, that the shake-up will put an end to the back-biting and snarling that has reached a nasty pitch since the Newbury by-election and local-council humiliations three weeks ago.
Policy may not change much.
But it had become impossible for Mr Major to plod on with the same soiled team.
Honest Tories confess that things had become distinctly worse than normal, even allowing for the grumps of mid-term recession and by-election rebuff.
Unrest in Parliament reached a new intensity this week.
The prospect of public-spending cuts had produced the usual bout of cabinet in-fighting.
Hints from Michael Portillo, the Treasury chief secretary, of a no-holds-barred review of welfare spending left Tory MPs wondering about the wisdom of ‘thinking aloud’— provoking, frightening, then denying — rather than ruminating silently before striking.
Most think he fired another shot into the government's big toe.
Mr Portillo, however, keeps his cabinet post.
The party's parliamentary majority, down to 18, faces a relentless squeeze.
In two years it could well be down to single figures.
The virus of backbench rebellion is as virulent as ever.
Worst of all, the angriest voters are not the unemployed in Hartlepool, but retired majors in Haslemere.
MP after MP is returning from awkward constituency surgeries in the shires with tales of hard-saving but far-from-affluent constituents, Tory to the marrow, boiling with rage at what they see as a government out of touch and misdirected.
Although many of them feel cheated by the government's refusal to hold a referendum over Maastricht, that is not the defining issue.
The new and, for Tories, most worrying phenomenon is the way Tory governments' traditional electoral strengths now seem weaknesses.
Older voters especially are sour at the failure to stem crime.
Low interest rates are seen — government cannot win — as being bad for their savings.
Rail privatisation gives them the shivers.
So, more literally, does the promise of value-added tax on fuel.
Talk of means-testing pensions hardly warms the cockles.
Haslemere also scents a whiff of dishonour in the reluctance of errant ministers to resign.
The smell could get nastier, as the Matrix-Churchill case produces new revelations about the government's past arms-to-Iraq policy.
Sir Hal Miller, a retired Conservative Party vice-chairman, and Sir Patrick Mayhew, the former attorney-general and the current Northern Ireland secretary, publicly recall embarrassingly different versions of events.
One of them, it seems, is wrong.
At the back of every cabinet member's mind is the question how much, before he was prime minister, Mr Major himself knew.
Mr Major's sole crumb of comfort is that John Smith, the Labour leader, has yet to convince the British people that he and his party are viable alternatives.
He must be relieved by Mr Smith's refusal to reveal whether he would deal with the deficit by raising taxes or cutting spending.
As Tory MPs mull over the changes during the ten-day Whitsun recess, they are still likely to feel buffeted rather than reassured.
Full charge
‘NEED, not ability to pay, is and will remain the basis on which care is offered to all by the National Health Service.’
So promised the Tory manifesto for the 1992 election.
But start a public-spending review and all the old options are trotted out: in particular more and higher charges for patients.
The political uproar that follows is wholly predictable.
In an international context, it is also peculiar.
The NHS is notable for the paucity and low level of its charges, not the reverse.
America has big ‘co-payments’ even for the fully insured.
In continental Europe, out-of-pocket charges often contribute about 15% of health spending.
In Britain the equivalent is 3–4% (itself a smaller proportion than in the 1960s).
Other European countries have no compunction about charging for health-care services that are free in the NHS.
France and Italy, for instance, have a ticket modérateur under which patients pay 25–30% of the costs of consulting a general practitioner (GP) and of prescriptions.
Belgium, Germany, France and Italy all impose charges for stays in hospital, typically £5–10 ($1–16) a day.
Even Sweden, once the paragon of all welfare states, has stiff charges for prescriptions, seeing doctors and staying in hospitals.
It has few exemptions, though it sets annual ceilings on how much individual patients pay.
Ireland is more ruthless still in targeting public health care.
The ‘rich’— which for this purpose means the top two-thirds of the population — pay in full for GP consultations and prescriptions; they also pay £10 a day for hospital stays.
In comparison, British prescription charges seem mild indeed.
Patients pay £4.25 per item but four out of five prescriptions are dispensed free to people who are exempt.
There is plenty of scope for more.
Extending prescription charges to the better-off old might bring in £350m a year, according to the National Association of Health Authorities and Trusts.
Making non-exempt dental patients pay in full for treatment could raise nearly £200m a year; so could charges of £10 a day for stays in hospital.
Charging £5 for GP visits might raise as much as £500m a year.
Britain also lacks a coherent philosophy for charging patients.
If charges are intended to raise money, it seems odd not to impose them for staying in hospital or visiting a GP.
If they are to deter wasteful and unnecessary spending, it seems foolish to impose them for sight tests and dental check-ups (preventive care usually saves money in the end) but not for old people's prescriptions.
But do not expect much new philosophy from the present government.
In 1988 Margaret Thatcher squeezed sight-test charges through Parliament only after a Tory rebellion that shrank her majority by 28 votes.
Today John Major has an overall majority of barely half that.
Motorway pricing
No through road
THE great advantage of having a former chief secretary to the Treasury as transport secretary is that he knows a thing or two about raising money.
This week John MacGregor launched a debate on a scheme which could, in the medium term, turn Britain's motorways into money-earners by charging motorists to drive on them.
Economists like the idea of charging motorists for the costs that traffic jams impose on the environment and the community.
Mr MacGregor's discussion paper has a tinge of greenery, but its main interest is conveyed by its title: ‘Paying for Better Motorways.’
The transport secretary thinks Britain needs more roads, and therefore wants to extract more money from road-users.
One option would be to raise the duty on petrol: Britain's fuel prices have long been lower than the EC average, and petrol duties have provided a static share of tax revenues in spite of the rapid growth in road use.
But all car-drivers pay petrol taxes, while only half use the motorways.
In contrast, motorways account for 30% of the mileage covered by heavy goods vehicles (and 45% of that of the largest lorries).
Britain's lorry drivers are already heavily taxed compared with their EC counterparts.
British taxes on the ownership of a large lorry are almost as high as in Germany, at the top of the EC league; the retail price of diesel is a touch lower than in Ireland.
Moreover, when a lorry can drive up to 600 miles (960 km) on a single tank of fuel, longhaul drivers can avoid paying British diesel taxes by filling up in France.
If the charges for motorway use are too high, they will divert drivers to other roads.
There is no advantage in pricing lorries off the highways and on to by-ways.
The transport department estimates that a charge of about 1.5 pence a mile for cars and vans and 4.5 pence for other vehicles would divert about 10% of vehicle miles at peak periods.
That sets a ceiling on what is feasible.
Such charges would raise some £700m a year.
But there is a further practical constraint.
To charge per mile will need fancy electronic gadgetry which is not yet available.
Meanwhile, the government may introduce a permit system, such as Switzerland already uses.
Such a permit, which might cost £75 a year for cars and up to £750 for heavy lorries, would cost all motorway-users the same.
If road-users are to accept the proposal, they will need to be persuaded that they will get something in exchange.
Mr MacGregor hopes to build more roads.
He knows the Treasury does not allow departments to earmark tax revenues.
So he dreams of a highways authority, which could charge, not tax — and the magic of semantics would leave the cash in the transport budget.
But the idea of more money for road-building will infuriate environmentalists.
No wonder Mr MacGregor produced his paper and called for full public discussion just as political pundits were tipping him for promotion in a ministerial reshuffle.
Dark secret
The Scott inquiry into illegal arms exports to Iraq hit new dirt.
Sir Hal Miller, a former senior Tory backbencher, claimed that Sir Patrick Mayhew, then attorney general, had urged him not to produce evidence which would have cleared businessmen accused of exporting arms.
According to friends of Sir Patrick, Sir Hal is ‘muddled’.
According to Labour MPs, he has ‘blown open the cover-up’.
Bitter
Republican and unionist extremists both made gains in local elections in Ulster, damaging hopes for an early resumption of round-table talks.
Four IRA bombs exploded in Ulster within several days, at a cost of £22m ($14m).
The last wrecked Magherafelt, a small town, days before its Mad May Fair.
Boastful
Inflation fell in April to its lowest level for 29 years — an ‘astonishing’ achievement, says Norman Lamont.
But take away the effect of the new council tax and underlying inflation has risen slightly.
Manufacturing productivity rose nearly 8% in the first quarter of 1993 compared to the same period last year.
Brainwave
William Waldegrave, the science minister, unveiled the first new government strategy for science and technology for 21 years.
His big new idea: ‘technology foresight’, a method for picking research areas which will help industry.
Sinking
Receivers at Swan Hunter, a Tyneside shipbuilder, sacked 420 workers.
Unions pleaded for all shipyards to boycott work on the frigates the government is threatening to move from Swan Hunter.
Tea break
For 70 years British royals have taken a frosty view of Ireland.
But now the queen has invited Mary Robinson, Ireland's president, to tea in London.
House music
Derek Enright, a Labour MP, was signed up to make a album of Beatles classics in Latin.
He was discovered after singing ‘Yellow Submarine’ in Latin in a Commons debate on education.
Public spending
Doing more with less
Too many welfare benefits go to people who do not need them
BRITAIN'S welfare state needs a complete overhaul.
The government spends too much on benefits.
As many of those benefits go to people who do not need them, that spending does far less than it could to relieve poverty.
The best way to remedy this is to move from universal benefits — those paid to all claimants without taking their other income into account — to means-tested ones.
That was roughly what Michael Portillo, the chief secretary to the Treasury, told the press on May 19th.
To the consternation of his cabinet colleagues, he is currently conducting a wide-ranging review of public spending.
His bluntness got him into trouble.
Press leaks hinted that the government was considering means-testing the child benefit now paid to every mother and charging richer patients to use National Health Service hospital beds.
In the ensuing political rumpus John Major shamelessly distanced himself from his henchman.
This was short-sighted.
The government will almost certainly have to do some unpopular things to the welfare state.
Mr Major would do well to get the bad news out of the way as soon as he can.
The catalyst now is the need to slash the public-sector borrowing requirement (PSBR), which may soar to £50 billion ($17.5 billion) this year.
Even if recovery reduces the PSBR, few economists expect it to dip below £25 billion (around 4% of GDP) even after several years of growth.
This figure would meet neither the government's own goal of balancing the budget over the economic cycle, nor the Europe-wide aim, agreed at Maastricht, of limiting borrowing to 3% of GDP.
To bridge the gap by raising taxes would mean painful choices.
To raise even £10 billion would mean, say, lifting the main income-tax rate from 25p to 33p, raising the VAT rate from 17.5% to 21.5%, or imposing 17.5% VAT on food and public transport, both at present zero-rated.
The alternative is to cut spending.
It is tempting to think that slashing the defence budget, which was £24 billion or 10% of total public spending in 1992–93, would be enough.
But health, education and social security together account for 61% of public spending.
It is hard to see how they could escape unscathed.
The pressure will grow as the population ages.
In 1945, when today's welfare state was born, there were seven people of working age to each person aged over 65.
In 1991 there were 3.3 workers per pensioner; by 2030 there could be just 2.2.
Welfare spending has soared from around 8% of GDP in 1946 to around 24% today (see chart 1).
Will it continue to rise, without fundamental reform?
Certainly, state pensions — now over £25 billion a year — will not grow as fast as they might have done, or seem likely to do in many other rich countries.
The Conservative government chose in 1979 to raise pensions in line with prices rather than wages; in 1986 it reduced the value of the state earnings-related pension scheme (SERPS).
The Institute for Fiscal Studies forecasts that the cost of the basic state pension will peak at around £35 billion (in 1990 prices) in 2030; SERPS will have risen to £15 billion from around £1 billion today.
The cost of health care may rise faster.
People are living longer, and costing the state more in the final years of their lives.
In 1992 the NHS spent more than £1,000 a head on the over-75s, compared with less than £250 each on under-65s.
The health budget, now £37 billion, is rising fast.
Unlike the pensions budget, it has no obvious ceiling.
As the government looks for cuts, it will find plenty of scope to make improvements at the same time.
Around one third of pensioners are so poor that their basic state pension is topped up with other state benefits.
Yet the richest 20% of pensioners, whose state pension is, on average, just one quarter of their income, actually get higher state benefits than the poorest 20%.
The rich receive the bulk of SERPS pay-outs.
Another anomaly is that people both pay taxes and get their money back in benefits.
This now happens in two ways.
First, the same person both pays tax and receives benefit in the same financial year.
The Central Statistical Office's study of the impact of tax and benefits on household incomes crudely illustrates the point (see chart 2).
Households with income in the middle 20% pay direct taxes of around 22% of their earnings, and receive cash benefits worth 16%.
If the cash benefits paid to those households could simply be deducted from their tax liability, their direct tax bill would fall to just 6%.
Benefits in kind — worth around 18% of income to the middling household — are harder to dispense with: they represent mainly education and health care, which is best provided by the state.
Second, the welfare state works as a kind of ‘savings bank’, taking money at some points in each person's life and returning it at another.
According to John Hills of the London School of Economics, the average person gets back in benefits about two-thirds of what he pays in taxes over his lifetime; the richest 10% of people get back about half.
A state monopoly savings bank seems, for the most part, a poor substitute for the more flexible products and greater efficiency that could be offered by competing private providers such as pension funds, insurers and banks.
Rather than target help on those who need it most, Mr Major may prefer to protect the middle class and let the poor get poorer.
But the British remain fond of the welfare state; they might, in the end, thank him if he made it work more fairly.
Nostalgia
A market for the past
BRITAIN is notoriously good at selling heritage and tradition.
So good that it can do it almost without help from history: it manages to turn 20th-century products into cult objects of British tradition.
The world laps them up.
Take the Mini car, first produced in 1959.
In Japan it still sells more than all other British cars put together.
Or take the black cab, designed in the 1950s.
Some 27,000 classic cabs are still roaming the streets of Britain, 17,500 of them in London.
Popular at home (the Duke of Edinburgh recently bought one), for foreigners they offer cheap chic: a cab dismissed after ten years' service sells for around £1,500 ($1,250).
Or consider the ‘hop on, hop off’ red bus, officially known as the Routemaster.
Designed in 1954 and built until 1968, the model has remained so popular that London Transport is currently refurbishing 500 of them, at a cost of £1m.
Those which are being discarded, usually after 30 years and around 750,000 miles (1,200,000 km) of service, are sold at £8,000 each and go on to another life overseas.
Sri Lanka has 41 of them, Japan 38, Canada 24, Belgium 15, France ten.
Some are used for public transport.
Others advertise English school, beer, discotheques, even politicians.
The most popular British cult object, however, has no wheels and would not have moved at all if it was not for British Telecom.
It is the red telephone box.
In the past five years BT has replaced some 47,000 of them by glass kiosks which are supposed to provide ‘better lighting’ and a ‘smell-free environment’.
About 20,000 of the old sort still grace the streets of Britain; 2,000 boast rare features and have been listed as Grade 2 buildings, worthy of preservation.
The rest are harder to get registered — designed by Giles Gilbert Scott in 1935 and dubbed jubilee kiosks, they were mass-produced until 1968 — but they are likely to survive so long as they are in good condition and in ‘heritage locations’(that is, near the house of somebody ready to give BT a hard time if it tries to take them away).
The 47,000 discarded kiosks have been the subject of a brisk trade.
One kiosk entrepreneur in Essex has 600 boxes in a field ‘set aside’ from agricultural use under EC regulations.
The current price of an ‘unrefurbished’(smelly, rusty and broken-windowed) kiosk ranges from £300 to £500.
For a refurbished one you can pay anything from £600 to £14,000 (for a gold-leafed kiosk bought by a discotheque in Germany).
Most are sold abroad.
One stands proudly in the main lobby of the student union at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Another arrived in China on the day of the Tiananmen Square massacre, and was subsequently lost.
There is no shortage of uses for the red boxes.
People have converted them into showers, poolside bars, intimate snugs in gay bars, fish tanks (a favourite), aviaries, greenhouses, bookcases, cocktail cabinets, barbecues (you take the glass out and add a chimney stack), coffins and lavatories (if that can be counted as a conversion).
The latest news down the telephone line is that Madonna has just bought one.
Mucking with monarchy
IS THE crisis of British monarchy now likely to be permanent, unless the battered institution be shorn of its residual powers?
If you take your cue from a recent televised day-long forum of the London intelligentsia, hosted by The Times and a constitutional reform group, Charter 88, the answer is probably Yes.
Monarchists could find some solace in the fact that the participants were not exactly representative.
Of the 90-odd writers and politicians billed to speak, most hailed from the soft and hard left, and were hostile to the status quo, or abolitionist.
Most of the discussion would have been marvellously unintelligible in a Basildon supermarket or in a pub in Barrow-in-Furness.
Yet constitutional monarchists would be foolish to shrug off the event.
That it happened at all was historic.
The editor of The Times would not have hosted it ten, maybe even five, years ago.
Opinion polls show a huge dip in enthusiasm for the monarchy.
MORI, a public-opinion pollster, recalls that in 1984 77% of Britons thought the country would be ‘worse off’ without the monarchy; eight years later, only 37% thought so.
The straight abolitionists, meanwhile, had more than tripled, to 17%.
More significant, perhaps, was the leap in number of those reckoned ‘indifferent’— up from 16% to 42%.
The focus of the forum blurred into Charter 88's campaign for constitutional reform in general.
The group professes agnosticism on the monarchy, but sees it as the ‘apex and symbol’ of an unfair and ineffective system.
Thus a key feature of discussion was the monarch's role in such matters as choosing a government in a hung parliament and allowing ministers to exercise the royal prerogative to push through Orders in Council without parliamentary debate.
The Charterists have a case for deflating executive power.
But it can be argued outside the question of the monarchy.
As for the worry about the Queen and hung parliaments (following, presumably, a Labour victory and proportional representation), it is exaggerated.
Queen Victoria and George V presided a dozen times over the formation of minority or coalition governments.
The unwritten rules, in such instances, are the purest common sense.
All the same, among today's MPs, the monarchy itself has become a touchy and electorally dangerous topic.
John Smith, the Labour leader, is characteristically cautious.
He is a monarchist.
For Labour to be tagged with republicanism would still lose votes.
But Mr Smith can no longer order his MPs to agree.
The Labour party is now divided between reformers and abolitionists, the latter now numbering about a quarter of all Labour MPs.
In the old days, the argument between radical-reform monarchists, such as Jack Straw, and the straight republicans, like Tony Benn, was academic.
It is not yet a big issue.
But one day it may become a more serious aspect of wider constitutional argument.
The Tories cannot sit back and smile smugly at another Labour spat, knowing that few Britons, so far, are republican.
Tory republicanism seems inconceivable today.
It may not always be.
The harshly meritocratic, anti-toff right-wingery exemplified by the Sunday Times is instinctively republican.
Senior Tories were unwise to stay away from the forum.
The monarchy these days has to be intelligently fought for, even among conservatives.
Like Labour, Tories will have to discuss reforming the monarchy versus keeping the status quo.
A Tory backbench constitutional committee may soon do just that.
It is novel stuff.
As for the royal family itself, its own strategists watched the forum carefully, without participating directly, naturally wary of joining the fray.
Its main hope, now that the Prince and Princess of Wales are settling down to their lives apart, is that the ructions that have damaged the monarchy's dignity have ended, allowing Prince Charles, in particular, to rebuild his image as an earnest and honourable man.
Should he divorce, he can still attain the throne.
The Archbishop of Canterbury thinks so.
Still, monarchists pray that the Queen, now 67, will continue, fully fit, for at least another decade.
Thoughts on the monarchy invariably turn on the constitutional insights of a former editor of The Economist, Walter Bagehot, after whom this column is named.
Every monarch since George V, and Prince Charles too, has imbibed his words.
For them he is a prime interpreter of the modern monarchy.
Yet his strictures, pondered today, are not entirely encouraging.
He was a pragmatic, not romantic, royalist, though he encouraged the notion of romance in monarchy for people less worldly than himself.
‘The use of the Queen in a dignified capacity’, he wrote coolly, ‘is incalculable.’
But he felt no emotional objection to republicanism; he merely doubted its efficiency.
‘Among a cultivated population, a population capable of abstract ideas,[monarchy]would not be required.’
Today's Charterists argue that such a level of sophistication may now be achievable.
In a famous passage, Bagehot argued for secrecy as ‘essential to the utility of the English royalty as it now is.
Above all,’ he went on, ‘our royalty is to be reverenced, and if you begin to poke about it, you cannot reverence it…
Its mystery is its life.
We must not let in daylight upon magic.’
The daylight, filtered through the merciless pages of the press, has already expunged the mystery.
Bagehot also urged that the monarch must ‘be a figure, and not a mere person liable to criticism even for vices.’
Yet he stressed the importance of middle-class religion and family life to the monarchy's health: ‘A family on the throne brings down the pride of sovereignty to the level of petty life.’
Some younger royals have forgotten that rule.
True, the British monarchy has adapted over the ages.
It can still be cherished if less often adulated.
But the old monarchist argument that the monarchy can be separated from the royal family no longer holds.
Bagehot certainly reckoned that, in the end, the durability of the monarchy depends on the qualities of the individual monarch.
If he were alive today, he would probably have argued that the system of constitutional monarchy is sustainable, just, in more or less its present form.
But he would also have concluded that its ability to survive into the next century would depend upon the character and common sense of Prince Charles.
Hence he would probably have remained open-minded.
EUROPE
Ukraine
Like Albania, or Bolivia?
FROM OUR KIEV CORRESPONDENT
AS YOU might expect of a nation that has devoted the past three and a half centuries to failed attempts at independence, Ukrainian leaders have a propensity for messing things up when it matters most.
This trait was in evidence last week as the president, Leonid Kravchuk, threw his country into a constitutional crisis.
His timing could not have been worse.
The outlook for Ukraine has been more cheerful in the past few weeks.
Relations with America are on the mend after months in which the two countries had been arguing about the fate of nuclear weapons on Ukrainian soil.
The IMF was beginning to think that Ukraine's economic reforms might be worth supporting.
And the government seemed to be growing up: when Russia announced it would start charging world prices for oil, the Ukrainian government, instead of moaning about injustice, said it was time to free prices and begin real reforms.
To do that, on May 18th the prime minister, Leonid Kuchma, asked parliament to grant him a range of extraordinary powers: to rule the economy by decree, control the central bank and the state privatisation body and have jurisdiction over the president's satraps in the regions.
In fact, these powers were not so extraordinary by local standards; Russia's reformers have asked for much the same.
In return, Mr Kuchma, a hard-headed former factory director who has promised reforms but has had difficulty implementing them, promised to free prices, close factories and privatise small businesses — all this with ‘sweat and tears’.
Remarkably, Ukraine's generally conservative parliament appeared inclined to support him, largely because it felt there was no alternative.
This was the moment that Mr Kravchuk chose to stab his prime minister in the back.
Instead of backing Mr Kuchma, the president presented parliament with another option: amend the constitution and put the president at the head of the cabinet.
A good soldier to the end, Mr Kuchma, who learned only an hour before Mr Kravchuk's speech that the president would not support him, tendered his resignation.
The next day, to its credit, parliament overwhelmingly rejected Mr Kuchma's resignation.
It then took a short break.
The legislature's vote was an embarrassment for Mr Kravchuk, but it has left Ukraine with a paralysed government at a time when the country must react swiftly if it is to survive increased prices for Russian fuel.
The stalemate is expected to be resolved when parliament reconvenes on June 1st (though nothing can be certain in Ukraine's topsy-turvy politics).
The best, but least likely, possibility is that Mr Kravchuk will again change his mind and ask parliament to grant Mr Kuchma the powers he has asked for.
This would allow Mr Kravchuk to duck responsibility for the painful economic reforms Mr Kuchma wants to implement.
Ukraine would benefit, too, because the sooner it begins to reform, the sooner its economy has a chance of recovering.
But Mr Kravchuk seems unlikely to choose this course, and Mr Kuchma has said he will bow to the will of his president.
Mr Kravchuk has clearly been rankled by polls which show that his prime minister is twice as popular as he is.
Some of Mr Kravchuk's advisers are exploiting his vanity, perhaps because they fear that Mr Kuchma's reforms will put an end to the opportunities for easy profits offered by the current chaos in the economy.
If Mr Kravchuk listens to their counsel, he has two choices.
He could again ask parliament to put him at the head of the government.
Or he might stick with the status quo, in which parliament has principal responsibility for the economy, and replace Mr Kuchma with a more pliant prime minister.
Either way, Ukraine will be headed for harder times.
Parliament, which rejected Mr Kuchma's plea for price increases in response to Russia's shift to world prices, summoned up the courage to raise wages and pensions instead.
That, as Viktor Pynzenyk, the leading reformer in Mr Kuchma's cabinet, pointed out, means yet more inflation and yet further devaluation of a currency that is falling even against the rouble.
If Ukraine follows this path, it risks hyperinflation and the breakdown of its monetary system.
Diehard optimists, like Mr Pynzenyk, say that hyperinflation and economic collapse will eventually force the country to its senses.
This happened in Bolivia in the mid-1980s.
When things get bad enough, he says, the nation will find a new reformer and swallow his bitter medicine.
But Bolivia is one of the few countries in which hyperinflation has had a happy outcome.
In most it has led to the destruction of market mechanisms, to chaos, sometimes to fascism.
In Ukraine the result could be either a return to the Russian fold, or a reversion to authoritarian rule, compounded perhaps by civil war in the Russified eastern regions of the country.
Depressed reformers call this ‘the Albanian option’.
Unless Mr Kravchuk — who likes to be seen holding the spiky bulava (mace), the symbol of Ukraine's bygone Cossack leaders — puts his vanity aside, he could end up being judged as harshly as the most famous Cossack, Bohdan Khmelnytsky.
Like Mr Kravchuk, Khmelnytsky won independence for Ukraine but then lost it by making a fatal alliance with Russia.
Ukraine's national poet voiced the robust verdict of an unforgiving nation: ‘If only mother Ukraine had strangled him in the cradle.’
France
Cohabitation turns to love
FROM OUR PARIS CORRESPONDENT
THE second period of cohabitation in France between a conservative government and a Socialist president seems to be working a treat.
There have been none of the head-on clashes that occurred in 1986, when President Mitterrand had as his prime minister the neo-Gaullist Jacques Chirac.
Mr Mitterrand appears so delighted with the ultra-courteous Edouard Balladur, that some Socialists wonder whether he has at last found the prime minister of his dreams.
The conservatives are seizing the moment to push through deep reforms before the honeymoon ends.
On May 26th, two weeks after a tough austerity budget, they unveiled plans to privatise 21 state firms, including Renault, Air France and Crédit Lyonnais, in the hope of raising FFr40 billion ($1.3 billion, see page 97).
In the two months since the right's crushing victory at the polls, Mr Mitterrand has only twice expressed ‘reservations’ about the government's plans (on its proposals for tightening up on law and order, and on its latest privatisation ideas).
He remained silent when the government decided to extend the period of contribution required for a full state pension, thereby calling into question the right to retire at 60, introduced by the Socialists.
He has said nothing about the government's economic package, with its plan for a FFr68 billion rise in taxes.
In foreign policy, where cohabitation looked hardest, co-operation has been exemplary.
Both Mr Mitterrand and Mr Balladur seem happy to accept that foreign policy and defence should now be shared (domaine partagé) rather than part of the president's exclusive preserve (de Gaulle's famous domaine réservé).
Unlike Mr Chirac during that earlier experiment, Mr Balladur has taken care to consult Mr Mitterrand regularly.
Contrary to expectations, there appears to be a broad convergence of views between the two men, even on such tricky issues as Bosnia, NATO, the EC and the GATT trade talks.
Not unnaturally, however, this glowing relationship between Mr Balladur and the president has made it harder for Mr Balladur to stay on loving terms with his former boss, Mr Chirac.
The latter did not want the prime ministership, calculating that another tough spell of cohabitation could damage his presidential chances in 1995.
Both he and Mr Balladur knew there would be strains between them.
But Mr Chirac promised that he would give his full support to the government, expressing criticism only in private to Mr Balladur.
In return, Mr Balladur would give Mr Chirac full support for his third (and almost certainly last) bid for the presidency.
The trouble is that Mr Balladur has become unforgivably more popular than Mr Chirac.
Despite the tough measures of May 10th, the opinion polls say he is by far France's favourite politician.
According to a poll published on May 21st, 54% of the French think Mr Balladur would make a ‘good president’.
That puts him 11 points ahead of Jacques Delors (a possible Socialist candidate), 16 points ahead of Mr Chirac, and 26 points ahead of the other main conservative hopeful, Valéry Giscard d'Estaing.
Mr Balladur denies presidential ambitions, but such figures are enough to turn anyone's head.
The comfort for Mr Chirac is that Mr Balladur's popularity is unlikely to last.
The recession is deepening.
The number of jobless, already at a record 3.1m (10.7% of the workforce), is expected to rise by at least 340,000 by the end of the year.
In response to growing criticisms of its economic policy, from Mr Giscard d'Estaing among others, the government has decided radically to revise its original economic package, announced barely a fortnight ago, by launching a record FFr40 billion state loan, of which FFr25 billion will be used to create jobs and generally give the economy a shot in the arm.
But it still may not be enough.
Mr Mitterrand, meanwhile, is lying low.
He knows he has little room for manoeuvre while the government's popularity is so high and his so low.
But he knows, too, how to wait patiently for things to change.
Germany
Capitalism's limits
FROM OUR BERLIN CORRESPONDENT
TRADE-UNION leaders in Germany are creatures of contradiction.
They are the chief advocates of the working class.
Yet, as partners in the social-market economy and directors of public companies, they are also parts of the establishment.
Most have managed to co-operate with politicians and businessmen without being co-opted by them.
Franz Steinkühler, chief of IG Metall, the country's biggest union, lost that balance.
On May 25th he resigned after admitting that he had speculated in the shares of companies associated with Daimler-Benz while sitting on its supervisory board.
Mr Steinkühler is no Jimmy Hoffa.
Insider trading, an unproven allegation in Mr Steinkühler's case, is not a crime in Germany, though it is a breach of stockmarket rules.
Nor is it uncommon.
The Frankfurt bourse is investigating whether other Daimler insiders also manipulated share-trading.
Yet allegations against Mr Steinkühler are becoming daily more serious.
At Daimler's annual meeting on May 26th, Deutsche Bank said he had received confidential information about Daimler's accounts before he speculated in related shares.
On the same day, IG Metall said that in 1985 Mr Steinkühler had dealt in the shares of another company related to Daimler, a charge he had denied.
Mr Steinkühler's dealings enrage the two groups he served for different reasons.
IG Metall's members could not forgive him for gambling in a casino for capitalists.
Nor do they take lightly his abuse of Mitbestimmung, the hallowed German practice of giving workers a voice in public companies by setting aside for them nearly half the seats on supervisory boards.
Businessmen will not soon forget that Mr Steinkühler has dealt a blow against Germany's reputation as a financial centre.
To recoup, the government is expected to speed up the passage of a law that would make insider-trading a crime.
Mr Steinkühler's mistakes will not destroy Mitbestimmung or Germany's financial ambitions.
But they are bound make Germans even more cynical about their public institutions.
Every big party this year has lost a leader to some (usually petty) scandal.
The governing Christian Democrats have lost their transport minister.
Their partners, the Free Democrats, have lost their economics minister.
Bavaria's conservatives are losing their state premier and the opposition Social Democrats their leader.
Weakened leaders are not what Germany needs at present.
The budget deficit is rising alarmingly as recession cuts revenues and drives up unemployment.
Unless the government cuts spending, its finances will deteriorate further.
The finance minister, Theo Waigel, has proposed a list of cuts to save DM20 billion ($12.2 billion) annually beginning next year.
Such schemes require courage from the government, the co-operation of the opposition and forbearance by unions.
With all three weakened by scandal, these virtues are likely to be in short supply.
A foreign-aid opportunity
FROM OUR MOSCOW CORRESPONDENT
KALMYKIA is a semi-autonomous republic of the Russian federation with a population of 320,000, no trees, a universal drink of tea mingled with mutton fat, and a 30-year-old Buddhist president who claims to control 50 companies with a combined turnover of $100m a year.
It is also the source of an idea that could save Russia.
While Boris Yeltsin has struggled to control the Russian parliament for a year, Kalmykia's 30-year-old president, Kirsan Ilyumzhinov, has solved a local version of the same problem in a day.
On April 30th he persuaded the Kalmyk parliament to adopt three bills.
One created a presidential republic.
One abolished all local councils.
The third reduced the republic's parliament from 130 to 25.
This rump has been ordered to draft a new electoral law within two months so that new elections can be held.
Mr Ilyumzhinov's technique for getting rid of parliament was simple.
He bribed it.
The parties in Kalmykia were offered interest-free loans on condition that they abandoned politics and went into business.
All except the Communists have accepted.
The Democratic Party has turned itself into a ‘small enterprise’.
In Russia itself, parliamentary deputies hinted that they might be open to a spot of bribery when, earlier this year, they discussed a bill to guarantee them various privileges for life — a flat in Moscow, a salary, priority booking on aircraft and trains.
Sergei Yushenkov, a leading democrat in the Russian parliament, guesses that, for less than $10m, you could bribe enough deputies to resign, making it impossible for parliament to form a quorum and thus forcing a general election: a small price to pay for removing a big obstacle to reform.
Spain's conservatives
From the jaws of victory
FROM OUR MADRID CORRESPONDENT
THE Spanish general election on June 6th is the first for a decade in which the result is not a foregone conclusion.
Everything points to a victory for the conservatives, except their inability to make the most of their advantages.
For months, polls showed the two main parties neck-and-neck.
The peseta's devaluation on May 13th looked as if it might help the right-of-centre opposition People's Party, but the party's leader, Jose Maria Aznar, failed to exploit the opportunity and polls taken after the devaluation showed the ruling Socialists nosing ahead.
Then, on May 24th, Mr Aznar regained the lead in Spain's first-ever television debate between prime-ministerial candidates.
Better prepared and more aggressive, he unexpectedly outmanoeuvred the prime minister.
A poll taken after the debate showed that his performance had converted about 1m previously undecided voters — 4% of the electorate and enough, perhaps, to swing the election his way in a close race.
To an outsider, though, the surprising thing is not that Spain's conservatives are inching ahead but that they are making such heavy weather of it.
Next door, in France, conservatives swept to triumphant victory in the general election in March.
Mr Aznar has been trying to exploit their success by taking time out of his campaign to visit Jacques Chirac (and, for some reason, John Major).
Yet the French enthusiasm for the right does not appear to travel.
At home, Felipe Gonzalez's Socialists are in deep trouble.
The economy is shrinking.
The budget deficit is growing.
Unemployment has risen to almost 22%.
His party is riven by personal and ideological differences and is under fire because of allegations of corruption.
On the eve of the television debate, El Mundo, a Madrid newspaper that has uncovered several corruption scandals involving the Socialists, said that the party may have used dodgy methods to finance its campaign before the 1986 referendum on whether Spain should stay in NATO.
The Socialists reply that the actions in question were not illegal at the time (the law on party financing came in later).
But the row does seem more damaging to the Socialists than the devaluation.
The People's Party should also be benefiting from the little-noticed collapse of the Democratic and Social Centre (CDS), a party that took votes away from it at the general election in 1989.
The lesson of that election was that only an alliance of all those who stood to the right of the Socialists could succeed in easing them from power.
The CDS, founded by Adolfo Suarez, the man who supervised Spain's transition to democracy in the 1970s, was the only nationwide party to straddle the ideological ground between the People's Party and the Socialists.
So when voters began deserting the CDS in droves, the People's Party stood to benefit most from the defections.
Four years ago the CDS collected 8% of the vote.
Next month it is likely to get only 1%.
That the Socialists should be anywhere near the People's Party is testimony to the adroitness of Mr Gonzalez, and to the discipline of his followers.
It also says something about the shortcomings of Mr Aznar.
A former tax inspector, he has had experience of power only as head of the regional government in Old Castile and Leon.
Four years after taking over the leadership of the party, he can still seem shallow and dull.
Mr Aznar's difficulties also underline two legacies of Franco's 36-year dictatorship: Spaniards are wary of change and suspicious of the right.
Both factors are being exploited to the full by the Socialists.
Mr Aznar has tried to combat them by promising ‘rational change’, pledging to keep, for example, Spain's restrictive abortion law.
What he has not done is to spell out his policy on the central economic issue: how does he intend to cut the budget deficit without raising taxes?
Mr Aznar has repeatedly taken refuge in claims that the Socialists are hiding the true figures and that he cannot make promises until he has seen the books.
Exploiting the feebleness of this excuse, Mr Gonzalez has began to regain the ground lost after the televised debate.
Unless Mr Aznar can come up with a convincing exposition of his economic policies, he could see his lead slip away once again.
Unsafe areas
FROM A CORRESPONDENT IN VITEZ
THE six ‘safe areas’ that America and its allies have promised to defend for Bosnia's Muslims look anything but safe.
They are coming under attack from outside and are being undermined from within by economic and social disintegration.
In the circumstances, Bosnia's government seems to have no future.
In the eastern Bosnian enclave of Srebrenica, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has managed to feed and keep alive 50,000 people crammed into a space once occupied by 7,000.
During the city's siege by Serbs, these people had a cause: to stay alive and to find food.
Now that the UN provides food, the refugees are bored, listless and jobless.
The social fabric is disintegrating; warlords rule.
As an island in a Serb sea, Srebrenica's future seems to lie in breeding a generation determined to liberate all Bosnia for the Muslims.
This is an idea that could overtake current government policy that Bosnia should be a state of three faiths and three peoples, and provide the ideology for future Bosnian-Muslim terrorists.
Though Tuzla is the only officially declared safe area in central Bosnia, in fact much of the territory between it, Sarajevo and Zenica, two other safe zones, will become a sort of basket-case protectorate.
‘This risks being a humanitarian catastrophe,’ says Jose-Maria Mendiluce, the outgoing UNHCR boss for ex-Yugoslavia.
General Philippe Morillon, the UN's commander in Bosnia & Hercegovina, has begun negotiations to end the siege of Sarajevo and open UN-controlled ‘blue routes’ through Bosnia.
When that happens, Sarajevo's defenders will hand in their light arms, heavily armed Serb besiegers will withdraw with their weapons — and tens of thousands of those in the city will bolt.
The lifeblood of Sarajevo will drain away, the television cameras will go home and Bosnia will be forgotten in the West.
For all these reasons, the Bosnian government does not much want its own capital to become a safe haven.
And UN officials worry that there is little prospect of creating stable government in what is left of ‘free’ Bosnia.
Order has collapsed.
The government's subjects are melting into the hills.
So is independent Bosnia.
Russia
Soft-centred
FROM OUR MOSCOW CORRESPONDENT
YEGOR GAIDAR, the architect of Russia's economic reforms, thinks the most interesting phenomenon in Russian politics is the collapse of the centre.
This, he argues, is good news for reform since it makes fudging the issue harder: ‘We still have not answered the basic question: do we want to be Libya or Europe, to re-establish an old-style communist regime or to promote market institutions?
Where there are two principal alternatives, you must chose one.’
Russia's centrists are led by Alexander Rutskoi, the vice-president, Nikolai Travkin, the leader of the Democratic Party of Russia (the country's best-organised political party), and Arkady Volsky, who leads a lobby that claims to produce 72% of Russia's industrial output.
They think stark choices are dangerous.
What Russia needs, they reckon, is compromise, fudge and slower reform.
Their influence used to be great.
In April 1992 they persuaded Boris Yeltsin to put three industrialists into the government to act as a brake on the free-marketeers.
Last December they were instrumental in getting rid of Mr Gaidar and replacing him with one of those industrialists.
Since then, they have grown weaker.
The centre stands for compromise between president and parliament — and compromise no longer seems a solution to their bitter war.
Further, they lack a strong leader.
The widening breach between president and vice-president might have solved this problem by freeing Mr Rutskoi to act as their leader.
And indeed he has been nominated as the centrists' candidate in the presidential election due in 1996 (but likely to be held earlier).
On May 20th, he held a meeting of more than 30 centrist groups to start preparing for elections.
But all this meeting succeeded in proving was that the centre is falling apart.
Mr Travkin, one of the centre's few leaders with a genuine popular following, refused to attend.
Most serious of all, the centre's backbone — the directors of various state-owned enterprises — has broken in two.
The lobby of industrial managers has long been subdivided between reformers and conservatives.
Under Mikhail Gorbachev, Mr Volsky counted as the leader of its reformist wing, whereas the leader of the conservatives was one of those who staged the attempted coup of 1991.
That group, now represented by Yuri Gekht's Industrial Union, has broken with Mr Volsky's lobby, ignoring calls for compromise at recent sessions of parliament and voting against Mr Yeltsin at every opportunity.
Its members reckon their enterprises have no future without price controls and government subsidies.
On the other side are the managers of enterprises who think they have a commercial future.
‘They don't see themselves as old-style state directors,’ says Mr Gaidar.
‘They understand that subsidised credits and inflation are not a solution but a problem.’
This group's main interests are that privatisation should be speeded up and that privatised companies should have the same rights as state-owned rivals.
The pro-reform directors are now organising to defend these interests.
The first get-together of private business was held last November.
In March representatives of more than 1,000 private firms decided to set up the Association of Private and Privatised Business, which they have invited Mr Gaidar to run.Two other lobbies for reform have come into being, the Entrepreneurial Policy Initiative and the Inter-regional Trade and Banking Union.
Their leader, Konstantin Zatulin, says their members are not content with playing the role of ‘donors to well-known politicians with unclear political goals’.
The fudge at the centre is plainly melting.
Apartheid comes to Europe
FROM OUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT IN ZAGREB
After the changes in western policy in Bosnia, we look at the prospects for peace there, at the ‘safe areas’ for Muslims and at the province of Serbia that could become the next Balkan flashpoint
WHEN Radovan Karadzic, leader of the Bosnian Serbs, put his worthless signature on the Vance-Owen plan in Athens on May 2nd, another Serb leader present, Dragoslav Rancic, chuckled that the plan, if it ever worked, would leave Muslims in a ‘Balkan Lesotho’.
Wrong.
Lesotho is at least a single unit.
Now that America and its European partners have said they will concentrate on protecting ‘safe areas’ in Bosnia, the Muslims are left in a kind of Balkan version of KwaZulu, the most fragmented of the black homelands scattered across the map of South Africa.
It was the UN commander-in-chief in Bosnia & Hercegovina, General Philippe Morillon, who pushed for the idea of ‘safe areas’ to save lives.
But he never wanted them to replace the Vance-Owen plan.
It would be too much to say the West has abandoned that plan; some people still think it can be implemented.
But, by an agreement reached in Washington on May 22nd, five countries — America, Russia, France, Britain and Spain — have switched their attention from the plan to preventing the war spilling out of Bosnia.
They have also, in effect, ruled out force to make Serbs (and to a lesser extent Croats) give back land they have grabbed.
Serbs and Croats have decided to live apart and to divide conquered Bosnia between them.
Apartheid is growing in Europe.
Bosnia is in worse condition now than had it been split up last year.
Countless Bosnians have died.
More than 2m are refugees.
Feeding and protecting the six Muslim enclaves will take an open-ended commitment from an overstretched UN that is suffering its usual agonies with unpaid peacekeeping bills.
Even if the fighting dies down, no answer is in sight to the political issue that led to the war — the reluctance of most of Bosnia's Serbs and many of its Croats to live in an independent Bosnian state.
Tanjug, the Belgrade news agency which reflects official thinking in Serbia, reacted to the Washington agreement by crowing that ‘Bosnia will go down in history as a state that never existed.’
The world has depressingly little to show for its 14-month effort on behalf of that state.
Last year it might have hard-headedly encouraged a negotiated partition.
Instead, it chose the road of principle, refusing to recognise changes made by force to international boundaries.
But it was not willing to provide the means needed to make the Serbs (or Croats) stop land-grabs.
The agreement in Washington has muffled the many disagreements encountered along this road by limiting the West's aims.
Three resolutions are going to the UN Security Council.
First, to set up a war-crimes tribunal.
The very least the world can now do is to read into the legal record the barbarism of the Bosnian war.
On May 25th the council set up an 11-member tribunal in The Hague.
It will have to try many of the villains in absentia.
By a second resolution, the UN may try to dispatch monitors to the border between Bosnia and Serbia and to the one between Kosovo and Serbia.
The idea of UN policing of the Bosnian-Serbian border was agreed to last December.
Nothing happened.
It looks even more doubtful now, given the Serbian government's opposition.
Third, to protect Bosnia's Muslims, six ‘safe areas’ are to be declared: Bihac, Gorazde, Sarajevo, Srebrenica, Tuzla and Zepa.
According to the best estimates, at least 10,000 extra peacekeepers will be needed to protect them.
The Clinton administration says it will protect peacekeepers if they are attacked.
Since Mr Clinton has said many times that he will not send ground troops to Bosnia until there is peace, the protection he has in mind will presumably consist of air power, no more.
Nice as it sounds, a distinction is made between ‘safe areas’ and ‘safe havens’.
In Iraq, safe havens were imposed without the agreement of the Iraqi government.
In Bosnia, safe areas will be set up by negotiation.
The safety of the people in them will thus depend mainly on the forbearance of Serbs.
Even if reinforced, UN peacekeepers are not deployed or armed to defend themselves against concerted attack.
The promise of air defence will apply to peacekeepers only, not to the Muslims they are there to protect.
The Bosnian government has condemned the plan for consigning Muslims, as it sees it, to ‘concentration camps’.
Jose-Maria Mendiluce, the departing UN aid chief in Bosnia, makes the same point in describing life in the safe areas.
Hundreds of thousands of refugees are packed into over-crowded towns and villages.
These are surrounded by hostile forces, vulnerable to shelling and dependent for most necessities on UN aid.
Nobody has much to do.
Economic activity is at a standstill.
Young demobbed men are restless for a fight; women sell themselves for a cigarette.
Carry on cleansing
Even if it were true that the war is over and the Serbs have won, victory will not bring stability to Bosnia & Hercegovina.
True, the Croats are largely in control of western Hercegovina.
That area has become, in effect, an annex of Croatia; stability of a kind may be achieved there.
True, too, Bosnia's Serbs have won as much land as they want (though in the territories they control ethnic cleansing continues: about 1,000 Muslims or Croats are leaving northern Bosnia every week, it is reported, after signing papers to say they are going voluntarily).
But the corridor that links the Serb enclave of Krajina in Croatia to Serb territory in Bosnia and to Serbia proper is vulnerable.
Serbs in Krajina and the Croatian government gingerly talk about talking about reopening dams, roads and power stations.
At the same time, Croatian and Serb forces continue to shell each other around Zadar.
Unconfirmed reports say that talks between senior politicians in Zagreb and Belgrade (the Croatian and Serbian capitals) have taken place.
But distrust remains strong.
The two countries are technically at war.
On either side of the disengagement zone in eastern Croatia, their armies have massed heavy forces.
According to Jane's Sentinel, a defence information service, Croatia has bought $1.2 billion-worth of weapons in the past 18 months, much of it from other former communist countries.
Worst of all, perhaps, is the possibility that the Bosnian war has not ended but merely changed.
Embittered Muslims, radicalised by defeat, may resort to terrorism, thus turning Serbo-Croat propaganda about fighting Islamic fundamentalism into a self-fulfilling prophecy.
On the morrow of victory, Croats and Serbs may find themselves faced with a war without end.
With no economic future, Bosnian Serbs and Croats may leave for their motherlands or for abroad in greater numbers than at present.
Without a political settlement any truce in Bosnia remains precarious.
The Serbs' next target?
FROM A CORRESPONDENT IN KOSOVO
‘THIS city will be another Sarajevo.’
The young Albanian stares up from Pristina's rubbish-strewn streets towards the wooded hills on the west of the town.
The sealing of Bosnia's fate makes the people of Kosovo feel vulnerable.
In this province of southern Serbia, 90% of the population are ethnically Albanian.
They fear that the Serbs may intensify their ethnic cleansing here too, by throwing more Albanians off their land to make room for Serbs.
President Clinton has said he will act to stop the war spreading to Kosovo, but few in Kosovo believe his promises.
The leaders of Kosovo's Albanians, Ibrahim Rugova and Bujar Bukoshi, are moderate men who are starting to look isolated.
Under pressure from the Serbian government, and sometimes violent attack by the 10,000 or so armed Serb toughs in the province, up to 100,000 people may have left Kosovo in the past couple of years.
Those who have stayed, especially the young, are getting angrier.
The time is coming, some say, to make a stand.
The Serb minority in Kosovo has a monopoly of the local firepower, and it uses it to intimidate the Albanians.
Pristina is surrounded by artillery ranges that belonged to the old Yugoslav army.
The ranges are much in use at the moment.
The Serbs say this is normal at this time of the year.
The monitors from the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe say they agree.
The Albanians feel the CSCE has been hoodwinked, and believe that guns are being dug in around the city.
It is not hard to picture how Kosovo might explode.
Last week two Serb policemen were killed in the town of Glogovac.
The Albanians claimed, improbably, that it was done by Serb supporters of Vojislav Seselj's Radical Party, a group of far-right nationalists.
It is much likelier that Albanian gunmen killed them.
President Milosevic of Serbia may not want a fight in Kosovo, since the current campaign of slow ethnic cleansing is doing quite well.
But the Serb extremists are demanding a ‘solution’ to the Kosovo problem.
They will be happy to use things like the Glogovac murders as a justification for sending their own armed thugs into action against the Albanians.
Like the rest of Serbia, Kosovo has been hard hit by international sanctions.
Many things are in short supply; diseases such as polio and hepatitis are spreading.
It is difficult to believe that the precarious peace can last long, whether or not guns are being dug into the hills around Pristina.
BUSINESS
AT&T's global calling-card
MULTINATIONAL firms spend at least $10 billion a year on international telephone calls, and get a lousy deal.
Not only do cross-border calls cost up to six times as much as domestic calls of equal distance, but technical standards, tariffs, service and transmission quality change wherever a telephone line crosses a dotted line on a map.
Eager to cash in on this sorry state of affairs, big telecoms firms are scrambling to offer all-in-one ‘global’ telephone services to multinationals.
On May 25th America's AT&T unveiled the most ambitious to date.
WorldSource, a joint venture with Kokusai Denshin Denwa, Japan's largest international telecoms carrier, and Singapore Telecom aims to provide a seamless global telecoms networks for both voice and data.
AT&T has already signed up several big American customers, including Motorola, Goodyear and Unisys.
WorldSource's success will depend on AT&T's ability to sign up more partners.
So far, Australia's Telstra, Canada's Unitel and Korea Telecom have said they will join.
Finding European partners will be harder.
Britain's BT has its own global offerings, Syncordia and Cyclone, into which it is sinking some $100m.
Both France Télécom and Deutsche Bundespost Telekom would love to launch global telecoms joint ventures, but not with AT&T in the driving seat.
Undaunted, AT&T believes it will eventually find partners in Europe: ‘Everybody's talking to everybody,’ says John Foster, president of AT&T's European communications services.
Meanwhile, AT&T is going it alone, installing network-management systems in nine European countries at a cost of $150m.
WorldSource will cost the company at least $150m in all, though AT&T hopes to palm off a chunk of that on its partners.
Despite the hefty investments — and the regulatory hoops through which WorldSource will have to jump in Europe — Mr Foster is confident AT&T's new venture will ‘make a buck’.
In time, perhaps.
But BT's Syncordia, despite having snared $100m of business in less than two years, is still making heavy losses.
Which is why BT, too, is keen to find partners overseas.
The Japanese economy
The other bubble
TOKYO
A RECENT ¥13.2 trillion ($121 billion) supplementary budget has raised hopes that the Japanese economy will soon pick up again.
Typical of the infectious optimism was Michael Ainslie, president of Sotheby's auctioneers.
He visited Tokyo this week to persuade Japanese investors to return to their extravagance of the 1980s and start buying paintings again.
His sales pitch was that the Japanese economy is ‘coming back strong’.
Some hope.
The Japanese economy is undergoing two profound adjustments.
The first is the natural reaction to the excesses of the credit boom of the late 1980s, and takes the form of debt deflation.
Its symptoms are familiar: feeble monetary growth, a weak property market and a distressed banking system.
The second adjustment is less recognised, but more noteworthy: Japanese businesses are coming to believe that the country's long-term rate of economic growth may be no more than 3% a year.
This belief will call for radical changes in employment, management and corporate strategy.
But most of all, it implies a sharp decline in domestic investment.
This process has only just begun and is likely to continue until the middle of this decade.
As it continues, it will restrain demand.
As a result, the economy is unlikely to perform well during this period.
Smithers & Co, an investment research boutique, calls the current decline in Japanese business investment the natural consequence of Japan's ‘other bubble’.
This was not the speculative boom in the markets for equity and property, but a massive binge of capital spending driven by the availability of cheap finance.
Capital investment accounted for two-thirds of GNP growth between late 1986 and early 1991.
The difficulty in maintaining such a high level of domestic investment is clear from Japan's deteriorating ratio of capital to output: it takes more and more investment to deliver a given increase in output.
This fact has its counterpart in Japan's declining long-term growth rate.
Smithers & Co calculates that the trend growth of real GNP in the decade before the oil shock of 1974 was nearly 9% a year.
Since then the rate has declined to 4.25%.
Another aspect of this change is that the return on investment has declined sharply.
Business investment became even less profitable in the most recent capital-spending binge (see chart on previous page).
Looking ahead, the government is still hoping for continuing growth of 4% a year.
But now that the population is no longer growing, increases in GNP will have to rely almost entirely on rising productivity — and during the 1970s and 1980s productivity grew, on average, by only 3% a year.
Experience in Europe and America suggests that a ratio of capital spending to GNP of about 12–15% is typical for a mature economy.
Japan's ratio peaked at 22% in 1991.
Since then companies such as Toyota have announced steep reductions in investment.
But capital spending still accounted for 20.5% of GNP in 1992.
Further severe cuts seem inevitable, with consequences for both employment and consumer confidence.
Smithers & Co expects capital spending to fall by almost half before this adjustment is complete.
So far manufacturers have led the way in announcing cuts in investment.
But manufacturing only accounted for 36% of business investment in the last fiscal year.
The rest of the economy has been slower to cut investment mainly because the slowdown hit the service sector only in the second half of last year.
Service companies have now begun to make cuts.
The numerous non-manufacturing subsidiaries (such as travel agencies, restaurants and computer software firms) that were set up in the late 1980s are most vulnerable.
These were established less to make money than to absorb excess employees.
Many will close.
Some Japanese businessmen will concede, at least in private, that the post-1945 system of lifetime employment in large companies cannot survive.
If so, that will be a crippling blow.
Yet the government still acts as though it is business as usual.
It plans to boost public investment again, but this is unlikely to make much difference: public investment accounts for only 7% of GNP.
If Sotheby's is lucky, the judgement that Japan is ‘coming back strong’ may sell a few paintings.
But for those with eyes to see, the claim — at least for now — is unpersuasive.
Computer workstations
Last year's model
SULTRY, sinewy and sophisticated, computer workstations have been used to create everything from 3-D molecular models to the psychopathic cyborg in ‘Terminator 2’.
In less than ten years the market for these potent desktop machines has grown from nothing into a global business with sales of $1.4 billion last year.
Buoyed by their success, workstation makers have now turned their attentions to the $10 billion personal-computer market.
Their dream is that many business PC users — as opposed to the scientists and engineers who usually buy workstations — will ‘trade up’ when they realise just how speedily such machines can crunch numbers.
Sadly, that dream may soon be shattered.
While PC makers have been battered by price wars, workstation manufacturers have had it easy.
Selling mostly proprietary technology to a niche market meant they could charge high prices: on average, gross profit margins in the workstation business have been 15–20% higher than those in the PC industry.
Firms such as Sun Microsystems, which has a dominant one-third share of the market by value (see chart on page 80), have grown rich.
In the year to June 1992, 11-year-old Sun made a net profit of $173m on sales of $1.6 billion — a threefold increase in revenues in only four years.
Sun reckons it can succeed in the PC business because the market is changing.
Corporate users are hankering after the sort of power, networking features and ‘scalability’(the ability to expand a network almost infinitely) that have long been available on workstations.
‘We believe there is a new segment emerging; we call it business workstations,’ says Anil Gadre, head of product marketing at Sun.
To win a slice of that market, Sun, Hewlett-Packard and IBM are now selling workstations priced at less than $1,000 — little dearer than top-of-the-range PCs and far cheaper than the $15,000 or more charged for traditional scientific machines.
‘Everybody is going after this market,’ says Gary Eichhorn, head of Hewlett-Packard's workstation group.
That includes the PC makers.
Two new products are set to transform the performance of familiar PCs.
Over the next few months supplies of Intel's new Pentium microprocessor will trickle on to the market.
Pentium is five times as fast as the Intel 486 chip found in the swiftest of today's desktop PCs.
It is also much more adept at carrying out the ‘floating-point’ calculations required for sophisticated financial and scientific modelling, and at which workstations have traditionally excelled.
PC makers such as Compaq, Dell, AST and ALR are scrambling to launch Pentium-based machines, which will match the power of most entry-level workstations, at prices as low as $1,100.
The second weapon is Windows NT, a new operating system for PCs unveiled by Microsoft on May 24th.
NT's speciality is big, scalable corporate networks, the very market that workstation makers hoped to snare.
NT's strength is that it is compatible with — and works just like — the Microsoft Windows operating system already fitted on 25m PCs.
Workstation makers, by contrast, favour various forms of the Unix operating system.
In theory, Unix is an ‘open’ system.
In practice, the various versions are largely incompatible.
They are also distinctly user-unfriendly, and will not usually run PC-users' favourite applications programs (such as word processors).
All this, says Michael Dell, chairman of Dell Computer, means ‘workstation makers are in real, serious trouble.’
Sun and Hewlett-Packard remain confident they can beat off the challenge from NT, especially where firms are scrapping their Unix-based mainframes and minicomputers for networks of desktop machines.
Sun also believes it has a lucrative, though limited, opportunity in the PC market, because machines equipped with both Pentium and NT will not be available until late 1993.
So the company's SunSelect subsidiary has launched its Wabi software package, which allows Unix-based computers to run Windows applications software without the need for a Windows operating system.
But even with Wabi, Sun's Mr Gadre admits that ‘Pentium PCs will be a threat to us.’
To see off that threat, Sun and the others will have to cut their prices still further.
That will be painful.
Merely entering the low-cost workstation fray has slashed Sun's profits.
Boosted by lower prices, Sun's total sales in the nine months to March 31st were, at $1.05 billion, 16.5% up on the same period of the previous fiscal year.
But its operating margins collapsed, falling from 8.1% to 4.3%.
Worse, Intel is likely to cut the price of its Pentium chip during the next two years — perhaps by one-third or more going by the firm's past behaviour.
That could cut the cost of the Pentium-based machines sold by high-volume PC makers to less than $1,500 by late next year.
This might not trouble Hewlett-Packard, IBM and those other workstation makers who also make PCs.
But it could eclipse Sun's ambitions.
Zeneca
Blurred vision
ON JUNE 1st Zeneca, the drugs firm about to be spun off from Britain's ICI, will discover the result of its £1.3 billion ($1 billion) rights issue.
So far its pulse feels weak.
When Zeneca announced an issue price of 600p, its shares in the grey market shot to 680p.
They have since sunk as low as 620p.
The firm boasts that it is ‘one of the biggest and most innovative pharmaceutical businesses in the world’, but Zeneca has a problem: how to prove its a good buy.
Financial markets are finding it difficult to evaluate the future worth of drugs firms.
Drugs accounted for 40% of Zeneca's 1992 sales of £4 billion and 80% of its trading profit of £587m.
But just one product, a heart drug called Tenormin, made up a third of its drugs sales last year, and this treatment faces new competition.
Great effort was put into developing three new drugs, but these flopped; Zeneca has launched no new products since 1989.
The firm has 20 new drugs in its pipeline.
The question is, will they flop, too?
Only a few years ago a drug's prospects were easy to calculate.
A new drug could become a potential blockbuster if it treated a common ailment and generated $100m-plus in annual sales (see table).
Picking winners today is harder.
Competition in the drugs industry is fiercer, and governments are trying to curb health-care costs.
Analysts now reckon that a drug firm's ability to manage risk, rather than banking on a promising new drug, is one of the most important things to measure.
There are other yardsticks, as well.
The best drugs firms are not necessarily those who spend most on R&D.
A flow of products is more important for growth in profits.
Zeneca admits that it has concentrated on too few products.
Its R&D has broadened to produce one novel drug a year.
But that might not be enough.
Tighter health budgets mean new drugs have to be very good indeed to command high prices.
Generally they must save or enhance lives and offer an advance on current therapy.
Three of Zeneca's new products come close to meeting the blockbuster criteria: Casodex, Accolate and Merrem could all be approved for use by 1996.
Some time later they might add about $1 billion to Zeneca's annual sales.
Or perhaps not.
Casodex is a drug that blocks the release of testosterone, a hormone that is linked to prostate cancer.
This is usually treated by castration or by drugs that can cause side-effects.
The market for Casodex could exceed $100m a year.
It might be much bigger if the drug could be used to prevent, as opposed to treat, prostate cancer.
But other drugs companies have new products which they hope will do this.
Unlike Casodex, they only partially block the release of testosterone.
The snag is, scientists do not yet know whether patients taking the drug for a long time are better off with a little testosterone, or none.
It could take years to find out.
A similar uncertainty affects Accolate, an anti-asthma drug.
Asthma is currently treated with two different drugs taken by inhalation.
One of them is a steroid, which some doctors fear can stunt growth, so there is plenty of room for a therapeutic advance.
Accolate, which is taken as a pill, could be it.
But lots of testing will be needed before investors can be sure.
Merrem is an antibiotic.
As the market for such drugs was showing little growth, many drugs firms abandoned antibiotic research.
Some analysts argue that this could work in Merrem's favour.
But Merck, the world's top drugs firm, already has a similar product in the market that is good at its job.
This means Zeneca might have a hard time charging much more than Merck's price for its drug, even if Merrem is better.
What investors in drug firms really need is a pill to calm their nerves.
HDTV
All together now
FOR more than six years the race between America, Europe and Japan to establish technical standards for their own versions of high-definition television (HDTV) has been one of the world's great technological rivalries, pitting the market-driven regulatory approach of America against the government-led industrial policies favoured in Japan and Europe.
On May 24th it became clear that America has won the contest hands down.
On that day the three surviving entrants in a technical contest sponsored by America's Federal Communications Commission (FCC) decided to form a ‘grand alliance’ to offer a single HDTV system, which is expected to be perfected some time next year.
Japan and Europe are now likely to adopt some form of the American system, which will employ digital signals similar to those used by computers.
Officials in Washington have a right to celebrate.
And yet their triumph could quickly prove bittersweet.
The same breakneck pace of technological change which helped America leapfrog the expensive HDTV efforts of Japan and Europe may also soon make America's victory irrelevant.
The FCC's decision to choose an HDTV standard through a neutral technical competition run and paid for by equipment makers, broadcasters and programme makers has been vindicated.
The competition looks poised to produce a digital HDTV system years before anyone thought possible, immediately making obsolete the analogue systems promoted with lavish subsidies and much arm-twisting by government officials in Europe and Japan.
The alliance partners honing the final American system — AT&T, General Instrument, Holland's Philips, France's Thomson, Zenith, the David Sarnoff Research Centre and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology — together represent the kind of commercial strength needed to get a new TV format on the air.
And yet even the combination of the ‘grand alliance’ and the FCC may not be able to enforce a single American HDTV broadcast standard, or ensure HDTV's success.
The FCC competition has helped to concentrate the minds of everyone in the broadcast industry on the digital technology which has always been employed by the computer industry.
This opens a veritable cornucopia of broadcast possibilities.
HDTV is only one of these and, for consumers, perhaps not even the most attractive.
Many industry specialists claim that a new international standard called MPEG-2, quietly agreed in April, could be just as influential as the result of the FCC competition.
MPEG-2 sets the standard for the compression of digital signals, the most complicated and expensive element of any digital broadcasting system.
With these specifications agreed, chip makers can now concentrate on producing single microprocessors capable of performing this difficult task, reasonably confident that other bits of equipment will be compatible with them and that a large market for some sort of digital broadcasting will develop.
Standard chips should cut the cost of digital broadcasting.
But the most likely users of the new technology are not existing  terrestrial TV stations, for which the FCC sets standards, but the satellite and cable broadcasters, who are free to choose whatever technology or standards they wish.
And the attraction for them is not the crystal clear images of HDTV, but the prospect of broadcasting up to a dozen channels carrying pictures of today's conventional clarity over cables or satellite transponders that now carry only one channel, a marvel made possible by digital compression.
The merging of computing and television — the much-vaunted ‘multimedia’— which digital technology will also make possible, could produce a wave of startling new products from the computer and cable-TV industries.
HDTV may be a much lower priority for both manufacturers and broadcasters.
No one yet knows whether consumers will pay extra for the cinema-like images it offers or whether the huge, high-tech screens needed to make HDTV attractive will soon be ready.
The FCC's cleverly contrived technical contest may have helped accelerate the move to digital broadcasting, but that may not be of much help to the  terrestrial TV broadcasters it had hoped to escort into the digital age, nor give much of an edge to American equipment makers.
Mr Lopez's many parts
BERLIN
TO GERMANY'S beleaguered car-components suppliers, José Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, Volkswagen's new purchasing and production chief, is all ten plagues in one.
Immediately after defecting from General Motors in March, Mr Lopez demanded deep price cuts from VW's 1,500 suppliers.
He vows eventually to slash their number.
Politicians in Lower Saxony, which owns a 20% stake in VW, are trying to mediate.
The parts makers must therefore take some pleasure in Mr Lopez's increasingly bitter dispute with his former employer.
Mr Lopez brought seven GM executives with him and allegedly attempted to poach a further 40.
GM has now accused him of taking industrial secrets as well.
Although VW and Mr Lopez deny the allegation, German prosecutors have decided to launch an investigation.
Yet Mr Lopez's troubles cannot save parts firms from a painful readjustment.
Germany's car makers are slashing costs, and components are their first target.
DB Research, an affiliate of Deutsche Bank, expects component prices to fall by 5–10% this year and volumes to drop by 12–15%.
Only the strong will survive.
German auto suppliers are a classic Mittelstand industry: 3,000 firms employing 750,000 people have annual sales of around DM130 billion ($10 billion).
The top 100 account for about four-fifths of sales and employment.
The bottom 2,900 are at risk of disappearing.
A recent study by Price Waterhouse, an accounting and consulting firm, says that only 500 will exist in 1999 and that half the top 100 will be owned by foreign firms.
Others will merge, be bought, or go bust.
Fewer firms need not mean a weaker industry.
While car makers demand lower prices, they want suppliers to take over a bigger share of production and become more involved in the design and development of parts.
Since 1981 German car makers have lowered the share of a car's value they produce themselves from nearly 40% to less than 35%.
But other European car makers produce less than 30% of a car's value, which suggests that German firms have more out-sourcing to do.
That is good news for firms with the skills to graduate to supplying entire systems.
VDO, acquired last year by Mannesmann, has progressed from making instruments like speedometers to manufacturing complete dashboards.
Besides cost-cutting, Mr Lopez offers lots of advice to firms about how to rectify production weaknesses.
To the dismay of German suppliers, Mr Lopez is also eager to share this advice with foreign competitors.
Foreigners, which pay less for labour and in many cases make components of equal quality, are winning business away from German firms.
To stay competitive, German companies are shifting production abroad.
Robert Bosch, Germany's biggest parts supplier, is moving production of alternators from Stuttgart to Wales and Spain.
If GM's allegations force Mr Lopez to retire early to his native Spain, he should find plenty of consulting work there.
Renaissance or reburial?
MILAN AND ROME
For Italy's big family-run firms, it is no longer business as usual
‘THERE is no doubt that today we all have the opportunity to open a new chapter,’ said Giovanni Agnelli, boss of Fiat, Italy's largest private-sector company, in a speech in Venice last month.
Shareholders at Fiat's annual meeting on May 31st will be looking for signs that the troubled company really does mean to turn the page.
Like Fiat, the Ferruzzi group and Silvio Berlusconi's Fininvest (Italy's second and third-biggest private firms) also face big problems.
And, like Fiat, their owners are considering radical cures.
The contrast with the halcyon days of Italian family capitalism in the late 1980s is stark.
Then, Fiat was jockeying with Volkswagen for the top spot among Europe's car makers.
The Agnelli family, which owns almost 40% of the company, was riding high.
Ferruzzi Finanziaria had become a powerful force in chemicals as well as agribusiness through the acquisition of Montedison in 1987.
Raul Gardini, then head of the family group, was battling for control of Enimont, a big chemical company which Montedison owned jointly with the Italian state.
And Mr Berlusconi's Fininvest rose to dominate the country's media alongside the state's RAI television company.
Today the three groups' future no longer looks so bright.
The collapse of Italy's old political order has, among other things, helped to uncover wrongdoing at Fiat.
A dozen of the company's senior executives have been caught up in the country's ever-widening corruption scandal.
Despite Fiat's efforts to defuse the situation by adopting an ethics code, its problems are not over yet.
After initially denying knowledge of any kickbacks paid by Fiat to win public-sector contracts in Italy, Cesare Romiti, the firm's managing director, is now under formal investigation for corruption and illicit financing of political parties.
The new political order could cause problems for Mr Berlusconi too.
He was a personal friend of Bettino Craxi, the disgraced former leader of Italy's socialist party and prime minister while Mr Berlusconi was building up his empire.
So far, Mr Berlusconi has been allowed to keep three national TV channels — the same number as RAI.
Between them, the two account for almost 90% of Italy's television audience.
But the discrediting of his political allies leaves Mr Berlusconi vulnerable.
This week Oscar Mammi, a former minister and the man responsible for Italy's media laws, was told he is under investigation for receiving illicit funds.
Mr Mammi's successor says he wants Italy's entire television regulations to be re-written.
Mr Berlusconi is indebted to bankers as well as to politicians.
With net debt of 3.1 trillion lire ($1.1 billion) at the end of 1992, Fininvest is strapped for cash.
Much of the debt was taken on to pay for Standa, a supermarket chain, and the Mondadori publishing empire.
Worryingly for Fininvest, its profitable TV interests are also under attack.
Rival publishers claim Mr Berlusconi's 55% share of TV advertising revenues allows him to offer cut-price deals which newspapers cannot match.
They want his grip loosened.
The Ferruzzi family has an even bigger financial headache.
At the end of June 1992, the group's consolidated debt was already 10.7 trillion lire.
Throw in Ferruzzi's share of debts at other companies such as Fondiaria, one of Italy's biggest insurers, in which the group has an interest, and its state of health is far worse.
The group's 1992 results, which are due to be unveiled at a board meeting on May 28th, will be awful.
That is largely because of persistent problems in its chemicals business.
‘We are trying to turn around a situation we do not deny is difficult,’ admits one Ferruzzi executive.
Mr Gardini, who together with his wife, Idina Ferruzzi, severed his links with the Ferruzzi family in March 1991, bears much of the blame for the group's woes — not least because the family paid 505 billion lire in August 1991 to buy Idina's 23% stake.
A trader at heart, Mr Gardini masterminded the purchase of Montedison and the stake in Fondiaria, but his over-ambitious strategy saddled Ferruzzi with huge debts.
Though Eridania Béghin-Say, Ferruzzi's agribusiness arm, and Edison, its power company, are doing well, new investment may have to wait until Carlo Sama, Mr Gardini's successor, has paid off some debt.
Unlike Ferruzzi, Fiat has a cast-iron balance sheet.
But its car division, which last year accounted for some 45% of the group's 59 trillion lire of sales, is in difficulty.
Analysts reckon the company's net profit probably halved last year, to around 500 billion lire.
Fiat, whose market share in Italy has slid from around 60% to 44% in the past four years, said on May 25th that it will ask the Italian government for more financial help with temporary lay-offs, because of the slump in European car sales.
The woes of Fiat, Ferruzzi and Fininvest will inevitably lead to a restructuring of Italian family capitalism.
Both Fiat and Ferruzzi have already sold some of their businesses and are seeking buyers for others.
Fiat, which needs to raise 40 trillion lire for ambitious investments in the car business, sold its stake in a telecoms joint venture with France's Alcatel Alsthom last year.
It has hinted it may sell its construction, insurance and retailing activities too.
Ferruzzi, which says it wants to concentrate on its core activities of energy, agribusiness and chemicals, has also been slimming.
In March, Montedison sold its drugs subsidiary, Erbamont, to Sweden's Kabi-Pharmacia in a deal worth 2.6 trillion lire.
And in Milan, speculation is rife that Ferruzzi will soon sell its share of Fondiaria.
Foreign alliances are also in the air.
Ferruzzi is hunting for partners for its troubled chemicals businesses, and is talking with Royal Dutch/Shell about a possible deal in plastics.
Fiat is said to be looking for a partner for its car business.
Renault, a state-owned French car maker which is due to be privatised soon, is tipped in Milan as a likely partner, though suggestions of a grand alliance are pooh-poohed in Paris.
Mr Berlusconi, in a sudden change of heart, is turning to the stockmarket to raise fresh cash — and find more friends.
Fininvest, in true Italian tradition, is a secretive family-owned company and Mr Berlusconi had always said he preferred it that way.
But now he plans to merge its publishing interests in a single listed company which could place up to 49% of its shares on the market raising up to 600 billion lire.
If this proves a success, the plan is to proceed with a second listing to bring Mr Berlusconi's TV and advertising interests to the market.
With plenty of shareholders on his side, Mr Berlusconi seems to think he will stand a better chance of resisting a political challenge to his television empire.
Mr Berlusconi's new affection for the stockmarket will be welcomed by investors in Milan, who have been starved of new opportunities.
So might the revolution set to take place in the state sector.
The recent nomination of Romano Prodi, a respected manager, as chief executive of IRI, Italy's biggest state holding company, has revived hopes that many of its subsidiaries could soon be sold.
‘Privatisation will have a dramatic impact on Italy's business system’, says Rolando Polli, the head of the Milan office of McKinsey, a consultancy.
Together with the demolition of family-run dynasties, this might provide some medium-sized firms to fill the gap between the ailing giants and Italy's myriad small companies.
How do you mean, ‘fair’?
Economists are not merely dismal, it appears, but selfish and unco-operative, as well SOMEBODY, presumably Groucho Marx, once offered the following advice: ‘The secret of success is honesty and fair dealing.
If you can fake those, you've got it made.’
If you aren't smiling, you may be cut out for economics.
Students of the subject are trained to regard self-interest as the force that decides economic choices.
It is easy to imagine cases where cheating is advantageous.
The economist's view is: others will see that the logic of the situation calls for cheating, so you had better cheat, too.
This idea pervades the literature.
But here's a disturbing thing: it may be having some effect.
Nothing personal, but economists are an unpleasant lot.
The evidence is in a new paper by a team of one economist and two psychologists from Cornell University*.
It reviews several behavioural studies.
In one, first-year graduate students were asked to take part in an experiment.
They were given some money, and told to divide it into two accounts, one ‘private’, one ‘public’.
Money in the private account was given to the student at the end of the experiment.
Money in the public account was pooled, multiplied by a factor of more than one (the exact figure varied), and then divided equally among all the students.
For society as a whole, as it were, the best thing is for the students to put all their money into the public account.
That creates the biggest pie, which is then shared equally.
But for each individual student, the best thing is to put everything into the private account.
That way, you get back all your own stake, plus a full share of the pool provided by the suckers.
The study found that economics students contributed, on average, 20% of their stakes to the public account.
Students of other subjects contributed 50%.
The researchers then asked the students to explain their actions: had they worried about whether their decision had been fair?
Nearly all the non-economists said yes, they had worried.
The response of the economists was different.
More than one-third of the economists either refused to answer the question regarding what is fair, or gave very complex, uncodable responses.
It seems that the meaning of ‘fairness’ in this context was somewhat alien for this group.
Those who did respond were much more likely to say that little or no contribution was fair.
Another study involved a game played by an ‘allocator’ and a ‘receiver’.
The allocator was given $10 and asked to divide the cash between himself and the receiver.
The receiver could either accept the division (in which case, both parties kept the sums proposed by the allocator) or refuse it (in which case, both got nothing).
Fairness calls for an equal split.
But what does self-interest tell the allocator to do?
Only a non-economist could ask.
The answer is: keep $1.99, and give the receiver one cent.
The receiver will not refuse because one cent is better than nothing (and self-interest does not understand spite).
Note also that the game was played just once for each pair, so there was no reason for the receiver to refuse in the hope of prompting a better offer next time.
As before, the study found that economics students ‘performed significantly more in accord with the self-interest model’ than non-economists.
Other studies have found the same.
A survey asked 1,245 randomly selected college professors how much they gave to charity each year.
About 9% of the economics professors gave nothing; the proportion of professors in other disciplines giving nothing ranged between 1.1% and 4.2% (despite generally lower incomes than the economists).
The median gift of economists to big charities such as the United Way and viewer-supported public television was substantially smaller than the median gift of non-economists.
The prisoner's dilemma — a game where two players have to decide whether to co-operate with each other or cheat — has long been of great interest to economists.
The key feature is that for each player, ‘defecting’ secures the best outcome regardless of what the other does.
But if both players accept this logic and defect, they end up worse off than if they had co-operated.
The Cornell team conducted an experiment involving 267 prisoner's dilemma games.
Economics students defected 60% of the time; non-economists defected 39% of the time.
Does training in economics make you mean — or is it just that mean people are somehow attracted to economics?
To find out, the Cornell team did a further experiment, to see whether students became more or less ‘honest’ in a hypothetical situation, after doing some economics.
They compared three sets of students: the first took a course in mainstream microeconomics, taught by an instructor with an interest in industrial organisation and game theory; the second took a similar course, but taught by a specialist on development in Maoist China; the third took a placebo (astronomy).
Across a range of questions, the pattern was consistent: the first set contained the largest proportion of students who became less honest; next came the second set; honourably in the rear were the astronomers, with the smallest proportion of students who became less honest.
Perhaps, then, there is a public interest in curbing the study of economics.
Or alternatively — a conclusion that this column would prefer to endorse — economics needs to take psychology more seriously.
The fact is that people do co-operate more than the self-interest model (useful though it is) seems to predict.
As the Cornell team points out, recent research sheds light on one reason for this.
Imagine a world in which people move from one prisoner's dilemma to the next (ie, the real world).
If people can choose their ‘partners’ freely, and if honest types can spot each other in advance, co-operators will be able to interact selectively with each other— and will therefore do better than cheats.
Experiments have shown that people are surprisingly good at telling co-operators and cheats apart, even on the basis of what seems to be limited information.
So there you have it: narrowly self-interested behaviour is ultimately self-defeating.
Economics practised with that in mind could become the uplifting science.
If economists can only incorporate a bit of psychology, they've got it made.
FINANCE
Writs fly
COULD the Bank of Credit and Commerce International (BCCI) yet prove to be the Bank of England's nemesis?
The central bank hoped that last year's moderately critical Bingham report on its less-than-rigorous supervision of BCCI would mark the end of a very public pillorying.
No such luck.
Far from fading away, public interest in BCCI took on new life on May 24th.
Depositors and liquidators of the failed bank served writs claiming both that the Bank fluffed its legal duty to regulate and supervise BCCI, and that it acted in bad faith, an accusation designed to bypass its broad legal immunity from prosecution.
In response, the Bank curtly expressed confidence in its possession of a ‘complete defence’.
If the full case ever gets to court, the Bank (read the taxpayer) faces claims running to billions of pounds.
If it gets as far as a decision, it will prove the leading case for some time on the thorny issue of what duty regulators owe the customers of the regulated.
The action may fail before it gets much further, however.
Prosecution lawyers face a daunting obstacle-race across uncharted territory.
The Bank has only once been sued for regulatory failure, after it rescued Johnson Matthey Bankers; the case was settled out of court in 1986 in the Bank's favour.
That is why some observers say that getting to the starting-line is an achievement in itself — most had reckoned the Bank's immunity from prosecution to be an iron-clad provision of the 1987 Banking Act.
The first hurdle will be to renew the approval of the Vice-Chancellor, a senior judge, who has so far agreed that there is a case to argue but wants to know that enough creditors support the action to make its pursuit a worthwhile use of all creditors' funds.
If lots of them signed up at a creditors' meeting in London on May 27th, that could be decided quickly.
But some creditors might prefer a bigger pay-out sooner to financing a risky and expensive test-case.
And it will be expensive.
If the Bank's lawyers fail to have the case struck out early on, they will probably appeal on the principle of regulatory immunity as far as the House of Lords, Britain's equivalent of the Supreme Court.
That battle could take a year or more, bills mounting all the while.
If the plaintiffs do jump that second hurdle, another will stand in their way.
To make their case, they are likely to want every record of the Bank's relations with BCCI introduced into evidence.
Yet much of the juiciest information, collected for last year's Bingham report, was kept secret.
Getting that information released could also mean appealing to the highest courts.
Small wonder that lawyers acting for the depositors describe their prospects as ‘fair’.
Burnt offerings
WHEN a firm first sells shares to the public, investors tend to gobble them up with relish.
No wonder.
Big instant profits can be made on initial public offerings (IPOs) in most countries simply by buying shares at the offer price and selling them straight away.
Over the past 30 years investors in American and British IPOs who sold their shares on the first trading day earned returns of 15% and 12% respectively.
Japanese IPOs have shown average instant gains of 32% since 1979, while offerings in some emerging markets have averaged gains of more than 50%.
If these broad historic trends still prevail, investors on both sides of the Atlantic are doing nicely.
In the first quarter of this year, IPOs in America raised $11.5 billion — more than in any previous quarter.
The three months to June may see even more.
In Britain, around £1.2 billion ($1.9 billion) is likely to be raised through IPOs in the second quarter, well up on the same period in 1992.
But investors should uncork the bubbly only if they have already banked their profits.
A new study of more than 5,000 IPOs in America between 1968 and 1989 by Tim Loughran and Jay Ritter of the University of Illinois finds that the instant gains quickly vanish.
* IPOs make lousy long-term investments.
On average, says the study, buying a share at its initial offering and holding it for three years yielded a total return (dividends plus capital growth) of just 8%.
Investing instead in a similarly-sized firm that was already traded in the market generated, on average, a profit of 30% over the same period.
Over five years IPOs did even worse, yielding a total of just 5%, compared with a 50% gain on the already-traded firm.
Though initial offerings in a handful of years did buck this trend, they did so by tiny amounts.
One reason why most IPOs are so lacklustre, the study concludes, is that a large proportion of them are ‘growth’ stocks: firms whose market price is high compared with its book value.
These are often small firms, with brief track-records but big ambitions — bio-tech stocks, which boomed last year, are an example.
All growth firms, IPOs or not, performed poorly in most of the period at which the authors looked.
The study reckons this factor accounts for between a quarter and a half of IPOs' underperformance.
Interestingly, initial offerings that reverse leveraged buy-outs — a fast-growing category, especially in America — seem to perform better than average.
So do privatisations, according to a recent study of 712 British IPOs between 1980 and 1988 — even after taking account of deliberate underpricing for political reasons**.
Other British IPOs underperformed by nearly as much over three years as American ones.
When a firm is mature, with a long track-record, investors are less likely to pay over the odds for it.
The timing of initial offerings is the crucial factor in both countries.
Most take place at high points in the stockmarket cycle, when investors are at their most bullish.
Company bosses complain that big first-day profits mean an issue is underpriced.
In fact, they seem to get a good price for their equity, because they only sell when they sense that investors feel lucky.
In many countries, IPOs have reached record levels just before stockmarket crashes.
Investors be warned.
Sberbank
Into the fray
MOSCOW
THERE is no sign on the grubby building in north Moscow which serves as the headquarters of what is, by some measures, Europe's largest bank.
From this office a staff of 750 tries to control the 40,200 branches of Russia's Savings Bank, or Sberbank.
The network, which covers 11 time zones and employs 191,500 people, holds 86% of the household savings that are deposited in banks.
A new team of managers took over the semi-state-owned bank on May 13th.
They are ambitious.
They want to turn Sberbank from a dowdy savings bank into a universal bank that can compete with the likes of Germany's Deutsche Bank.
The challenge is mammoth.
The collapse in the value of the rouble means that, by international standards, Sberbank is a financial minnow.
Its total assets on January 1st were only 959.9 billion roubles, or $1.3 billion at the exchange rate of the day; at today's rates they are more like $1 billion.
And until recently Sberbank was a bank in name only.
Under the Soviet system, it was little more than a bureaucracy to collect personal savings for which there was no other legal outlet.
By law, 30% of these deposits were lent to deserving groups (such as war veterans) at heavily subsidised rates.
The rest of the money financed the government deficit.
To compete with the more than 2,000 commercial banks which have sprung up in Russia since then, Sberbank has to do more than teach its staff to smile.
It must learn how to lend and how to operate in Russia's developing securities markets.
The most urgent task is replacing ledgers and pencils with a management-information system that allows the head office to monitor risk.
At the moment, Sberbank's 77 regional banks telegraph in their loan positions only once a month, says Anatoly Barabash, Sberbank's new financial controller.
Pavel Zhikarev, who stood down as chairman after 25 years at Sberbank, laid the foundations for the changes that lie ahead.
At the end of 1991, with the support of Russia's reforming president, Boris Yeltsin, he managed to get the bank turned into a joint-stock company.
Most of the shares are held by institutions that have yet to be privatised.
Mr Zhikarev chose as his successor 40-year-old Oleg Yashin, his former deputy.
What makes Mr Yashin's ambitious goal less ludicrous than it sounds is Sberbank's near-monopoly of Russia's household savings.
Despite sharply negative interest rates, Russians saved 32% of their disposable income last year, and put most of it into Sberbank.
Though these rates have risen — Sberbank offered an annual 3% last August on savings accounts with instant access and pays 40% now — they still lag inflation, which is running at 15% a month.
Sberbank makes a handsome spread by lending these deposits to banks which lack a deposit base, charging an annualised rate of 160–200% for a three-month loan.
It made pre-tax profits of 95.3 billion roubles in the year ending on January 1st 1993 ($141m, at the average exchange rate for 1992).
The problem for Mr Yashin is that the value of Sberbank's monopoly is being eroded.
Inflation has taxed most Russians massively; but whereas households have suffered these losses in full, Russia's state-owned enterprises have, in effect, been bailed out by the central bank.
(Last year these firms received total central-bank loans equal to 32% of Russia's GDP.)
At the beginning of 1992, Russian household savings were bigger than those of enterprises; by the end of the year they were equal to only 18% of what the state-owned enterprises had in banks.
That hurts Sberbank, whose deposit base is mainly retail; only 2% of its deposits come from enterprises.
As firms' share of total deposits has ballooned, so Sberbank's relative power has shrivelled.
That could change, however.
The president and the parliament are struggling for power, but both have said that individual savers will be compensated for the ravages of inflation.
Mr Barabash argues for a hefty transfer.
He points out that Sberbank was forced to lend to the government nearly all of its 372.3 billion roubles in deposits at the start of 1992, the year when price controls were removed and prices rose by a factor of 26.
Sberbank has asked the government to give each depositor cash equal to three times his deposit on January 1st 1992, as well as a ten-year bond worth 21 times his average deposit in 1992.
Yet Mr Barabash is cynical about the likely outcome: ‘Both sides have only populist ideas.
Neither has promised anything definite.’
Other political problems also threaten Sberbank's new-found independence.
Russia's anti-reformist central bank, which is Sberbank's largest shareholder, tried to make it a subsidiary earlier this year — accusing its management, paradoxically, of being too profit-conscious.
After five months of hearings, Russia's parliament decided on May 18th that Sberbank should remain independent.
Now, however, the constitutional court, whose chairman is allied with the anti-reformers in parliament, has begun investigating whether the bank acted unconstitutionally in allowing the real value of savers' accounts to fall.
If the court finds against the bank, its bosses might be replaced with central-bank appointees.
Despite such political distractions, Mr Yashin is getting on with business.
He has asked the bank's 160,000 shareholders to stump up another 90 billion roubles to finance modernisation.
Subsidised lending has been cut back, while credit to small, private businesses is growing rapidly.
More effort is being put into getting managers trained by western banks, with help from the European Community.
The network of regional banks is being decentralised, in order to give local managers more freedom and accountability.
Sberbank, which was 150 years old in 1992, may never rival Deutsche, but it has life in it yet.
When rudeness pays
TOKYO
THE Japanese hate confrontations.
It can therefore pay foreigners to stage them when polite and prolonged discussion has failed to yield results.
Such a stroppy strategy appears to have worked for Bloomberg Business News, a New York-based financial news service.
Bloomberg's on-line screen service reports the results of all companies quoted on the Tokyo and Osaka stock exchanges.
The firm has been campaigning since November 1991 to receive results at the same time as the Japanese press — a privilege denied it because it is not a member of the Tokyo Stock Exchange press club, where securities companies post earnings announcements in members' pigeon-holes.
This labour-intensive process can take up to ten minutes, and has to be completed before news-hungry outsiders such as Bloomberg get to see the results.
Bloomberg decided to raise the stakes at the peak of the latest reporting season.
The company's Tokyo bureau chief, David Butts, twice entered the press club room — on May 21st and May 24th — and demanded to see the results as they were being put in the cubby-holes.
On each occasion, he became engaged in long disputes with local reporters, some of whom tried to jostle him out of the room.
The two sessions, described by Mr Butts as ‘good confrontations’, seem to have been more than the sensitive Japanese journalists could stand.
On May 25th he received a letter from Masanori Shigemitsu, a reporter with the Mainichi Shimbun, a respected daily paper, and the current head of the press club.
The letter states that efforts will be made to create a ‘fair distribution’ of press releases, and holds out the olive-branch of club membership before the next company-reporting season in November.
While not completely satisfied, Mr Butts hopes that Bloomberg has hit its real target — the right to simultaneous access to news.
That principle now seems to have been conceded despite the stiff resistance of Bloomberg's biggest opponent — the Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Japan's main financial newspaper.
It owns 40% of Nikkei Quick, a Japanese-language on-line financial news service whose cubby-hole is the first in which company announcements are placed.
Bloomberg's on-line service is offered in both English and Japanese.
London's crumbling pillars
Confidence in the City of London's main institutions is ebbing away.
The City's business cannot long prosper without it
HOWEVER dire the rest of Britain's economy, it has had one sure prop: the City of London, still the world's leading centre of international finance.
This role was thrust on the City by empire.
It has lingered largely thanks to two things.
One was a relatively liberal regulatory regime compared with other financial centres.
The other was a well-ordered institutional infrastructure based on such pillars as the London Stock Exchange, Lloyd's of London and the Bank of England.
The liberal regime remains, though rules are tougher now and there are more lawyers about the place.
But other centres have also seen the advantages of liberalism; and the end of capital controls has made finance more competitive.
As for the institutional pillars, they still stand, but they are shakier than they were.
In recent months the City's leading institutions have taken it in turns to come under fire: for regulatory failure, for losing money, for not moving with the times, or for lack of leadership.
Take the London Stock Exchange.
It was dragged kicking and screaming into Big Bang in 1986, but since then it has seemed pretty effective, in the main.
Its membership embraces foreign banks and investment houses.
Run by a corporate-style board chaired by Sir Andrew Hugh-Smith, the exchange is leaner than it was — staff numbers have fallen by two-thirds in five years.
It gave up its trading floor before most other exchanges; its computerised SEAQ trading system has been highly successful at pulling business in European blue-chip shares from continental bourses.
Yet as the board met on May 27th to discuss a new trading system to replace the ageing SEAQ system, its members were conscious of the exchange's troubles, not its successes.
Taurus, a computer project that was to have delivered paperless share settlement, was scrapped in March after five years' work and a £400m ($150m) outlay by the City.
The exchange's chief executive, Peter Rawlins, then resigned (and was this week the centre of another row, about his huge pay-off).
The City is no longer confident enough to pay blithely for a new trading system being developed by consultants at Arthur Andersen.
That is why the board has been considering developing an alternative system jointly with NASDAQ, the American over-the-counter market.
The troubles of Lloyd's, London's main insurance market, are more familiar.
Losses that look like totalling £6 billion in the years 1988–91 have ruined many names — the individuals who provide the market's capital on the basis of unlimited liability.
Lloyd's has belatedly woken up to the need for change.
The business plan presented in April by the new chairman, David Rowland, seemed radical enough to relaunch the market.
Yet what was striking about the open meeting to discuss the plan that was held on May 25th in London's Albert Hall was the names' total loss of confidence in Lloyd's leadership.
The biggest cheers came when speakers suggested liquidating the society and turning the lights off in Lime Street.
Mr Rowland's new offers of cash advances from Lloyd's trust funds to help names meet losses, and of a legal panel to examine ways of settling negligence suits against underwriting and members' agents, cut little ice.
Many names are too irate to care any more whether Lloyd's lives or dies.
The Bank of England, for so long the City's unofficial leader, is also discredited.
Long famed for its masterly handling of the markets, the Bank lost face when sterling was forced out of the European exchange-rate mechanism in September.
The tangled affairs of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International (BCCI) continue to damage its reputation as a bank supervisor (see box on next page).
Nor does it avoid all blame for the City's other failings, including those at the stock exchange and Lloyd's.
In years gone by, some say, the Bank's governor (Eddie George, from July) would have stopped the rot by calling somebody in to his office for tea.
Now there is less veiled menace in such an invitation.
The city's newer pillars, especially the regulators and fraud-busters, have fared little better than the old.
This week Andrew Large, the chairman of the Securities and Investments Board (SIB), published a report that acknowledged the defects in the regulatory regime set up by the 1986 Financial Services Act.
Mr Large proposed changes to make the system work better (see page 15); but he stopped short of the obvious answer, which is to revise the act itself.
Meanwhile the Serious Fraud Office is reeling from its failures to secure convictions in high-profile City trials like Guinness and Blue Arrow; and from the flight of its next target, Asil Nadir, before he could even be brought to court.
It is widely accepted that City regulation is too fragmented to meet the challenges of insider-dealing and market manipulation.
Calls for a thorough overhaul are growing louder.
Cause and cure
Three related ailments can be diagnosed for these failings.
One is the City's tradition of management by consensus.
The Taurus project, for instance, collapsed largely because it was repeatedly redesigned to please all the vested interests involved in settlement — many of whom quietly wanted Taurus to fail.
Lloyd's stood by as underwriters took on risks that were likely to lead to losses, largely because of its habit of management-by-agreement.
Even the SIB suffers; Mr Large has been unable to establish a new retail financial regulator, the personal-investment authority, because he cannot get agreement from banks, building societies and life insurers.
A second problem is slowness to adapt to change.
The City has been quite good at throwing off old habits, less good at mastering new disciplines.
For example, the Bank of England would hardly have hesitated in the old days to close down a bank like BCCI, knowing that few first-rate domestic institutions were prepared to deal with it in quantity.
It was unsure of itself once a new Banking Act had defined its powers and duties more strictly.
Technology has been a particular poser: institutions like Lloyd's have been slow to exploit computers.
And the City took a long time to wake up to Europe's moves towards monetary union; its bid to host a European central bank was made later than most others.
That is partly because of the third and biggest failing: lack of leadership.
The Bank of England used to be the City's leader; in recent times it has seemed content to be its cheerleader.
In Tokyo and Paris finance ministries have stepped in to push through changes.
In America the weighty Wall Street houses, in creative tension with their main regulator, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), have led their markets forward.
London has traditionally preferred a free-wheeling culture with minimal bossing by government, big banks or regulators.
That has been a source of strength.
Yet the pace of change and growing competition sometimes make it a weakness now.
The Treasury could take a greater interest in the City's fortunes.
A stronger central regulator modelled on America's SEC could play a part.
And big City firms should remember that, although they compete, they also have collective interests in improving the City's markets.
Ironically, the two bombs that the IRA has planted in the City in the past year may help to show the way.
They have brought together firms, institutions, and local and central government, all eager to shore up the City's defences.
Its institutional pillars could do with some shoring up too.
Will you love Paris in the fall?
The French government is preparing for a massive new privatisation programme.
For this to succeed, the Paris stock exchange will need to be revived
ON MAY 26th Edmond Alphandéry, France's economy minister, unveiled a draft law that lays the basis for selling off 21 of France's big state-owned firms — including Elf Aquitaine, Renault, Air France and Crédit Lyonnais.
He hopes to raise FFr40 billion ($1.3 billion) this year.
The programme as a whole should produce far larger sums, perhaps more than FFr300 billion.
All he needs to make a success of this is buyers for the shares.
That's the trouble.
Investors, it seems, do not love French equities in the spring.
Since mid-March many have fled the market, spooked by a string of poor company results, rising bankruptcies and other symptoms of a deepening recession.
To give the bourse an appetite, the government will do what it can to ease monetary policy further and to attract foreign investors.
Assorted tax breaks and other incentives may also be called for.
The new government is no stranger to privatisation.
As finance minister in 1986–88, Edouard Balladur, France's new prime minister, sold some FFr83 billion-worth of state assets.
The new draft modifies the 1986 legislation in several ways, however.
Though the present list includes 12 banks, insurers and industrial companies earmarked for sale in 1986, it adds nine new companies, including Renault and Aérospatiale, a defence firm.
The new government's first sale, in fact, is to be none of the above.
The state will unload some of its remaining 25.5% stake in Crédit Local de France, a local-government financing outfit, in a few weeks.
As well as adding more candidates, the draft law allows France's seven-member privatisation commission to suggest names of investors who could form a ‘noyau dur’, or stable core of shareholders, to protect privatised firms against takeover.
The government says that this would depoliticise the choice, though critics claim the economy minister would still have the final say.
The law will also sweep away the previous 20% limit on foreign investment in privatised firms, in a bid to make them more attractive to international fund managers.
Instead, the government will retain ‘golden shares’ in companies it wants to keep in French hands, allowing it to block hostile bidders or the sale of ‘strategic’assets.
If the draft law is passed by July, as the government hopes, the first privatisations could be in September.
Mr Balladur, however, is not waiting until then for the money.
On May 24th the government said it would launch a FFr40 billion four-year bond issue whose proceeds would be used to revive the economy.
The idea is to repay the bond with cash raised from asset sales.
Bondholders who fancy a punt on the bourse can choose to be paid in shares in newly-privatised companies.
This ploy should give the stockmarket a boost.
It needs it.
In the first three months of the year, the CAC General, a broad equity index, shot up as investors devoured French shares.
They were betting that, before or after parliamentary elections in March, the franc would be devalued and interest rates would tumble.
When the new government said it would stick to the strong franc, fund managers who had been buying shares and selling francs promptly did the opposite.
The index ticked up again this week on news of the bond issue, reaching 517 on May 26th.
But the rally is likely to be brief, for France is sliding into recession.
Official forecasts suggest that the country's GDP will shrink by 0.4% this year, and even that prediction now looks rosy.
To make matters worse, first-quarter sales figures of big French firms have been poor, thanks to the strong franc.
Consider BSN, France's leading food company.
On May 18th Antoine Riboud, BSN's boss, said that sales had fallen by 5.7% in the first quarter, and threatened to cut prices to defend its markets.
Its shares plunged.
In spite of the bad news, Mr Alphandéry's wish for a buoyant bourse by the autumn may come true.
For a start, French three-month interest rates have been cut sharply since the new government arrived in March, as tension over the franc has eased.
They now stand at 7.4%, fractionally below German levels.
Bank base rates have come down too; most recently on May 25th, when they dropped by 20 basis points to 8.8%.
As well as pushing up financial and other stocks, falling rates should encourage investors to switch some of the FFr1.2 trillion now sitting in lightly-taxed money-market funds into equities.
The government may soon offer investors some fiscal carrots to do so.
A draft law likely to be passed by the end of June would exempt anyone shifting cash before the end of the year from money-market funds to tax-free equity funds from paying tax on their capital gains.
It would also lure small investors into privatisation issues by exempting small share deals from the stockmarket turnover tax.
Marc Renault of Fimagest, a French fund manager, reckons 1993's privatisations will also be aided by the fact that few French companies are likely to make big rights issues in the middle of a recession.
The government's plans to sell off state companies in several easily digestible tranches should also help.
To guarantee the longer-term success of the programme, the government will have to take even bolder steps.
Mr Alphandéry says that there will be more measures to boost the stockmarket in the 1994 budget later this year.
Some analysts hope that the government will do more to encourage the spread of private pension funds to supplement the state's creaky pay-as-you-go retirement system.
By promoting these new investors, Mr Alphandéry could kill two birds with one stone.
Mexico's peso
Gone tomorrow?
MEXICO CITY AND NEW YORK
Foreign investors are beginning to worry that the Mexican peso is less solid than it looks.
Are they right to worry?
NOT since 1822, when a Scottish adventurer called Gregor MacGregor sold £200,000-worth of bonds for the kingdom of Poyais, has a financial instrument seemed to offer such low risk and easy reward.
Mexican Treasury bills (known as Cetes) have this year offered annualised yields of between 15% and 18% for bills with a 28-day maturity.
Since Mexico's central bank is committed to depreciating the peso by no more than 6.6% against the dollar in 1993, and has $14 billion of reserves to back its commitment, these rates translate into an annual return for dollar investors of at least 8.5%.
American Treasury bills, on the other hand, yield 3–4%.
So private foreign investors, mainly American, have been devouring Mexican government securities.
Between December and March, according to the Bank of Mexico, foreign ownership of them rose by 12.9 billion pesos ($1.4 billion), compared with 27.6 billion in all of 1992.
In March foreigners held 57.2 billion pesos of government paper, more even than Mexicans, who owned 53.5 billion pesos — just half their holdings at the end of 1991.
Fidelity Investments, a Boston mutual-fund giant, alone has over $100m invested.
The kingdom of Poyais, on the mosquito coast of Central America, turned out to be a figment of MacGregor's imagination (he fled the British Isles when investors there cottoned on to this).
Now a small but persistent band argues that the risk-free returns on Mexican paper could prove illusory too.
Its members maintain that Mexico's current-account deficit — $12.5 billion in 1992 and now approaching 7% of GDP — is unsustainable.
Rogelio Ramirez de la O, a Mexico City economist who was ridiculed by the government last year for predicting so large a deficit, now says that a big peso devaluation (of perhaps 15%) is four months off.
The case for a devaluation will be stronger still if doubts continue about the Clinton administration's ability to see the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) ratified by Congress before the end the year.
Any delay in NAFTA might leave the matter unresolved as the ruling Mexican party chooses a successor to President Carlos Salinas de Gortari for the 1994 election, creating political chaos.
If Mr Ramirez de la O is right, then foreign gluttons will soon be spitting back their government paper.
The Salinas government is adamant that a large devaluation would be both damaging and unnecessary.
Rightly, the central bank argues that cheapening the peso would do nothing to enhance Mexican competitiveness, since it would feed through swiftly into inflation.
That, in turn, would destroy the government's anti-inflation credentials (inflation has fallen from 30% to less than 12% in two years) and make higher real interest rates likely.
The Bank of Mexico is confident that it can see off any speculative attack on the peso.
Its foreign-exchange reserves are rising.
It is rumoured to have secured a $10 billion standby line of credit from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
There is (intentionally) no proper derivatives market that allows the peso to be sold short.
Peso bears could therefore push against the exchange rate only by liquidating their long positions.
And the government's recent promise to give the central bank independence should buttress its authority in the markets.
Nor do the home-based banks have any interest in seeing the peso collapse.
Until they were reined back by the banking authorities at the end of last year, they had built up huge liabilities in dollars in order to play the interest-rate differentials that foreigners have so enjoyed.
Several banks have 30% of their liabilities denominated in dollars; one medium-sized bank recently had half.
The cost of servicing these liabilities would soar if the peso were devalued.
Finally, the credibility of the authorities, even if it is an intangible quality, can produce tangible effects.
It has become a cliche that Mexico's government has more academically competent economists and technocrats working for it than practically any country.
Mr Salinas himself is a Harvard-trained economist.
His finance minister, Pedro Aspe, has a doctorate from MIT.
And they all know everybody.
A few months ago, Rudiger Dornbusch, a professor at MIT and a mentor of Mr Aspe, told Wall Street investors that a devaluation of the peso was inevitable.
A number of big mutual and hedge funds got ready to sell.
Then the Mexican government stirred, from Mr Salinas down.
It urged Mr Dornbusch to revise his opinion.
He later did, and those sales were never made.
Yet Mr Salinas's government will have to rely on more than contacts; tight money and high real interest rates are likely for the predictable future.
Domestic demand needs to be restrained if inflation is to keep falling.
That means the economy will grow by less than 3% this year.
There are signs that the current-account deficit is growing more slowly than last year.
If they persist, the peso looks safer.
Meanwhile, however, concerns about NAFTA will not diminish soon — one reason, along with tight money, why Mexican shares are selling at only ten times prospective earnings.
New risks have time to emerge.
Suppose, for instance, that Argentina is forced to devalue as its autumn congressional elections draw near: the Argentinian peso is more vulnerable than Mexico's.
Such a shock might prove contagious to other Latin American countries.
Talk of a Mexican devaluation, and all it entails for foreign investment, is an issue the authorities cannot will away.
American futures markets
Roiled
CHICAGO
THE Chicago Board of Trade, the world's largest futures exchange, was slapped by the past this week when its chief regulator lodged its first serious complaint against the exchange, over an episode that took place three years ago.
The Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) brushed off its files on Stotler, a big Chicago futures brokerage that failed in August 1990, and issued a ten-count complaint.
The exchange, the CFTC said, had failed to notify the agency of serious deficiencies in Stotler's financial records as early as 1987, failed to enforce its own capital requirements, and failed to tell the CFTC that Stotler was undercapitalised by as much as $1.1m between October 1989 and April 1990.
In response, Pat Arbor, the chairman of the Board of Trade, said it was not the exchange's fault that it had been duped by Stotler's doctored financial records.
None of Stotler's 65,000 customers had lost money when the firm collapsed, because the exchange quickly transferred the accounts to other members and co-operated closely with the CFTC on the case.
The next step in the matter is a hearing before an administrative-law judge, for which no date has been set.
If the CFTC wins its case, its charges could result in fines of $1m or more for the exchange.
Yet the commission's revived interest in Stotler has some curious omissions.
It made no complaint against the National Futures Association (NFA), the self-regulatory body which was supposed to be watching Stotler Funds, the firm's mutual-fund arm.
Yet the NFA was slow to report Stotler Funds' inadequacies, including the fact that money from the mutual funds was being used to buy the commercial paper of the failing parent firm.
Investors in Stotler Funds lost millions of dollars and filed lawsuits against the NFA which are still pending.
Also absent was the name of Karsten ‘Cash’ Mahlmann, the Stotler executive who was chairman of the CBoT and a member of the NFA board at the time of the crisis.
Just why the commission chose to resurrect the case is another mystery.
Some speculate that the CFTC saw it as a way of getting the attention of the Clinton administration.
The CFTC has been without a chairman since January, when Wendy Gramm left.
Its five commissioners are now down to three.
The CFTC might well have felt that desperate moves were necessary to remind those in authority that it still exists.
Its skirmish with the regulators, however, is just one of the Board of Trade's problems these days.
Last week the more go-ahead Chicago Mercantile Exchange announced that the New York Mercantile Exchange would be its partner in developing a new system to clear trades.
The CBoT's Mr Arbor squawked that the deal was a double-cross; the two Chicago exchanges are in long-term negotiations to consolidate many of their operations.
Nonsense, flashed back Jack Sandner, the chairman of Chicago's Merc.
The Board of Trade and its clearing house had been invited to co-operate on the $15m project on five different occasions over the past year, and had refused.
Whichever side has the story right, the CBoT is, for now, excluded from one of the most important co-operative developments afoot, one with long-term implications for the American markets' competitiveness against newer, faster-growing derivatives markets in Europe.
And Mr Arbor has another grievance against the Merc.
His attempt to extend the CBoT's reach to New York by proposing a takeover to the Commodity Exchange, New York's precious-metals futures market, fell apart last month when Comex members sensibly declined the deal.
Mr Arbor had promised them cost savings, the CBoT's name and resources, and rights to trade a few marginal Chicago products — but no cash.
The New York Mercantile Exchange quickly picked up his lead.
It is pursuing the Comex with an offer of $10m (still only a fraction of its book value).
If that merger goes through, Mr Arbor's great rival, the Chicago Mercantile's Mr Sandner, would inherit the Comex as a partner in its new clearing system.
Japanese bonds
Life after death
TOKYO
THE Japanese government's successful propping up of the Tokyo stockmarket has been widely applauded, not least by officials themselves.
Yet it may have consequences that its authors never dreamed of.
Investors' new bullishness has raised hopes of economic recovery.
This, in turn, has helped government-bond yields to rise and the yen to appreciate.
Yet these side-effects will exacerbate powerful deflationary forces in the real economy, thus delaying the recovery which investors are so eagerly anticipating.
Might the stockmarket ‘price-keeping operation’ backfire after all?
Take the bond market first.
Banks' long-term prime-lending rate is about to be raised for the second month in a row, to 5.4% (up from 4.9% two months ago), which will trigger a similar increase in mortgage rates.
The rise is an automatic consequence of the sharp decline in government-bond prices: the ten-year benchmark bond yield has soared from 3.9% in late February to 4.7% on May 25th.
On the same day the implied yield on the September government-bond futures contract was over 5%.
Such a rise in long-term rates sits oddly with still-scanty evidence of economic recovery.
Yet it does mean that Japanese borrowers now face high real long-term borrowing costs.
Peter Morgan, an economist at Merrill Lynch in Tokyo, estimates that consumer-price inflation is just 1%.
And the trend is still downward: wholesale prices declined by 2.8% year-on-year in April.
The jump in bond yields has been mainly explained by growing concerns (among bond investors) about stronger economic activity both in Japan and abroad.
There is, however, a better reason to be wary.
Mr Morgan estimates that total bond issuance by the government will rise by ¥6.7 trillion ($11.2 billion)— a 34% increase — in this fiscal year as a result both of the latest supplementary budget and lower-than-expected tax revenues.
Japan will also see a rising number of corporate-bond issues in coming years, which may well serve to put further upward pressure on bond yields regardless of interest-rate developments.
The domestic corporate-bond market is still moribund, with only about ¥14 trillion of bonds outstanding (most of them issued by utilities).
There is virtually no secondary market.
But all that is about to change.
A bill currently before parliament will abolish the present arbitrary rule that a company can only issue domestic corporate bonds up to twice the value of its shareholders' funds.
This provision has remained in place for years because the banks wished it so.
They saw a flourishing domestic bond market as a threat to their mainstay, corporate lending.
That attitude persists no longer.
Loaded down with non-performing assets, the banks have balked at new lending, which grew by just 1.1% over the 12 months to April, its slowest ever.
An added reason why the bond market is about to become more lively is that banks will soon be allowed to set up securities subsidiaries and underwrite corporate issues.
The Industrial Bank of Japan, the Long Term Credit Bank and the agricultural Norinchukin Bank have already been given permission to establish such subsidiaries.
City banks may have to wait another year or so.
But since April they have been able to lead-underwrite offshore bond issues by Japanese companies.
All this means that domestic bond issuance is set to rise.
Akio Mikuni, who runs Japan's only independent credit-rating agency, reckons outstanding corporate bonds will have grown to ¥80 trillion by the end of the 1990s.
And the faster corporate bonds are issued, the speedier will be the development of an active secondary market.
If the rise in long-term interest rates threatens economic recovery, then so does the sharp rally in the yen.
On May 26th it hit a new high against the dollar of 108.5.
The pain here is concentrated on Japan's exporters.
Rumour has it that most of them are unhedged at these levels: they did not expect the currency to rise this far.
Conventional wisdom anyway held that if the yen rose above 115 to the dollar, virtually every exporter in Japan would be losing money.
Why hedge at rates that look unsustainable?
Such logic may seem odd.
But many Japanese companies' strategy is now simply to pray that the yen will fall in this fiscal year.
Meanwhile, those officials in the finance ministry and the Bank of Japan who still equate a strong yen with a strong economy may be in for quite a shock.
Higher long-term interest rates and a ceiling-busting yen amount to an effective tightening in monetary policy since the last cut in the official discount rate in early February.
That in turn is prompting talk in the stockmarket of another rate cut.
Based on past experience, the central bank is likely to keep investors waiting a while yet.
ERM
The Bundesbank's writ
BRUSSELS
SINCE the Danes said Yes to the treaty of Maastricht on May 18th, Europe's exchange-rate mechanism (ERM) has appeared calmer than at any time since they voted No a year earlier.
The first Danish referendum showed the currency markets that the treaty's goal of economic and monetary union (EMU) was far from assured and that the ERM's five-year old parities might well change.
And they did.
Between the two referendums the ERM suffered seven realignments, lost two currencies (the pound and the lira) and very nearly blew apart.
Diminishing interest-rate differentials among the ERM's core currencies (see chart on page 100) show that currency speculators do not, for the time being, scent the system's demise.
But the mechanism's long-term health remains in doubt.
Two reports — one by the European Community's committee of central-bank governors and the other by its monetary committee (composed of finance-ministry and central-bank officials)— were made public on May 23rd.
Looking at what went wrong with the ERM and what should be done about it, both conclude that the system is fundamentally sound but needs better management.
The experts are even-handed in apportioning blame among EC governments.
The German government should not have financed unification by swelling its budget deficit, thereby provoking the interest-rate hikes which others found unbearable.
When Britain's pound joined the ERM, the British should have consulted their partners about its chosen central parity of DM2.95; and when sterling came under pressure, they should have been prepared to raise interest rates sooner than they did.
Italy should have cut its budget deficit.
Both reports argue that the ERM would be healthier if the relationship between parities and economic fundamentals were more closely monitored — and, when the two diverge, countries realigned more readily.
They suggest that ‘early-warning systems’ would help politicians to swallow this often unpalatable medicine before speculators rammed it down their throats.
The monetary committee offers to carry out regular checks on ‘a confidential set of indicators…primarily measures of external competitiveness’.
Officials are surely deluding themselves if they imagine that they can respond to the misalignment of a currency more swiftly than the markets.
But supposing they were right about that, what would then remain of the ERM's former power to foster low inflation?
The system's anti-inflation discipline rested precisely in its creation of ‘misalignments’— which governments were encouraged to correct by reducing inflation, rather than by devaluing their currency.
If speculators do attack, the governors stress that the prime responsibility for protecting a currency should lie with the government concerned.
The best defensive weapon is usually interest rates — backed up by whatever policy changes are needed to restore credibility.
The governors add that the effectiveness of interest-rate policy is related to ‘the institutional status of the central bank’— a way of saying that those central bankers who are not yet free from the tutelage of finance ministries would like to be.
The governors acknowledge that there will be times when concerted central-bank intervention is desirable.
But, reflecting the Bundesbank's concern that it should not have to endanger its own money-supply targets by supporting every sick currency, they say there should be no rigid rules on who has to intervene when.
Since September Britain has claimed that ‘fault lines’ in the ERM needed to be tackled before sterling would rejoin the system.
Yet Britain offered neither the governors nor the monetary committee any proposals for reforming the system.
Norman Lamont, then Britain's Chancellor of the Exchequer, joined his fellow finance ministers in Kolding, Denmark, in welcoming the reports last weekend.
Mr Lamont told the other ministers that in speaking of fault lines he had merely meant that the British and German economies were out of phase.
Many of Europe's finance ministers and central-bank governors will have enjoyed that retraction — for that is what it was.
Yet the present mood of well-being is curious.
It is only days since Spain was obliged to devalue the peseta (which was not, as it happens, misaligned) at great financial and political cost to its government.
If this is the exchange-rate mechanism working as it is supposed to, how will it be possible to tell when the system is failing?
Mr Lamont said that it would be ‘two, three or more years’ before the pound rejoined the ERM.
The monetary committee's report warns that any currency wishing to rejoin should do so only if there is mutual agreement on its parity.
If and when Britain wants sterling to re-enter the mechanism, the British will not be able to dictate terms.
For the moment, few politicians in Britain are losing sleep over that.
Smoked out
NEW YORK
WHAT issue has most preoccupied the august board members of the World Bank during the past couple of weeks?
Russia?
Sub-Saharan Africa?
Women in development?
Way out: it is smoking.
A number of board members are pressing for the directors' new suites, now being readied at the top of a spanking new building on Washington's H Street, to be exempted from the Bank-wide policy of no smoking that begins on July 1st.
The cost of adapting the air-conditioning systems to these members' whims, it has just been calculated, is a mere $1m — or 200,000 child immunisations in the third world.
The fuss began on April 8th when the French and Spanish directors, Jean-Pierre Landau and Angel Torres, wandered into the board committee which handles administrative matters and on any normal day dozes to the rhythm of the rubber stamp.
There they pressed their case (over the protests of the Bank doctor) that the perils of secondary smoking through the air-conditioning system were overdone.
So banning smoking in individual rooms, insisted Mr Landau (a non-smoker), was an infringement of one's liberté.
Neither Mr Landau nor Mr Torres is a committee member.
Yet the committee voted four-to-two in favour of smoking in the directors' suites — though they reckoned the air-conditioning would need fixing.
The matter has now so vexed the senior levels of the Bank that on May 25th Lewis Preston, the bank's president, was asked to intervene.
He (a smoker) is wondering quite how.
The issue is now set to go to a full board meeting, a measure of how the directors' proud notions of consensus have withered over this issue.
A paltry sum like $1m might simply have been shoved under the boardroom carpet but for a greater scandal: the cost over-run on the World Bank's new H-Street block.
This is now more than $13m, 20% over budget — this, from a bank that vigorously defends the quality of its development projects.
Recently, the World Bank has been able to hide from the spotlight that has laid the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development bare before the public gaze.
Now, over the smoking issue, the World Bank's directors (says one of them) have been ‘caught with our pants down; and it's so bloody embarrassing’.
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
Talking into space
THE scene outside a Moscow hotel: a man in a suit unfurls an umbrella, turns it upside down and attaches it to a box the size of a fruit crate.
Then he fixes a smaller box to the larger one, types on a small keypad and whispers into a handset.
There is no need to fear for his sanity.
He is just calling the office.
A phone is only as good as the system it is plugged into.
In a developed country that system is generally dependable.
In Russia and other parts of Eastern Europe, though, it is notoriously unreliable.
Since it can take the best part of a day to book an international phone call, some foreign businessmen bring their own alternative — the Magnavox Magnaphone.
It is unwieldy and, at $40,000, hardly a snip, but it can place direct international calls on demand.
The cost of this do-it-yourself solution is coming down, and so is the size of the package.
For a mere $25,000 NEC can supply you with one of their new MLink-5000s.
This briefcase-sized satellite terminal will turn just about any spot in the world into a phone booth immune to the forces of nature, civil unrest or bureaucratic bloody-mindedness.
It squeezes the latest digital technology into a manageable package of 13kg (29lb); and it can talk to any of the four Inmarsat satellites that hover 36,000km (22,500 miles) above the earth.
All you need to do is unfold the lid (which doubles as a phased-array antenna), aim it towards the nearest convenient satellite and dial the call.
The unit can receive calls, transmit faxes or be used by personal computers to tap into remote data banks — all for $5.50 a minute.
For surveyors and civil engineers, relief workers and war correspondents, the ultimate mobile phone looks like a bargain.
NEC hopes to sell 1,500 of them next year.
Rain of terror
MONARCH butterflies — with their spectacular black, brown and orange colouring and their 10cm wingspan, are among the world's most famous insects.
They are also the insect world's most energetic tourists.
In summer they wing their way across much of North America; then, as the days close in, they go home.
Home is the Michoacan forests of central Mexico.
Here, clinging like autumn leaves to a few favoured trees, some 200m butterflies sleep through the winter.
Or try to, at least.
For another sort of tourist also likes to visit the forests of central Mexico.
Mexico's government has been trying to promote ‘eco-tourism’ in the area, believing that this will save the butterflies' trees from the attentions of woodcutters.
But these kindly visitors may be doing more damage than chain-saws.
The danger has been identified by Alfonso Alanso-Majia and Alfredo Arellano-Guillemo of the National University of Mexico, and Lincoln Brower of the University of Florida.
The problem is not, as you might think, that the butterflies are being trampled underfoot.
The threat is a lot subtler than that.
If roosting monarchs are dislodged by wind, rain or predators, they fall to the ground.
At night the ground is cold: -8C.
To survive, a butterfly must get away from it — at least 25cm away if it is to be certain of living until morning.
If the weather is wet, a fallen monarch's difficulties are compounded.
Climbing 25cm is not enough; a 50cm ascent is the minimum needed for the butterfly to have a reasonable chance of survival.
Monarchs and rain don't mix because, although the butterflies' body fluids can be supercooled (protected inside an insect's body, they ‘forget’ to freeze even when the temperature drops below zero) any drops of rainwater or dew on the insect's outside will turn to ice if the air gets chilly.
And if minute ice crystals break away from these frozen drops and get into a monarch's body through one of its breathing holes, they can, as it were, remind the fluid inside that it, too, should be frozen.
The result is a stiff monarch.
On warm days the answer is simple — take to the air.
But if it is cold, a monarch cannot work up the energy to fly and can only manage to crawl up the nearest sage brush.
If this royal retreat has been trampled by an enthusiastic tourist — which is increasingly the case — the insect is doomed.
A warning, perhaps, to other monarchs about to let the hoi polloi into their homes.
Falling to bits?
Everything electronic is going digital.
But the process is not always as beneficial as is popularly supposed
TECHNOLOGISTS who deal in information have a mantra: ‘digitise’.
Digital computers strangled their analogue brethren at birth.
Digital telephones, with their zippy fibre-optics, are rapidly replacing their copper-cabled analogue forbears.
High-definition digital television is promised daily (see page 92).
But one part of the data-processing-and-moving industry has been surprisingly slow to adopt the fashion.
That icon of yuppy modernity, the mobile phone, still generally uses boring old analogue.
And attempts to mend its ways are running into trouble.
Analogue technology has served mobile phones well.
Superimposing the pattern of a sound wave (such as a person's voice) on to an electromagnetic wave (such as the radio waves sent out from a telephone) is simple and effective.
Digitising the pattern is complicated.
It means describing the sound wave in numbers (the binary digits which give the process its name) and transmitting these instead.
The receiver then decodes the numbers and turns them back into sound.
Oddly, it might seem, running the signal through this electronic sausage machine can make it clearer at the far end.
The sinuous wave of an analogue signal is susceptible to distortion while it is travelling.
There is no easy way for the receiving equipment to recognise such distortions and compensate for them.
Binary signals travel as pulses (for the ones) and lack-of-pulses (for the zeroes).
A distorted pulse is, nevertheless, a pulse, and the receiver will recognise it as such.
A distorted lack-of-pulse is unlikely to be so pulse-like that it confuses the equipment.
It is doubtful, though, that clarity of signal alone would justify the expense of making the mobile-phone network digital.
The main advantage of digital mobile phones is that you should be able to have more of them.
By storing up a few milliseconds worth of message and then pumping it out in a splurge, several digital phones can operate over a channel that would accommodate only a single analogue one: they merely send out their bursts at different times.
This technology is known generally, and particularly in America, as Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA).
The specific version being developed in Europe has a rather more grandiose name: the Global System for Mobiles (GSM).
This European version is supposed to allow eight phones to share a channel.
The Americans have opted for a less ambitious three-way split.
Both seem to have tripped over some elementary physics.
The main difficulty is that neither system delivers the principal goods — lots of calls per channel — to anything like the extent that it should.
The modest American goal of a threefold increase in capacity recognises this fact.
The Americans had originally been aiming at a tenfold multiplication.
The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) originally made a tenfold gain over analogue a requirement.
The threefold improvement they finally settled for was a compromise.
But even this has not yet arrived.
In many trials, TDMA can fit in only twice as many users before voice-quality becomes inadequate.
The ambitious eightfold gain that Europe is aiming for has proved equally elusive.
GSM averages a two-to-threefold gain.
In Hong Kong, where the complicated city-scape tends to disperse the signal, GSM has managed to improve things by a mere 50%.
Another cause of trouble with TDMA is a phenomenon called signal splatter.
Digital mobiles witter noisily at high frequencies.
This noise can ‘splatter over’ into adjacent areas of the radio spectrum.
If these are being used by other people — other callers, for instance— there can be problems.
Things are especially bad in America, where the FCC unwisely insisted that TDMA be introduced directly into the band used by analogue phones.
To stop splatter from spilling into the conversations of people using analogue phones, the digital frequencies require buffer zones of precious spectrum to separate them from analogue channels.
The problem may turn out to be much bigger than crossed telephone lines in the ether.
In Germany, where the authorities have wisely allocated digital phones a slot a long way from that used by their analogue brothers, there are other worries.
Germany is the country with the largest number of digital subscribers (around 400,000), and there are signs that the spill-over from their conversations may be confusing other electrical equipment, from CD players to computers.
In early May the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications announced a joint study with manufacturers, network operators and broadcasters to investigate the matter.
Another group has been unexpectedly disturbed by the appearance of digital mobile telephony.
The deaf are finding that their hearing aids are amplifying more than just the voices of their friends.
Work at Australia's National Acoustics Laboratory (NAL) recently revealed that emissions from GSM phones can affect these devices as well.
The cause is not signal splatter; the noise which annoys the deaf is at a much lower frequency.
The trouble seems to be that bursts of information leave a phone at the sort of frequencies which hearing aids are designed to detect.
Indeed, many such aids have special induction loops tuned to these frequencies to help their wearers use telephones.
The result is not that the user of the aid hears the phone conversation, but rather that there is a loud hum which drowns out everything else.
The NAL's tests show that interference can extend several metres from a mobile phone — as much as 20 metres if it is one of the more powerful sets installed in cars.
And, as David Byrne, the NAL's director, points out, people who wear hearing aids will neither be able to use digital mobiles, nor work with colleagues who use them.
All this matters.
The industry, which once appeared so promising, now seems to have lost its self-confidence.
Only Germany has anything approaching a large-scale commercial network.
Operators in other countries may maintain that they have ‘commercial’ digital services, but as yet they have few customers and they are finding it hard to rival the falling prices of analogue cellular networks.
The promised ‘bells and whistles’ that digitisation of cellular telecoms would allow — reliable mobile faxes, intelligent computer modems, interactive paging systems and so on— are being postponed into the late 1990s.
When they will actually arrive is anybody's guess.
No doubt the problems can be overcome.
One remedy for the electronic pollution may be to reduce the power of the phones' transmitters and instead have more of the receivers that pluck their signals from the air.
Another may simply be to wait.
An alternative way of extracting more from the spectrum, known as Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA) shows promise.
Though the eventual solution remains unclear, it is unlikely that this small corner of electronics can resist an industry-wide trend.
But, until recently, manufacturers have been reluctant to acknowledge the difficulties.
Britain's Department of Trade and Industry notified European developers nearly 18 months ago of the problems that their system might cause for people who wear hearing aids.
It never received a reply.
Retail technology
Remote control
TROY, MICHIGAN
WHEN George Bush was startled by the sight of a supermarket cashier using a laser to read bar codes, he looked like Rip Van Winkle on Main Street.
Bar codes are old hat in retailing.
But America's top shops are learning to apply their bar-code data in ways that might surprise a good many customers who shop more often than Mr Bush — and that signal big changes ahead for store managers, as well.
Kmart, one of the country's leading discount-store chains, has its employees scurrying around the aisles with hand-held lasers to zap bar-coded labels on products that are still sitting on the shelf.
A display window on the laser gun provides an instant score-card.
It shows how many items of the product ought to be on the shelf; how many are still in the stock room; the minimum number that the store is supposed to be carrying; whether fresh ones have been ordered if stocks are too low; what the current price is; and whether that price is the Kmart standard, or has been lowered to beat local competitors.
The value of this gadget — known to Kmart as a ‘remote maintenance unit’(RMU)— may go beyond its usefulness as a labour-saving device.
According to Kmart's senior management, it also helps to reassure employees in each of the company's 2,300 discount stores that they are the masters of Kmart's computer universe, not its servants.
It is easy to see why they might need reassuring.
The power of the RMU lies in its access, via an in-store radio network, to all the relevant inventory data, regardless of where they are held.
As Kmart has begun putting these data to work over the past few years, the company's operations have become steadily more centralised.
Bar codes scanned at the check-out counters of Kmart's new store at Auburn Hills, near Detroit, for example, are not just recorded in the store's point-of-sales computer to keep the finances straight.
They are also sent to a second system, called the Kmart Information Network (KIN).
After the store closes in the evening, this sends the data by satellite to Kmart's head office in Troy, another suburb of Detroit.
Troy logs the information for research purposes, then retransmits it to an inventory distribution centre, where more computers decide what restocking is needed at Auburn Hills.
The fresh stocks arrive within 48 hours.
This centralised replenishment system makes it practical for Kmart's management in Troy to dictate exactly which goods will be displayed at Auburn Hills, and how.
The same goes for all the other stores in the chain.
By the end of the year about 90% of everything Kmart sells will be subject to this centralised merchandising system.
Staff at the stores will be left managing the other 10% — fast-changing lines like greetings cards and fizzy drinks — though they can give the 90% a nip here and a tuck there with the help of the RMUs.
Systems like KIN are transforming retailing.
Large chains can keep track of shoppers' preferences daily, enabling central merchandisers to predict selling trends far more accurately than the average store manager could hope to do.
Dave Carlson, head of information systems at Kmart since 1982, thinks that retailers have taken their time confronting the managerial implications of this.
Surprising data from the machines can still clash with big egos that want to trust to old-fashioned hunches.
Mr Carlson reckons America's mass merchandisers have realised less than half of the potential of their bar-code systems.
And as they push those systems harder, they will be able to move beyond their obsession with sales per store and think more about maximising sales per customer.
Two examples.
Kmart collects the data on every transaction from 60 of its 2,300 stores.
This gives it a way of testing its own skills at forging links between different products.
Suppose it has tried to promote a special line of soft toys by selling them next to infants' clothes.
Data showing that shoppers buy these items together more often when they are displayed together will confirm that the ploy works.
The other example is known as the ‘could-sell’ concept.
The idea is to compare a store's performance not just with its historical record, but with some more objective measure of how well it should be doing.
It is particularly applicable where buying can be assessed in the light of the demographic characteristics of shoppers.
The Sports Authority is a specialised sporting-goods retailer owned by Kmart.
Customers in its 61 stores across the country are asked to give their zip codes at the check-out counter; and 98% do so.
Over three years the chain has amassed profiles of around 60 zip codes per store.
This provides a benchmark for sales in areas where several stores serve the same communities.
Spotting a store that is not selling as much as it could sell is easy.
So is assessing the effectiveness of local advertising.
The Sports Authority has run rings round most of its competitors — further confirmation, for those who need it, of the high-tech war in American retailing.
‘And it is not going to be won’, says Mr Carlson, ‘by a bunch of biplane pilots flying round by the seat of their pants.’
SPECIAL
The road to ruin
The outside world has accepted defeat in Bosnia.
The best it hopes for now is to stop things getting worse.
Could it have stopped them getting this bad?
Or even have prevented the war entirely?
How did Yugoslavia get into this mess?
NO ONE can say he was not warned.
When Josip Broz Tito, the communist leader of modern Yugoslavia, died in 1980, plenty of Yugoslavs told foreign friends that their country would come bloodily apart.
A federation of six republics, its citizens included Catholic Christians (Croats and Slovenes), Orthodox Christians (Serbs), Muslims (some speaking Serbo-Croat, others who spoke and felt Albanian) and sundry other minorities.
They lived in peace, in many places closely mingled together, and to many the distinctions meant little anyway.
But the groups had historic scores to settle with each other, some of the nastiest no older than the second world war.
And the newer divisions between communists and anti-communists, though stifled under Tito and weakened by the country's openness to the West, were not dead.
Yet nothing happened.
Even sympathetic ears stopped listening.
Then, late in 1990, like an overdue rockslide, the destruction of Yugoslavia began.
America and most of its allies were busy with Iraq, Germany with unification, and the Soviet Union with its own looming collapse.
Though Slovenia, and then Croatia, broke away two years ago, the world — ie, chiefly Western Europe and America, working through the UN with Russian assent and Chinese compliance — did not focus seriously on Yugoslavia until last year.
In August a UN/EC conference in London laid out principles for peace.
The fighters agreed to them, and fought on.
That autumn the EC and UN mediators drafted a peace plan for Bosnia & Hercegovina, to be policed by 60,000–75,000 peacekeepers.
The fighters agreed to it in Geneva in January, and again in Athens this month.
The war went on.
With outsiders now reduced to promising physical safety, no more, for the Muslim portion of Bosnia's inhabitants, the world asks itself guiltily what more it could have done.
It was not outsiders who began and brutally carried on this war.
The blame for that lies within ex-Yugoslavia, largely on the Serbs.
But the question has to be asked.
Three-act tragedy
The answer — so far as there is one — springs, like the arguments about it, from the complex background of these vicious wars.
The Yugoslav tragedy is in its third act.
The first — after some centuries of script-writing and setting the scene — began in June 1991 with a ten-day war in Slovenia.
Around 3,000 soldiers from the Yugoslav federal army were sent north on a vain mission to prevent Slovenia seceding.
Around 50 died (19 during ceasefires), as did 20 Slovene militiamen.
Next came a seven-month war between Serbia and Croatia.
It ended in January 1992 with a UN-monitored ceasefire.
Croatia lost control of a third of its territory.
But it gained international recognition.
With Bosnia and Macedonia too heading for independence, though not yet recognised, Yugoslavia shrank, for practical purposes, to just two republics, Serbia and Montenegro.
Act Three opened in April 1992, as an uneven, three-sided war broke out in Bosnia among Croats, Muslims and Serbs.
It flares on, despite countless local ceasefires, occasional truces and the efforts of the world to get it stopped.
The tactics used — besieging towns and terrorising villages — come down unchanged from Europe's wars of religion three and four centuries ago.
Set-piece battles have been rare.
Civilians are targets.
Though the Bosnian Serbs, headed by the endlessly duplicitous Radovan Karadzic, have behaved worst, no one has clean hands.
But it has been Muslims, set upon by Croat and Serb militiamen alike, who have suffered most.
The scale of the killing in ex-Yugoslavia is disputed.
But its savagery is not in doubt.
In less than two years of war, many thousands — some say many tens of thousands — have died.
Snipers of all sides pick off civilians, and all have murdered helpless prisoners.
The Serbs have ruthlessly shelled towns, and have at times adopted rape as a method of war.
Gunmen have driven countless people from their villages and seized or burned their homes.
In all, says the UN, of Yugoslavia's pre-war population of 24m, some 3.5m people are refugees.
Why did it happen this way?
Even Yugoslav patriots now admit that their federation was probably unsaveable.
But why was its break-up so violent?
With minor exceptions, the Soviet Union fell apart in peace.
The Czech lands and Slovakia divorced with little rancour and no bloodshed at all.
Why was Yugoslavia different?
The answer is tangled and tentative.
The roots of this war lie in Yugoslav history (though not as deep as some claim), in the frailty of Tito's state and in three distinct sorts of nationalism that sprouted as his odd form of communism collapsed.
A clue to the violence of the break-up may lie also in the balance of weaponry inside Yugoslavia.
Serb officers dominated the federal army with its tanks, howitzers and mortars.
But almost every Yugoslav household, especially in the countryside, had small arms and men trained in the militia to use them.
The ferocity and complexity of the Yugoslav wars have made for two simplifications.
Each contains part of the truth.
The first is to see this as a tragedy of revenge involving old feuds of churches and peoples, overlaid by score-settling for the atrocities of 1941–45.
Modern Yugoslavia sat athwart fault lines of European history: the fourth-century division of the Roman empire, the 11th-century division of Christendom, the 17th-century border between the Ottoman and Habsburg empires.
It is true, too, that under Hitler's occupation Croatian and Bosnian fascists butchered Serbs, Jews and Muslims, often with a nod from the Catholic clergy.
Yet Yugoslav history is not pure black.
After the first world war, Croats, Bosnians, Serbs and Slovenes united freely.
For all the horrors of the second world war, they lived in peace under Tito.
Serbs and Croats used the same language, and readily married each other, especially in the cities.
Sarajevo, Bosnia's capital, was cosmopolitan.
By East European standards, communist Yugoslavia was modern, open and international.
The other simplification is to treat this as a war of Serb expansion run from Belgrade by ex-communists and their army against the new democracies of Bosnia, Croatia and Slovenia.
As the first and most ruthless with force, Serbia bears the greatest blame.
Its leaders have abetted horrors.
Yet the Serbs of Croatia and Bosnia had legitimate demands.
The election of Slobodan Milosevic as Serbia's president in December 1990 was a pity, but not undemocratic; and, whatever his past influence, he does not control Bosnia's Serbs.
Croatia must share the blame.
Under Franjo Tudjman (an ex-communist general) it is no model of open government.
Its troops have fought in Bosnia, and in practice Western Hercegovina is annexed to it.
Mr Tudjman has often proposed splitting Bosnia between Croatia and Serbia, leaving a reservation around Sarajevo for Muslims.
Bosnia's Croats, like its Serbs, have practised widespread ‘ethnic cleansing’.
Recent history offers further clues.
Tito's Yugoslavia rested on three planks.
The ‘self-management’ economy, not private but not state-centralised, worked at first.
By the 1970s, it was a disaster.
Foreign debt, inflation and the wealth gap between north and south all grew.
Non-alignment in world affairs meant the Russians were not treading on Yugoslavia's neck, but left it without friends to stem the chaos when it broke up.
And, though Tito's slogan of ‘Unity and Brotherhood’ implied a lid on national — Serb or Croat — feeling, state jobs were dished out on national lines.
In 1974 a new constitution gave the republics more power.
Muslims became, in law, a nationality.
By the time of Tito's death, in short, federal institutions were fatally weak.
The communist parties of the republics were ascendant.
The economy was a shambles.
The one federal power was the army, and that fell ever more under Serbia's thumb.
Three sorts of nationalist strains were pulling Yugoslavia apart.
First, as in many federations, the rich (Slovenes and Croats) did not like bankrolling the poor (the southern republics) or the Yugoslav army, which ate up half the federal budget.
Second, many democrats became nationalists out of anti-communism.
As ex-communists hung on in Serbia, many Croats and Slovenes saw independence as the fast track to democracy.
Third, those ex-communists in turn used patriotism as their own lifeboat.
Disliked in the cities, Mr Milosevic waved the flag in villages and market towns left at a loss by the end of the Yugoslavia they knew.
He egged on — and his interior minister armed — the Serb politicians of Croatia and Bosnia, small-town professional men who fancied a chance of fame as Serb patriots.
By early 1991 the cavernous offices of the federal government in New Belgrade were empty and grass grew on the steps.
In March of that year, as Serbs blocked roads and fought with Croat policemen in Krajina, the presidents of the six republics made a last stab at bargaining.
Croatia and Slovenia wanted a confederation of independent states, Serbia and Montenegro a tighter union.
Macedonia and Bosnia tried to mediate, in vain.
Slovenia pressed for independence.
Croatia reluctantly followed.
To war
War might still have been avoided, but for the issue of Croatia's Serbs.
Though most of these lived in Zagreb, there were long strings of Serb villages in Krajina and Slavonia.
When a national minority is caught the wrong side of a new frontier, is it better to move the people, the frontier, or neither, giving expression to the minority some other way?
Neither Croats nor Serbs were willing to compromise.
The world, scared of border changes and wary of espousing people-transfers, was no help.
The Serbs were ready to fight.
The federal army said it was holding the ring between Serb raiders and Croat policemen.
Then it put two Croatian towns, ancient Dubrovnik, on the Adriatic, and Vukovar, a pretty Danube town, under siege; to punish or reverse Croatia's secession, said the army.
By late autumn, it was openly backing Serb nationalists.
Though bloodier and more complex, the Bosnian war fits a similar pattern.
Before it, the republic had 4.3m citizens.
Of these, 40% told census-takers they were Muslims, 30% Serbs and 17% Croats.
The rest, some sick of national stereotyping, listed themselves as Yugoslavs, Turks, Jews, Gypsies, Eskimos, Giraffes or Lampshades.
A seven-member collective leadership of three Muslims, two Croats and two Serbs presided over the republic.
In the 1990 election, the Muslim party of Alija Izetbegovic won 86 seats in the lower house of parliament, the Serb party 72 and the Croat one 44.
On big issues each nationality was meant to have a veto.
The Croatian war destroyed the fragile balance in Bosnia.
Muslim and Croat politicians voted in October, 1991, despite the veto rule, to make Bosnia a state.
The Serbs refused to accept Bosnian neutrality in the war next-door.
They left parliament and set up ‘Serb autonomous regions’.
The aim was to join Croatian and Serbian Serbs in a Greater Serbia.
The independence of Croatia and Slovenia left Bosnians a terrible choice: staying with Serbia and Montenegro or declaring an independent state, sovereign and recognised but unable to defend itself.
Freed from duty in Croatia by the peace of January 1992, federal troops were soon being redeployed in Bosnia as part of the Serb forces there, under General Radko Mladic.
In February 1992, Bosnia's authorities held a referendum on independence.
This was Europe's condition for recognition.
Croats and Muslims voted yes.
Serbs refused to vote.
In March, Serb members of parliament set up their own assembly at Pale, near Sarajevo.
By April 1992, the Bosnian capital was under siege and the destruction of Bosnia had begun.
Could the world have done better?
‘My apologies to Attila,’ Clemenceau once said, ‘but the art of arranging how men are to live is more complex even than the art of massacring them.’
Outsiders have looked hard for an arrangement for the southern Slavs.
First the EC tried to mediate, through Lord Carrington, a former secretary-general of NATO.
Then the EC and UN tried jointly, represented, respectively, by another Briton, Lord Owen, an ex-politician, and by America's Cyrus Vance (now replaced by a former Norwegian foreign minister, Thorvald Stoltenberg).
Nor did the world just talk.
Europe and America banned arms sales to ex-Yugoslavia in mid-1991.
The UN followed with a worldwide ban in September 1991.
America and the EC put trade sanctions on Serbia and Montenegro in November 1991.
The UN did likewise in May 1992, and that September denied them Yugoslavia's old UN seat.
A UN naval blockade was imposed in November 1992, followed by full trade and diplomatic isolation in April 1993.
Serbian pressure on Bosnia's Serbs to settle suggests sanctions have not wholly failed.
And, while it tried to limit the fighting, uphold, in some sense, Bosnia's right to exist, and bring a long-term settlement, the world also acted to protect the war's victims.
It has sent food aid and UN troops — 25,000 or so, by now, to ex-Yugoslavia as a whole — to attempt to keep the peace, though not by force.
Some countries, notably Germany, have taken in tens of thousands of refugees.
Fewer lives might have been lost if Mr Milosevic and Mr Tudjman had last year been allowed to split Bosnia between them.
But the world, at the London conference last August, chose principle over expediency.
It repeated the familiar rules that borders may not be changed unilaterally or by force, that gains made by force should not stand and that national rights should be respected.
With those principles, Lord Owen and Mr Vance drafted their plan.
Serbia would accept the Serb enclaves in Croatia as Croatian.
Kosovo would be acknowledged as part of Serbia.
Minority rights would be given expression somehow.
Bosnia would be divided into ten provinces, with three for each community, Sarajevo being shared by all.
Peacekeepers would patrol almost every cross-road.
In time, so ran the hope, the three sides could talk out lasting solutions.
The Serbs would abandon (or at least postpone?) dreams of Greater Serbia.
Sanctions would be ended if Serbia behaved.
In a world of reason rather than force, the Vance/Owen plan might have worked.
It was, after all, accepted by Mr Milosevic and at least signed in Athens even by Mr Karadzic.
It looks dead today.
But no outsider offered more convincing ideas.
To say, as some have, that the world has stood by doing nothing about Yugoslavia is thus simply silly.
It has often dithered and sometimes blundered, but it has never walked away.
Yet should it have done still more?
Could it have?
Soldiers and diplomats who knew Yugoslavia well could make its complexities sound like an excuse for doing nothing at all.
The world felt it must act.
But how?
To its cry ‘Something must be done’, the question ‘What?’ usually met silence or a chorus of discordant advice.
Bomb Serb gun emplacements?
Bomb supply lines?
Bomb key targets in Serbia itself?
Arm Bosnia's Muslims?
Send ground troops to enforce — not just oversee — a peace?
Create safe havens for the victims of war?
All these ideas have been considered recently, with caution in Washington, sceptically by NATO commanders, most often with alarm in European capitals.
The disagreements were unhelpful, but not shameful.
Generals, let alone politicians, could reasonably differ about the risks, costs, aims and prospects of one or other military action.
Governments had legitimately differing perspectives and aims — and differing public opinions to answer to.
All were dealing with a far-off, complex country of which most, even by then, still knew little.
Errors and omissions
That said, the outside world made some errors, and missed some opportunities.
It rushed to recognise Slovenia and Croatia, whose independence upset Yugoslavia's shaky ethnic balance.
In Bosnia it recognised a state most of whose Serbs and many Croats had no interest in its survival.
In neither Croatia nor Bosnia did the world heed the claims of the Serb minorities.
These errors made, the world reacted too slowly to their results, especially in Bosnia.
Had a few thousand peacekeeping troops been sent there as a sign of outside concern, that war just might have been avoided.
Peacemaking was botched.
At the least, attacks on civilians could have been more firmly discouraged.
Too many paper threats were made.
In August 1992, Mr Karadzic promised to put Serb guns under UN control.
They are still firing.
The UN banned military flights over Bosnia in October 1992.
Enforcement came only in March 1993.
Last winter, Bosnian Muslims were ready for a settlement.
They reneged — prompting the Serbs to do so too — when Bill Clinton hinted they might get help from America.
Thoughout, policy-makers were distracted by fears of setting precedents (for the Soviet Union, which broke up anyway) or breaking principles (non-intervention in civil wars), and by worries about their own institutions (will this or that action help or hurt the EC, the UN, NATO, etc?).
How much difference, though, did all this make?
No one can be sure that wiser decisions on these points would have prevented disaster, or what would have happened if the world had adopted any of the recent proposals for the use of force.
Most outsiders — this newspaper included — have had different ideas at different times of what was or was not desirable or feasible.
The best guess at the truth may be that of the sceptical experts whose answer to the question ‘What can be done?’ was, from the start: precious little.
If enough people, on the spot, are determined, and armed, to make war, outsiders who are neither sufficiently determined nor — on the spot — armed to make peace cannot prevent them.
BUSINESS THIS WEEK
On the block
A meeting of EC finance ministers gave the European exchange-rate mechanism a clean bill of health.
They blamed the crises that have affected it on the way in which EC members carried out their obligations, not on the ERM itself.
The Conference Board's index showed a drop in American consumer confidence this month to its lowest level since Bill Clinton was elected president, reversing signs of optimism in the spring.
According to Dun & Bradstreet, however, business confidence in America improved in the second quarter.
Earlier, the Federal Reserve said that higher short-term interest rates, currently 3%, should not be ruled out.
Coopers & Lybrand was appointed by the audit committee of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development to check its heavy spending on office furniture and private jets.
Russia's central bank and government, long at odds, agreed to co-operate on bringing inflation, running at more than 20% a month, to 10% a month by the end of the year.
The central bank said it would stop supporting the rouble and promised that cheap credits to moribund industries will be phased out.
The agreement could open the way to $1 billion in new loans from the IMF.
Under pressure from the American government, the three rival consortia developing four systems to set the technical standard for high-definition television provisionally agreed to combine those systems.
This could speed up the introduction of HDTV in America.
But the EC Commission doubted America could provide a global standard, even though Europe's attempts to set its own standard are mired.
Hot line
National Grid, a company jointly owned by the 12 regional electricity companies of England and Wales, was granted a licence to take on British Telecom and Mercury.
Through Energis, its telecoms subsidiary, it plans to spend £100m ($155m) in the next year on building a fibre-optic network throughout Britain, largely using its existing pylons.
It promises to start a price war within the year.
America's AT&T is forming an alliance, called WorldSource, with Asian telecoms groups.
Japan's Kokusai Denshin Denwa and Singapore Telecom are the first to join, with partners in Australia, South Korea and Canada to follow.
Though keen to form similar alliances with European telecommunications groups, AT&T has found little interest.
Britain's Courtaulds and Hoechst of Germany agreed on a joint venture that will merge their viscose and acrylic-fibres businesses in Europe.
In a deal that will create America's second-largest coal company and second-largest copper firm, Cyprus Minerals is paying between $1 billion and $1.4 billion, and assuming more than a $1 billion in debt, for loss-making Amax.
The merger of most of their core operations will create Cyprus-Amax, a company with $1 billion in assets.
Brought to book
The Bank of England's new accounts show that it made provisions of £115m ($100m) in 1991–92, against losses incurred in propping up small banks after the collapse of BCCI.
Separately, a number of BCCI depositors issued a writ against the central bank, alleging that it had failed to exercise proper supervision.
And the government of Abu Dhabi, the majority shareholder in the bank, may soon bring charges against 13 people, including the former chief executive.
Despite recession, and although the total number of investments fell by 10%, venture capitalists have poured $1.1 billion into budding European enterprises in 1992, 6% more in dollar terms than in the previous year.
Franz Steinkühler resigned as leader of Germany's powerful engineering union, IG Metall after being accused of insider-dealing in purchasing DM1m ($115m) of shares in Daimler-Benz.
Britain's main financial watchdog, the Securities and Investments Board, proposed changes in the wake of Robert Maxwell's plundering of pension funds.
The two-tier system by which SIB oversees self-regulatory organisations (SROs) will continue, with more stringency.
A slump in computer revenues sent Fujitsu, a Japanese electronics company, into a pre-tax loss of ¥16.2 billion ($150m) in 1992–93, its first-ever loss.
Two rival companies, Toshiba and Hitachi, saw a steep fall in profits.
Collision course
Bad relations between two big car companies continued after the defection of José Ignacio Lopez from General Motors to Volkswagen.
German prosecutors say they have enough information to investigate GM's complaints that Mr Lopez, and other senior executives who defected, took secret documents with them to VW.
Year-on-year car and van sales in the European Community continued to skid, with a fall of nearly 20% in April to 1.1m.
The biggest losers were Germany's Mercedes-Benz, Sweden's Volvo and Spain's Seat, all down more than 30%.
Only Ireland had increased vehicle sales in April.
Cesare Romiti, the chief executive of Fiat, is being investigated by magistrates in Milan for alleged corruption and illicit financing of political parties in Italy's continuing spate of corruption scandals.
To date, more than a dozen of the car maker's executives, including the chairman, Giovanni Agnelli, have been put on the hit list.
French housekeeping
Two weeks after an austerity budget to cut the public-sector deficit, France's prime minister Edouard Balladur said that his government will borrow FFr40 billion ($1.3 billion), partly to fight rising unemployment.
It also plans to privatise 21 state companies, including Air France and Renault.
French short-term interest rates fell below German ones for the first time since 1991.
After a week of fevered speculation, John Major, Britain's prime minister, shuffled his cabinet.
Out went Norman Lamont, the unpopular chancellor.
Kenneth Clarke, ex-home secretary, got his job.
America, Russia, and three West European allies announced plans to defend Muslim ‘safe areas’ in Bosnia, to set up a war-crimes tribunal in The Hague (this was then approved by the United Nations), and to prevent the conflict spreading into neighbouring countries.
The emphasis shifted from rolling back Serb territorial gains in Bosnia to preventing new ones.
The Vance-Owen peace plan for Bosnia seemed thereby gravely threatened.
Worried that demands for their peacekeeping services would strain declining defence budgets, NATO defence ministers called a halt to defence cuts.
The mafia were suspected of planting a car bomb in the historic centre of Florence, which killed six people and injured many more.
Buildings were destroyed and many others, the Uffizi gallery among them, were seriously damaged.
Ciriaco De Mita, a former prime minister of Italy and once leader of the Christian Democrats, was declared to be under investigation for alleged extortion as probes into corruption continue.
With a fortnight to go before Spain's general election, the ruling Socialist party found itself embroiled in more accusations of financial irregularities, this time involving the financing of its referendum campaign in 1986 to keep Spain in NATO.
Protesters cut off the German parliament in the (vain) hope of stopping deputies from voting on a bill to restrict immigration into Germany.
Cambodia's voice
Despite earlier threats from the Khmer Rouge guerrillas, Cambodia's election went off peacefully.
After three days of polling, 85% of those registered had voted.
In some areas, Khmer Rouge soldiers were seen voting.
Police fired tear-gas as hundreds of people demonstrated in Lhasa, capital of Tibet.
The protests, which continued for two days, were sparked mainly by price rises.
Xanana Gusmao, a former resistance leader in East Timor, was sentenced to life imprisonment by an Indonesian court for, among several charges, trying to set up a separate state.
Portugal, which does not recognise Indonesia's annexation of its former colony, said Mr Gusmao's trial was a travesty.
Hair-raising bill
Bill Clinton ran into trouble for blocking a busy runway while having a $100 haircut, and for appearing to divert the business of the White House travel office to a distant cousin.
For the first time, according to opinion polls, more people disapprove of his handling of his job than approve of it.
Conservative Democrats in the Senate unveiled an alternative budget plan, including caps on mandatory entitlement programmes and the demise of the energy tax.
The ‘motor-voter’ bill, which would allow Americans to register to vote when they get their driving licences, became law.
It should increase registration from 60% of the eligible population to more than 80%.
President Jorge Serrano ended the brief flowering of democracy in Guatemala.
Caving in to army pressure, he suspended the constitution and dissolved Congress.
The Supreme Court and the Senate in Venezuela ruled that President Carlos Andres Perez must face trial on corruption charges.
Octavio Lepage, the head of the Senate, is now acting president.
Iraq again
America accused Saddam Hussein of massing troops on the borders of the Kurdish ‘safe haven’ in northern Iraq.
It warned him not to attack.
Meanwhile, Iraq itself came under attack.
Iranian aircraft flew deep inside Iraq to bomb the headquarters of the Mujahideen e-Khalq, the Iranian dissident army.
South African police arrested 70 leading members of the Pan Africanist Congress and its military wing, the Azanian People's Liberation Army.
The two black groups, which stand to the left of the African National Congress, are accused of attacks on white farmers.
After six weeks, UN-supervised peace talks between the government of Angola and UNITA rebels, held in Côte d'Ivoire, broke up with no agreement.
Meanwhile, UNITA captured the strategic oil-producing town of Soyo.
SURVEY
Many waste-management policies impose economic costs that are not worth it, writes Frances Cairncross, our environment editor
A lasting reminder
WHEN archaeologists want to discover how primitive people lived, they delve into prehistoric rubbish heaps.
What will they make of the tips from the late 20th century?
They will certainly have plenty to pick over.
As people buy more objects, they throw more away.
And as they use more plastic, chemicals and metals, so what they discard becomes increasingly durable and potentially poisonous.
In many wealthy countries, waste is the environmental problem that people care about most.
Governments' policies are beginning to reflect that fact.
Once upon a time waste management was purely a matter of public health.
The main aim of policy was — as it still is in many poor countries — to take rubbish away from places where it posed a health hazard, and (to a lesser extent) to make sure that waste sites were properly run.
In recent years, most countries have tightened their standards of waste disposal.
Increasingly, their goals have become more radical too: they want to reduce the growth of waste, and to recycle as much as possible.
Legislation has typically attacked air and water pollution first, and solid waste last.
One good reason for such priorities is that waste usually poses a smaller threat to health than air or water pollution.
Once waste is solidified, it is much less dangerous than it is when blowing about in the air or dissolved in water.
Substances that are lethal if inhaled, imbibed or touched may do no harm at all when safely confined to a well-run tip.
Waste tends to be the pollution problem to which other problems are eventually reduced.
Although the industrial countries have had great success in cleaning their air and water, this very success has often increased the amount of solid dirt.
For instance, disposing of the gypsum that scours sulphur dioxide from coal smoke now costs some American power stations more per tonne than the coal itself.
Environmentalists are right to argue for strong controls on the way waste is managed.
But green campaigns directed at the handling of solid waste sometimes go much further than is justified by the need to protect health, or even to prevent litter or damage to the landscape.
They sometimes seem more concerned to punish those whose products end up on rubbish heaps than to encourage sensible behaviour.
This survey argues that governments have frequently failed, or not even tried, to resist such pressures.
Instead, they have sometimes adopted policies whose costs are wildly out of line with their benefits.
In no other area of environmental policy does legislation impose such burdens for so little gain.
This happens because the costs of such legislation are usually carried, in the first instance, by companies.
They are therefore hidden from the voters who demand them.
When they try to stunt the growth of waste and to ensure that it is properly disposed of, governments face a real quandary.
Ideally, polluters would pay the true costs of the degradation they cause.
That may well mean that waste disposal should cost more than it has done in the past.
But tipping waste into landfills or incinerators is not the worst thing that polluters can do with their rubbish.
The costs to society of illicit dumping, in streams or hedgerows, is higher still.
The more that governments raise the costs of legitimate waste disposal, in an attempt to impose on polluters the true costs of their activities, the greater will be the price difference between lawful and illegal disposal — and the greater the incentive to dump waste in the most environmentally harmful way.
That may involve shipping it across borders, to countries where controls are more relaxed, which is why efforts to control international movements of waste have increased in step with the tightening of disposal standards.
The problem of creating the right incentives for waste management is the central theme of what follows.
To set incentives and to monitor their impact requires reliable measures of what waste is produced and where: the next article examines how far countries agree on what counts as waste, and how much they know about its origins and destiny.
How much waste?
What?
Where?
Nobody is sure
Misunderstood mess
DECISIONS about waste management take place in a statistical vacuum.
Few governments have much idea of how much waste their citizens produce and what it consists of, let alone where it can be put.
Between countries, and even within them, there is disagreement about what constitutes waste and what should count as hazardous.
As a result, debates about policy tend to rely more on assertion than evidence, while the targets for recycling that governments increasingly pledge themselves to meet are impossible to verify.
Most people think of waste as being the contents of the domestic rubbish bin.
But that is a small fraction of the stuff which humanity discards each year.
Household waste accounts for perhaps 4% of the total waste produced in Britain.
Much the same is true for America and Germany: municipal solid waste, generated by houses and offices, makes up at most a tenth of the total.
Such figures are inevitably crude, if only because what counts as waste can vary even within one country.
Sometimes, changes in definitions can appear to make a country grubbier.
In 1990 Germany broadened the scope of wastes that counted as hazardous.
As a result, German output of hazardous waste appeared to quintuple.
In a recent review of Germany's environmental performance, the OECD criticised the confusion in Germany's definition of waste that has been caused by a desire to encourage recycling.
The same item may either be classified as ‘waste’, if it is to be disposed of, or as ‘residual matter’, if it has some further economic use.
The classification may depend on where it is and what facilities exist to deal with it.
Definitional problems are not the only ones.
Quantities are easily misjudged, as work in Britain at the government's Warren Spring Laboratory has shown.
The laboratory's John Barton, speaking at a conference in London last year, described a number of occasions when decisions to invest in schemes to recycle rubbish or to burn it as fuel had been based on estimates of commercial and household waste that turned out to be much too high.
In one instance, a local commercial waste-collection contractor overestimated the tonnage he was disposing of at his own landfill site by 30%.
Even if most figures for waste are not overestimates, national statistics tell a less-than-apocalyptic tale.
They appear to show that, at least in the richest countries with the toughest environmental standards, municipal waste is growing more slowly than the economy as a whole.
In western Germany, for instance, OECD figures suggest that the total of industrial waste was lower in 1990 than a decade earlier.
So was municipal waste, in spite of growth in GDP per head of 1.8% a year over the period (chart 1).
Even in America, municipal waste grew on average by 0.5% a head a year, while GDP per head grew by an annual 1.9%.
All these numbers are before allowing for recycling.
An increase of 0.5% a year in waste generation per head suggests that rich societies throw away progressively less of their total economic output.
That makes sense: a growing proportion of income is spent on services, such as health and education which generate less waste per dollar spent.
Speaking volumes
Not only does municipal rubbish seem to be growing more slowly than many people imagine; the components which appear to be increasing are not the ones that have attracted most attention.
As chart 2 on the next page shows, poor countries throw away lots of vegetable matter — what some rubbish boffins evocatively call ‘putrescibles’.
The most striking change as countries become richer is in the quantity of discarded paper.
That ties in with the findings of a remarkable researcher.
Estimates of what goes into landfills are usually extrapolated from what people buy.
Bill Rathje, a professor of archaeology at the University of Arizona, is one of the few people who has burrowed into America's landfills and weighed and measured their contents — a treatment usually reserved for the dustbins of rock stars.
Easily the largest component of the landfills he has examined is paper and board.
By far the biggest single item is newspaper, which has taken around 18% of landfill volume for 30 years.
The fastest growth has been in other kinds of paper, and particularly paper packaging, which now takes up 19% of the space in landfills.
The volume of plastics, which grew in the 1960s, has remained steady at around 12–13% since the early 1970s.
Household rubbish is also durable.
Mr Rathje often finds readable copies of 25-year-old newspapers and eatable corn cobs.
As he points out, an airtight, watertight landfill mummifies such treasures.
If paper does not rot, why bother to substitute it for plastic?
If corn does not decay, what hope for ‘biodegradable’ plastics made of corn starch?
Other surprises await those who search through rubbish elsewhere — such as the amount of demolition rubble.
In America, says Mr Rathje, it accounts for a fifth of landfill space.
In western Germany in 1990 the building industry produced more than five times as much rubbish as turned up in municipal solid waste — and most of it was simply tipped into Germany's scarce landfill space.
A law to encourage the industry to take back and reuse its rubble has languished for three years in the environment ministry.
Unlike packaging, recycled cement is not a vote-winner.
Although municipal waste seems to grow more slowly than income in rich countries, it does still grow.
It still has to be put somewhere.
Most countries put the largest single part of their waste into dumps, which are increasingly dignified as ‘landfills’ as they become more complex and expensive.
The rest is either incinerated (and sometimes the waste is used to produce energy) or composted or recycled.
The idea that the rich world faces a rubbish crisis has been aggravated by the fact that in some countries new landfills have opened more slowly than old ones have closed.
This is not a new worry.
An article in May 1992 in Waste Age, an American magazine, on landfill capacity in North America, opened with a quotation from a federal official in 1889: ‘Appropriate places for [refuse]are becoming scarcer year by year, and the question as to some other method of disposal…must soon confront us.’
The article reported a survey by the National Solid Waste Management Association of the change in landfill capacity over the past five years.
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) had estimated in 1986 that the 6,034 landfills then open would decline to about 2,000 by 1992.
In fact, as the article's authors drily reported, ‘the majority of officials were unable to respond to the survey with comprehensive, consistent data.’
Five separate surveys conducted by other bodies during 1990 and 1991 produced totals ranging from 5,368 to 7,378.
Slotting the survey findings together, the authors found that the total number of landfills in America might be anything from 4,462 to 10,467.
A best guess would be around 6,600 — a figure, they pointed out, that was higher than the EPA's estimate for 1986, let alone for 1992.
Times of plenty
So is there an incipient crisis?
Between 1986 and 1991 American states appear to have shut four landfills for every one they opened or expanded.
But new landfills are generally larger than the small ones which close.
The few states which actually measured what was happening to landfill capacity reported that it was increasing, in some cases because more waste was being diverted to recycling or waste-to-energy plants.
Of course, the states with good measurements tend to be the ones that had suddenly realised they might run out of capacity, and taken action to avoid that.
In Europe, the availability of landfill space varies enormously.
Britain has plenty.
The bricks from which the Midlands and south-east of England are built come from clay pits that make splendidly impermeable rubbish dumps.
But some of mining's convenient holes are in inconvenient places, far from the cities that generate most waste.
On the continent of Europe, Italy fills old quarries with rubbish.
Elsewhere, geology is sometimes less obliging.
Holland, most of it lying at or below sea-level, finds it hard to dig holes for waste.
But generally speaking, the availability of landfill space is more a matter of politics than geology.
Peter Daley of Waste Management International has pointed out in a lecture to Britain's Royal Academy of Engineering that landfills, at the present rate of waste generation in Europe, use about two square metres of land per person per century.
Even for Holland, that represents an area only twice the size of Schipol airport.
In an article due to appear in the Cato Journal this autumn, Clark Wiseman of Gonzaga University in Washington state offers some similarly ruthless calculations.
If America continues to produce municipal solid waste at present rates for the next 1,000 years, the whole lot will still be containable in a space 100 yards deep and 30 miles square.
Given that America's 48 contiguous states have 3m square miles between them, this hardly suggests a real problem of scarcity.
The rising cost of getting rid of things
The money in muck
ANY difficulty in finding space for rubbish dumps is largely man-made.
Pressure from environmentalists has gradually closed off the easy options for getting rid of waste, raised its cost and altered the shape of the waste-disposal business.
To a man from Mars, the ocean might seem a thoroughly sensible place to dispose of rubbish.
After all, the stuff has to go somewhere: why not put it as far as possible from people, where it poses no threat to drinking water and little threat (fisheries apart) to food?
But if the Martian truly were a little Green man, he might take a different view.
It is wrong, he might argue, to poison the sea with materials whose dispersion is difficult to control.
Besides, dumping at sea is cheap, and so it fails to reflect the possible environmental costs imposed on future generations.
That leaves governments and companies with no incentive to reduce the amount of rubbish they create.
Swayed by similar arguments, the governments of the rich countries have now largely deprived themselves of this option.
A series of international agreements has cut back dumping in the North Sea, to the point where it will be virtually eliminated by 1998, and outlawed incineration at sea.
New York city, banned by federal legislation in 1988 from dumping sewage at sea, has spent $1 billion it can ill afford on plant to convert its sludge into fertiliser.
Will beaches be cleaner as a result?
Almost certainly not.
In New York most beach pollution comes from overloaded storm drains, while in Europe, particularly in the southern countries, many cities discharge their sewage into the sea without treating it at all.
Will waste be more safely treated?
Probably not.
Leaking landfills are just as likely to threaten human health as toxic fish.
Will waste disposal cost more?
Of course.
If the sea is out, the land is increasingly unpopular.
People have become ever more hostile to the idea of living near a rubbish dump.
Opening a new landfill has therefore become a political problem.
Sophisticated voters have become increasingly adept at chasing away new applications for waste-treatment plants.
In America the rigmarole of getting a permit to develop a site can easily cost around $100,000, even before the expense of buying land.
Some of that money goes on convincing the local community.
And the risk is high, as permits are often refused or issued only after three to five years of arduous negotiation.
Expanding an existing landfill is often easier and cheaper than starting a new one from scratch.
In most of the rich countries, both old and new landfills are being forced to meet higher standards.
Dumps are increasingly required to have special liners to stop moisture from seeping in; to collect and treat any liquid that does get in; to monitor the waste that is added to a dump; and to provide for shutting down the landfill at the end of its life and cleaning up any environmental damage that may come later.
In America landfill standards have generally been a matter for individual states.
One result has been that the price of dumping rubbish has varied widely around the country.
Recently, the federal government set its own minimum standards for landfills.
In states where controls have been loose, they will now become much tougher.
In Europe, too, standards are converging.
In Germany, municipal waste can be landfilled only after being sorted and processed; in France, tough new landfill standards have recently been introduced; in Britain, higher standards for new landfills (although not for existing ones) are being introduced under the terms of the 1990 Environmental Protection Act.
The EC Commission has had a directive on landfill on the stocks for some time.
Where standards have risen, so has the price of landfilling.
But it is still generally cheaper than the alternatives of incinerating or recycling.
Standards for incineration have been going up too — in many countries even faster than standards for landfill.
America's 1989 Clean Air Act tightened the rules on air emissions to the point where typically half the capital cost of a new plant goes on air-pollution control equipment.
As landfill prices rise, they influence waste-to-energy prices, since disposing of the ash generated can be as much as one-third of the operating costs of a plant.
And getting a permit for a waste-to-energy plant is every bit as difficult as getting one for a landfill in most places.
While standards have become tighter for landfills and incinerators, they are rarely imposed on the plants at which recycled materials are sorted for reprocessing.
Sorting rubbish is still done largely by hand, often by low-paid or immigrant labour, and is filthy and dangerous work.
Only gradually are technologies being developed to mechanise the task.
Even with higher standards, the arithmetic of waste disposal still generally favours landfills (see chart 3).
And where standards are erratically enforced, the cost advantages are substantial.
That is true even if incineration produces energy that can be sold, or if recycling recovers sellable materials.
Bill Brown, director of environmental affairs at Waste Management Inc, America's biggest waste-management company, spells out the discouraging arithmetic.
‘We lose money on recycling,’ he admits.
‘It costs $150–200 a ton to collect from the kerbside and sort household refuse.
We might make $10 a ton from selling waste materials, and we might avoid $10 a ton of landfill charges.
But the bottom line is that it's not profitable.’
Picking up refuse for recycling can be profitable, if towns are willing to pay for it.
But sorting and reselling rubbish is not.
Waste Management had a facility in Philadelphia that originally took in recyclable materials for free.
Now it charges one part of the city $12 a ton and still loses money.
Mr Brown says it would need to charge $13 a ton to break even.
Similarly dismal conclusions come from a study for the British government by ERL, an environmental consultancy, which calculated that meeting the government's official goal of recycling half the reusable waste in household bins could cost roughly £50 ($10) a household — or twice as much as ordinary rubbish collection.
To justify that, people have to set a very high price on the environmental costs of landfill.
But its existing price arguably includes some allowance for these external costs (think of the cost of winning a permit).
Besides, recycling has environmental costs, too (think of the sludge produced in recycling paper).
Cleaner means bigger
Many of the costs of running a state-of-the-art landfill or incinerator change little with the scale of the operation.
Many of the safety costs, including the costs of monitoring and inspection, do not rise in line with the size of a site.
So there are advantages in running a big landfill or incinerator rather than a small one.
Big operators have the political muscle to win development permits.
Waste Management frankly admits that it approaches that task as a political campaign, spending heavily on advertising and on persuading local communities.
Big companies have the cash to sustain them through the long vicissitudes of permit-winning.
They have the clout to offer the integrated service that cities increasingly want, pulling together collection, disposal and recycling.
They now try to seek out alliances with other companies that want their materials recycled and companies willing to buy recyclables and make them into something useful.
Above all, they can carry risk.
For governments, large operators can offer reassurance that they will still be in business when today's disposal facilities have been closed, to monitor them and (if necessary) pay to clean them up if they go wrong.
In the past decade, the role of the private sector has expanded.
In Britain, this has been the result of the privatisation of collection and disposal services.
In America small town-dumps have been closed, or sold by the cities that owned them to private operators.
In 1984 only 17% of America's landfills were privately owned; by 1991, over half were in private hands.
At the same time, small operators have been disappearing.
In their place, increasingly, are a few giants: Waste Management and Browning Ferris from America, Compagnie Générale des Eaux from France, Edlehoff from Germany (see table on previous page).
The companies moving in often come from other sectors.
Many of Britain's waste managers are in the aggregates business; the two French giants began as water companies; Browning Ferris started life as a haulage company; some of the German companies are owned by electricity utilities.
As waste management becomes a bigger, more professional business, accruing skills from other industries, the large companies will tend to become a lobby for higher standards.
In Britain, for instance, Waste Management International, Shanks & McEwan and Severn Trent/Biffa are enraged that the government has decided to postpone the introduction of the landfill standards in the 1990 Environmental Protection Act, and refuses to apply them to existing landfills.
At present, they argue, landfill prices are actually declining as second-rate operators, in both the private and public sector, stuff rubbish into their dumps at bargain-basement prices.
When tougher controls eventually force these dumps to shut, the bigger companies fear, their operators will vanish, leaving the more reputable companies in the waste-management industry to carry the costs of cleaning up the mess.
The big companies will also be better placed to finance the development of new technologies, turning this traditionally low-tech industry into something closer to chemical engineering.
Already, engineering departments all over America are full of bright young graduates studying soil contamination and leachate control.
But above all, the big companies will bring to the business a sense of the relative costs of different techniques of waste disposal.
They may therefore be able to force governments to examine the economic consequences of bowing too readily to environmental prejudices.
Recycling to extremes
Second time around
MANY people love recycling.
It seems to meet some deep need to atone for modern materialism, by saving some of the materials from the rubbish bin.
Unfortunately, people do not feel quite the same craving to buy products made of recycled materials.
If they did, the whole messy business of recycling would be a great deal easier.
Governments and cities have seized on recycling as the best way to reduce the amount of rubbish going to landfills or being incinerated.
They have set themselves hugely ambitious targets.
Usually, they have conveniently failed to draw up a proper baseline first, or to lay down exactly how they will demonstrate success.
Invariably, they have failed to work out what the economic cost of achieving those targets will be, or to foresee the consequences of a huge and rapid increase in the collection of supposedly recyclable materials.
Some recycling pays for itself and always has done.
Precious metals are recaptured from industrial processes.
Printers gather up offcuts of white paper and card.
British milkmen retrieve milk bottles and bartenders return crates of empty soft-drinks bottles.
In poor countries, recycling is commonplace: markets in Bangladesh display selections of secondhand Coke bottles, and little boys in Ouagadougou sell cast-off plastic bags.
Viable recycling depends on a happy coincidence of materials costs, labour costs and technology.
In the early 1970s, lots of Americans feared their country would vanish under abandoned car hulks.
Then along came the shredder and the electric-arc steel furnace, which gobbled scrap steel.
Hey presto— car hulks were profitably recycled into new steel for new cars.
Now that is changing.
The pressure to make cars lighter, and so more fuel-efficient, has pushed up the proportion of plastic in a typical car, from around 2% of the weight in 1960 to 12% today (see chart 5 on previous page).
Result: less steel per hulk.
But a second more ominous result is a larger amount of plastic scrap, mashed up with car seats, brake fluids, coolants and oil.
As it becomes more expensive to dump dangerous waste, so the economic advantages of shredding deteriorate.
As a result, Germany is now considering legislation to compel car makers to take back and recycle vehicles at the ends of their lives, and its car makers are busily designing cars that can rapidly be dismantled.
They hope to recycle that unwanted plastic, as well as the desirable steel.
Over time, fewer materials have come to be reused or recycled.
One reason is the rise in the price of labour relative to the price of raw materials.
Washing hospital sheets costs more, in some rich countries, than providing disposable bedding; returning soft-drinks bottles through supermarkets to be refilled is dearer than using new ones each time.
Moreover, industries tend to prefer virgin raw materials: they are more likely to be of consistent quality and in dependable supply.
Even so, the prices of virgin raw materials fluctuate — and presently, many are depressed.
When they are low, the prices of recycled materials also decline (chart 6), dragging down the ratio of revenue to collection costs.
In March this year, for instance, Alcoa, Alcan and Reynolds, the world's three big aluminium producers, cut their ‘UBC’(used beverage can) buying price by 2 cents per pound.
The cut simply echoed the decline in the price of virgin aluminium.
Waste materials may be contaminated or laborious to separate.
This is particularly true of household rubbish.
As chart 7 shows, plastics are especially expensive to sort.
Companies, generally speaking, tend to produce relatively few kinds of waste — mainly paper, say, or mainly metal scrap — which makes recycling easier.
In promoting recycling as the best answer to waste disposal, environmentalists are therefore swimming against the tides of the market.
The main constraint on recycling is not the difficulty of persuading people to sort their waste: given encouragement, households and businesses seem surprisingly eager to do so.
The problem is that there are not enough markets to absorb the waste that is available for recycling.
This is partly a matter of technology — more paper mills need to be built with the capacity to take old paper instead of new pulp.
But mainly it is a matter of what producers want.
As a result, the more recycled materials are collected by keen governments, the more their price falls until in some cases it is negative: to persuade a company to take waste plastic for recycling, a large cheque has to be attached to each consignment.
In the case of household waste, the price rarely covers more than a fraction of the cost of collection and sorting.
Package deals
It therefore becomes necessary to rig the market.
So far, the most striking instance has occurred in Germany.
Klaus Töpfer, the federal environment minister, has capitalised on his country's environmental angst by devising a bold principle: that companies should have a legal obligation to take back — and to recycle — their products at the ends of their lives.
So far, legislation has been passed to apply this principle only to packaging.
Many people feel that packaging creates a disproportionate amount of litter.
They dislike the thought of all that paper and plastic and cardboard with no apparent purpose.
Not surprisingly, the packaging industry disagrees.
It argues that good packaging reduces other kinds of waste (by preventing food from going bad or goods from getting broken in transit, for instance).
It points out that packaged peas or tinned grapefruit produces less waste at home than the unpackaged product; and the waste left at the factory is unmixed and so easier to deal with.
Anyway, say packagers, their wrappings have become lighter.
The German government rejects such claims.
In 1991 it passed a packaging ordinance that imposes an obligation on companies to take back the packaging in which goods are transported and sold.
Manufacturers and packagers have arranged to pick up transport wrappings from retailers and have set up a parallel waste-collection scheme, called the ‘Duales System Deutscheland’,(DSD) which picks up recyclable packaging from households and returns it to the manufacturers.
They are responsible for recycling it.
The scheme is backed up with tough quotas, both for the amount of each kind of packaging to be collected, and for the amount to be recycled.
The quotas rise as time passes.
Incineration with energy recovery, which accounts for so much German waste disposal, is not counted as recycling.
The costs of all this are ferocious.
Some fall on consumers who now, in the city of Bonn, wash their rubbish and sort it into four separate bins.
People who put the wrong things into a bin can be fined, theoretically, up to DM100,000 ($12,400).
Bigger costs fall on companies.
Ask officials at the DSD secretariat in Bonn about them and they shrug, ‘It's a legal requirement, so the costs are not important.’
In fact, Gemot Klepper and Peter Michaelis at the Kiel Institute have estimated that it costs a mind-boggling DM2–5 per item — per yoghurt pot, per bacon wrapper — to collect, sort and recycle plastic packages.
To pay for this, companies that take part in the DSD are charged a levy on each package, which must be approved by the organisation as recyclable.
The package can then carry a green spot, to show retailers that they can leave its recycling to the DSD.
Understandably, retailers are unenthusiastic about stocking goods whose packages bear no green spot.
The DSD levies, which up to now have been based on the size of the package, are due to rise sharply in the autumn, and will be higher on the materials which have proved hardest to recycle, especially plastic.
The transfer of DM2 billion-3 billion a year from the consumers' pockets into the waste-management industry will, by the end of this year, rise to DM3 billion-4 billion a year.
Mr Töpfer has threatened to apply a similar scheme to car manufacturers and to the makers of electronic goods, such as computers and television sets.
Progress on these schemes has been slower, partly because recession has sapped German enthusiasm for self-inflicted environmental costs, and partly because of opposition from the federal economics ministry.
But Germany's competitors in Europe are assuming that Mr Töpfer will eventually get his way.
Most car companies are working on projects to make cars more recyclable.
And electronics companies are looking at ways to re-use components and recover materials from their products.
In Britain, the electronics industry has set up a working party to look at the options.
Germany's packaging ordinance is no longer unique.
The French government has told French industry to set up Eco Emballage, a recycling organisation which gives members the right to use a green dot on their packaging in exchange for paying a levy that is being spent on setting up recycling schemes.
Local authorities remain responsible for the basic costs and the task of collecting household waste.
The aim is to raise recycling of packaging by 50% over three years.
At the other extreme is the voluntary but draconian Dutch ‘covenant’ with industry that binds companies to reduce the weight of packaging to below the 1986 level, to end all landfilling and incineration of packaging, and to take back at least 90% of all non-reusable packaging — all by the end of the decade.
Why this headlong enthusiasm for schemes that are invariably expensive?
They have only modest environmental merit, and in some cases none: work by Dow Chemicals suggests that recycling plastic takes more energy than it saves.
The truth is that obligatory recycling protects markets as well as the environment.
Signing on to the DSD scheme, for instance, puts one more barrier in the way of a foreign firm wanting to sell in Germany.
Some German industries have benefited from a new supply of cheap raw materials.
Finnish pulp makers complain that German paper manufacturers have switched from importing virgin pulp to using cheap recycled paper.
Other countries may find themselves under pressure to follow the German lead.
Since last autumn, the British government has been lobbied by increasingly frantic waste-paper merchants and plastics recyclers protesting that their markets are being destroyed by the backwash of German rubbish.
Recoup, a pilot recycling company set up by the plastics industry, was paying local authorities £50–100 a tonne for plastic bottles and was trying to build a market for them.
Now processors say they are being offered plastic waste with a dowry of £50–100 a tonne attached.
In time, things will get worse.
Germany expects to collect 200,000 tonnes of plastic this year; it has capacity to reprocess at most 60,000 tonnes.
British officials thought about banning imports of plastic waste, until the processors pointed out that they would thus be put at a disadvantage to their competitors.
Ideally, the EC Commission would step in with a way to prevent the disruption of trade; but it has been trying unsuccessfully for many months to steer a directive on packaging waste through the council of ministers.
Countries disagree on whether incineration with energy recovery should count towards recycling targets (as in France and Sweden) or not (as in Germany).
The only alternative may be to match subsidy with subsidy.
Britain is now wondering whether to copy France and oblige industry to set up a recycling scheme of its own.
Britain will not be the only country whose unsubsidised domestic recycling industry is threatened by subsidised recycling in Europe.
German industry is scouring the globe for countries where German waste can be recycled.
A list of plants that recycle plastic waste is now being checked by the German quality-control institute for the DSD.
Easily the biggest available capacity is in Eastern Europe and South-East Asia.
But in those countries, and particularly in Asia, scavenging is a source of income for the very poor.
So Europe's subsidised rubbish will deprive some of the world's poorest people of work.
Finding things to make out of unwanted household rubbish will always be technically difficult.
It will be particularly hard with plastic, which is often used to wrap food but cannot, because of the danger of contamination, easily be reused in food containers.
Some recycling might be promoted by regulatory changes: building regulations, for example, often discourage the use of recycled materials.
In the United States, the federal government has used its road-building grants to insist that road-builders must recycle asphalt pavement and include old car tyres in the mixture.
By far the most sensible way to recycle the bulk of municipal waste is by incinerating it and recovering the energy.
The financial costs of incineration, even with high environmental standards, are rarely higher than the costs of recycling.
Most of the unpleasant gases from incinerators can now be scrubbed from their smoke.
Above all, incinerators produce a single product, of predictable quality, for which a market already exists.
If developed countries want to reduce the waste that goes to landfill, rather than simply make green gestures, incineration with energy recovery is the best way to do it.
The limitations of economic instruments
Creating incentives
ENVIRONMENTALISTS argue that the pricing of waste disposal, and especially of landfills, does not fully reflect its environmental costs.
They also argue that, although industries and offices usually pay to have their waste collected, households rarely do so (except, invisibly and at a flat rate, through local taxes).
So households have no incentive to minimise or recycle the waste they create.
In the case of industry and commerce, the market seems to have worked.
The rising costs of waste disposal, and the growing threat of being held liable in future for cleaning up even legally dumped rubbish, have encouraged many larger companies to cut back their muck.
True, recession is probably partly responsible for restraining the growth of industrial waste.
But some companies have made big efforts to throw out less.
Yet it costs individual households nothing more to put out an extra binfull, although the community as a whole will have to pay more; conversely, they save nothing if they recycle or compost or simply buy more carefully.
A number of experiments with financial incentives to reduce rubbish have been tried on both sides of the Atlantic, and others have been considered.
The most direct incentive is to charge people by the amount of rubbish they put out.
Such pay-to-throw schemes are run in over 200 American cities.
The EPA has analysed 109 of them.
Most charge a fixed fee for a basic service and, say, $1.35 for each extra bin of rubbish.
Such schemes have obvious snags.
Collectors rarely weigh the rubbish.
Households have perfected a manoeuvre known as the ‘Seattle stomp’, after the largest American city with a pay-to-throw scheme.
Billing people can be difficult, especially if they live in flats.
Everywhere, chasing defaulters is expensive — and American experience with private billing shows that default rates can run at up to 40% of households.
But the biggest difficulty is the incentive to illicit dumping.
Schemes that work in well-ordered German or American suburbs, whose honest burghers would never dream of squeezing their junk into a neighbour's bin or chucking it over a fence at dead of night, may be less successful in city centres.
One sign: when Seattle started to charge citizens by the bagful, charity shops found their doorsteps knee-deep in unwanted gifts.
Several studies are now examining the effectiveness of pay-to-throw schemes.
One, for the World Resources Institute, compared ten cities that had pay-to-throw schemes with four others that charged flat fees.
It estimated that a fee of $1.50 on each 32-gallon rubbish bag would cut waste by 18%.
If free kerbside recycling schemes were introduced, the volume of waste would fall by over 30%.
These results took no account of illegal dumping.
Two other studies are trying to weigh each household's rubbish before and after the introduction of a pay-to-throw scheme.
One, by Don Fullerton, an economist at Carnegie Mellon University, weighed the rubbish of 100 households before and after the introduction of a pay-to-throw scheme charging 80 cents a bag, in Charlottesville, North Carolina.
He found that the weight of rubbish put out weekly by the average household fell from 25.6 pounds (11.6 kilos) to 23.4 pounds — and the average weight of each rubbish bin rose by just over 42%, as citizens perfected the Seattle stomp.
Recycling also increased, from 8.2 pounds per household each week, to 9.8 pounds after the change.
The second study is being set up by the EPA in a Georgia town which was one of a large number that volunteered to be followed while it switched to a pay-to-throw scheme.
A study based on a volunteer for a show-piece environmental project may turn out to have drawbacks, too.
If a household chose only between the rubbish bin and recycling, Mr Fullerton points out, then a pay-to-throw scheme might indeed be the best way to capture the external costs that household rubbish imposes on the rest of society.
But there is a third choice — illegal dumping, or burning rubbish in the back garden — whose social costs may be even higher than the social costs of landfills.
Instead, the logical policy is to tax consumption, at a rate which reflects not the disposal cost of a good but the costs which would be inflicted on society if it were illegally dumped.
The tax should then be returned as a subsidy on all recycling and all proper rubbish disposal, leaving a tax only on illicit dumping.
Which is, of course, roughly where conventional rubbish-collection policy has been for a long time.
Another option is that of refundable deposits.
These are applied to drinks bottles and cans in nine American states and several European countries.
A review of American schemes carried out in 1990 by the General Accounting Office found that they reduced the total amount of litter by 10–20% by weight and 40–60% by volume.
But at what cost?
David Pearce, an environmental economist at University College London, began as an enthusiast for deposit-refund schemes.
Having studied one in Australia, he reluctantly concluded that their costs exceeded their benefits.
The best use for deposit-refund schemes may be to encourage the return of material whose toxicity makes it especially important that it be disposed of safely, such as car batteries and engine oil.
Even here, though, there are dangers: set a deposit too high, and every car battery becomes a potential money-earner for the light-fingered.
What about a virgin-materials tax?
That, in theory, ought to offer an elegant way to encourage people to use less and recycle more, not by taxing the output of waste, but by making new materials more expensive to use.
Such a tax would not encourage illegal disposal, and might be adjusted to hit toxic materials harder than those whose disposal is harmless.
No country has yet applied such a tax.
The obvious difficulty would be what to do about imports.
GATT rules make it hard to levy a tax on the estimated value of the virgin materials incorporated in an import.
And there would be other problems.
If the tax is intended to discourage landfill, ought it to be based on the volume of a product?
If to encourage recycling, should it not reflect the relative cost to industry of switching from virgin to recycled materials?
If it were imposed on a narrow range of products, would it not encourage substitution (from plastics to glass, for instance)?
Some of these problems arise with another untried option: recycling credits.
Increasingly, American states have passed laws to insist on some recycled content in, for example, newsprint.
These might offer the best way to improve the cost-effectiveness of such targets.
Firms that did better than the target would be rewarded with credits which they could sell to firms that did worse.
The most efficient recyclers would thus have an incentive to go further than they would otherwise do.
The drawbacks would be mainly administrative: how to ensure that products really did contain as much recycled material as was claimed — and how to apply the scheme to imports.
A final option is a landfill tax.
Such a tax is imposed in New Jersey and Pennsylvania, applied in France and being considered in Britain.
By jacking up the price of the cheapest disposal route, a landfill tax makes other options look more attractive.
It would, note, generally fall not on the individual household, but on whichever public authority is responsible for waste collection — and thus on local taxpayers — and on companies that bring their rubbish straight to the dump.
A landfill tax may encourage recycling, but not necessarily: a study for the British government by Coopers & Lybrand, a consultancy, recently argued that the main effect of a levy would be to encourage incineration.
Even at £20 ($11) a tonne, the study claimed, half of all domestic waste would still go to landfills, 38% would be incinerated (compared with 15% today) and 12% of domestic waste would be recycled (compared with 2% now).
Even if an effective way could be found to pass on the costs of rubbish disposal to the average household, an awkward fact would remain.
Even on the most extravagant assumptions about land costs, transport and environmental effects, landfilling rubbish is cheap.
It will never be a large enough part of the family budget to create an adequate financial incentive for people to change their ways.
That is why environmentalists have often clamoured for regulation, as the best way to conceal the true costs of policy.
Who should clean up old dumps?
How much?
Old horrors
MOST kinds of pollution conveniently vanish soon after they have been created.
Nasty gases and smoke disperse into the ether; sewage eventually floats out to sea.
Solid waste is different: unless it is burned or buried at sea, it lingers on as a visible souvenir.
As environmental standards rise, especially for water quality, people worry more about cleaning up land that has been contaminated by past dumping.
But who should pay for such clean-ups?
Increasingly, the courts search for past polluters and pass the bill to them.
This practice, common in America and spreading to Europe, has had a more dramatic effect on corporate attitudes to waste management than almost anything else.
For it suggests that they may be penalised in future for environmental damage which was legal at the time they allowed it to happen.
The most striking example is in America.
Cleaning up contaminated land has become the most expensive and controversial aspect of American environmental policy.
It corresponds, in a sense, to Europe's passion for recycling: it is an area in which environmental goals have parted company from a rational consideration of means.
Obligations to clean up land arise under a number of programmes.
Some of them impose burdens mainly on the private sector.
Others, such as the need to treat old military sites owned by the departments of energy and defence, will fall on the taxpayer.
The total cost is unknowable: it will depend, for instance, on how clean the sites have to be and on whether clean-up technologies improve in future.
But one very rough guess by Paul Portney of Resources for the Future suggests a cumulative cost, in 1990 dollars, of perhaps $136 billion, roughly half of which will fall on the private sector and disproportionately on manufacturing.
Another guess, by a team at the University of Tennessee, thought that the cost could run up to $1 trillion, if standards were stringent.
Most of the debate about cleaning contaminated sites has concentrated on the Superfund programme.
Under this, the EPA is responsible for cleaning up the most contaminated sites and then recovering the cost from the bodies held responsible for the contamination.
The basis for passing on the bill is extraordinarily wide.
Liability is ‘strict’: the government does not have to prove negligence, only that an enterprise was involved at a waste site (mainly as the present or past owners and operators of the site, or the generator or shipper of the waste).
It is ‘joint and several’: anybody involved may have responsibility for the whole site, however slight the involvement.
And it is retroactive: it applies even to actions that were legal at the time.
Superflop
The Superfund programme has not been a success.
Although it has been running for 13 years, few sites have so far been cleaned up to the EPA's satisfaction.
The programme has cost the federal government over $1 billion a year.
But enormous sums are also being spent by polluters and their insurers, not just on cleaning up but also on legal fees, as the courts struggle to decide who should pay what share of the bills.
A study published last year by the Rand Corporation, a think-tank in California, found that 88% of the money spent by insurers went on legal fees and other paperwork costs.
Even though that share seemed to fall over time, as claims were settled, the $170m insurers spent in such unproductive ways in 1989 alone would have paid for the treatment of 15 sites.
Such figures have caught the attention of Bill Clinton, who admitted in his ‘state of the union’ address that Superfund needed to be re-examined.
Perversely, the existing system has begun to attract support, from three sources.
First, quite a lot of people now make money from Superfund.
They include all the many companies which treat contaminated sites and some environmental lawyers, who lobby sternly against changing this lucrative arrangement; and many states which have Superfund sites providing local employment at federal or corporate expense.
Cleaning up contamination is wonderfully labour-intensive: some old military sites being cleaned up by the Department of Energy now employ twice as many people as they did at their peak of production.
For these — unlike Superfund sites — the cash comes entirely from the federal government.
Secondly, the companies that have already spent money on cleaning up are reluctant to see others let off the hook.
They argue that Superfund might be improved, but should not be swept away.
Third, some analysts who have studied Superfund admit its weaknesses but argue that its shortcomings are less than those of the alternatives.
Kate Probst, of Resources for the Future, argues that it is usually fairer to penalise polluters than to leave the taxpayer to clean up dirty old sites.
After all, if the taxpayer footed the entire bill, some polluters would enjoy windfall gains — especially now that land prices have begun to incorporate contamination costs.
Miss Probst points out that the law gives the private sector a strong incentive to clean up at the lowest possible cost.
When the Rand study looked at five giant companies with Superfund sites, it found that their legal fees were only 21% of what they spent on cleaning up, and much less when only one company was involved in cleaning a site.
If taxpayers footed the bill, those costs might well be higher.
Rand found that some firms were even trying to avoid bad publicity by cleaning up sites before they were put on the Superfund list.
Indeed, sometimes there were hardly any transaction costs at all.
It may be almost impossible to allocate the costs of cleaning up old sites in a way that is both fair and efficient.
Even if it were, a more basic question would remain: up to what standards should a site be treated?
The answer, in a rational world, would depend on the future use of the site.
It would also take account of the fact that evidence linking hazardous waste with harm to human health is uncertain, at best.
When, in 1987, the EPA did a laborious review of the relative seriousness of America's environmental problems, it ranked old hazardous-waste sites below 30 others.
Second, the technology for cleaning a site, rather than simply sealing it, is still inadequate and expensive.
A study by America's Office of Technology Assessment admits that ‘Some clean-up problems have no good treatment solutions.’
Yet clean-up, on EPA estimates, costs roughly twice as much as containment.
Clearly, it could make sense to seal many sites and leave them until better treatments have been developed.
But it takes great courage for a politician to try and persuade voters of that fact.
Public-opinion polls have found that contaminated sites are the environmental problem that Americans feel most squeamish about.
The problems of clearing up are also now becoming more pressing in Europe.
One reason is the need to clean up the mess in Eastern Europe left by Soviet military installations and sloppily run Communist mines and factories.
Germany has decided that 90% of the costs of cleaning sites in the eastern states should be split between state and federal governments; the new owner should carry only 10% of the costs.
The aim of this is to avoid discouraging new investment, although the 10% share still represents an open-ended liability.
Eastern Europe cannot draw on the deep pockets of the German taxpayer; the danger of being landed with a bill for remedying sites there is a big deterrent to foreign investors.
Another reason for Europe's greater interest is the change in the manufacturing base, as heavy industries give way to offices and shops and derelict land seeks new occupants.
Germans are uncomfortably aware that some parts of the Ruhr are just as dirty as anything the Communists left behind in the east.
A third reason is the rise in water-quality standards, which mean more attention is paid to monitoring contamination in water supplies.
In Britain the courts have recently decided that a leather firm should pay the Cambridge Water Company almost £1m in damages for contaminating one of its boreholes with chlorinated solvents, even though the solvents were disposed of 17 years ago in a way that was legal at the time.
The damage was discovered because EC rules forced the water company to monitor more closely the quality of its water.
The case is currently on its way to the House of Lords.
Until recently, European countries have been far more willing than America for the public sector to pay much of the cost for cleaning up.
Where the private sector has been legally liable for the costs of doing so, liability has been much more limited than in America.
The Dutch parliament has recently decided that owners of contaminated sites should aim to clean them up to a level that is suitable for any use, but has accepted that where such a policy is uneconomic, it would be sufficient to isolate, control and monitor the land.
Several countries are reviewing the issue of environmental liability.
In March, the European Commission published an extremely tentative paper on remedying environmental damage.
It seems to favour ‘strict’ liability, in which negligence does not have to be proved, and some kind of joint compensation scheme, financed by payments from enterprises whose activities were ‘most closely linked to the type of damage needing restoration’— and, perhaps, the taxpayer.
To clean up dirty land efficiently and cheaply will need, above all, pragmatism and moderation.
Obviously, water sources need to be protected — although sometimes it will be cheaper to purify the water than to clean the filth that pollutes it.
Where land is already spoilt, it may make more sense to find appropriate uses for it than to clean it up.
It might be better to seal off some of the most polluted land — like America's vast military estates — from the public and leave it as new wildernesses.
What better protection for the rich world's vanishing wildlife than a tract of land that stays untouched because people are frightened to visit?
Why waste is exported
Going abroad
HIGHER disposal costs encourage those who produce waste to look for cheaper ways to get rid of it.
And as the disposal industry becomes more capital-intensive, in response to the rise in standards, disposal plants need a larger and more reliable stream of material.
The treatment of hazardous waste is particularly expensive and needs especially sophisticated equipment.
As a result, the tendency for waste — especially hazardous waste — to cross borders is especially marked.
Not just national borders: in America, for instance, 8% of the 180m tons of municipal solid waste generated each year is disposed of in a different state, mainly the one next door but increasingly farther afield.
The main driving force is the rise in tipping fees on the east coast, relative to those in the midwest.
A study by Margaret Walls and Barbra Marcus for Resources for the Future found that New York and New Jersey accounted for just over half of all interstate exports of waste.
Tipping fees at New York city's only landfill, Fresh Kills, rose from $10 to $150 a ton between October 1991 and July 1992; in northern New Jersey, tipping fees have shown a similar increase.
Two of the largest importers of waste are Ohio and Indiana, where the average tipping fee is $11 a ton.
Not surprisingly, it costs less for New York and New Jersey to send their rubbish halfway across America than to tip it at home.
In a rational world, such trade would be welcome.
Waste processing would be an industry like any other.
Some regions and countries would have a comparative advantage, either because they were sparsely populated or because they cared less about the smell of a rubbish dump than their more pernickety neighbours did.
But many places hate importing other people's rubbish.
The top end of the waste-management industry encourages such scruples: after all, if waste can go to the cheapest hole, who will pay for expensive treatment plants?
So cities, states and countries increasingly try to keep their waste facilities to themselves.
Several midwestern American states and even some countries have tried to ban waste imports.
In 1990 Indiana passed a law that obliged transporters to certify that their rubbish included no medical or hazardous waste, and charged them tipping fees equal to those at the landfill nearest the place that had sent the rubbish.
In Europe last summer, France banned all imports of domestic waste after intercepting German trucks carrying hospital waste, sometimes hidden in ordinary household rubbish.
Controlling the movements of waste is a legal quagmire.
The main problem is separating the concept of a waste from the concept of a raw material.
One test is whether a material has an economic value.
But whether, say, used office paper has an economic value may depend on whether it has been collected and sorted.
Value may also depend on the price of other raw materials: when the price of oil was high, companies in America would pay to collect and clean used fuel oil.
Now the oil price has fallen and the business has collapsed.
Is used oil therefore a waste?
Why, lawyers ask, should waste be treated differently from trade in other goods?
Interestingly, the place where this question has been raised most insistently has not been in the GATT or in Brussels, but in the American courts.
Had their judgments on waste been issued by GATT, they would no doubt have provoked uproar from environmental activists.
For the courts have repeatedly ruled that discrimination against waste from other states violates the interstate commerce clause of the American constitution.
Fortress filth
A number of bills before Congress would make it easier for states to block imports of waste.
The new EPA standards for landfills may help to reduce cross-border trade, by setting uniform minimum standards across the country.
But, as Ms Walls and Ms Marcus point out, a better way to direct the trade is through the solution that the market has come up with: private waste-management companies now typically pay host fees to places that are willing to accept a new landfill.
For instance Chambers Development, a waste-management company from Pittsburgh, has guaranteed Charles City county in Virginia a host fee of at least $1.14m a year to open a landfill.
That is not much less than the county's entire annual tax revenues before the landfill opened.
The fee will come from a charge on each ton of waste going into the landfill, and rises steeply as the tonnage increases.
The American courts have resisted controls on interstate transport of all kinds of waste.
That is an easier position to implement than the one taken by the countries which drew up the Basle convention on transboundary movements of hazardous waste, agreed in 1989 and in force since May last year.
The convention insists that signatories should aim to treat their own hazardous wastes at home, as the greenest countries (chart 8) have notably failed to do.
They should not export them without first getting permission from the importer and making sure that the receiving country can dispose of them properly.
Elaborate procedures are set out to ensure that both the exporter and the importer know what the wastes are, and where they have come from.
But the Basle convention fails to offer a watertight answer to the awkward question: which waste is hazardous?
Each country has its own definitions, some more comprehensive than others.
Basle's basic principle is that if the country exporting a waste does not regard it as hazardous, it does not need to ask the consent of the importing country in order to ship it.
Some countries, such as Germany, do not regard a waste as hazardous if it is intended for recycling.
So German companies can export anything deemed recyclable by German law to other countries, without giving any formal notification.
Trade in recyclables is the Achilles heel of waste regulation.
It is a large industry.
Of the 500m tonnes of industrial and domestic waste that OECD Europe produces each year, roughly a third is recovered rather than incinerated or buried.
To avoid restricting the scrap business, the OECD countries agreed, before the Basle convention was signed, to allow wastes that can be recycled, including metals, plastic and car tyres, to be traded among its 24 industrial members with minimal controls.
When the EC wanted to ratify the Basle convention, it decided to extend that principle to trade by EC members with non-OECD countries.
Environmentalists are aghast.
They argue that lots of imported scrap is, in fact, highly contaminated with heavy metals; and that much ‘recyclable’ waste that crosses borders is going to importers with no means or intention of recycling it.
Controlling this trade will not get easier.
Indeed, waste-smuggling will become one of the growth industries of the early 21st century.
What are the alternatives?
One is to try to raise waste-disposal standards everywhere.
If developed countries do not want their rubbish to end up in the third world, they must help developing countries to build better treatment facilities and enforce higher standards.
Conversely, if developing countries dislike being used as illicit rubbish dumps, they must devote much more cash and effort to improving the quality of their own waste-disposal facilities, and preventing illegal dumping.
That is a tall order.
There are better options.
First, developed countries must accept that high standards and costs for waste disposal will always increase the incentive to dump and cheat.
They must take this into account when devising their own waste-management policies.
It is vital to take only those measures whose costs match their likely benefits.
Expensive gestures may be good for political show; they will also mean more waste dumped in the wrong places.
Second, governments need to apply financial instruments to the materials society uses rather than to the wastes it creates.
Measures that drive up the costs of waste disposal may appear to fulfil the principle that polluters should pay for the dirt they create; but they also encourage waste to end up where it should not.
If a government taxes, say, the use of nasty chemicals, it may run into problems with its domestic industry, which will complain that foreign competitors escape scot-free.
But countries cannot have it both ways: the cost of a cleaner environment may sometimes be fewer jobs in dirty industries, which will migrate to less environmentally sensitive lands.
One useful incentive is public information.
In America a law that forces companies to measure and disclose all the toxic waste they produce has had a significant effect.
Numbers not only give managers a better sense of their company's impact on the environment; they provide a baseline against which to judge waste reduction.
Such openness might be extended to non-toxic waste.
Third, adopt the Charles City county approach.
Rich countries should accept that they do not have, and never will have, facilities to recycle more than a fraction of the rubbish they create.
Instead they should offer to pay other countries handsomely — and openly — to take the stuff off their hands.
Legalised exports of waste from rich countries to poorer ones are much better than a black market.
Poor countries, rather than banning imports of hazardous waste — as the Organisation of African Unity tried to do in the 1989 Bamako convention — should accept it and legalise it.
That way they can make sure that the host fees benefit the whole country, rather than slipping into the pockets of a few crooks.
They can also demand that the rich countries build them adequate waste-treatment plants.
Coping with waste will always be hard, and hypocrisy and wishful thinking will not make it easier.
The best way to reduce the amount of rubbish that goes into the domestic bin is not to persuade people to sort out unwanted recyclables.
It is to persuade them to buy less and to buy differently.
That may be more difficult, but it is ultimately more likely to lead to a cleaner world.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL INDICATORS
OUTPUT, DEMAND AND JOBS
Output in both France and Sweden was unchanged in March, though over the year it fell by 2.8% in France and 3.9% in Sweden.
Revised figures show that Britain's GDP rose at an annual rate of 1.4% in the first quarter, up from the original estimate of 1.1%.
France's retail sales climbed by 4.4% in the year to March.
Spanish retail sales fell by 12.6% in the year to April; Holland's edged up by 0.5% in the year to February.
In April Britain's unemployment rate was unchanged at 10.5% of the workforce.
PRICES AND WAGES
Western Germany's annual rate of producer-price inflation edged down to 0.1% in April, from 0.3% in March.
The annual rate of consumer-price inflation in Britain fell to 1.3% in April as poll-tax charges were removed from the calculation; this was the smallest year-on-year rise since February 1964.
French consumer prices rose by 2.1% in the year to April; Canada's consumer prices rose by 1.8% during the same period.
BUSINESS CONFIDENCE
Businessmen are feeling more confident than they were three months ago in 10 of the 14 countries covered by Dun & Bradstreet's latest survey of sales expectations.
Mexicans are the cheeriest: comparing optimists and pessimists, a net 76% of Mexican businessmen expect sales to rise in the second quarter of this year, compared with 69% in the first quarter.
Confidence has risen most in Britain, where signs of economic recovery helped net optimism to 42%, more than twice its level in the first quarter.
Italy's businessmen are bullish, too.
Their net confidence rose from 24% to 46%.
Cheerfulness also reigns in America, Germany, Canada and Australia.
But the Japanese remain gloomy; there, pessimists outweigh optimists by 20%.
COMMODITY PRICE INDEX
The price of coffee, which rose 50% from a 20-year low between August and the end of 1992, has fallen by 7% this week, to an average of 60 cents a lb.
Brazil's current coffee crop is estimated at only 20m bags (of 60 kilos apiece), compared with 27m bags in 1991–92; Colombia's crop is likely to fall by 10%, to below 16m bags, in 1992–93.
In the first 11 months of 1992 Brazil exported 15m bags of coffee — 14% fewer than in the same period of 1991.
Central American producers, however, are filling the gap by selling more coffee this year.
And consumer stocks have risen since November 1991 by 2m bags, to 18.6m, which should ease the pressure on the market.
PENSION FUNDS
The investment strategies of pension funds vary surprisingly from country to country.
Investment theory suggests that, on average, pension funds everywhere should favour equities.
Historically, over almost any run of three or four years or more, equities have outperformed bonds and, as pension funds are investing for members' retirements, they can take the long view.
British equities account for more than half of the assets of British funds; foreign equities are a further 20%.
American funds also prefer equities.
But more than half the assets of Japanese and German funds are bonds.
They prefer them mainly because they face regulations that reward stable growth in returns from year to year rather than the more volatile — but, in the long-run, almost certainly higher — returns they would earn by holding more equities.
TRADE, EXCHANGE RATES AND RESERVES
France's visible-trade surplus narrowed to $170m in January, raising its 12-month total to $1.9 billion.
This compares with a deficit of $1.5 billion a year ago.
Sweden's current-account deficit shrank slightly in the year to March, to $1.1 billion.
In trade-weighted terms the dollar and D-mark both fell by 0.6% during the week and the yen rose by 1.8%.
WORLD BOURSES
Hong Kong soared by 3.1% on the week to an all-time high, on growing hopes that America will renew China's most-favoured nation status.
Wall Street ended the week 2.1% higher after briefly reaching a record high.
Milan rose by 2.6%.
MONEY AND INTEREST RATES
The Bank of France cut its prime rate by 20 basis points to 8.8%.
German broad money grew by 8.8% in the year to April and its narrow measure expanded by 9.1%.
Britain's wide-money growth eased slightly to 3.5% in the 12 months to April.