

Integrating services for the under fives
Attempting to integrate under fives
Policy in Islington, 1983–8
Margaret Boushel, Clare Debenham, Lisa Dresner and Anna Gorbach
During the 1980s Margaret Boushel, Claire Debenham, Lisa Dresner and Anna Gorbach worked in the London borough of Islington within social services for pre-school children.
This chapter is an account of the way they perceived attempts to develop integrated provision for under fives and the barriers in attitudes and systems which were encountered.
The first section provides an overview of provision and services in 1983.
The next section describes attempts to create a clear under-fives policy.
The third section looks at the faltering progress towards integrated services.
The fourth section examines the formidable barriers that were posed by reorganisation of social services, local authority cuts and the demise of the Inner London Education Authority.
The chapter concludes with a mixture of resignation and determination.
BACKGROUND: UNDER-FIVES SERVICES IN ISLINGTON, 1983
Islington is a multi-ethnic, inner city London borough with a child population of 29,000.
In 1982, 44 per cent of under fives in Islington had the use of an under-fives facility, 29 per cent on a full-time and 15 per cent on a part-time basis.
Between 1982 and 1988 provision gradually increased, so that by 1988 there were 12 children's day centres, about 70 playgroups and 350 assisted child-minding places funded partially or totally by the Social Services Department, and 1,075 full-time and 824 part-time places in nursery schools funded by the Inner London Education Authority.
The Beacon Nursery, a local Mencap project, offered care five days per week to children over one year of age categorised as having severe learning difficulties.
Unlike council day centres, playgroups or community nurseries, the Beacon Nursery was free.
Children were collected from home by special bus and places were available on demand.
The Beacon had been in existence for many years and in the past had catered for up to thirty children with a wide range of disabilities and needs.
By 1983 it had half that number on roll.
Since 1983 numbers at the Beacon continued to fall as it was increasingly seen as a resource for children with severe and multiple disabilities.
In addition the Elfreda Rathbone  organisation, a voluntary organisation helping people with learning disabilities, ran a free day nursery in the borough for a small number of children with learning difficulties.
Some integrated services emerged in the early 1980s — one playscheme was developed through a parent's initiative, and an integrated adventure playground was established by a voluntary organisation.
Workers from the integrated playscheme subsequently supported a local special school in integrating under fives into a playgroup.
In addition to its mainstream schools, the borough included five special schools providing primary and secondary education to children with special needs from Islington and neighbouring boroughs — one for children with moderate learning difficulties, one for children with severe learning difficulties, one for children with emotional and behavioural difficulties, one for autistic children, and one for children with physical disabilities.
In 1983 three of these offered nursery places to children from the age of 2.
The children using all of these services came from a wide range of ethnic backgrounds, though rarely was this actively and positively reflected in the type of care provided or the ethnic background of their carers.
Residential units
By 1983 residential services were designed with ‘care in the community’ in mind, but most were based in specialist settings.
For example, Field End House had been open for three years as a specialist unit for children with learning difficulties, and was designed to offer respite ‘round the clock’ care.
Parents had fought for this as a local resource to prevent the need for children to be placed in long-stay placements far from home.
By 1988 Field End had been joined by another specialist children's respite care unit at Leigh Road.
The Social Services Department also provided thirteen short-term and long-term residential units for children in care (by 1988 their number had been reduced to eleven), none with wheelchair access and only one with any experience of caring for children with learning difficulties.
The Community Health Team
The Community Health Team had major responsibility for assessing children and recommending provision.
It included physiotherapists, occupational and speech therapists, doctors, psychologists and a specialist health visitor.
They were joined in the network by specialist teachers, funded by the ILEA and based in the special schools, who visited children at home before they were due to start school.
This group of people met on a regular basis to coordinate services and discuss professional issues.
Discussion of services to individual children also took place.
This included deciding between day care or school, and parents' attitudes  to different options.
Often a member of the group was delegated to advise parents on a course of action.
The Community Health Team aim was to ensure a place of treatment for children from the earliest possible age, to enable them to develop to their fullest potential.
They were, however, an all-White group, operating without directly involving parents and were generally committed to specialist care in the community.
They gave support to the Beacon and Elfreda Rathbone nurseries and most members saw these settings as the best places to ‘treat’ children.
Because of their early contact with parents they often had considerable influence in steering parents towards specialist provision.
The Special Services Team
In the early 1980s social workers were funded jointly by the ILEA and Islington Social Services Department to work with children attending two special schools and two specialist units for ‘partially hearing’ children.
These social workers were based in the borough's Special Services Team.
They all worked with some under fives attending the schools they covered.
They were aware of a number of pre-school children who did not have adequate access to resources or support when parents and professionals were becoming aware of the possible extent and implications of the disability.
When a vacancy arose within this group of social workers in 1983 it was decided to appoint someone specialising in work with under fives with special needs.
This might have had the effect of drawing families into the specialist system at an earlier stage.
Instead, for a number of reasons, it proved to be a key step in the development of the debate about integration in Islington.
First, the post was not attached to any specialist institution.
There was an expectation but not a contractual obligation that the postholder would work closely with the Beacon Nursery.
Second, the worker had an alternative peer group of under-fives workers who were key figures in controlling access to all other under-fives facilities.
Third, the worker was committed to the idea that treatment of a medical or disabling condition should not take precedence over the child's social, emotional and cultural needs.
There was now a new worker in the network who also made an early relationship with families but who could present a broader choice of day care to parents.
ATTEMPTING AN INTEGRATION POLICY
The Labour Council, elected in 1982, had as a stated policy aim that every child whose parents so wished was entitled to a pre-school place of some sort.
This led to the initiation of an under-fives review.
The review team, set up under the auspices of the Social Services Committee, included councillors, senior departmental management and representatives of the children's day centre organisers and under-fives social workers in its membership.
It proposed a network of  under-fives centres throughout the borough — an idea which the under-fives workers had been anxious to promote for some time.
Day care in each area would be organised and coordinated through the children's day centres which would also provide information, support and resources to parents.
The review had made no mention of children with special needs.
The specialist social worker and another under-fives worker with a personal interest in the issues undertook a supplementary review to examine resources for these children.
They interviewed parents, specialist professionals and mainstream day-care workers and they designed a questionnaire which was completed by workers in a large proportion of mainstream council services and voluntary organisations, as well as by some child-minders.
Broadly, the survey confirmed that parents of children with special needs had not been given a real choice of placement, and that they had to fight hard for mainstream provision if this was their choice.
Parents wanted to be part of the decision-making and did not feel that they were.
Many commented on lack of information about the range of facilities on offer.
One Afro-Caribbean woman described how she felt that she was never given a choice of provision for her son, and objected to being told he should be in a specialist nursery for his own good.
She fought hard to get him a part-time playgroup place in the group his older brother attended.
Because the group had known her and her children for some time they agreed to ‘have a go’ and the placement went ahead.
She commented:
I had to fight every step of the way for this.
No one told me about it, and no one wanted him to have it.
I knew it was right for him — this is where he learnt to join in and be like other children.
It doesn't matter that he's not like them.
I know what is right for my child, but I'm not supposed to say.
Parents also wanted an increased availability of specialist ‘therapy’ time, but wanted it to be used in a more flexible way.
Some parents were very worried that more integrated settings would lead to lack of attention for children with special needs.
Definitions of ‘special needs’ varied widely in the questionnaire responses — some defining it as children with disabilities, some including children with behavioural and emotional problems and some including children whose first language was not English.
This made the survey difficult to interpret.
The findings were documented in a report A Place For All Our Children (CCUF 1983) and an analysis was prepared of the practical and bureaucratic problems in gaining an ordinary childcare place for a child with special needs, with suggestions for how these might be overcome.
These ideas were informed by a paper which had already been produced by an active member of the local Mencap group, who had previously tried to generate the debate within the Community Health Service through the Mencap committee.
The conference: ‘A place for all our children'
As a result of this work the Coordinating Committee for Under Fives (CCUF), an umbrella organisation of statutory and voluntary sector groups and individuals providing a service to under fives, decided to organise a conference to look at the issues of integration of special needs children within mainstream provision.
Prior to the conference various groups met to produce short contributions to the debate.
These included parents, under-fives workers, specialist workers, children's day centre organisers and playgroups organisers.
Each of these groups came up with a list of proposals which were sent to everyone attending.
About 230 people attended the conference, held in April 1985.
Workshops facilitated by the speakers and the conference organising group examined integration policies, overcoming practical problems for children in integrated provision and available sources of information.
The conference made the following recommendations:
1
For a formal, universal information system, covering local and specialist resources.
2
For children's needs to be considered with parents and their wishes acknowledged and recognised.
3
For employment of extra staff where needed, and employment of peripatetic special needs workers.
4
For availability of money for equipment, toys and adaptations.
5
For enhanced payments to child-minders caring for children with special needs.
6
For priority status for children with special needs in order to facilitate access to ordinary provision.
7
For training facilities for staff in ordinary provision, specialist provision and child-minders.
8
For greater communication and sharing of resources between ordinary and specialist provision.
9
For therapeutic and professional staff to reflect the cultural backgrounds of the children, and that for all children, including those with special needs, their day-care environment and activities to express a consciousness of the multicultural society in Islington.
It was made clear that all of the above areas needed funding from health, education and social services before they could be implemented.
Finally, it was felt that unless the attitudes of advisers and information-givers became more positive towards integration, none of the recommendations could be effective.
The Social Services Department had responsibility for carrying out many of the recommendations of the conference.
The message came loud and clear from all quarters that until council services were more welcoming to children with special needs, parents would continue to choose specialist provision out of caution.
Unfortunately, at this point neither senior management staff in the Social  Services Department nor the local councillors involved in the conference presented the Conference Report to the Social Services Committee for ratification as council policy.
The core group who organised the conference were basic grade workers in the department who did not know the processes by which policy change is effected.
As a result there was no informed discussion within the department or at the Social Services Committee about resource issues and the status of the recommendations remained vague.
The sub-committee
In the absence of official support we established a Special Needs Sub-committee of the Coordinating Committee for Under Fives to further the conference recommendations and the proposals of The Fish Report (ILEA 1985) on special education provision within ILEA, which favoured integration.
The group eventually included representatives from health, education and social services with a small representation of parents and voluntary groups.
Battles were waged in meetings of the sub-committee and the level of organisational resistance to change became clear.
Many community health workers attended and expressed their scepticism about moves to greater integration.
They said children needed trained professionals to care for them and carry out their treatment programmes.
They also felt that specialist workers could pass on skills and ideas to others, but it would take time.
If children were integrated, workers would have to travel to many different centres and spend time training carers.
Their aim was care in the community, but not anywhere in the community!
Interestingly, few of the workers at the Beacon or Elfreda Rathbone had ‘specialist’ training, but they had experience of specialist segregated provision and an approach which focused on the ‘special needs’of a child rather than on ‘total needs’.
THE PROGRESS OF INTEGRATION
Despite professional and organisational inertia and resistance, some things did happen!
There were a number of areas where greater willingness was apparent to include children with special needs and make services more locally responsive.
Day-care provision
Successful integrated day-care placements for under fives were negotiated by the specialist social worker and the parents, or sometimes the parents alone or the parents with another committed individual.
It involved hard work and long discussions, dealing with fears, anxieties and practical problems, which needed to continue long after the child had been placed.
Even when day centres or playgroups were willing they were often still very nervous, and afraid of making mistakes.
This could lead to over-protectiveness and care had to be taken to ensure that a child was involved in all the group's activities.
Playgroups
Following the CCUF conference playgroups responded most rapidly.
To some degree they had already been catering for children with special needs.
Because of their small size and their close connections with local parents, playgroups were responsive and flexible in their way of working.
Despite unsuitable premises, lack of funding and a dearth of promised support from the council, many groups tried hard to accommodate children's needs.
Their staff were generally willing to ‘have a go’, and with some information and support went a long way in challenging their own attitudes and those of other children and parents.
Some children moved out of specialist provision into playgroups (full or part time) and made considerable strides in social relationships, becoming part of a community and friendship network which continued into their schooldays, whether or not they went to special school at 5 years.
Day centres
Some individual placements were being made in children's day centres.
Although it was policy for all children to be welcome in council provision, in reality this was highly variable.
Access was dependent on parents receiving the information and encouragement to apply, experiencing the organiser and staff of the centre as welcoming and willing to learn about and accommodate the child's needs.
They had to be willing, too, to wait for a place to become available.
Some extremely successful placements have been made in council day centres.
Sometimes centres were able to relieve any additional pressure on staff by allocating the equivalent of two places to one child.
In some cases extra support has been unnecessary.
Child-minding
A few children were also placed with child-minders, who were awarded additional payments by the council if the child required sufficient extra attention that s/he needed to take up more than one place.
This led to battles with senior management who questioned the status of the policy decision to implement the new system.
The specialist nursery
The Beacon Nursery was taken over by the council, as requested by Mencap.
This could have provided opportunities for structural change and review.
These never took place.
Senior management failed to take a lead in clarifying the role of the Beacon in the department's services to under fives.
What did happen was that the nursery staff felt themselves to be part of a wider childcare system and took advantage of formal and informal links.
There was exchange of information and  sometimes of staff and children.
The nursery was also influenced by the council's equal opportunities policies — for example, staff took part in a conference considering anti-racist strategies with under fives.
A consideration of these ideas fostered the recognition that the children had social, racial and cultural identities as well as disabilities.
As a result of more able children taking up integrated placements or moving into school, the Beacon was now catering for a very small number of multiply disabled children, who were highly segregated as a result.
Residential provision
As a result of two consultation days held to examine possibilities for greater integration in residential provision for children and young people with special needs, a series of recommendations were made to and accepted by the Social Services Committee in January 1987.
These included: developing a respite care service, improving mobility access in children's residential units, providing disability awareness training, developing a coordinated assessment and review system for all children arid developing services for young adults.
Most of these recommendations affected services for under fives.
Respite care
The Family Care Scheme, which provided care for children in their own homes was from its inception open to children with disabilities and their families.
Again this was possible, at least in part, because the scheme coordinator was personally committed to such provision.
Following the consultation days a pilot respite care scheme was begun offering twenty days respite care per year to ten families, to be planned at times and in ways to suit the families concerned.
Priority is being given to children with physical disabilities for whom no other respite care service exists in the borough.
Access
At the time of the consultation exercise no children's home in the borough had mobility access.
Since then plans were drawn up to make one short-term unit and one longer-term unit accessible.
On completion, the use of day and residential facilities, including a family flat, were to be available to parents and children with physical disabilities or sensory impairments.
Disability awareness
A small group of specialist and non-specialist staff and a couple of parents of children with special needs together devised a two-day training course on disability awareness, directed in the first instance at staff working with young children.
The course included information and discussions about discrimination, legal issues, support services, parents' views and shared care.
Parents, staff with disabilities, and specialist and non-specialist staff from the department and from local voluntary organisations were involved in running the course.
It was attended by workers with under fives, children's residential staff and Family Care Scheme staff and found very useful.
Staff were particularly positive about the contributions from parents, the information on the support available from local specialist workers, and the practical information on such things as lifting techniques, epileptic attacks, which was provided.
BARRIERS IN THE SYSTEM
From 1985 onwards a number of additional formidable barriers to progress towards a coherent, integrated under-fives policy began to emerge.
Reorganising social services
After 1985 the Social Services Department underwent fundamental structural change as its ten area teams, including under-fives workers, were redistributed to twenty-four Neighbourhood Offices as part of the council's decentralisation policy.
Field, day and residential services changed to an integrated line management structure, so that all day and residential services were managed through the Neighbourhood Office in which they were situated.
The Department was reorganised into five geographical districts, each managed by an assistant director who also had a responsibility for particular service areas.
The way these responsibilities were divided presented particular difficulties in work on integration.
Three different assistant directors had responsibilities relating to children with disabilities — one for under fives, another for older children and their families, and a third for adults with physical and learning disabilities!
Each Neighbourhood Office was allocated a half-time under-fives worker post, despite a large increase in workload.
It was almost inevitable that this would have a negative effect on any innovative work.
The issue of integration began to lose its visibility.
Attitudes, especially among new senior staff, were often at variance with the council's stated philosophy towards under fives generally and towards integration in particular.
The cuts
As a result of central government policies, Islington social services suffered 8 per cent cuts in 1987/8 and all departments were asked to produce proposals for cuts of up to a further 25 per cent which they might have to achieve over the next two years.
Cuts of that level would decimate the existing service and make it almost impossible for underdeveloped areas of the service such as facilities for children with physical disabilities, imaginative respite, and family-based care schemes and improved under-fives facilities to be developed.
Under-fives services were not identified as a priority.
Instead, it proposed that the Beacon and six other children's day centres be closed over the next two years, with an increase in supported child-minding placements to compensate, in part, for this loss.
The care provided by the Beacon was to transfer to special units in the remaining children's day centres.
It is ironic that radical proposals for the integration of the Beacon, resisted by some specialist staff at all levels in the past, were now to be enforced by the cuts exercise.
The danger was that the department would end up with the worst of both worlds — an integrated service provided in a hastily planned way, foisted on staff unprepared for the challenge and lacking the positive commitment and support that is so necessary from specialist staff and their managers.
The abolition of the ILEA
Legislation in 1988 brought with it the central government decision to abolish the Inner London Education Authority (ILEA) by 1990, despite the opposition of 93 per cent of parents in Inner London.
For Islington this meant that in addition to taking over the day-to-day running and management of the pre-school, school and adult educational facilities in its area, the borough had to provide resources in areas previously funded by ILEA, London-wide.
In particular these London-wide resources have been used to provide facilities for children with special needs in specialist day and boarding schools.
The borough brought in a group of consultants to produce topic papers on twelve of the major areas affected by abolition.
These included issues of equality, special needs and services for under fives.
Before the decision on its abolition, the ILEA had already virtually abandoned the recommendations of The Fish Report, although some of the topic papers continued to support the idea of integration in general, unspecified ways.
The paper on Special Needs however, written by a former director of the local ILEA division, raised the integration principle as one which was again open for discussion and decision.
The document stated that the arguments for and against would be set out in some detail.
The only argument stated in its favour, however, was to refer to The Fish Report ideas on equality.
The author (Roy price) then went on to state that integration may not be ‘practicable’; and that ‘segregation is a way to later integration’.
He gave the example of a two-year Community Skills course in a local college that drew its recruits from the special schools.
He also argued that the Campaign for Choice in Education advocated specialism.
It so happened that a local head of a special school was very involved in this campaign.
Finally, he suggested that opportunities for increased parent/governor control and ‘opting-out’ under the Education Reform Act might mean that schools would become more competitive and less likely to want to pursue integration.
Most people in Islington, councillors included, were unlikely to have read The Fish Report or to be aware of the arguments put forward in it.
In such a context Roy Price's description of the issues involved struck us as extremely lopsided.
The abolition of the ILEA also had a direct impact in the under-fives field.
The under-fives topic paper suggested that all group provision for under fives should be organised through the new borough Education Department.
This would lead to the transfer of children's day centres from social work to education and their possible future demise.
It contained a plan to halve the number of places in children's day centres from 1989.
The number of subsidised child-minding places was to be increased, but this would not provide the group experience that is such a valuable aspect of day centre provision.
Neither would it allow for flexible staff allocation to meet the needs of children with particular disabilities.
It was unclear where responsibility for child-minders, registration of playgroups, etc. would rest in the new organisation, but it was possible that the new provisions in the Children Bill going through parliament would allow for those services to be provided through education departments.
Despite the difficulties in changing attitudes outlined in this chapter, there is little doubt that workers in mainstream social services provision were more prepared to accept the idea and practical implications of integration provision than those in mainstream education.
In such a situation the future for integration looked bleak.
The transfer of ILEA responsibilities to the council meant that future decisions around integration and children would be mainly the brief of the new Education Committee.
This committee was likely to be more responsive to lobbying and pressure from parents of children already in ‘mainstream’ schools and from the huge workforce in mainstream and specialist education.
Such a powerbase is potentially much more difficult to change in the interests of a small discriminated-against group.
The cuts and internal reorganisation in the ILEA also resulted in a total turn-about on decisions concerning the specialist social worker post.
When the postholder left in December 1987, the post was redesignated to a special school.
Once again all social workers in the Special Services Team were to be attached to special schools with under fives inevitably drawn into the specialist system again.
Shortly after this regressive move the post was cut completely.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
In 1988, integrated placements are still being achieved ‘against the tide’.
There was still a lack of commitment to integration from social services, health and education, even though individuals within those services were becoming increasingly willing to help.
Parents were still placed under enormous pressure to choose specialist resources ‘in the interests of the child’: integrated placements were often presented as chiefly fulfilling a selfish need of the parents to deny their child's special needs.
A coordinated assessment and review system for all children had proved difficult to develop.
Children with disabilities and their parents tend to have most contact with specialist health, education and social services during the child's  early years.
Until the three agencies actively involve parents and staff from non-specialist areas in their assessment and review procedures and give equal weight to the promotion and consideration of integrated placements, such placements will remain a rarity.
Staff and parents need to be strongly motivated to seek an integrated placement in a children's day centre or nursery school.
The local specialist nursery for children with learning difficulties had a much shorter waiting list and took children from the age of 2.
Within social services, respite care for children with learning difficulties was provided by the local specialist units.
It demanded interest and commitment on the part of the workers to try and set up respite fostering or other more integrated arrangements as an alternative.
Placements are most successful when the policy-makers and professionals involved have a positive attitude to exploring integrated care and are willing to support the care-givers and the parents.
Too often, unnecessary organisational problems undermine the process.
At the end of 1987, three years after the conference ‘A place For All Our Children’, one council day centre offered a place to a child with a ‘learning difficulty’.
Some days later some staff raised objections at a staff meeting and the offer was withdrawn.
Because council officers still fail to enforce council policy and because individuals involved in management are still unwilling to grasp the nettle and take up the argument the child lost the place.
Cost is not everything.
It is very obvious from our experience that attitude is at least as crucial as cost, and arguments around cost sometimes act as a smoke-screen for negative attitudes.
It is now more important than ever, as we endure and try to resist the demolition of the Welfare State, that children with special needs and their families do not suffer a disproportionate reduction in services.
The shift in policy, attitudes and provision begun in the moves towards integration must a continued.
Community play
Veronica Hanson
In this article, Veronica Hanson describes a scheme that was set up by the Welsh Pre-school Playgroups Association (PPA) to encourage the integration into local playgroups of children who experience difficulties in learning.
There is national funding for the scheme.
Veronica Hanson describes the stages that the PPA proposal had to go through to be accepted by the Welsh Office and she goes on to describe how the county schemes are supported, managed and run now that they are in operation.
INTRODUCTION
Members of the Pre-School playgroups Association (PPA) in Wales (which became in independent association in 1987) are so convinced of each family's right to choice of provision for their children that they have taken positive steps to make this possible.
County ‘referral schemes’ have been established to ease the integration of children with special needs into the local playgroup or mother and toddler group.
Once a family contacts or is referred to the referral scheme coordinator every assistance is given to that family to link into their local community group to ensure that the group is physically suitable and that any special assistance needed to enable the child to attend the group and enjoy its activities is provided.
Playgroups and mother and toddler groups offer safe and stimulating play opportunities for the children and friendship for mother and child.
Playgroups are set up and managed by parent members of the group, usually through a committee and employing a playgroup leader.
The groups take place in a church or chapel hall or other community building and are supported by PPA voluntary area organisers and a network of volunteers at branch, county and Wales level.
FINDING THEIR WAY
Children with special needs have long been welcomed into playgroups or mother and toddler groups but members have tended to worry on two counts — first, that only a minority of families with children with special needs were finding their  way to playgroup, and second that the playgroup was not fully able to meet the children's needs.
Two counties, Clwyd and South Glamorgan, took the lead and the nucleus of a PPA special needs referral scheme was established in each county in the early 1980s.
In 1983 the Welsh Office produced a document —The All Wales Strategy for the Development of Services for Mentally Handicapped People/Strategaeth Cymru Gyfan Datblygiad Gwasanaethau Pobl dan Anfantais Meddyliol .
This document proclaimed to the people of Wales that members of a society with mental handicap had a right to the same services as everyone else, had the right to be treated as individuals, and might need special assistance to make this possible.
The Welsh Office promised funding to initiatives developed by county social services departments in conjunction with voluntary organisations and families.
Members of Wales PPA quickly realised that these published beliefs were the same as their own, and that here was perhaps an opportunity to avail themselves of much-needed funding to establish support systems which would enable families to take their rightful place in the local playgroup or mother and toddler group.
Development of an All Wales Strategy has involved long discussions at county level between social services department personnel, representatives from voluntary organisations, parents and sometimes consumers.
PPA volunteers joined these discussions with a view to offering playgroups and mother and toddler groups as a resource for young children with mental handicap — an opportunity for integration right from the start.
If integration at school age and afterwards is to be a real possibility a family with a handicapped child needs to be involved in the community, making friends and developing natural support systems from the beginning.
Every local authority was required to submit a county development plan for acceptance by the Welsh Office before funds were released.
PPA members sought to have their ‘referral schemes’ adopted and given high priority within the county plan.
This involved PPA volunteers and staff in the tripartite consultations at county level, the preparation of budget submissions, agonising waits while plans were considered, elation when funding was agreed, disappointment when refused, months of hard work to set up a scheme or, when necessary, to re-draft the plan to try for funding again.
LIAISON
In 1985 the Welsh Office agreed to fund a Special Needs Liaison Officer for Wales PPA for three years to support the referral schemes in the counties.
By 1987 seven county-based PPA referral schemes had been established and a branch scheme set up in the eighth county.
Funding for the schemes is varied.
Every county his received some support from All Wales Strategy sources varying from core funding for a coordinator and placement costs for children with mental handicap to one-off grants or payment of incidental expenses.
Every county has had to seek additional funding to support placement costs for children who do  not have a mental handicap.
Understandably there is reluctance within the authorities to diagnose a child under 5 as having a mental handicap, and there is a move to relax the criteria to include children with developmental delay amongst those eligible for funding.
Alternative or additional funding has been sought from social services departments (non-Strategy), health authorities, education departments, Children in Need, trusts, and by fundraising.
Two schemes received grant aid from Under Fives Initiative (Wales) which came to an end in March 1988.
Each PPA county referral scheme is responsible for the finance and general administration of the scheme and employment of the coordinator.
The financial requirements involve funding to employ a part-time coordinator and staff support for the scheme, expenses for coordinator and volunteers, training, publicity and placement costs for the child.
Placement costs vary according to need but are likely to involve token payment for an extra helper within the playgroups and may include transport cost and playgroup fees.
A toy library may be run in conjunction with the scheme.
The referral scheme works in conjunction with statutory bodies and professionals from the social services and education departments and health authorities who will be invited to referral scheme management groups.
Coordinator and parent and playgroup will seek advice and support from the professionals involved with the child when this is appropriate — health visitor, social worker, physiotherapist, speech therapist, community mental handicap team.
Essential equipment to enable a child to participate in a group may be provided, opportunities for training may be shared.
STATEMENTS
The playgroup leader may be asked if she will support the parents' contribution to the Statement of special educational needs by describing the child's participation at playgroup, his needs and capabilities, adaptation and behaviour.
The playgroup leader will usually offer her observations as part of the parents' contribution to the Statement.
She will not, indeed cannot, make any form of assessment but will, in discussion with the parent, describe the activities the child enjoys and his responses to playgroup life in a relaxed, familiar and friendly atmosphere.
The educational psychologist may be invited to observe a child it playgroup should this be deemed useful hut will not, as a rule, carry out a formal assessment during playgroup time which would thus single the child out from his/her peers and probably deprive the other children of their leader's care.
PPA special needs referral schemes link into training courses organised generally by PPA within Wales and within the county — special needs is integrated into every foundation course and basic course.
Training opportunities for helpers in the groups, for coordinators and management committees are offered.
Short ‘special needs’ courses or informal talks may be arranged to develop confidence and awareness and understanding of integration.
LIFE AFTER SCHOOL
An international perspective on transition
John Fish
In this chapter John Fish draws on his experience working with the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) to provide an international perspective on the opportunities in work, training and education for young people with disabilities or learning difficulties.
He discusses the need for improving education and training and the way the contexts for transition to adult life have changed in the United Kingdom.
He argues for the coordination of agencies involved in supporting young people and considers the major issues these agencies need to address.
A number of initiatives in Europe and the United States are described.
Finally he considers the part education should play.
INTRODUCTION
Transition from school to adult and working life has been receiving increased attention in most developed countries over the last decade.
At first this was because of high levels of youth unemployment and latterly because of demographic trends.
These show a growing number of older people entering active retirement and much smaller youth age groups entering employment.
As a result it is important to create as many wage-earners and taxpayers as possible.
A smaller labour market creates a window of employment opportunity for minority groups, including those who are disabled.
It presents a chance to establish employment as a natural conclusion to education and training for these groups.
In many instances expectations have been too low.
When decisions about employability are based on school performance rather than on work experience, training opportunities are often limited.
Recent developments have shown that appropriate education, training and direct experience of work and living away from home, can enable a very significant proportion of those with severe disabilities to maintain themselves in employment and independent life.
For more than ten years the Centre for Educational Research and Innovation (CERI) of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) has been studying aspects of integration and transition for young people who are disabled.
A number of reports on issues and innovations have been published (OECD 1986, 1987, 1988).
Although the cultural traditions and education and social systems in OECD member countries vary there has been wide agreement about the importance of transition and the nature of the process.
The work has led to the development of a conceptual framework for a period which is both a phase and a process.
It is a time-phase between childhood and adulthood and a process of changing from a pupil to an independent working adult.
There is also agreement about many major issues which need to be addressed.
Finally, there are a number of effective innovations which have been studied in detail.
If the handicapping effects of disabilities are to be minimised, appropriate education, training and support been the early teens and the middle twenties is essential.
THE NEED FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING
The educational achievements of nearly half of all those completing the compulsory school period in the United Kingdom leave a lot to be desired.
In addition, the academic standards of those receiving special education in secondary and special schools are not always impressive.
It is one of the inequalities of the education system that the more successful you are the longer you can remain in it and thus delay independence and entry to work.
Higher and flexible skill levels are now required in the labour market — an objective endorsed by both the CBI and TUC (CBI 1989).
This is a major reason for attention to transition.
But, as a recent OECD publication Labour Market Policies for the 1990s (OECD 1990a) has shown, the United Kingdom, of all member countries, had the second lowest percentage of young people in full- or part-time education at the age of 17 in 1986 — 7.
Although there has been some improvement, comprehensive preparation for an adult life, which includes employment, is not readily available to all who might need it.
In a European context there are many countries where a high proportion of the school population stay in school or technical education until after the age of 18.
In Scandinavia and North America it is rare for young people with severe disabilities to be expected to enter employment and to live independently until after education and training up to the early twenties.
THE CHANGING CONTEXTS
There is new legislation affecting every aspect of transition in the United Kingdom.
Those responsible for post-school education cannot ignore the changing context in which their work takes place.
The Education Reform Act 1988 creates a new basis, the National Curriculum, from which to develop the further education contribution.
It also creates a new framework for further and continuing education where marketing, effective performance and an appropriate response to community needs are increasingly important.
Social and Health Services have the Disabled persons Act 1986.
The parts  being implemented require that a life (transition) plan be prepared with individuals in collaboration with other agencies.
Sections concerned with the representation of disabled persons' interests are not being implemented at present.
The Children Act 1989 also requires greater cooperation between departments where the needs of children with disabilities are concerned.
This will be particularly true in the final years of school and in the initial preparation of an individual transition plan.
‘Care in the community’, in whatever form it is introduced, will have a significant effect on transitions.
The movement of individuals from institutional care to supporting arrangements in the community, the support of more people in their own homes, and the general management of disabilities by social services through individual care packages all create a new context to which a contribution from further education and training will be essential.
Changes are also taking place in the benefit system which it is hoped may provide more flexible support for those who are disabled, and enhance their employment possibilities.
Finally, new employment and training arrangements are being introduced through Training and Enterprise Councils.
These will influence what education and training is available to support transition, how it is managed in an area, and who has access to it.
Education can only contribute one element to successful transition.
To be really effective, lecturers and tutors must be sensitive to the contexts in which their institutions function and work closely with other training partners towards common ends.
COORDINATION AND CONTINUITY
Although an individual makes many important transitions in a lifetime, that from school through adolescence to adult life is one of the most important.
For a young person with a disability or learning difficulty this transition is crucial.
Transition is a personal and confused process for the individual but for national, local and voluntary departments and agencies it is a period of divided responsibilities and fragmentation.
During the compulsory school period there are usually only two centres, home and school, which coordinate services for children.
After that period there are many independent contributors.
The secondary school, the further education college and the adult education service, health, social and employment services, all have potential contributions to make as have voluntary agencies.
This confusion between providers is compounded by the different definitions used by departments and agencies to identify their clients.
For example, Education Acts use relative definitions of performance separating disability and performance but the 1986 Disabled persons Act uses 1948 social security definitions of disability.
Some definitions may be administrative, others functional and some may encompass a wider group than others.
After school, individuals can  move into and out of departmental definitions.
There are also attempts by agencies to establish an ownership of clients.
This is particularly evident where funding to agencies depends on clients served.
This may involve developing life plans with the individuals for whom they are responsible in isolation from other agencies.
With so many players, in addition to the most important one — the young person — it is not surprising that there are no clear aims for the transition process.
Indeed, in many countries, one government department may be paying huge sums to enable those with disabilities to become employable and to live independently while another is paying out larger sums as long as they remain dependent and unemployable.
Even if a coordinated approach to transition is difficult to achieve it should be possible for all concerned to agree a broad range of aims for transition.
The OECD/CERI programme (OECD 1986) has identified four general areas in which detailed objectives should be developed:
Employment, useful work and valued activity.
Personal autonomy, independent living and adult status.
Social interaction, community participation, leisure and recreation.
Adult roles within the family including marriage.
Progress towards the achievement of these aims requires inter-agency collaboration.
To pursue one aim, such as employment, in isolation from the others, such as the ability to travel to and from work and get on with other people, is ineffective.
Continuity is another significant ingredient in effective transition.
OECD/ CERI work has identified three stages of the process — the final school years, further education and training, and the early years of employment and independent living — between which a continuity of approach is vital.
MAJOR ISSUES IN TRANSITION
A number of issues are common to national and international contexts.
They provide a useful agenda for discussion:
The starting point
Consideration of the process of transition needs to begin in the early years of secondary education.
The place of education is also important.
Attendance at a special school may automatically limit the choices subsequently offered to individuals when expectations are low and stereotyped.
The importance of further and continuing education is that valuable opportunities can be offered for individual self-appraisal and for the reassessment of potential together with the recognition of previous learning.
Inter-agency planning and collaboration
The United Kingdom is not alone in having traditional areas of responsibility and means of allocating resources which mitigate against joint planning and collaboration.
Responsibility for individuals may be handed from one department or agency to another or individuals may be left to find their way through a maze of fragmented information, responsibilities and opportunities.
Empowerment
To fail to make a distinction between a disability and its handicapping effects at different times and in different situations may limit expectations.
Effective education, experience and training can significantly reduce the handicaps which may arise from disabilities.
Similarly, a lack of knowledge about the nature of transitions and uncertainty about relevant goals for those with disabilities may inhibit progress.
Professional and agency ownership of clients is also a major barrier to empowerment.
Transitional programmes should develop self-advocacy (FEU 1990a) and should result in the individual being supported and empowered to make decisions and plan his or her life.
But the shift of power from parents and professionals to individuals with disabilities, especially those who require considerable physical care, is difficult to manage.
Professionals and services have to manage the dual, and often conflicting, roles of support and empowerment.
Ambivalence and uncertainty in departmental and agency policies and in the aspirations and practices of professionals, together with uncertainty about client demands, are all factors which work against empowerment.
Work with parents
Little professional work with parents is undertaken after the compulsory school period.
Parents have a crucial role to play in preparing their children for an independent adult life but may in practice unwittingly inhibit that progress.
As work for the Further Education Unit (FEU 1990b) has shown, sensitive support is necessary to enable many parents to face the issues arising from their children's autonomy, empowerment and adulthood.
Supporting arrangements are rarely readily available.
The importance of parental support in effective transition cannot be overestimated.
Assessment
Transitional needs can only be met by assessment which both avoids categorisation and looks at all the future needs of the individual.
Assessment should be concerned with potential and the future education, training and support an individual might need.
It is also important to recognise that, for many of those with disabilities, performance in one situation, such as school, is not always a good guide to performance in real living and working situations.
Too often decisions are:
1
based on past performance;
2
confined to the requirements of one sector, e.g. education or employment; and
3
seldom based on experience and training in real situations.
New legislation lays particular stress on appropriate assessment.
It is becoming increasingly clear that a transition plan, developed with the individual during the final years of schooling, to which all agencies agree to contribute is the only practical way of coordinating local services.
Continuity of support
In the United Kingdom, as elsewhere, continuity of support for disabled individuals or their families through transition is rarely available.
The development of appropriate mechanisms to initiate and sustain the continuity of support and funding is a problem common to OECD member countries.
There is a need to provide a single point of reference (an individual guide or facilitator or a recognised team) for young people and their families throughout transition.
Professional rivalries often prevent a single person being the means by which services to meet individual needs are facilitated.
It is also necessary to understand that many people with disabilities are apprehensive of well-managed services providing continuity.
Such services may be seen as diminishing personal control and choice.
INNOVATIONS AND INITIATIVES
There are a number of interesting initiatives in the literature including those in the United Kingdom.
Those reported here are from other countries.
This is not because they are immediately transferable to this country but because they illustrate particular features of transition.
The final years of school
The work of Sailor and Wehman in the United States (Sailor et al .
1989, Wehman et al .
1989) stresses the importance of an effective programme for individuals in high school.
The Comprehensive Local School (Sailor et al .
1989) gives details of school programmes.
Students with severe and profound disabilities and learning difficulties are entitled to attend high school up to the early twenties in the USA.
Thus, the further education element in the United Kingdom is completed in the school  system although community colleges do similar work, often with an older age group, in the United States.
Sailor's book sets out a systematic training programme for young people with severe disabilities (SLD in this country) based on modified behavioural approaches.
This starts in the early teens and takes students into real living and working situations.
Experiences in travelling, shopping and taking part in recreational activities in the community are carefully planned with clear behavioural objectives and criteria.
Vocational preparation is done in real situations in the community but use is also made of situations within schools to learn social and work skills.
An individual transition plan
The Individual Education plan (IEP) is a central feature of special education in the United States.
An Individual Transition plan is now being introduced to follow this.
The purpose of such plans is to coordinate the contributions of different agencies towards agreed transition goals which have been planned with young people and their families.
The features of such plans and examples of them can be found in the books of Wehman and Sailor.
A guide or point of reference
Because of the variety and confusion of possibilities and responsibilities after the compulsory school period the need for a guide has been widely recognised by young people and their families.
In a study published by OECD/CERI a number of examples are given (OECD 1990b).
One which has received considerable attention is the Kurator system in Denmark.
A Kurator is similar to a specialist careers teacher with additional contributions to make after school.
The Kurator is a member of the school psychologist's team who teaches children with special educational needs and is responsible for their careers education and work experience.
He or she has a number of non-teaching hours for work with young people and their families after they leave school.
The time available and balance of the Kurator's work may vary from one municipality to another.
Support can be offered for up to four years after school.
The Kurator is a facilitator who works on request with young people and their families.
Supported employment
One of the most significant developments has been the increasing open employment of young people with severe disabilities, particularly severe intellectual disabilities.
Research in the United States has shown the inadequacy of the sheltered workshop model where commercial objectives limit access for those with severe disabilities and where transfer to open employment is very limited.
Supported open employment is much more successful.
The Genoa approach is  one identified by the OECD but there are others in the United States.
The importance of the Genoa experience is that it has the backing of employers and trade union organisations.
Young people are placed in open employment and trained and supported by social service teams.
Salary is paid by the province or state for the first year after which the employer accepts responsibility.
Support teams work with employers and fellow workers in a training programme and are also on call if there are problems.
Results are impressive.
In a city with 12 per cent unemployment 300 recent placements have resulted in an over 90 per cent job retention rate after the first three years of employment.
THE ROLE OF POST-SCHOOL EDUCATION
It is important that those concerned with post-school education for young people with disabilities and learning difficulties are informed about the context in which they work and have a grasp of the essential features of transition.
They also need to be conversant with the main developments taking place in further and continuing education.
Many of the features of effective special education, such as individual programmes and the management of a wide variety of learning rates and styles, are now expected in the mainstream of education and training — for example, work in the Teaching and Vocational Educational Initiative.
The labour market will need to make effective use of the smaller groups leaving school.
To increase the labour force will require that the potential of minority groups, including those with disabilities and learning difficulties, is recognised and that appropriate training and support for them is made available.
The possible introduction of individual education and training vouchers for school leavers will also provide education and training with a new challenge.
Unless the youth group has adequate guidance and counselling, individuals may find choice difficult.
Vouchers may also limit the opportunities of those with special needs unless their value is enhanced to make provision of good-quality training attractive.
A recognition that education post-school is a shared responsibility is vital.
Parents, social workers and other carers have an educational role as do vocational training staff, employers and employees.
This means that lecturers and tutors should work with them to develop programmes and curricula.
But, above all, responsibility must be shared with the young person.
The development of self-presentation, self-advocacy and of self-directed learning should all be central features of this phase of education.
Supporters of those with special needs should be exemplars of such good practice.
Developments of this kind have been initiated and sustained, in recent years, by the Further Education Unit.
Its publications (FEU 1986, 1988, 1989, 1990c) are an important source of guidance and good practice.
CONCLUSIONS
Post-school education for young people with disabilities and learning difficulties has had to be fought for.
In the past the case has been based on the wish to delay in unstimulated life it home or admission to a training centre.
Now the grounds are more positive, namely the right to be considered for employment and as a contributor to the economy.
For the individual, employment may represent the most potent symbol of adult status and integration into the community.
What is being sought by many is equality of opportunity and access.
However, there are also positive grounds for governments to invest in education and training for independence and employment.
Research in Scandinavia and the United States has identified the cost of lifelong dependent care for those with disabilities as something developed economies cannot sustain in the future.
Only by enabling those with disabilities to contribute, if they wish, through independent living and paid employment, will the increased percentage of ageing people be able to receive the support they expect and need.
Thus, the charity image of disability must disappear.
Higher expectations and effective post-school education for those who have received special education in school is not a luxury but an economic necessity.
The form that post-school education should take is a matter for major discussion beyond the scope of this review.
The rhetoric and reality of transition to adult life
Jenny Corbett and Len Barton
In this chapter Jenny Corbett and Len Barton take a critical look at the concept of ‘transition into adult life’ for young people with disabilities and those categorised as having learning difficulties.
They argue that the barriers to participation which exist in society should be given greater recognition.
They discuss the approaches and difficulties encountered in further education and youth training.
They describe a reality in which pressures to exclude and marginalise young people with disabilities or those categorised as having learning difficulties, are still very strong.
INTRODUCTION
This chapter examines the currently popular notion of ‘transition to adulthood’ in order to illustrate the complex and contentious nature of integration into adult life.
It is a process of transition which all young people have to pass through but which is experienced differently as a result of such key factors as class, race, gender and disability (Cross and Smith 1987, Griffin 1985, Willis 1977).
Integration into adult life is constricted within social and economic boundaries.
‘Transition to adulthood’ involves a wide diversity of progressions beyond school into further education, training programmes, employment and community living.
The extent to which individuals are able to participate in employment, leisure and social interaction, for example, will be an indicator of the reality of their ‘adulthood’.
This broad view offers a wider concept of ‘integration’ than the narrow educational framework which predominantly confines debate in this area.
It also places ‘transition’ in a political arena in which the tensions between rhetoric and reality are highlighted.
We are concerned to challenge the extent to which those involved in this restricted form of transition are offered any real choices in decision-making.
CONCEPTIONS OF ‘TRANSITION'
A failure to address the nature of the society into which integration is being advocated reveals the fundamental weakness and inadequacy of much of the  literature dealing with this issue.
If integration is seen merely as a response to individual needs, then the unequal, offensive and divisive nature of society remains unchallenged.
Given the degree and stubbornness of such inequalities, the topics that concern us are those of power, choice, entitlement and social justice: issues of rights, not needs.
The question of how to empower those people marginalised through disabilities and learning difficulties is, thus, a central one.
Government documents and official statements concerning integration are replete with romantic and ill-defined language.
The Warnock Report, for example, contends that there is a
widely held and still growing conviction that, so far as is humanly possible, handicapped people should share the opportunities for self-fulfilment enjoyed by other people.
(DES 1978: 99)
and the Council of Europe's Report on Measures to Promote the Social Integration of Mentally Disabled People states that:
The integration of mentally disabled people into society means that persons with mental handicaps of any degree should be able to live as normal a life as possible.
(Council of Europe 1986: 9)
just as with these statements about integration, an unchallenged view of ‘normality’ is subsumed within the rhetoric of ‘adulthood’.
Adulthood is, thus, largely perceived in consensual terms with the emphasis being upon enabling the individual to be ‘as normal as possible’.
‘Normality’ is a nebulous concept unless we ask whose normality is to be valued and emulated?
As it is professionals who generally define what they regard as ‘normality’, this allows limited scope to negotiate flexible boundaries to accommodate a range of perspectives.
Abberley (1989) argues that the specific form of normality being advocated becomes disabling in itself as it inhibits expressions of difference.
He claims, moreover, that such a view is
not only profoundly mistaken as to the source and nature of the multiple disadvantages experienced by disabled people, but that its propagation, in the context of modern Britain, serves not to combat but to perpetuate the oppression of disabled people.
(Abberley 1989: 56)
The argument of achieving ‘self-fulfilment’ and of ‘living as normal a life as possible’is seriously flawed when set against the context of an environment that is essentially oppressive and unadaptive and in which professional power establishes and perpetuates patterns of dependency.
Opportunities for meaningful decision-making on the part of marginalised groups are largely cosmetic.
Barnes (1990) made a recent study of the role of day  centres for disabled young people, in which few opportunities were offered for significant decision-making despite the operation of ostensibly progressive policies.
This research illuminated the contradictions of a transition from passive schooling to day centre provision.
Where young people were not used to making independent decisions and had become conditioned by special education, they found this move into a more adult environment difficult to adjust to.
Staff encouraged debate but these users
 appeared to have little interest in the sort of discussion groups generally seen as furthering mutual support and understanding…
The more able in the group felt they ‘couldn't tell us anything we don't already know’ or they were ‘depressing’, while the remainder said that they did not like them because they made them feel inadequate.
(Barnes 1990: 136)
It is not only the limitations of the day centre model of care but also the legacy of segregated schooling which makes taking over control so difficult.
‘Transition to adulthood’ suggests a journey to a substantive destination to which we all travel.
However, the real passage which most of us experience is unpredictable and irregular.
Griffiths argues that
Adulthood is not recognised as a single event evident to everyone.
Instead, a number of small changes in status and recognitions of the progress towards adult status takes place over a number of years.
(Griffiths 1989: 5)
There is not one form of adult status but a hierarchy which reflects the way in which society values different groups.
for those at the lowest levels, the quality of this transition places them in a severely restricted form of ‘adulthood’.
For an increasing number of young people, ‘transition’ is into vagrancy.
Recent research has illustrated that the raising of the minimum age of entitlement for Income Support in 1988 has forced young people to be dependent on their families and has inhibited their transition to adulthood (Harris 1988, Whynes and ferris 1990).
The majority of those young people who leave home to live rough are found not to have chosen this course but, rather, to have had it thrust upon them by circumstances.
Hostels which offer short-term care for the young homeless find their clients are usually the most vulnerable and difficult (Hutton and Liddiard 1990).
This form of ‘transition’ from residential care or the family into homelessness can instil a sense of despair and dependency which becomes habitual.
Wallace and Cross (1990) suggest that young people in the 1990s are no longer setters of trends but ‘have become to some objects of pity and concern’(Wallace and Cross 1990: 7), more vulnerable and dependent than in the recent past.
TRANSITION THROUGH FURTHER EDUCATION
The whole concept of ‘transition To adulthood’ is problematic.
The period affects all young people and involves a series of stages over a number of years, which are influenced by social and economic status.
Yet for some it appears to form the focus of their curriculum.
The curriculum for most young people who have left school involves academic or vocational courses which prepare them for specific adult roles.
By contrast, a curriculum for young people with disabilities or learning difficulties often centres around a ‘preparation for adulthood’ as if this constitutes a recognisable area of study.
In the curriculum framework for students with severe disabilities called Transition to Adulthood , Hutchinson and Tennyson (1986) acknowledge that, despite the title of their curriculum and their aim of extending choice, their actual capacity to change current opportunities for students on completion of the programme is negligible.
Thus, the rhetoric of choice and entitlement is met by the reality of devalued citizenship.
The language of such curricula denies the real economic and cultural oppression experienced by disabled people.
Yet Hutchinson and Tennyson are well aware of the frustrations facing their students and seek to combat them:
Jealousy and resentment between the different agencies involved with disabled people are often deeply entrenched and extremely difficult to break down.
‘Who pays for what’ often results in essential facilities or care being postponed or withheld indefinitely whilst the ‘professionals’argue the case amongst themselves.
Alternatively, in the present economic climate, the power relationships between the different agencies may result in professionals vying to serve the needs of prospective clients since they have vested interests in defining the needs of their clients and expanding the numbers they serve in order to safeguard their own jobs.
It is all too easy for this system to lead to a ‘disabling’ rather than an ‘enabling’context for students' adult lives, thus negating the benefits of a college-based ‘Transition to Adulthood’course.
(Hutchinson and Tennyson 1986: 68 — 9)
The authors go on to offer examples of students whose transition from college has been one of experiencing limited choice and often unsuitable placements.
They even suggest that
Such problems lead us to question the purpose of a ‘Transition to Adulthood’ course.
It is felt that much of the progress students make whilst in college will be lost if they are not able to go on to meet fresh demands in new situations.
(Hutchinson and Tennyson 1986: 72)
If this form of ‘transition’ becomes simply a retrograde return to passivity, it can be seen as a complete negation of all that the college course sought to encourage:
Indeed, it has been said by some professionals in the field that we are doing the students a disservice by attempting to break through their apathy since their main chance of happiness lies in their passive acceptance of traditional ‘care’ facilities.
Naturally, we as a staff find this attitude totally unacceptable.
If nothing else we hope that by attending college the students will have gained the confidence and determination to go out into the community and demand that changes be made.
(Hutchinson and Tennyson 1986: 72)
Within this framework, ‘transition’ becomes a new form of responsibility and awareness, a way of viewing the situation.
A common practice of ‘transition’ is that from special school to college of further education.
Despite a commitment to curriculum entitlement (FEU 1989), institutions have commonly narrowed opportunities by the provision of separate courses or by restricting the participation of disabled students in a full range of general education classes.
Social and life skills classes have often been created with the overt intention of facilitating the integration of students with disabilities (Dee 1988), yet they may lack certification and have low academic status.
Although notions of autonomy and self-advocacy are central to many courses, there is evident tension between the aims of course tutors and the constraints imposed by parents and post-college opportunities (Dee 1988, Wertheimer 1989).
Such ‘ghettoisation’ is supported by the familiar practice of transferring special school staff and a skills-based curriculum into special needs departments in colleges.
A move towards student autonomy might be seen in an increasing emphasis upon the value of students entering into negotiation about their individual programmes, including the assessment process.
However, Major (1990) argues that inequalities of power between student and teacher mitigate against any real negotiation.
fay (1988) also argues that ‘negotiating’ with students can be personally intrusive and involve a hidden assessment of ‘qualities such as‘willingness’, ‘drive’, ‘reliability’and even ‘self-awareness’(fay 1988: 27).
Fay contends that such activities ‘colonise private space’(Fay 1988: 27).
An invasion of privacy into the lives of vulnerable individuals is masked by the rhetoric of empowerment with the implication that it is being ‘done with rather than to trainees’(fay 1988: 26).
TRANSITION TO YOUTH TRAINING
Another aspect of transition is that from school to youth training.
This offers programmes in vocational areas such as carpentry, office skills, catering, hairdressing, building, word processing, banking, sport and the arts.
These programmes are of two main kinds: the one based with employers offering the most favourable route to jobs; the other, workshop-based, simulating employment and with implications of unemployability.
Hollands (1990) illustrates the  way in which young people themselves challenge aspects of the training programmes:
Some young people refuse to accept that they are deficient in the skills and cultures necessary for many working-class jobs.
As such, they often see through life and social skills training and develop common-sense critiques of the curriculum.
(Hollands 1990: 73)
In supporting a transition to adulthood, how does youth training differentiate between groups of young people? for some young Black trainees, disproportionately represented in workshop-based schemes, the programmes serve to shape them into acceptable employees within a market which discriminates against them and to ease them gently out of their aspirations into the reality of restricted choice (Corbett 1990).
As this liaison officer recognised, the basic level of skills training equipped them only for unskilled work and they had to learn to cope with compromise:
so that even if we get a young person coming out of the workshops that may not be the best electrician going, we can find them something in a related area — an electrical warehouse, where their knowledge of the bits that they know will be put to good use and they'll still be in that environment they want to work in.
(Liaison Officer 1988, in Corbett 1990: 97)
This ‘transition’ is one of learning where you fit into society rather than one of practising choice.
‘Life skills’ training supports this delicate process:
Perhaps, not surprisingly, in a short space of time life skills training has become detached from the wider objectives associated with liberal humanist education: the point being that teaching young people about society has been replaced by criteria designed to alter their relationship with it.
(Gleeson 1990: 188)
Youth training can act as a form of ‘moral rescue’ from the penalty of unemployment, in which trainees perceive their transition into training itself as a form of moral superiority:
George, a former school truant and now a construction trainee, said: ‘At least I did something…but the others, you saw them at school, just lazy.’
Others spoke of their gratitude to YTS and how it ‘worked for me’.
It was in this way that YTS helped to sustain an individualistic and divisive work ethic.
(Lee et al .
1990: 133)
Within this work ethic, girls are encouraged to accept tasks in Youth Training Scheme (YTS) institutional care programmes which prepare them for often  distasteful and uncomfortable future roles as unskilled care staff (Bates 1991).
In exploring the ways in which young people are guided into employment, Bates recognises that.
Young people do not ‘go gently’ into employment.
The work required to bring them there is not a bloodless operation.
(Bates 1991: 1)
For some young people, especially those in areas of high youth unemployment who are attending special youth training programmes for trainees with learning difficulties, this operation may never succeed in bringing them into employment (Wilkinson 1990).
Transition through training is shown to be a process in which vulnerable young people are stratified into the slots allotted to them rather than being engaged in real decision-making about future choices.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
Transition is shaped by different opportunities and experiences and is a development which highlights inequalities.
for some young people with disabilities which require a high level of care, this stage can be one of experiencing frustration in the limits of housing provision and support services (Fiedler 1989).
Their ‘transition’ may be no more than being found a placement in residential care after the completion of an independence training college course (Corbett 1991).
The reality of their adulthood may include exclusion from the labour market (Oliver 1989).
If they are fortunate enough to become involved in an initiative which supports their progress into employment, this can lead them into another level of experience.
Newman (1990) described a young man with cerebral palsy employed as a council clerical officer on a Sheltered placement Scheme.
He was assessed as only able to work at 50 per cent of the rate for the job and only half his wages were paid under the scheme.
As it turned out, his skills on the job have led to the department trying to regrade him into a more demanding post.
Without initial support, this transition would have been impractical.
Class, race and gender differences can determine the quality of transition in terms of what training is provided and where it leads.
The level of support which young people receive from parents and mentors will also have a significant effect upon the process of transition, for it is a stage in which their dependency is visibly apparent.
The rise in youth homelessness is a testimony to the need for consistent support during this vulnerable period.
Much of the rhetoric of ‘transition’ fails to recognise the complexity of the social world.
It is only within this complexity that ‘transition to adulthood’ can be understood.
Supporting special needs in further education
Maureen Turnham
Since 1983 Maureen Turnham has been a lecturer in a college of further education with responsibility for a group of students categorised as having severe learning difficulties who are on a ‘life-preparation’ course at her college.
In this chapter she discusses her preconceptions and first impressions of further education, then describes her own and her students' experience of their course and their attempts to participate with other students in the life of the college.
She questions the selection procedures for students with difficulties and disabilities and discusses the barriers to participation posed by the arrangement of the buildings and people's attitudes.
She reviews her own changing perceptions in the light of a commitment to equality of opportunity for all learners.
IMPRESSIONS OF FURTHER EDUCATION
My mother saw it.
My colleague saw it and cut it out for me.
I didn't see it but when I was presented with the job advert from a local newspaper the words leapt out at me: ‘Lecturer: Special needs’ in the college in the borough where I used to teach before becoming a peripatetic home teacher for pre-school children.
Lecturer!
I remember, several weeks after my successful interview, discussing my impending change of job at a party with a neighbour who works at the local university.
My quizzing about the intellectual world which I was about to enter with some trepidation left him with a wry smile, which puzzled me for some time after, as my naïvety about the world of further education lasted well into my early days in college.
My initial perceptions of a college of further education might have begun on a lofty plane, but I was soon brought down to earth with a bump.
Upon being introduced by the special needs coordinator as the new tutor to a group of students with severe learning difficulties, I heard several groans of ‘Oh no, we thought we'd got rid of you…’.
Several of my ex-pupils, some of whom I'd first taught when they were 7 years old, grimaced at me as they carried on preparing their lunch.
They had made the transition to college ‘inhabitants’ in the two years since I had left the borough.
It was to take me some time longer to undergo the metamorphosis from a ‘teacher’ to a ‘lecturer’.
Some of that initial group of  students and myself already had known each other for several years and knew each other 's families.
They all knew my younger sister, for example.
She went to a special school, and continued to be a voluntary helper at the school where I taught when I left.
Some first impressions and, early experiences of college life remain clearly in my mind — what was this new world where the academic staff all taught, but many of them were not ‘teachers’ like me but engineers or nurses or painters and decorators?
My knowledge of the history of further education, and of how my college had evolved from a county technical college, was scant.
I was thrown into a jungle of new jargon.
The language of special education had long been tucked under my belt, but now I was faced with filling in timetables with terms such as‘DD’ time — departmental duties, to the uninitiated — in other words, time when I was not actually in direct teaching contact with students.
College induction programmes for staff new to FE were in their infancy at that time and I probably felt content in the knowledge of my own ‘expertise’.
After all, I had nine years' experience in special education.
Surely, further education could not be so different?
THE DEVELOPING ‘SPECIAL NEEDS’ PROVISION
Seven years later, my experience of further education has grown and my perceptions of it have inevitably changed.
Our college's initial provision for ‘students with special needs’ was established in 1978 — a ‘discrete’course for students with moderate learning difficulties or, in some instances, school leavers from high schools who needed extra support before joining training schemes.
The lecturer appointed to teach the students, who was later to become the college's special needs coordinator, once told me about those early beginnings as ‘part of the Engineering Department, based in a hut on the field’.
For a long time I assumed she was joking, but not only was I wrong, I was also ignorant of the hard facts of life about the value of students with special needs and the staff who work with them.
Talking to colleagues from other establishments at a conference some years later, I was struck by the similarities in their early beginnings — often in a portacabin or separate annexe from the main college building, or in accommodation previously occupied by a school.
Stories of inferior accommodation, equipment and materials, effectively deemed to be ‘good enough’ for students with special needs, seemed to far outweigh reports of a stated commitment for those students being backed up by provision that was dignified and appropriate.
The life preparation course
In 1983 we began to provide a course for students with severe learning difficulties.
This provision was established as a result of several pressures, not least of  all parental lobbying for an alternative option to adult training centres.
For many young adults with severe learning difficulties this was not much more than a decade after they became ‘entitled’ to full-time education.
A former school for children with severe learning difficulties, a single-storey building three miles from the main site, therefore became a college annexe.
It began as, and has remained, the base for nursery nurse students and for ‘life preparation’ students (referred to not as ‘special needs’students but prefixed by the title of the course they are following — the same as other students!).
The building also houses the relevant staff, including the senior lecturer who is the college's special needs coordinator.
Opportunities for the integration of students were present from the beginning.
For instance, there is a shared student common room, shared toilet facilities for all students (there is one adapted toilet/bathroom), and equal access to facilities such as the juke box (donated by the Students' Union, but removed when it failed to show a profit!) and the vending machines.
The annexe has few refectory facilities, and on some days it seems that the queue for the coffee machine snakes endlessly around the corridors.
During queuing periods, there have been occasions when I have witnessed nursery nurse students, with the best of intentions, ‘helping’ life preparation students, for example by operating the machine for them or by ‘allowing’them to jump the queue.
I have to admit that, in the early days, it was with mixed feelings that I intervened — suggesting, for example, that life preparation students really ought to take their turn the same as anyone else.
The mixed feelings were, perhaps, a little cowardly on my part.
While I saw no justification for positive discrimination in the coffee queue, I was aware that prejudice can stem from the most unexpected beginnings.
Something as innocuous as suggesting to another student that a life preparation student should be allowed to take the coins out of her purse unaided may, inadvertently, upset the nursery nurse student in the short term.
However, in the long term, I feel sure that continuing input (both formal and informal) into initial nursery nurse training can only serve to extend students' knowledge about the nature and implications of severe learning difficulties.
How nursery nurses and other students choose to use this knowledge is another matter entirely.
Joint craft
Conscious of our lack of truly integrated teaching sessions, and freshly inspired by a successful ‘joint’ activity weekend at a local Outward Bound Centre, we made plans to change the structure of one particular curriculum area.
It was decided that a double staffed session of craft, with one group of life preparation students and one group of nursery nurse students would be on the timetable once a week.
The nursery nurses were initially given a talk on the nature of what was, in essence, a pilot scheme for functional integration.
It was explained that it was hoped that they would ‘befriend’ a life preparation student for craft sessions, working alongside each other on a variety of projects.
The projects were pitched at different levels, so that in the strictest sense the students were working in a parallel fashion.
Although this pilot was not monitored formally, it was hailed by participating students and staff as an unreserved success, generating a substantial commitment to equality for students with severe learning difficulties, and a sound knowledge, on a practical level, of many of their needs.
One unexpected spin-off was the growth of a few genuine friendships.
The increase in confidence in many of the life preparation students was another benefit.
Flushed with success we repeated this timetabled session, with the original members of staff, the following year with different students.
The results were disappointing.
With hindsight, there were ‘rumblings’ from some nursery nurses during the early stages of the course, but the matter only came to a head when a small group of nursery nurses made a formal complaint to a course tutor.
They felt that they were ‘not getting on’ with their craft work or were ‘held back by the students with severe learning difficulties’.
The outcome was that a second room was negotiated and the students returned to the pattern of separate and segregated groups.
During a further meeting about the problems, some of the nursery nurse staff expressed their concern over the attitude of this group of students.
They felt that their students are in the caring field and ‘ought naturally to empathise with students with severe learning difficulties’.
I would question this, as I feel we are treading on dangerous ground if we even contemplate trying to impose our values in this way, however strongly we feel personally.
It seems obvious to me now that several factors involved could have been given more thought.
There could have been greater consultation with both nursery nurse and life preparation students and due consideration given to the fact that completed craft projects are an important part of a nursery nurse's final assessment.
We now have an opportunity to benefit from lessons learned, as, during the past year, we have undertaken a pilot scheme to integrate life preparation students with Sports and Leisure students who are following a City and Guilds course.
Feeling established
Our life preparation student numbers have grown continually and encompassed students from outside the district as happens on other such courses.
This was partly because our college's provision for students with severe learning difficulties was being recommended by careers officers from other authorities.
A pat on the back!
It felt like confirmation that we had got it right.
This seemed to be further corroborated when we were invited to join the second phase of a research project being undertaken by the National Foundation for Educational Research and the Further Education Unit.
Other colleagues working in schools or adult training centres from our authority were also asked to participate, as together we had previously set up a voluntary curriculum development group to look at authority-wide provision for young people and adults with severe learning difficulties.
This  group had met almost every week for nearly two years.
The national research project resulted in the publication of New Directions: A Curriculum Framework for Students with Severe Learning Difficulties in early 1988 (Dee 1988).
Curriculum principles
From the very beginnings of the ‘life preparation’ course, we tried to write an independence curriculum, and to follow the principles of ‘normalisation’.
Every opportunity to maximise the differences between school and college life was seized.
For instance, the college day for life preparation students is the same length as for other students.
The possibilities for integration, that do not exist in a segregated, all-age special school, are many — as students begin to mix, sometimes for the first time, in a community setting with other adult learners.
The college environment may offer less ‘protection’ than their school, but it offers the chance to broaden horizons.
One example of this is in the chance to meet and work with non ‘special needs’ staff.
Students have the opportunity to join the college library and are encouraged to join the Students' Union.
They are given a copy of their own group's timetable, whether or not they can read, and they are timetabled in a variety of rooms, with different tutors on two different sites.
Travelling is done on public transport — we have a college minibus which tutors can book for residentials, visits and regular timetabled activities, such as the Leisure Centre.
Supervisory duties at break and lunch-time are carried out by non-teaching assistants.
In general, the staff/student ratio is rarely as good as in a school for children and young people with severe learning difficulties.
However, as our special needs coordinator rightly emphasises ‘we are a college — not an extended special school’.
The whole ethos of a college of further education is different to that of a special school — from the funding and the staffing to the size and complexity of the sites.
We share the annexe base with nursery nurse students and staff.
An early rule of thumb became ‘if the nursery nurses don't do it, neither do we’.
We talked with our students about the freedoms of college life, and suggested that they might judge whether or not certain behaviour was ‘age appropriate’ by looking at the nursery nurses (incorrectly and naïvely assuming the latter would unfailingly provide the models we sought!).
This mechanism ended in total failure when, after lengthy and various attempts to persuade several female life preparation students to give up wearing white ankle socks in favour of tights, short socks, mostly white, suddenly became very fashionable and seemed to adorn every other pair of ankles in the building.
With hindsight, I question some of my early motives and certainly now see different ways of exploring choices with students.
One route for beginning to make informed choices is through self-advocacy, where students are encouraged either to speak up for themselves or to use an advocate who speaks on their behalf.
Self-advocacy complements ‘normalisation’ and it is an issue which, recently, staff have actively begun to promote.
The Open University's Patterns for Living: Working Together has generated much interest in this area (Open University 1989).
Selection procedures
At present, we select students for the life preparation course, following a baseline assessment devised by myself and colleagues which is carried out during a links week when potential students attend college full time.
We didn't have interviews, but a young person had to ‘gain' a place none the less, as we had criteria for entry onto the course.
I suppose I felt that this fitted in neatly with the selection process for other students.
Also, we had no ‘medical’ back-up, as is often the case in special schools, therefore we felt unable to meet the needs of students with profound multiple disabilities.
I can recall talking to Lesley Dee, ‘New Directions’ project leader, about her teaching experience in South Thames college and her approach to ‘FE for all’.
When she spoke about learning difficulties or special needs she included everyone, even young people with severe ‘challenging behaviour’.
This represented a very different target group to the one with which I was familiar, and it seemed an alien approach to me.
I was worried that it could dilute or blunt our provision.
I thought that it undermined the satisfaction of ‘getting a place in college’ for students with severe learning difficulties.
However, I now realise that perhaps the only person who felt intimidated by ‘FE for all’ was me.
Our selection procedure has resulted in no places being offered to students with profound or multiple disabilities or severe challenging behaviour.
Our selection procedure still exists, but I want to see it changed to one which is more equitable.
National reflections currently focus upon the need for college to be ‘responsive’ in order to ensure that individuals can gain access to the curriculum ‘regardless of any disability or special learning need they may have’(FEU 1990: 11).
In considering the issue of entitlement to access, my college would be required to look at two groups of learners hitherto excluded — students with profound or multiple disabilities and students with challenging behaviour.
The life preparation course, in its present form, is unlikely to meet their specific needs, but the curricular content could serve as a starting point for designing new provision which would.
The possible stumbling blocks would be financial and attitudinal barriers to these learners.
It is my belief that our life preparation students are not ‘valued’ by many colleagues, so how would they react to learners seen to be ‘less able’or more difficult to cope with?
COUNTERING OBSTACLES TO INCLUSION
There are a number of issues which still concern me about continuing education for students with disabilities, just as they did when I entered college life — for example, the fear and ignorance that often surrounds this seemingly homogeneous condition known as ‘disability’, and the unmitigated prejudice and stereotyping of people who do not ‘fit’ into a mythical category commonly  known as ‘normal’.
However, I hope I am not so complacent that I am unable to acknowledge the difficulties of trying to bring about change.
It is a lengthy and wearing process.
Attempting to challenge and change the attitudes of individuals who feel discomfort or exhibit prejudice when faced with the possibility, or reality, of encountering people with disabilities is both a responsibility in my job and intrinsic to my personality.
I believe in the precept of ‘person first, disability second’.
I believe that students with disabilities need to be valued as people, and any establishment that implies this on paper needs to put policy into practice.
Our college, and authority, now has an equal opportunities policy document.
I am departmental representative on the Equal Opportunities Sub-committee.
When the college policy and the sub-committee was first constituted, I was enthusiastic — teeth at last!
Unfortunately, two years later, we are trying to rectify an original omission — the word ‘disability’ does not appear in the policy document.
Unfortunately, it is not possible to just insert the word ‘disability’ into the document, as there are several procedures which must be adhered to, not least of all submission to the governors appointed since financial delegation some months ago.
I failed to realise for some considerable time the importance of commitment from the top down.
Once again it was during some exchanges with colleagues from other establishments that I began to realise the significance of ‘who is on your side’.
Senior management who truly support the right to continuing education for all learners are worth their weight in gold to lecturers who may be struggling to persuade colleagues, in their own department/school/division or otherwise, that students with special needs are entitled to be included in the further education system.
Negative statements such as‘I don't know how you can work with them’ or ‘they don't belong here — this is a college’, which were once like a red rag to a bull to me, no longer insult or injure as they did.
I have grown used to the fact that I will never ‘convert’ some colleagues however enthusiastic, persuasive or reasoned I am.
I no longer vociferously challenge those who insult; instead, I may casually invite them to come for a coffee and see/meet some students.
Alternatively, if faced with a determined ‘It's not on…
I/we are not trained/paid/ supposed to teach these students’, I do not launch into a tirade on equal opportunities but try to draw breath instead and substitute a concerned ear about the anxieties of dealing with students seen to be different.
It's not always easy or straightforward, and I still have difficulty in dealing with such sweeping generalisations as: ‘he's a Down's Syndrome — they can be very stubborn, can't they?’; ‘mentally handicapped…they can be quite violent if they don't get their own way’.
Apart from the danger in such misconceptions, the terminology used by some colleagues when referring to anyone with a disability can be disturbing.
I refer to my students by name and would never refer to any of them as ‘a Down's Syndrome’, just as I would never refer to any of my friends who wear contact lenses as ‘a myopic’.
Students with learning difficulties do encounter prejudice, and confronting prejudice is rarely an easy task.
As a group, they are marginalised in a society that places a high value on being clever and articulate.
Within a large establishment such as a college it is unlikely that they will avoid some name-calling or jokes at their expense.
We do have strategies that can be used — from advising the students with learning difficulties to ignore insults, to implementing the equal opportunities policy which finds such discrimination to be indefensible.
Questions of physical access
The physical barriers to integration for students who have special needs will undoubtedly continue to pose problems in my own establishment, and those of colleagues, and are due, not least of all, to the ever-increasing constraints of finances.
At the time of writing, plans to join two buildings with a walkway to improve access to the second building, which has no lift, have been scrapped.
In the current financial climate, which sees us wrestling with colleges managing their own budgets and, in our own authority, reeling from the outcome of poll-capping, the expenses involved in improving physical access are likely to be competing with numerous other worthy but expensive causes.
Physical barriers to integration often receive much publicity.
However, it is not good enough to assume that physical restrictions to access to college buildings can be removed, in one fell swoop, by the construction of a ramp or the fitting of a handrail.
The ramp, for instance, needs to be of the correct gradient, something which, in my experience of discussing such matters with colleagues, appears to be overlooked with alarming frequency!
I discovered that, for instance, one of our students was unable to propel her wheelchair up the ramped entrance to our annexe, a former special school building, without the dangerous likelihood of tipping backwards.
A subsequent ramp built on to a fire exit out of one of the rooms was better, though the aforementioned student had long since left.
Any ‘make do and mend’ philosophy which applies to facilities and provision for any group of learners, including students with disabilities, is regrettable and short-sighted.
Regrettable because it compounds a belief that there is a group of learners with lower status that the rest because they have been labelled as having ‘special needs’.
Short-sighted because no amount of patchwork planning can be a substitute for a blueprint for services that has commitment, consultation and collaboration ingrained, like a name through candy rock.
THE FUTURE
There are new developments ahead in FE, such as new funding arrangements, which I hope will not add to the difficulties of access for any student who may require specific support for learning.
There are also planned changes within community living which are likely to have significant implications as ‘different’ client groups such as ex-patients from long-stay hospitals move into the community.
The need for a student-centred approach, perhaps not always present in some sectors of FE, is likely to become increasingly vital to tailoring programmes to meet the individual needs of those learners not traditionally seen as ‘student material’.
Very recently, some of ‘our’ students have, like many of their peers, ‘voted with their feet’.
They did not turn up for sessions they considered boring and did not meet their needs.
They are speaking up for themselves and expecting, rightly, that they will be listened to by staff and that their opinions will have the same validity as those of the next person.
The current emphasis upon ‘empowerment’, and the belief that ‘the more self-empowered a person becomes, the more able he or she will be to enable others to be the same’(Fenton and Hughes 1989: 19), is effecting a shift in approach generally, and in my own personal practice, from a passive model of students.
My earlier justifications of an elitist selection procedure for our target group of students are incompatible with my commitment to equality of opportunity.
I obviously cannot swear allegiance to the principles of equal opportunities then justify the exclusion of some students purely because of the severity of their disability.
However, the access route to our college for these students with additional difficulties seems likely to be long and winding, requiring commitment not only from staff such as myself, but also from those senior staff who are the policy-makers and who control the purse strings.
Many changes would need to be made to meet the needs of those learners.
These are likely to range from an amendment to our current equal opportunities policy document (correcting the omission of ‘disability’) to a need to employ more staff, possibly from another discipline such as health.
In a climate of radical spending cuts, the latter seems highly unlikely.
Putting theory into practice is far from simple.
Nevertheless, my beliefs have changed over the last years and the message is clear: I no longer think in terms of‘further education for not quite all’ but of providing access to learning for everyone.
A hard journey in the right direction
Experiencing life beyond an institution
Linda Shaw
In this chapter, Linda Shaw describes her experiences of supporting Elizabeth and Helen in their South London flat — initially as a member of their team of workers and later as a friend.
Her knowledge of and friendship with the two women also enable her to describe what life was like from their point of view.
Elizabeth and Helen were living in the community after many years in an institution for people classified as ‘mentally handicapped’.
Linda describes the details of their daily lives, the problems that arose in trying to set up a network of support that was sufficient, stable and yet not undermining of the women's growing independence, and the different reactions of Elizabeth and Helen to their new life.
Despite the difficulties and the continuing insecurity of support, Linda concludes that life for Elizabeth and Helen has been improved by their time in the community and that the hard journey is worth it.
INTRODUCTION
Elizabeth and Helen moved into their own basement flat in an inner-city suburb in 1987. they are middle-aged and spent nearly thirty years together at the same mental handicap hospital but lived separately for the two years before the move into the community because Helen was transferred to a smaller institution.
The move was part of the ‘community care’ initiative adopted by health authorities to provide housing and support services in ordinary settings for people with learning difficulties.
I was a member of the health service team supporting Elizabeth and Helen at the time of the move and I have stayed in touch with them since, as a friend and advocate.
I have written this account on their behalf, based on my knowledge of the women, observations of their lifestyle, and discussions with them and their support workers.
The women's real names and some details about their lives have been disguised to protect their privacy.
STARTING AN ORDINARY LIFE
More than two years after the move from institution to ordinary housing, Elizabeth and Helen are still learning about community living and adjusting to its demands and possibilities.
The women's days are beginning to include the mix of activities, experiences and relationships which make up ordinary life for most people.
Their daily routines are starting to reflect their preferences and abilities and to include a level of personal responsibility.
As well as having to adapt to major changes in their status, environment, lifestyle and relationships, Elizabeth and Helen have to cope with the adjustments made by the people on whom they depend.
Health service staff and managers are still developing the new skills and the framework necessary to offer a quality community care service.
Neighbours and business people, many of whom are confronting disability for the first time, have yet to work out ways of behaving with respect towards them and ways of making links which are welcome and helpful.
The women's long separation from the mainstream means that increasing their participation in ordinary life is an inevitable learning process for everybody involved.
The realisation that the transition from exclusion to inclusion is a slow manoeuvre and that community care evolves rather than happens became clear soon after Elizabeth and Helen arrived at their new home.
The first few months of life in the community were dominated by support workers' sense of heavy responsibility about the twin tasks of meeting the women's physical and medical needs and, at the same time, enabling them to be as independent as possible.
One member of the staff team of nine had nursing training; two had been teachers and the rest were from a variety of other backgrounds.
The balance between doing too much and doing too little for Elizabeth and Helen, who both use wheelchairs, had to be continuously readjusted.
Staff received basic instructions, but the appropriate ways to help each woman with personal care, diet and medication (for epilepsy) had to be worked out through discussion with the helpers.
From the beginning of her tenancy Helen took pride in having a home of her own.
She coped well with the change-over and immediately welcomed any opportunity to take part in household activities.
‘It's my job’, is her prompt response to any attempt to take over tasks she wants to do herself.
Helen's ability to enjoy herself and express her objections effectively make her an easy person to help, although she is sometimes criticised for being demanding.
Elizabeth found the move to community living much more difficult.
On many occasions during those first few months, she was moody, tearful and uncommunicative.
At the worst times she refused to leave her armchair in the lounge all day and occasionally overnight, saying she was too frightened to go to bed or to the bathroom.
She cut herself off from comfort by clenching her fists, screaming and occasionally kicking when people approached.
She was also frightened of doing housework and passed on jobs to a support worker, announcing: ‘She can do it.’
professional advice about Elizabeth's unhappiness  was that she was in a state of ‘mourning’ and that time would improve matters.
In those early stages, support workers, who were highly motivated to give Elizabeth and Helen a ‘better life’, felt that the demands of the women's physical needs, together with Elizabeth's state of mind, undermined hopes for their social progress.
The basic business of looking after them felt so demanding and emotionally wearing that there seemed little rime left to introduce them to ‘real living’.
WIDENING HORIZONS
Looking back, there's no doubt that we were too impatient and were unprepared for the major impact of the change from institution to community care on all concerned.
As the third anniversary of the women's arrival in the community approaches, there is a marked improvement in Elizabeth's sense of well-being and greater participation by both women in activities beyond domestic and care routines.
The women may spend large parts of the day on personal care, preparing and clearing up after meals and doing their laundry.
They have to overcome difficulties to accomplish these tasks so the amount of time involved increases the more the women participate and the less support workers take over.
Although lengthy domestic and care routines are to some extent a reality of disability, it is necessary to work out a level of sharing between the women and their staff which allows a varied day and does not make a drudge out of anybody.
A typical day for Elizabeth and Helen includes the usual range of personal and domestic tasks involved in looking after themselves and their flat with support, together with popular leisure activities such as watching television and listening to music.
Helen may do some painting and Elizabeth likes to work at drawing shapes and picking out words as first steps in reading and writing.
Some form of keep fit exercises or dancing in the flat is a feature on most days as are trips out to pursue activities in connection with their developing social programme.
Such social activities as going to adult education classes, taking trips out in their car, going to church, visiting friends and being visited, now happen on a more regular basis.
Around the time I was compiling this report the women attended three adult education classes a week — for music, keep-fit and self-advocacy.
They had recently been on separate holidays, met support workers' families at their homes, danced at a party and had their photographs taken cuddling the few weeks' old daughter of a woman Elizabeth met at church.
A trip to London was planned and they were expecting two visits — one from an elderly relative who'd been in touch after receiving a holiday postcard and another from two people who used to live in the flat upstairs and had telephoned asking if they could call by.
Elizabeth compiled the following list, with support, of what she likes about living in her own home.
Because of Helen.
Going out.
Likes seeing Linda.
Likes the workers.
Because of my car.
Going to church.
Having visitors.
Having a fish tank.
Elizabeth was also asked if she would like to make a list of what she does not like about community living but could not think of anything for the moment.
She says that in the future, in addition to her current activities, she wants to learn to read and write and to plant flowers in the garden.
She does not want to do housework.
Helen is not interested in making lists about her life, preferring to talk about the more immediate experiences of her recent holiday and birthday.
Her speech is not easy to understand but she effectively communicates her complete approval and enjoyment of the busy week when she went away.
She'd been ‘everywhere’, she says, raising her arms and pointing in many different directions.
She is an outgoing, cheerful person with an ability to communicate her feelings, to get along, and find enjoyment in most situations.
She often opens conversations by telling people brightly: ‘I got up this morning’, which seems to reflect her talent for being delighted by what is deeply ordinary.
Helen's main problems since she moved into her own home have been a period of illness, which caused her much discomfort, and a spate of difficulties in accepting personal care from temporary staff.
Helen's personality does not seem to have altered significantly since her move into the community, although she has become more tolerant.
In general, she has simply become more herself; opportunities to participate have increased and she has responded to most of them enthusiastically.
Elizabeth, on the other hand, has changed significantly.
For a start she looks different.
She is slimmer and looks more of a woman, in clothes which are appropriate for her age.
She slouches less in her wheelchair, raises her head more and looks at people in a more direct manner.
She says she does not like housework but she can manage some tasks.
She can count out and administer her own drugs and explain her own needs during visits to the doctor.
She is exceptionally good company when she is happy.
She is curious and asks many questions about people and situations around her, including her own disabilities and difficulties.
She works hard to understand issues which confuse her and is learning to be patient with herself when, as she puts it, her brain ‘gets stuck’.
She expresses much appreciation for what she considers beautiful and is beginning to show and receive affection.
How to tell when a person has become a friend is the latest of many difficult questions to which Elizabeth struggles to find answers.
Elizabeth is learning to speak up for herself.
She says ‘no’ more often, rather than suffering or withdrawing, and she is able to remind people of her difficulty in concentrating on more than one thing at a time.
I received a straightforward message recently when I telephoned her flat for a chat: ‘Elizabeth says she's busy.’
She is sorting out the conundrum of being a ‘high grade’ in hospital and a ‘person with a disability’in the community.
At times it surely is very difficult for her.
She still has periods of withdrawal and sadness but they are decreasing.
A SHAKY SUPPORT NETWORK
Community care for Elizabeth and Helen involves an extraordinary network of services which has yet to operate to full capacity and efficiency.
Elizabeth and Helen have made progress despite the weakness and unpredictability of this shaky, official safety net.
It is a constant concern that they might have achieved much more if services had been better and that they may regress if services don't improve.
The women's direct support comes from a staff team working in twos at their flat during the day with one person sleeping overnight.
Behind this front line is a complicated structure of health, social, housing and financial services, management and monitoring systems.
During the first years of the women's life in the community, the full-time team of health authority support workers has been regularly understaffed, with temporary cover being provided by a private nursing agency.
None of the original team who were with the women at the time of the move still work at their flat.
I left the team because the low pay would not cover the cost of my share in a mortgage to buy my own flat, and because I found it difficult to reconcile the separate roles of paid worker and friend, when Helen and Elizabeth recognised no such distinction.
I was sad to leave but felt that a turnover of paid staff was unavoidable with the present pay and conditions.
I reassured myself that nothing could stop me keeping in touch with the women on a voluntary basis, provided they wished to remain friends.
The period during which I have been writing this chapter has seen one of the worst staffing levels ever at the women's flat.
At one stage half the permanent health service posts were unfilled and agency staff worked in the flat on a daily basis.
The consortium responsible for looking after the women's housing and financial affairs, as well as providing some monitoring of the quality of service, had temporarily to reduce its operations because of staff shortages.
Members of the health authority team set up to give advice on the ‘physical, psychological, communication and mental health needs’ of people with learning difficulties are often difficult to contact when support workers want to discuss problems relating to the women.
It is only recently that Elizabeth and Helen have had the benefit of a full-time manager whose job is to provide support, supervision and leadership to staff working in their home.
The effective operation of an Individual programme plan (IPP) for each woman is a major casualty of the haphazard delivery of services.
The IPP is a system for mapping out individual goals, specifying means of achievement and assigning responsibility for progress.
It is the most reliable method available for trying to ensure that the principles of community care policy agreed by the health authority — community presence, community participation, competence, respect and choice — are actually made available to the users of a service.
The system aims to involve service users, and their friends and relatives, in planning individual lifestyles in the community, working out strategy and reviewing progress.
The written document produced in the process belongs to service users and provides them with necessary information to challenge service providers if they don't fulfil their contributions to the plan.
The Individual Programme Plans of Elizabeth and Helen, which took two attempts to get off the ground because of staff changes and inadequate training, have been virtually suspended — even before the first reviews — because of the latest staffing upheaval.
Support staff who remain with the women worry increasingly about the lack of continuity.
They are concerned that agency staff and new staff who don't know what the women have achieved will undermine progress, or even reverse it, by underestimating their capabilities.
The lack of fully operational IPPs, which could have provided a safeguard against inconsistency, adds to workers' anxiety that Elizabeth and Helen are being let down.
While the community care service sorts out its shortfalls, Elizabeth's enthusiasm to learn to read and write could be overtaken by boredom and depression.
Helen's frustration with people who don't appreciate her could result in a marked reduction in her tolerance level.
According to one worker there had already been an occasion when she found Helen being ‘fed, wiped and pushed round the house’.
Support workers also worry about the effect of setbacks on the generally negative attitudes of many people in the community to people with learning difficulties.
‘It's a vicious circle’, explained one worker.
‘people with learning difficulties are not respected to begin with and because the women's Individual Programmes, including skills training, are not in place, they are not progressing as well as they could and they are not getting respect.’
A senior manager agreed that because of staff shortages in the flat, planning and development for the women had taken second place to ‘keeping people afloat’.
When new staff were appointed development could move ahead again.
Regarding community care in general in the authority the manager insisted, ‘We haven't got there yet, but we are certainly going in the right direction.’
Elizabeth and Helen express rather similar sentiments about their new way of life.
‘It's all right’, ‘I feel all right ’, they say.
‘I'm happy’, ‘I'm settled’, ‘Now I know what it feels like’, ‘I got out on the right side’.
They have not expressed any wish to return to living in an institution full time, although Helen occasionally likes to visit the hospital where she was a resident immediately before the move into the community.
And while support staff are adamant about the need for  improvements in services and organisation, nobody believes the women would be better off returning to institutional care.
CONCLUSION
Elizabeth and Helen's initial experience of life in the community has brought them unhappiness and difficulties.
There has also been much learning, laughter and warmth which has extended the enjoyment and understanding of everybody involved.
The new community care service has enabled the women to claim their places as citizens in their neighbourhood and take a tentative hold of a share in the goodness of ordinary life.
Opportunities have become available to them which would have been impossible in hospital.
From the women's point of view, the need in the future is for a more reliable and responsive support network and a wider circle of friends and acquaintances to help them strengthen their hold on, and increase their share of, life in the community.
THE EXPERIENCE OF FAMILIES
Fools and heretics
Parents' views of professionals
Chris Goodey
In this chapter Chris Goodey reflects on the diagnosis, assessment and categorisation procedures employed by ‘professionals’: doctors, psychologists, teachers and administrators.
He argues that such procedures and the decisions about a child's acceptability within mainstream education which may follow from them, are underpinned by competing philosophies about a child's acceptability as a human being.
It is this philosophy, he argues, rather than a body of technical knowledge, which drives the behaviour of professionals in their interactions with parents.
He supports these contentions with the words of parents of children with trisomy 21 whose reactions to, and following, the birth of their children belie the simplified professional stereotypes which he sets beside them.
He concludes by suggesting that membership of the group that accepts children with disabilities as full members of the human tribe, is open to all.
A HUMAN FAILING
What is it to be human?
The segregation of school pupils who have disabilities or learning difficulties poses this question immediately.
Professionals segregate according to expert criteria, but ‘what is it to be human?’ sounds like a philosophical question — in which case it is also a political one — rather than something for experts to decide.
We as a group, defining ourselves as human, decide whom to include and whom to exclude as members of this group.
We do it when we decide what it is acceptable for people to be able or unable to do.
We do it when we decide that someone is unable to attend a school we have already described as ‘comprehensive’.
We do it when we decide that the sibling rule — that a child can attend the same school as a brother or sister — does not apply (the assumption here must surely be that siblings can belong to different species).
Alongside the ideal common sense of the saying, ‘Nothing human is alien to me’, we operate the opposite principle too: nothing alien is human to me.
In our own society we leave it to certain specialised people to decide, in practice, who is alien to the species and where the alien should be put.
Expert classifications of disability and difficulty, and the apparatus of assessment that goes with them, appear to be scientifically objective.
But in fact this  appearance is only the distorted mirror-image of the reality I have described.
We have already chosen , more or less deliberately, whom we want to belong and whom not.
We then invent criteria to back up the choice, delegating our responsibility to professional specialists.
The appearance of scientific objectivity is painted on afterwards.
It gives credibility to the particular choice we as a self-defining ‘human’ group have made, and reinforces the validity of that choice by obscuring the fact that we make it voluntarily, rather than have it imposed on us by scientific laws which are unquestionable and necessary.
If it is all just a matter of philosophy, then anyone can voice an opinion on it, and there may be differing views of what ‘humanity’ consists of behind it all.
Philosophies clash and compete.
As far as those who experience difficulties in learning or have disabilities are concerned there are ‘excluders’ and ‘includers’.
The excluders, since theirs is the prevailing view in our educational and other institutions, want to keep convincing the world at large that their choice as to who belongs is the only possible one.
This necessitates them saying something about the rival philosophy of the includers in addition to conveying the appearance of expertise.
History has shown that the favourite way of dealing with any fundamental philosophy opposed to your own is to abuse its advocates as being fools and heretics — that is, to exclude the people along with their philosophy.
The Catholic Church and the Soviet state under Stalin, for example, found ways of doing this to people who advocated different theological positions from the established one.
In our case, the excluders want to keep out both kinds of fool: people with learning difficulties themselves and their fool advocates, those people who represent the rival philosophy and advocate their inclusion.
Natural experts?
The includers are not always merely disinterested advocates of a philosophy, but people who have become so through experience, through the sheer amount of time they spend with members of the excluded social group.
‘parents’ are the best example, though not the only possible one.
I put the word in inverted commas to highlight a mystique about parenthood.
There is no reason why having some coincidental sperm-and-egg relationship with a child should entitle someone for that reason to be seen as a ‘natural expert’, as distinct from a very clever, highly qualified one.
But if criteria for inclusion and exclusion are not technical and professional but based on a philosophy about what human beings are, then parental expertise cannot be different in kind from that of professional (unnatural?) experts.
As one of the parents in the interviews described later says, ‘When they say, you're the experts, parents are experts, what they really mean is — you get on with that little bit over there, and we'll get on with the really important stuff over here .’
Conversely, of course, not all parents of children with disabilities see their children as members of the human species.
Most parents, though, have a world-view which as you may expect does include ‘their’ children as fully paid-up members of the species.
This observation  has occasionally even found its way into the specialist literature, but it is easy to miss its full significance.
For parents, this world-view may not be ‘philosophical’ in the sense of something that is calculated, worked out and argued, though it can be and often is.
It is a way of life.
Deny or threaten it, and you deny and threaten someone's existence.
They will strive to validate it, and even prescribe it for you and everyone else: not just ‘this is how we live’, but ‘this is how one ought to live’.
In the prevailing exclusionist literature, which is controlled by the professionally intelligent, the attitude that what professionals define as ‘intelligence’ does not matter, and that their child's humanity does, may be seen as a symptom of pathology as severe as (and similar to) a child's intellectual disabilities.
It is a lack, a disqualification, an inability to face the reality of their child's disability.
Because it is pathological it must not be allowed to appear in public in its own form.
To borrow from the classic language of the history of slavery, parents in this sense are ‘physically alive but socially dead’: we do not see them.
They contain endlessly frustrated plantation slaves who are rebellious at assessments and in encounters with professionals, but whose views only reach daylight in fragmented and unvalidated form; and they contain house slaves who agree with everything that goes on and use ‘massa's’ language and concepts, but who believe something else all the time and are waiting for the day.
In short, they are a colonised people.
But in common with other colonised people such as the Algerians under French rule described by Frantz Fanon or the Black Americans by Stokely Carmichael in the 1960s, they believe that they and their children should themselves be the civilising force to overcome the ‘civilisation’, the predominant philosophy and way of life, that has colonised them.
The stakes are high: it is not just a question of particular social groups (‘What is it to be Black?’,
‘What is it to be a woman?’), but of the very qualifications for inclusion in the human species.
They believe they have a different and better answer to the question, ‘What is it to be human?’
WORDS OF EXPERIENCE: A RESEARCH PROJECT
My opening observations are not random reflections, but arise directly from a piece of research.
Between 1987 and 1989 I conducted in-depth interviews with nearly forty parents of children with trisomy 21 (so-called Down's Syndrome) who were between the ages of 2 and 7.
I had several interviews with each parent individually, speaking to nearly 90 per cent of the total population group in a borough with a wide class distribution and a large ethnic minority population (see Goodey 1991).
Before I began the formal research I had been aware from the few parents of children with trisomy 21 I knew that there was more disquiet about their negotiations with professionals and the treatment of their children than had made its way into the academic and professional literature on parents and families.
Second, I also knew that this disquiet existed alongside other more conventional attitudes which perfectly fitted the portrayal of parents usually found in that literature.
After beginning to interview people in depth, I realised that, to explain this juxtaposition of apparently contradictory values within  individuals, I needed to go beyond the conceptual framework set by clinicians and sociologists alike.
A shared language between parents and professionals did not necessarily mean shared attitudes.
It may be that when we express our opinions, we only have available to us ready-made sets of ideas, ‘discourses’, other people's words which we choose from, string together in different ways and think (mistakenly) to be our own; these include ‘expert’ ideas and the colloquial, common-sense versions of them absorbed by ordinary people in one way or another.
But we have something else too which is genuinely our own, even though we don't choose it, and that is experience.
It became clear from talking to parents that I had to see how what they said actually hooked up with their experience, the fine detail of it, and not to assume that I knew exactly what kind of lived experience lay behind a familiar form of words.
Parents as truth tellers
Even in order to get this far, I had to believe that what I was being told by people about their experiences and feelings was the truth, or essentially the truth.
I may have been wrong proportionately as many times as the result of an amniocentesis turns out to have been wrong: that is, being wrong in both cases amounts to a hypothetical possibility, but is not normal.
I decided, for example, that if a parent told me they had dreamt about having a ‘Down's baby’ before the birth — in the medical literature, this is a classic after-the-event self-deception — they had in fact had such a dream.
If they said they had not been upset on being told the diagnosis, this actually was the case; they were not suffering from amnesia.
If they became angry at things said to them by professionals, as a majority of them did at some point, the horrifying causes of their anger were true, and were not projections of their own distress on to the professional concerned.
To accept the truth of these accounts is a simple but giant step, and one which the academic and professional community is by its own self-definition incapable of taking: a social group which bases its very existence on its own claims to cleverness would risk its life if it opened even one ear to the voices of fools and heretics, especially when the topic itself is about foolishness in the form of ‘learning difficulties’.
In what follows I have used my interviews with parents as a counterpoint to a professional judgement.
SHOCK, HORROR AND DEMYSTIFICATION
‘When parents are first told that the baby has Down's Syndrome they are all deeply shocked’(Cunningham 1982: 28).
Bernadette : With my other babies they've mostly left them quite close to me, but she was put over to the side, the doctor was slow in coming, and she went over and checked her over, instead of coming to speak to me as they usually do — she went out again and didn't even look at me  [laughs]…
I had an instant bond with Marie — I thought she was beautiful the moment she was born — I can really say that.
I thought she was beautiful, and I didn't mind about her being Down's Syndrome.
Mentally I was prepared to cope with it you see, I'd made my mind up right through my marriage that I would.
Every one of these parents can recount stories of being not believed, not looked at, not spoken to: that is what dead people experience, if the dead have experiences.
For Bernadette, it's amusing.
From this paediatrician's reaction, it seems as if the clinical notion of deep shock as a natural reaction is itself a projection of that professional's anxiety on to the parent.
Pat : He was six months old and I'd gone down for his second immunisation and I mean the doctor I went to see was a family doctor — I've known him since I was a baby — and he just, he was looking at him and he just said, ‘Is your husband Chinese?’
And I said, ‘No.’
And he just stuck the needle in his arm, and he said, ‘Well, I think the baby's a mongol’, and he showed me the door and that was it.
He wasn't looking at me.
He was kind of looking down and twiddling his pen, you know…and I mean I know it sounds stupid, but I didn't mind, I think I knew anyway.
I mean when he was born they laid him on me, he'd had the cord round his neck three times and he looked like a tortoise with his long neck and this little tiny head [laughs].
And I thought blimey, he's a mongol, you know, when you're looking at them, and then I was looking at the nurses and waiting for everyone to say something, and nobody said nothing.
And then I thought, I couldn't say ‘Here, is this baby a mongol?’ in front of Stan, I think he would have fell over.
Pat has reasons not to mind.
The baby is already six months old, and she has already made the diagnosis herself, at birth.
In addition, both her own parents had considerable physical disabilities.
Both she and Bernadette have realised beforehand that the boundaries of human experience are wider than those indicated in the Mothercare catalogue.
What about those who haven't?
Rita : Well the doctor was crying, she had tears in her eyes, and she said, ‘We've got some news.’
And then the stupid thing, the doctor said to me, ‘Does she look like anybody in your family?’
I said, ‘Well you don't have to tell me, I know she's a mongol.’
She said, ‘Oh — you a nurse?’
I said, ‘No, I can just tell by her face’…
So I went back and see the baby in the incubator and then I went back to the ward.
None of the nurses spoke to me, nothing, till 2 o'clock that afternoon, which I'd had her at 7.30 in the morning…
Yeah, yeah, well I completely rejected her.
As soon as I knew she wasn't a hundred per cent, I just didn't want to know her…
The exact feelings…
I wanted her to die…
And I'll tell you the only reason I took the baby home was because Martin wanted her.
Now this looks more like it: a normal, natural reaction, even if I do have to search through several of the transcripts on my desk to find one.
‘Natural’: does this mean that we all have a gene that determines we will be shocked?
In the clinical literature, the word ‘natural’ is left undefined (the medical description of this kind of shock goes back to the nineteenth-century discovery of ‘hysteria’and its symptoms in women).
Rita, however, takes care to define it, and is aware of the surrounding social circumstances.
The baby had been taken away immediately and wired up in an incubator for three days.
Since Rita has been sent to Coventry, she has not been told that it is physically possible for her to open up the incubator herself and put her hands in.
Eventually a nurse does show her, and then ‘Once I'd touched her, she was mine.’
She is further handicapped by having a sister-in-law (a nurse herself) who visits immediately after the diagnosis has been made and starts discussing fostering and adoption procedures.
Most importantly, Rita, just as she makes her own diagnosis, knows — unlike the professionals — exactly what the ‘shock’ is and that it comes from somewhere:
Rita : You know, the old story, my first thoughts when I had her, well one of my first thoughts, was Oh, I've got one of them kids that have silly haircuts, silly anoraks, spend all day on buses or all day in a home, weaving baskets, and that was my first thought…
I don't know, I always said I'd never took the piss out of these children, but I'm sure I must have done at school, but I must admit I was embarrassed.
I was embarrassed giving birth to a mongol.
If we was educated with handicapped, you know, if we'd mixed with them…but we never saw them.
I'd never spoken to one till we had Louise, you know, which is not fair on us normal people…
They're anti-social, handicapped people, and they're kept that way.
They're all at a different school all day, and they shop at different times…but you never see them in restaurants and why shouldn't they be?
They're just there , you know.
Like many of the parents, Rita readily agrees with the professional maxim that ‘It's natural to feel shocked’, but she clearly does not take this to be some scientific and objective concomitant of the situation, something in her genes.
Such parents know that it is something they have been socialised into by a segregated society, and that things could have been otherwise: that they ought to be otherwise (It's not fair…’).
Between the apparent extremes of these examples lie all sorts of individual circumstances.
Some parents' reaction to the diagnosis is nullified by the additional diagnosis of some life-threatening physical condition such as meningitis or a heart defect, which to them is more distressing.
Some may have previously had a miscarriage or an infant who died.
For others who went through distress, over and over again the concrete feelings behind the abstraction of ‘shock’ have to do, not with newly existent beings whom one doesn't know, but with existing people in one's life — partners, family, etc.
And none of them fails to recognise where these negative feelings come from, that such feelings have been  taught by a particular upbringing and environment.
‘Shock’ and ‘trauma’must be seen as an example of what psychologists call reification: sets of concrete interpersonal and societal relationships are turned into an abstract ‘thing’which dominates our language and hence our way of thinking.
This self-perpetuating process of mystification that denies real feelings and experiences is a necessary prop to the status, power and basic philosophical values of a way of life; the teaching of negative feelings must go on.
What needs to be emphasised, though, is that direct experience — becoming part of a way of life that includes the alien in a wider definition of what it is to be human — seems to be almost the only way of achieving demystification.
Brian:The only problem I had was people thinking I had problems.
‘COMING TO TERMS’: WHOSE AND WHAT TERMS?
For many parents it is as though the child they were expecting is dead.
Many doctors think that it is important for parents to recognize these feelings and to go through a period of mourning for their lost imaginary baby…
These feelings…may diminish in time so that the parent can come to terms with the fact that the baby has Down's Syndrome.
(Cunningham 1982: 31, 39)
A couple of hours after drafting this, I receive a call from a local health visitor asking advice about a child who has just been diagnosed.
She tells me that ‘the mother is just going through the process of grieving for the child she hasn't had’(the child is already eight months old): the health visitor's instruction in the art of creating unpersons has been exemplary, and no doubt she is keen to pass this on to the mother.
Sharon : At school when you have these, you have lessons about childbirth and babies and things, nobody ever says like not all children are born, you know, normal.
Antenatal classes should talk about it.
Although I said to my husband when I was pregnant, what if I have a handicapped baby?
And he said he wouldn't be able to cope, but it was in the pretext that it would never happen to us.
But you've got to think about it if it does happen to you.
I mean if it does, you, I think you find a way of coping with it.
There's no connection between the thought beforehand, and when it happens to you something different happens.
Dave : I'd always tended to shy away from them, like, because like I say I think it's the fear of the unknown, what you've been told.
If you don't understand something you normally tend to be a bit aggressive towards it, don't you?…
Looking at what Micky's like and everything, when I thought before what it would be like and what the situation actually is, I think basically you're in another world, you know what I mean?
Because it is another world.
Because what you're thinking it's going to be like is completely the opposite of what is happening.
For both ways of life and for both sets of values, excluders and includers, the language of ‘coping’ and ‘coming to terms’describes the transition between one world and another world; this much they agree on, even if the values they attach to these worlds are totally opposite.
Many parents can put their finger on a moment or incident when they experienced this transition, which they often mark as rebellion.
Phil : When the paediatrician come in next morning, I mean he only was in there two seconds, he looked her up and said ‘Typical mongol’, either ‘Typical mongol features’ or ‘Typical mongol face’, it was one of the two he said, and I could have killed him…
They put Jenny [Phil's wife]in a grotty old side ward so that she didn't upset any other of the patients, no one come in and tell us anything.
I grabbed one of the midwives, the senior one there, and I said to her, what happens now?
And they reiterated that they would like Becky to stay in for tests but Jenny could come home, and Becky was a bit jaundiced you see.
I said what happens if she hadn't had Down's Syndrome, they said she could have gone home, so I said: ‘That's it, wrap her up, we're going home.
Start life as we mean to go on, we'll go home.’
That afternoon a friend came round, Ruth and Jim, and they come round with a bottle of champagne, the best you could buy, and it was just like we'd had a baby…
I mean I'd had a sort of cry I suppose, but at the actual time I was glad I had a daughter [after two sons].
And after he said typical mongol, I think, I don't know, it's awkward to explain: everything seemed to fall into place.
Just as the clinical professions can provide parents with the language and the concepts with which to take a negative view of the child, so they can provide the unwitting stimulus for the parent to enter a new, positive world in which things ‘fall into place’.
Helen : For some reason I thought of it that they've given me this monster of a baby that I wasn't going to be able to love, and some woman came round — she may have been the hospital social worker or an almoner — and spent about an hour telling me how this was going to completely change the course of my life, I was going to be saddled with this child that would need twenty-four hour care and attention, and I had to think carefully about whether I wanted that for the rest of my life, i.e. was I going to keep him — virtually talking me into not keeping him, and I think the turning-point was that I felt there was something coming from the outside that was, sort of, really trying to urge me to reject him, and that I rebelled against it.
So that I can't say I had any positive feelings in the first place, but the realisation that everybody else had negative feelings made me love him.
The majority of parents reported being presented covertly or overtly with an opt-out clause when the diagnosis was first made, often couched in terms of: ‘Leave  the baby here for a couple of days, go home and think about it’(‘it’ being unspecified).
Cunningham (1982) reports that if parents decide to give up the baby permanently, it is ‘for the parents who make it, the right decision,.
It is important to note here than even if a parent is gripped by those negative fantasies that the textbooks claim to be real and universal, she is also immediately capable of embracing a critique of the values she is confronted with.
Perhaps we are now in a position to give, from a parental perspective, an alternative interpretation of what exactly it means to ‘come to terms with’ a child's disability.
For the clinical and educational professions (and the lay notions which derive their values from them), their very practice makes it clear what fact it is that you ‘come to terms’ with: you have not given birth to a member of the human species as we define it, and to which we allocate certain rights and social roles, but to an object of pathology — a ‘monster’, to use a technical term employed in medical anatomy.
For the parent, the same phrase means the inverse: I have not given birth to the monster which my upbringing and socialisation led me to believe I'd had, but to a normal member of the human species as I now define it.
This widening definition of what it is to be human, couched in sociologically aware terms, runs throughout the responses, and is further expressed in attitudes to amniocentesis and abortion in subsequent pregnancies.
In medical practice, and especially in medical economics, it is assumed that the identification of a foetus with a disability by amniocentesis (CVS) will inevitably lead to an abortion.
Yet, only a small proportion of the parents interviewed would even contemplate termination of a subsequent pregnancy should a test turn out to be positive.
Some who had subsequent pregnancies had refused any kind of test, despite in some cases being aggressively pressurised by the hospital.
Others had undergone a test because they ‘needed to know’, not because they had any intention of terminating.
Even where doubts are expressed about ‘having another one’, they are stated in terms which imply a criticism of social arrangements rather than in terms of personal coping.
Jeanette : They're such lovely babies you'd have twenty of them.
I'm not sure, though.
I'm not sure I could stand shlapping up and down to that bloody clinic time and time again.
Similarly, cosmetic surgery is seen in the professional literature as an option (some parents choose it, some don't), or even as a kind of cure, especially by the surgeons contracted to perform it, whose understanding of the issues extends as far as the principle that if people see a physically normal child they will react to it ‘normally’ and will elicit normal behaviour.
No doubt cosmetic surgery is performed, even encouraged.
In this sample, however, not one parent wanted it for their own child, and in general they were more prescriptive about what was morally correct for other parents here than on any other issue.
Pat : The surgeons are God, anyway, aren't they?
I mean it was like years ago I  heard things about Down's children with holes in the heart and why bother to do it, but now everything's changing — let's make them more normal.
But why do that?
I mean they're normal to us but they're not normal to other people, so why should we make them normal to them, just to please society?
I mean the world's made up of all different coloured people — why shouldn't we have different faces and all?
If we all walked round with the same face and same coloured skin it would be pretty boring, wouldn't it?
The world of normality is redefined.
No longer a matter of distribution across a norm, of statistics and probability, ‘normality’ itself is simply a common-sense, inclusive definition of what it is to be human, with wider boundaries redefined from experience.
LUCKY LEPERS
‘I am fortunate.
I do not truly know what it is like to have a child with Down's Syndrome’(Cunningham 1982: 16).
Kathy : Scott is the best thing that ever happened to us.
I think it was more, I thought if people would feel sorry for me, then I wouldn't be able to cope with this thing, like.
I didn't want any pity, that was the thing I was worried about: that people were going to pity me.
I didn't want people to think I couldn't cope with it, like, 'cos I knew I could.
I'm never, ever going to be frightened of anything again.
Before I had Scott I would never say boo to a goose.
But I think all the time where you have to keep on fighting all the time, so now like you get so mouthy in the end you can't shut up, you know [laughs], you end up winning the argument 'cos you can't shut up, like.
You've had to be like that all the time, otherwise you feel like you ain't getting there, they're getting the better of you, like…’ cos you listen, don't you, when you've had the baby they are supposed to help you and advise you, so you take all their…but then you can only take so much, and you think these must be the mad ones, like.
Beverley : In actual fact me having Devon, I've never met so many real people…
He's made us really meet real people, you know what I mean, people with handicapped children, and to me I find them more real than some of my friends that live in another world, fantasising about the future, you know, ‘What's the kids going to be when they grow up?’
I wouldn't plan a life out for my child, I couldn't possibly do it, you know…
My priorities in my mind's eye is better.
Their priorities to me is out the window, if you understand my meaning.
My priorities in life is smaller, more compact, but their priorities is for about ten, fifteen years from now.
God forbid anything should happen to their children, never mind their house, or their car.
It stand out like a sore thumb sometimes when I'm with them, I find people with  handicapped children are real people, are people who are people with their children being, talking to them, instead of things that they can give them, you know.
Maybe I've swapped lenses…
Phil : Well I would say that if I had my life over again I wish and hope that everything happens the same, and I think at the end of the day Becky had been the cream on top of the cake…
Perhaps my opinion on morality's changed, you know, that there is right and wrong and all this and that you've got to accept people.
I mean I know what it's like to be Black.
I feel now that I've got an epitaph at the end of my life that I did something, I wasn't a taker…
I mean we still live, which is a sad fact, but we still live in a society where we were like lepers, we still live in a society where you can still reject, and it shouldn't be that; you shouldn't have the option to reject, you should have the support there.
Bravery, contact with social reality and a sense of justice are the themes of these three extracts.
If they are symptoms of leprosy, then we are indeed ‘fortunate’ to know what the experience is like.
LAST WORDS
I have quite intentionally cited only one example of the available professional and academic literature.
Apart from being one of the most widely read and influential books, it is also more enlightened than most of the published work getting through to teachers, health visitors, therapists and parents too.
It does not appear to take a lofty clinical viewpoint, but partakes of the language of partnership and equality between experts and parents.
I have ignored such central and prestigious characters in the drama is professor Wold of St Bartholomew's Hospital, who is seeking to perfect a cheap, early diagnostic test for trisomy 21 during pregnancy on the interesting grounds that it costs £500,000 (not accounting for inflation) to look after a person with trisomy 21 for life.
Let us skirt round professor Joan Bicknell, a major authority in child psychiatry.
In a bang-up-to-date textbook (see Bicknell 1988), she lectures future generations of health and social service professionals on imparting what they are to perceive as ‘sad, bad news’ to parents.
Following a time-honoured tradition of psychiatric categories, she elaborates the ‘bereavement response’ to diagnosis into a farrago of stages (none of whose terms, as far as I can make out, has ever been defined):(1)‘Shock’,(2)‘panic’,(3)‘Denial’,(4)‘Grief’,(5)‘Guilt’,(6)‘Anger’(in general),(7)‘Anger Against professionals’,(8)‘Bargaining’and finally (9)‘Acceptance’.
Anyone who wants to explain away the material I have offered in the interview extracts will merely have to look up item (7).
Let us return to the measured tones of Cliff Cunningham.
Earlier I mentioned Stokely Carmichael; and here is the White liberalism of mental disability issues.
Why am I using his work to set alongside the interview extracts?
I am saying that  we are confronted, beneath a language which is often common to both parties, with two competing moral philosophies, and that the language of partnership is a mirage, a deliberate and partisan disguise for the fact that one of those philosophies holds power while the other comes from beneath the underdog.
There are not ‘professionals’ and ‘parents’.
There is a strange tribe that believes in spells, psychometric assessments and incantations, and there is a tribe of what Beverley, Devon's mother, calls real people.
The beauty of it is that while nut everyone can become Black or become a woman, anyone can join the ‘real people’.
They may be parents or they may only have letters after their name, but what they have in common is this: they know that intellectual perfection and the criteria for measuring it are chimeras.
In our society this knowledge is dangerous, subversive, and — make no mistake — will be dealt with as such.
The best way of dealing with it, perhaps, is to draw parents into a prevailing set of values about intelligence and humanity on the grounds of an ‘equal partnership, that is spurious and reinforces the attitudes underlying segregation.
Ruled out or rescued?
A Statement for Balbinder
Elizabeth Grugeon
Elizabeth Grugeon provides a detailed account of her association with Balbinder Singh and his family.
She was a friend and adviser for the family as they tried to negotiate a path through an education system which was not always easy to understand.
Balbinder was the subject of a Statement and Elizabeth Grugeon charts the process from an initial expression of concern about Balbinder's lack of progress by the primary school to his transfer to a special school for pupils categorised as having ‘moderate learning difficulties’.
MY INVOLVEMENT WITH THE FAMILY
A long-standing friendship with an Asian family who were neighbours of mine led to my being involved in the process of Statementing their youngest child, Balbinder Singh.
He was 6 years old and had been at the school for three terms when the head, knowing that I was a neighbour and friend of Balbinder's mother, invited me to go with Mrs Singh to a meeting with the educational psychologist.
The head explained that he and the class teacher felt that Balbinder was making little progress and they were worried about his lack of concentration and poor language.
They were considering the possibility of a place in a special school for children with moderate learning difficulties which could offer ‘smaller classes and more individual attention’.
His transfer would involve a lengthy and complicated assessment procedure, and they wanted me to help to explain this to Balbinder's parents and to reassure them.
This chapter is an account of the process and is an attempt to see it from the family's perspective.
I had known the family for some years as I had been Mrs Singh's English tutor on a local authority adult literacy programme.
Balbinder was 3 years old when I first started visiting the house, a very sociable child who eagerly awaited my arrival and the chance to play with the bag of toys I always brought with me.
Over the years, in my role as home tutor to his mother, I had had a privileged relationship with Balbinder and his family.
By the time he started school I had already been an intermediary between the family and the town hall, the DHSS, the local social services, the medical profession and school.
Mr and Mrs Singh kept most of their official correspondence between the pages of their telephone directory and on my weekly visits we sorted out the milk tokens, rates demands, post office giros, all of which made linguistic demands which were beyond the level of their competence.
Mr Singh, a Kenyan Asian, confessed to me, after I had been a friend of the family for several years, that he was neither fluent in Swahili, the language of his education up to 13, nor in Punjabi, his mother tongue.
However, the family spoke Punjabi exclusively at home and had very strong views on the need to do this.
They were concerned that the boys should not lose touch with their language and culture.
The two older boys, aged 5 and 7, were competent in both languages.
Balbinder seemed slower to talk and his mother was worried about his reluctance to speak English.
As both parents spoke to him in Punjabi for most of the time this did not seem surprising.
I reassured Mrs Singh that once he started playgroup there would be an improvement.
In fact the health visitor diagnosed a problem with speech at his screening at age 3, and he began attending the local health clinic for speech therapy.
Mrs Singh mentioned this once or twice but did not seem to set much store by it.
She continued to express concern at what she felt to be his backwardness at speaking English.
I wondered how many people he had the opportunity to speak to outside his family.
However, the playgroup run by local parents had not been the success for Balbinder that we had hoped.
There were complaints about his behaviour.
He did not seem to know how to play, would not settle down, ran about too much and fought with the other children.
At home, whenever I visited, he always seemed the same docile, attractive child sitting silently watching TV in the impeccably tidy and attractive furnished living room of the very small, terraced house.
In the house, the lives of the three young boys seemed quiet, calm and disciplined.
But the large hall at playgroup, the number of activities, different experiences and other children seemed to produce excitable and often aggressive behaviour in Balbinder.
The staff were also worried about his speech, not seeming to take into account the fact that this was the first time he had come out of a Punjabi-speaking environment and was having to cope with new experiences in a foreign language.
His mother's fluent, though inaccurate, English and confident manner may have led them to expect more of him.
Mrs Singh worried about him a great deal, and was often very angry at his apparent lack of progress.
She wanted him to learn to count, begin to write, and above all to speak English.
She and the children visited my house regularly at this period, so that I could hear the oldest boy, Ravi, read.
He had already overtaken his mother and she did not know how to cope with the graded readers he brought home from school or his teacher's request that she should hear him read.
Whenever they visited me I listened to him reading.
He was quite fluent but seemed to read without comprehension.
I felt that the texts he was reading did not speak of familiar experiences or vocabulary.
I remember him struggling with a story where understanding of the narrative depended on the reader knowing about canals.
He could read the  words —canal, lock, barge — but the illustrations of an urban canal with tall, industrial buildings and long painted boats portrayed an unknown landscape.
At 8 he was rapidly becoming a non-reader.
The idea that reading might be for pleasure had not occurred to him.
Balbinder was always pleased to come along for these sessions, to play with my children's toys and run in the garden.
Mrs Singh brought her letters and forms for me to elucidate.
I was constantly surprised at the extent to which she needed explanations for even the most taken-for-granted aspects of junior school life.
The list of clothing for a school trip included ‘night-dress’ and ‘sponge-bag’.
The Singh children slept in their underpants, and she wondered whether I could lend her a ‘night-dress’ for Ravi and also a sponge.
Almost all documents sent home from school were incomprehensible.
Letters inviting parents to join the parent — teacher association, visit the ‘Spring Fayre’, to volunteer for ‘parent-governor elections’, or attend a ‘Maths Workshop’ were put in the bin after my attempts to explain them.
Schools unwittingly erect a language barrier which must exclude great numbers of parents.
End of term reports contained phrases like ‘his development of spatial awareness, or ‘his confidence on the apparatus’.
However phrases like ‘is working hard’, ‘always tries his best’, ‘is beginning to show some improvement, did not fool her.
She interpreted them quite accurately to mean that her children were under-achieving and the message she took from them was almost always a negative one.
On one occasion Mrs Singh had asked me to go with her to visit one of the boy's teachers.
The teacher was brusque and busy.
She brushed aside Mrs Singh's assertions that her son was not making progress by telling her repeatedly that it was unreasonable to expect anything more; she used phrases like ‘He is well below average’, ‘He is slow’, ‘He is in the bottom set, you must accept that.
You can't put it there if it's not there.’
Mrs Singh was not satisfied.
She wanted to know why he never brought anything home, why he had no reading book.
His teacher explained that homework for 8 year olds was not school policy and Jeetinder was called in to show his mother that he could read.
He produced his reading book, one of the ‘pirate series’ by Sheila Mccullagh, and read quite fluently.
The teacher suggested that Mrs Singh could help by reading with him, Mrs Singh to read one line, Jeetinder the next; she was evidently unaware of the possibility that Jeetinder's reading could be more competent than his mother's.
Looking at a piece of work on the board Mrs Singh said she wanted her son to write like that.
The teacher, by now worn down by Mrs Singh's refusal to accept Jeetinder's limitations, told her that it had been written by ‘a highly intelligent girl’.
She continued to try to convince Mrs Singh that although Jeetinder was in the bottom set he was doing well and was not ‘the bottom of the bottom set’.
None of this convinced Mrs Singh who left the classroom saying in an unusually dictatorial tone to the class teacher, ‘I want you to sort him out and bring homework home.’
Later, I tried to mollify her by pointing out that the teacher had said what a nice boy he was.
Looking me straight in the eye she replied, ‘Nice is in every child.’
The school's educational psychologist had made contact with the family when he had been involved in an assessment of Jeetinder, the second son, now in the fourth year at the school.
There had been concern about his progress at the same stage as there now was for Balbinder's.
Mrs Singh had been visited at home and the head had arranged for me to be present so that I could explain and reinforce any suggestions.
In the event, I found this difficult as they seemed inappropriate.
The psychologist had suggested among other things that Mrs Singh could help to improve Jeetinder's spoken and written language by reading to him at bedtime and could help to improve his numeracy by encouraging him to spend and account for his pocket money.
Both ideas were culturally alien to Mrs Singh.
There were no English children's books in the house, and the boys did not shop on their own nor have regular pocket money.
Neither parent was fully literate in English or their mother tongue.
Mrs Singh had seemed mystified by the advice, as she believed the school should be responsible for progress in English and mathematics and shrugged helplessly when I suggested that parents also had an important role.
THE STATEMENTS PROCESS FOR BALBINDER
My contact with the family had lapsed for a while when the head asked to see me to request help in explaining the Statementing procedures to Mrs Singh.
The head told me that Mrs Singh had been coming to school regularly to express concern about Balbinder's lack of progress.
The class teacher and the head were also worried; they felt that, ‘after four terms at school, he is the slowest in the class’.
Their concern was that in September, when he should be moving into the second year infants with his age cohort, he would be far behind.
The head had asked the educational psychologist to come and assess him with a view to producing a formal Statement of Special Educational Needs.
Standardised tests had shown that ‘whereas his two older brothers had scored better on verbal ability than on visual motor ability, Balbinder had performed equally poorly on both’.
As a result the educational psychologist had been investigating the possibility of a place at a local special school for Balbinder.
They now wanted to explain all this to Mrs Singh and hoped that I would be able to explain the implications of what they were going to say.
The same morning Mrs Singh had approached me in the school foyer, handed me a bag full of letters, and burst into tears.
I realised that I hadn't visited her for some weeks and agreed to go to her house after school.
As an outside observer drawn into the Statementing process by the professionals involved, I had a neutral but not disinterested role.
I kept a diary of events and attempted to chart the process by which 6-year-old Balbinder was removed from mainstream education.
March 3: The initial meeting
Meeting with the head, the school's educational psychologist, Mrs Singh and myself at school.
The head explained to Mrs Singh that Balbinder was not making much progress and that because of class sizes he would be unlikely to receive the kind of attention he needed.
He explained that at Cedars (the local authority's school for children ‘with learning difficulties’) where classes are small and the teachers are specialists at coping with Balbinder's sort of problems, he might do better.
He stressed that it was essential for Balbinder to start at Cedars as soon as possible, if he was going to catch up.
He seemed to be suggesting that once Balbinder had been at Cedars for a while, he might be capable of re-entering mainstream education at middle school transfer.
This was an idea she was to hold on to throughout the process.
Both the head and the educational psychologist stressed the positive value of Cedars and the likely problems for Balbinder if he stayed on at his present school, which they told her did not have the expertise to cope with his needs.
By suggesting this they began quite unwittingly to undermine her confidence in the school and in herself.
She became very upset and confused, clearly feeling that Balbinder's failure was her fault.
She cried a lot repeatedly saying ‘He always wants to play…he just wants toys.’
When she was calmer, she also made it clear that she felt that a stricter approach that forced Balbinder to concentrate and work harder was all that was needed.
She felt that he was not doing well because he was not trying hard enough, and that his teachers were not making him try hard enough.
She listened intently as they explained the Statementing procedure.
They stressed that the decision to send Balbinder to Cedars would be made by Mrs Singh and her husband.
The first stage would be to visit the school and then return to discuss the matter again.
A date was arranged for the following week for both events and I agreed to go with them.
What I did not realise at the time, but discovered later, was that Mrs Singh had no idea that transfer next September had been suggested — she expected that it would happen straight away.
After she had left, the head and educational psychologist explained the Statementing procedure in more detail.
In the past they had waited until after the school screening tests at 7-plus but felt that this was leaving it too late.
In Balbinder's case it was not simply that he was a slow learner.
There were what the head called ‘social concerns’ behind his transfer.
He was developing self-control in the classroom, but found it harder on the playground where it seemed that he was easily influenced by other children to behave badly.
As he put it, ‘He reverts when he is with naughty children.’
They had not given these reasons for transfer to his parents.
Yet they were clearly important considerations as far as the school was concerned.
It was not a foregone conclusion that there would be a place available at Cedars since there is a lot of pressure on special school places in the county.
As the head of Cedars was making his entry list for September already, and would have to submit it by the end of the week, the educational psychologist was going to request a place for Balbinder before Statementing him.
Thus it was essential to get Mr and Mrs Singh's agreement as soon as possible.
Later on the same day, I visited Mr and Mrs Singh at home.
Over tea and food we talked about the school's suggestion.
Mrs Singh was upset; she felt rejected by the school her children had been attending for five years.
She was depressed and angry with Balbinder.
She had been crying and said that she had been ‘feeling awful’ all day.
She clearly found it hard to sort out the implications of what was being suggested.
However we agreed to visit Cedars together in a few days' time.
The difficulty she was having in making sense of the boys' education was illustrated by the packet of letters she had brought to school in the morning.
One from the LEA was about her 8-year-old son's transfer to middle school, an event generating a great deal of paper including a list of the available schools; another letter from the LEA explained parents' rights of choice and appeal, also dates of open evenings; yet another letter from the school to which he had been allocated required the parents to sign the tear-off slip and return it to their present school.
Fortunately, I noticed that he had been given a place at a different school from his older brother and that it was actually a matter of filling in the appeal form requesting a place at another school.
I suggested that they should also accept the invitation to take him to visit his new school's Open Evening.
Mrs Singh said she would go if I came too but not otherwise.
Another letter from the middle school was about a visiting theatre group and asked for money as well as a tear-off slip.
We discussed with her 10-year-old son whether he wanted to see the play and we put the money for a ticket in an envelope.
To his chagrin we threw away the letter about a skiing holiday.
At nearly £400 for a week in Austria his parents were not interested.
In the evening I consulted a friend who is also a local head teacher.
Her school has a high proportion of ethnic minority children where I felt Balbinder might not have seemed such a problem.
In her opinion, it was unlikely that he would get a place at Cedars at such a late stage in the year.
She also felt that age 6 was too early to make what she saw as a drastic decision — once out of mainstream education she felt he would be unlikely to get back.
At this stage in the proceedings, my own feelings were mixed.
If the school felt it could not cope with Balbinder then maybe he would be better in a more sympathetic environment.
On the other hand Mrs Singh would lose all her social contacts in the local community once she did not have to take him to school every day.
The school gave her a point of reference and contact with other mothers.
The middle school which both her older boys attended was a long walk from her home and made little or no attempt to involve parents.
If Balbinder was bussed to Cedars every day she would be effectively cut off from any real involvement in her children's schooling, and from an important part of her own role  within the community as the mother of a young child at the local school.
On the other hand I knew that her confidence in Balbinder's school had been profoundly shaken by the interview with the head and educational psychologist.
If Balbinder didn't get a place at Cedars this year she would become even more anxious about his progress.
March 9: Visiting Cedars School
The head made us very welcome.
He began by talking to Mr and Mrs Singh about the school.
He stressed the normality of the children who attended it.
He explained that children came to Cedars when their own school could not give them the individual help with basic skills which they needed.
He explained that when a child becomes anxious he or she may stop learning.
Cedars, he told them, was a special school because it had special teachers with special skills and training.
All of the sixteen teachers in the school were experienced in teaching children with learning difficulties.
Another special feature was the size of the groups, ten in the first year, twelve in the second and fifteen thereafter.
Balbinder would be in a group with ten children.
Mrs Singh seemed to be listening intently but I guess that a lot of what was being said went over her head.
I am not sure that she even knows the word ‘special’; and phrases like ‘learning difficulties’, ‘becomes anxious’, ‘experienced’ are not necessarily familiar.
After a while she asked, ‘These children, do they learn it at the end?’
The head replied that the school offered ideal circumstances and that most children responded positively.
There is an annual review in which a report is made on the child's progress.
All parents, he told them, have the right to say, ‘I want my child to leave’, and he said, ‘Our job is to help the child go back.’
They review this possibility annually and he explained that when they have identified children who will go back they let them go into mainstream school for at first a morning and then one day a week.
At the moment six children would be going back into middle school in September.
At this point Mrs Singh said comfortably, ‘They have learnt, that's nice.’
The head went on to explain that the school's job was to understand each child's problem.
He told them that many children learned more slowly.
He illustrated different ways in which reading, for example, could be taught, and how some children may not be ‘mature’ enough to cope with a ‘look and say’approach, or may not develop that way.
He explained how ‘look and say’ uses eyes, while phonics uses ears.
Mr and Mrs Singh listened politely but, possibly, were confused by all this specialist terminology.
He went on to tell them about the school.
The children started at 5 and could stay until 16.
They could also leave at any time.
Each part of the school — lower/ middle/upper — resembled mainstream school, the difference lying in the size of the teaching group.
At 16-plus they go on to college for up to two years and follow courses which will lead to work.
Several of the 15 year olds were on work experience at the moment.
He then took us round the school.
The lower school had its own grassed and paved play area with plentiful equipment.
The rooms were small, purpose built, had carpeted floors, and each teacher had a non-teaching assistant.
It was an intimate small-scale non-threatening environment.
I was particularly impressed by the art room.
The workshop and home economics area were also impressive, and the school had three computers.
Outside was very pleasant with views over open fields and a local park.
Part of the senior side had been landscaped to make an attractive outdoor work area with wooden table and benches made in the workshop.
There was a swimming pool and a distant view of the donkey field.
There seemed to be few ethnic minority children, one in each class perhaps, certainly none in the youngest group.
After the visit the head talked about the importance of parental involvement.
He explained that regular contact and discussion of ways in which parents can help at home was vital: ‘Together, we can achieve more.’
The school had an open-door policy.
He then put it to Mr and Mrs Singh that they would have to think about whether they would like Balbinder to come to the school.
He explained that there were a limited number of places, with sixteen or seventeen taken up for September already (I wondered whether this meant Balbinder might be unlucky, but did not like to ask).
He explained the procedure by which Balbinder would be given a place.
The educational psychologist would prepare notes on Balbinder.
He himself would visit Balbinder at his present school.
He stressed, ‘We only want him to come if it's right.
Nothing happens until you say yes.’
Then Mr and Mrs Singh would come again with Balbinder, and finally they would receive a letter from County Hall.
Again, he stressed that the final decision lay with them: ‘He will not come until you sign it…in the end you decide.’
Mr Singh asked his first question: ‘Would it be next September?’
The head said that that would be the case and that Balbinder would stay for as long as he needed their help.
However they could make the decision to take him away ‘at any time’.
Mrs Singh asked ‘Do you have the same holiday?’ and then spoke for the first time about Balbinder.
She seemed distressed, ‘I mean Balbinder, he used to just sit by the telly, even now he still…he wants toys…he doesn't want to do the things, he wants to do all the time what he wants to do…’
The head nodded reassuringly, seeming to listen, but he did not encourage her to talk about Balbinder any more.
Instead he went on to tell them that the shortest time they kept pupils was for two years but that usually they tried to move people back into mainstream at the time for transfer to middle/upper school.
He told them that the educational psychologist was very good and really knew the children.
Mrs Singh, still pursuing her own thoughts, said, ‘I wish he was just like other children, like my other children.’
The head said it was important to think about ‘whatever is best’ for Balbinder, and went back to what the school catered for —‘people think it's for mentally handicapped’.
‘It doesn't look like one’, said Mrs Singh very positively.
The head told them that there were many different special schools in the county and explained where and what each one  was for, reassuring them that Cedars is ‘a school for children who have difficulty getting started with basic skills’.
Its job is to help children ‘who are struggling’.
He gave Mr and Mrs Singh a school booklet and saw us out.
We rang for a taxi and while we waited, looked at books of photographs of school plays, trips, art work and sports days.
Both Mr and Mrs Singh seemed surprised and relieved by the normality of the school.
Mr Singh told me that one of his brothers-in-law had told them it was a school for mentally handicapped.
This had clearly been worrying them both.
When we got home I could see that they were ready to agree to the move.
It was also evident that they had not weighed up the consequences.
It all seemed easy — they sign on the dotted line and Balbinder would be virtually taken out of their hands.
Despite the school's stated intention to involve parents as far as possible, I seriously doubted whether Mr or Mrs Singh would be capable or prepared to enter into the kind of partnership the school envisaged.
Looking through the booklet the head had given them, I guessed that they would have some difficulty making sense of it.
They would probably need help with sentences like, ‘class teachers, together with the help of the remedial specialist, ensure that there is a detailed understanding of the learning difficulties of each individual child.’
Terms like, ‘environmental work’, ‘a full curriculum’, ‘special programmes of work for language development’ would need to be explained to them.
The school's expressed intention is that ‘parents are helped to understand the nature of the learning difficulties of their child and are encouraged to visit the school frequently to develop that understanding and to continue that approach at home.’
Neither Mr nor Mrs Singh have the confidence to take on such a role.
March 12: Coping with the procedure
I met with Mrs Singh and the educational psychologist in the head's room.
Mrs Singh was very certain — she and her husband had decided that they both want Balbinder to go to Cedars.
I tried to explore the problems Mrs Singh would have in attempting to be a fully participating parent but the educational psychologist seemed to feel that this was a problem common to many Cedars parents.
The educational psychologist spent some time explaining the legal side of Statementing, which is complex.
He told us that it would take many weeks to sort out and would involve a variety of procedures, such as a medical, reports from the school and visits.
There would be twenty-nine days between the initial letter from County Hall and any action.
The sheer amount of information seemed daunting.
I arranged to visit that afternoon and to go through it with Mr and Mrs Singh.
When I arrived they showed me the letter they had received from the Chief Education Officer that morning which explained the proposed Statementing procedure:
The learning difficulties being experienced by your child were discussed and  you agreed that your child probably has a special educational need which requires further investigation.
Therefore it is proposed to carry out an assessment of your child's needs under the Education Act 1981 with your agreement.
The letter was at pains to stress the parents' involvement and their rights: ‘If it is agreed that the Authority should determine the special educational provision for your child…your further rights under the Education Act 1981 will be explained to you.’
An enclosed booklet gave further general information about the provision of special education with an addendum summarising the legal rights of parents in relation to the assessment process.
In this, the mysterious twenty-nine days was explained: ‘parents will have a period of 29 days in which to seek further information from the Chief Education Officer and to make representations and submit written evidence.’
Since they had evidently made up their minds, none of this seemed important to them.
Going through the Cedars' brochure with them, however, they were pleased to find a statement which they could relate to, namely that the school sets out to help children, ‘who are having problems in learning to read, find spelling and writing difficult, are unable to express themselves well, are unable to settle and concentrate…’
All these seemed to relate to Balbinder's needs as his parents saw them and Mr and Mrs Singh were beginning to seem happier.
As they understood it, after a short while Balbinder might be sorted out and returned to mainstream.
I did not feel so optimistic.
The brochure stated clearly that while some children transferred back to mainstream schools, ‘the majority remain until they are 16 years of age’.
June 5: Testing
Visited Mrs Singh at home.
She told me that she had been present when Balbinder was tested by the educational psychologist.
Balbinder had had to do a lot of puzzles.
The psychologist had said he was good with his hands.
Mrs Singh said he would not sit down and kept walking about.
She said he was the same at home, only wanted to play with toys and watch TV, he wouldn't do any ‘work’.
I was not sure what she meant by ‘work’.
She went on to her worries about Jeetinder who still wasn't bringing anything home from school.
She was being racially harassed and was afraid to go out into her garden.
Her husband was away in India for three weeks.
People were throwing things over her garden wall and someone had painted on the front door.
We spent a lot of time discussing this.
In some ways Balbinder seemed the least of her problems at the time.
Perhaps it was a relief that matters were being taken out of her hands.
We agreed to meet at school the following week.
June 10: The information for the Statement
First, the head went through the school report, details of birth, address, etc.
There was a brief account of professional intervention to date.
Before starting school he had attended the child development centre, received speech therapy and since had been seen on several occasions by the educational psychologist.
Then, there was a description of the child's functioning: he had taken a long time to settle into school, e.g. routine and order of the class.
He had communication problems — speech and English language were not good.
He had difficulty ‘sounding’ because of this, and it was thought to be affecting his progress in learning to read.
The head attempted to explain to Mrs Singh how children have to learn the initial sounds of words and how having two languages can impede this.
I think Mrs Singh understood.
Balbinder has also had difficulty learning colours, numbers and sounds.
His progress was slow because his retention was poor.
At this point Mrs Singh looking concerned said, ‘You think there's something wrong with him inside of him?’
The head said, ‘No, he's not ill.’
Mrs Singh agreed that it must be the way he forgot things.
The head said ‘Yes, he does have difficulty remembering — particularly sounding’, and felt that this could be because he was perhaps more fluent in Punjabi.
There were discrepancies in the report.
On the one hand Mrs Singh was told that his drawing and writing were immature, that he was still drawing and writing like a very young child; yet later she was told that he was very good with a pencil and talented at art!
Having said that he was very immature the report added that there had been considerable improvement, but it had taken a long time (he had only been at school for four terms and had had a change of teacher).
The head stressed that what Balbinder needed was to be in a small group, not in a class of twenty-three.
In order for him to maintain interest he needed to work in short spurts.
In his present situation, his difficulty in concentrating took up a lot of the teacher's time.
The head then commented on his social development.
Here they felt there had been much progress.
Balbinder used to be ‘wild’, but he had learned to share and to take part in group work, despite still being a very lively child.
The head then went on to describe the aims and provision of special education.
Since Balbinder clearly made more progress in a small group where he could have a lot of attention, and where all worked at the same pace, this could be an answer.
The head felt that the boy needed somebody permanently watching him.
Also he needed a lot of talking in English, as he was still not sounding words clearly.
Further he was a very active child, and needed specialist apparatus.
They had all the necessary facilities and resources at Cedars.
The head was very persuasive, showing concern for the way Balbinder would react when (or if) he fell behind.
As he was already behind in mastering the basic skills which lay the foundation for all further work, he felt that Balbinder needed a lot of help if he was to do justice to his abilities.
And he said very kindly, ‘That's our view of Balbinder.’
The educational psychologist gave his report.
He reiterated that Balbinder's problems with language had needed attention before school.
He stressed that he was a very likeable little boy.
However, observing him in the classroom he had noticed his immature behaviour.
He ran about a lot, and found concentration difficult.
Despite much improvement in pencil and art work there had been none in reading and other school work.
He was fidgety and in a dream world when being given instruction in a group.
Often he watched other children and then followed and copied them.
The psychologist commented that Balbinder had liked having a reading book and clearly wanted to read but when it came to reading he did not understand what he was doing but relied on guessing.
He clearly wanted to do well, wanted to read but needed a lot of extra help.
When asked questions he gave one word answers, though he used two words on occasion, as in ‘boys swimming’, ‘wet play’.
On the tests he gave him he was better on puzzles and patterns, poor on those involving speaking and understanding.
He felt that Balbinder needed to work slowly and not be pushed — he needed more time and specific help to speak in sentences.
At this point Mrs Singh said, ‘They are not allowed to speak English at home.’
She felt that he spoke better in Punjabi and that he remembered better in Punjabi.
She referred to her own family: parents, brother and sisters who all spoke English at home.
She found this very odd.
At the weekend when she had taken Balbinder to stay with his grandparents in Coventry, her brother had been trying to teach Balbinder to say ‘can I’, or ‘May I’ instead of‘I want to’.
The educational psychologist listened tolerantly to Mrs Singh's comments, did not respond to them but simply repeated that Balbinder needed to be with teachers who were experienced in working with small groups.
Mrs Singh said that she felt that Balbinder would always do what was wanted if it suited him.
The educational psychologist told her that one of the teachers from Cedars had visited Balbinder in school and made very positive comments.
It seemed that a place was available but that all the complex procedures had to be completed before it could be offered to them.
He still had to have a medical.
The head would speak to the school doctor that same day.
Social Services would write to Mrs Singh.
The procedure was necessarily long-winded but it could be completed by the end of term.
Mrs Singh expressed a worry about Balbinder refusing to dress himself and ordering her to get him ready for school when he could do this perfectly well if he wanted to.
The educational psychologist said this was understandable while he was feeling rather unsettled.
The head said he would chase up the documents.
Mrs Singh seemed bewildered by the amount of information she had been given.
I promised to go and see her again on Friday morning.
Throughout this interview Mrs Singh, who was still struggling to grasp the implications of what the head and educational psychologist were telling her, attempted to contribute.
Her anecdotes were treated courteously but no real response was made.
It seemed that now the process was under way her contribution was not required.
June 12
I visited Mr and Mrs Singh.
Mrs Singh and I talked Mr Singh through the meeting, point by point.
He agreed with the head's account of Balbinder's lack of concentration, which obviously worried them both a great deal.
He listened to what I had to say about the procedure still to be gone through and hoped that they would soon hear whether Balbinder had a place.
I said that this was almost certain but the process was rather slow.
Mrs Singh agreed to tell me when she heard from the doctor.
They both understood that this was a formality and that he was not thought to be ‘ill’.
What particularly concerned me was their feeling that Balbinder seemed to understand and respond better in Punjabi.
Mrs Singh expressed her feelings that it was very important for all her children to speak Punjabi and she was afraid that they might not do this if she and Mr Singh spoke English.
Both parents were very concerned that he should get more appropriate help and were now convinced that this would be provided at Cedars.
June 22: Acceptance
Mrs and Mrs Singh had received a letter offering Balbinder a place at Cedars.
They had understood the gist but needed help.
We filled in the acceptance form and phoned the school about a visit.
The school secretary said all the September intake would be invited for a morning before the end of term.
Balbinder, who had been excluded from all deliberations about his future, had not seen his new school yet.
July 15: Balbinder visits his new school
Mrs Singh, Balbinder and I set off to visit Cedars School.
Balbinder was very subdued.
His mother said he was not happy about the new school, and wanted to stay where he was.
He had, after all, had five terms there, he would be 7 in December.
He did not speak all the way.
Mrs Singh remarked what a long way it seemed.
We were early and stood in the playground.
Balbinder looked around but clung to Mrs Singh.
We went in and were ushered into the hall where a number of other new children were looking at books of photos of school trips and events.
We were asked to sit in the third and fourth rows and the lower school children filed in.
The head explained that the school had a lower/middle/ upper division and the lower school head briefly explained that the children were going to show the parents and new children what they had been doing.
Each year group described a recent trip and showed photos and work they had done.
The classes were small, as was the number of ethnic minority children.
There were one, or possibly two, Afro-Caribbean children overall and one or two Asian children in each group.
Mrs Singh and Balbinder noticed each one and commented.
It was hot and the demonstration went on much too long, but it  gave us all some idea of how caring the teachers were and it was a practical illustration of what the school was trying to do.
The children were then asked to go out to play.
Balbinder was very reluctant and clung to his mother.
He had lost interest in the activities.
There had been too much ‘talk and show’ early on and he had been wriggling about, scraping his chair back and causing Mrs Singh to reprimand him constantly.
It looked as if we would have to take him out but an older Asian boy came and took him away, and he went quite confidently.
The head then told the parents about travel, uniform, swimming (once a week all the year round), the PTA, illnesses, notes for absence or non-swimming and, above all, contacting the school whenever in doubt.
We were then taken to have coffee and the school secretary handed out official forms for the parents to fill in.
Mrs Singh filled them in although she had already expressed alarm at the number of notes she was going to have to write to the school.
Classes were allocated and Balbinder was to be in class 1 with a Mrs Allinson and a nursery assistant.
It was small, with its own toilets and washbasins and an entirely private playground.
Balbinder ran outside straight away, gesturing to me to come and look at it.
In the playground they had a sturdy wooden house with door and windows, climbing and swinging equipment and lots of small bicycles and tricycles.
In the classroom, photos of the trip to the seaside were on display and there were small circular tables.
It was all on a scale much more appropriate for children than the high vaulting of his previous school and there was much more play equipment.
This filled Mrs Singh with horror.
She was worried by the way he roamed about touching everything, and during a long chat to Mrs Allinson expressed her concern that he could not get on with anything, and could not write or read.
Mrs Allinson was very reassuring.
However, Mrs Singh clearly saw Cedars as a temporary phase.
Earlier on, in the playground, as Balbinder had gradually gained confidence and begun to explore and use things Mrs Singh had said, wistfully, ‘I do hope Balbinder learn so quickly he will soon go back to his school.’
On the way out the head knelt down to say goodbye to Balbinder, who was still looking rather mystified but was much less clinging and was smiling more.
In the car on the way home he sat alone, opened the window and put his head out.
It was very hard to imagine what he made of what was going on.
No one had consulted him and he didn't seem to want to talk about it.
In all these transactions Balbinder seemed a shadowy figure.
Decisions were being taken about his future which no one could explain to him.
Over the last few months he had become rather withdrawn and mistrustful; a subdued version of his former self.
At Cedars Mrs Singh had instantly made friends with a young Asian woman (wearing trousers and a shirt) with a little girl who was evidently a year older than Balbinder.
She and Mrs Singh spoke in Punjabi but her English sounded local and I suspected that she preferred to speak English.
However, Mrs Singh was pleased to meet her and generally liked all the teachers and what she saw.
I wondered whether she had any misgivings.
The distance will certainly be a  problem.
What she was making of this experience was also hard to imagine.
Choice seemed to have been taken away from her, but some of her anxieties had also been allayed.
PROGRESS REPORT
In September Balbinder started at Cedars.
My contact with the family became much less frequent.
Their circumstances had changed: Mr Singh had a full-time job, they had taken a big step and purchased their council house and Mrs Singh now felt that she needed permanent work herself.
The job she finally acquired during the summer holidays meant leaving home before the children and returning after them.
The coach which picked up the Cedars' children stopped about five minutes' walk away from their home.
Balbinder had to be seen onto it, and met at the end of the day.
For the first few weeks of term this was a problem.
Mr Singh could take him to the bus when he was on late shifts and collect him on early shifts.
His brothers aged 8 and 10, whose school was a long walk in the opposite direction, had to be relied on to take this responsibility when their father could not.
The whole operation caused Mrs Singh a great deal of anxiety.
By half-term, a local parent with a child at Cedars had offered to put Balbinder on the coach in the morning and let him stay at her house until he could be picked up in the evening.
Mrs Singh had now effectively become cut off from her children's education just as Balbinder had been cut off from local peer group relationships.
She occasionally contacted me, and for a Christmas present gave me a photograph of Balbinder taken at school and made into a calendar.
This showed him sitting at a desk, pencil in hand: his mother's vision of what school should be about.
She and Mr Singh had visited the school for a Christmas event and had been pleased to hear that Balbinder was being moved into the second class.
She had been worried that he was still playing too much and not learning anything.
From January to July my contacts with the family were infrequent and concerned the progress of the two older boys.
My advice was sought on several occasions when the family did not know how to cope with quite serious problems concerning the behaviour of one of them.
Balbinder was no longer a worry.
However, in July Mrs Singh phoned to ask whether I could go with her to Cedars' open evening.
She wanted my opinion on Balbinder's progress.
I was not able to go with her, but, as I was in contact with the school's section XI teacher at the time, I arranged to visit on my own.
The section XI teacher, who had particular responsibility for Balbinder, said that he was the least of her worries.
He had been moved to a higher class, seemed well adjusted and chatted a lot when she worked with him.
His class teacher also felt that he was making progress.
Both parents had come to the open evening and she had been able to talk to them.
They had also come to school earlier in the year for the annual assessment meeting, a statutory requirement for children who are the subject of Statements.
Looking back to her first encounter with Balbinder a year ago, when she had visited him at his previous school, she said that she had been shocked.
He had been on the periphery of a large class and little attempt was being made to involve him in what was going on.
She had felt at the time that he was ‘pretty borderline for special school’.
It seemed that in a school where he was in such a minority, his language and ethnicity had been defined as particular problems requiring the rather Draconian solution of Statementing.
His present class teacher and the section XI teacher both agreed that he was a slow learner, but felt that he did not exhibit the behavioural problems nor degrees of learning difficulty that characterised many of the children in the school.
This was borne out by observing him in the classroom, where he was sitting quietly working, in contrast with the much less controlled behaviour of other children in this small group.
In this environment he appeared to have become a model pupil.
However, despite the small class and the specialist attention he was still considered far behind for a 7 year old.
He could not read or write independently.
His written work, like both his brothers', was neat and controlled, consisting of short accounts of daily events which the teacher had transcribed and he had carefully illustrated and copied.
The question of return to mainstream schooling was not being considered.
Later, talking to his teacher after a year and two terms at Cedars, it seemed that Balbinder's conversational language was developing well; he could hold his own in a small group often initiating topics of interest, describing, explaining and enquiring.
However, his teacher warned that proficiency in conversational language should not be assumed to equate with proficiency in cognitive or ‘academic’ language.
She reported on his ‘good imagination, something which shows up particularly in his drawings which always contain fine detail,.
Out of mainstream education perhaps for the rest of his school career, Balbinder is no longer defined as a problem.
His re-entry, however, either to mainstream or to the start of adult working life, may not be achieved so smoothly.
The process of Statementing has disrupted his normal development.
It has not taken into account the evident disjuncture between the cultural norms of his home and community and those of the school.
In a more recent conversation with his mother she was still worried about him despite good reports from the school and the fact that ‘he now speaks both languages all right’.
Her lack of contact with the school, the distance and her work made her feel helpless: ‘I can't rely on myself — I don't know — working all the time — how could I know.’
Balbinder would be 8 at Christmas and she saw no evidence of the improvement in learning to read and write that she was hoping for.
On being a client
Conflicting perspectives on assessment
Derrick Armstrong and David Galloway
This chapter looks at the perceptions of parents of their role in the assessment of their child's special educational needs as part of the Statementing process carried out under the 1981 Education Act.
The analysis is based on observations of professional — parent and professional — child interactions during the assessments of thirty children referred to the Schools Psychological Service in three LEAs because they were thought to have emotional and behavioural difficulties.
In each case these observations were complemented by interviews held with the participants.
INTRODUCTION: PERCEPTIONS DIFFER
Perhaps it is not surprising that, without exception, the professionals to whom we talked stated emphatically that their overriding concern was to act in the interests of their child clients.
Likewise, they expressed a desire to involve parents at the centre of decision-making.
The former is consistent with the ethical codes of their professional associations (e.g. Association of Educational psychologists (1984) Members Handbook).
The latter, recommended by The Warnock Report (DES 1978), was established in law by the 1981 Education Act and supported by subsequent advice to professionals issued by the DES (1983, 1989).
Does the 1981 Act assist or inhibit cooperation between professionals and parents?
On face value the Act formalises a cooperative framework.
In practice, however, the bureaucratisation of the professional — parent relationship and the assessment process may lead to a situation in which the primary function of parental involvement is to legitimise professional decisions.
Many parents felt that their own contribution to the assessment was only taken seriously when it supported what the professionals were saying.
On many occasions in our study we found a sharp contrast between the professionals' perception that a high degree of consensus had been reached and the parents' perception that they had agreed to a course of action because they saw no other real choice, particularly if the urgent needs of the child and other family members were to be quickly met.
In the following section we use case history data to identify ways in which the professional — parent relationship operates within the context of the 1981 Act.
This is followed by a discussion of the impact the 1981 Act has had on the notion of partnership.
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: THREE CASE STUDIES
Each of the examples in this section illustrate the complexities which lie behind the definition of problem and special need by professionals in what they believe to be a collaborative relationship with parents.
John: defining parents as part of ‘the problem'
Cooperation with parents may be made particularly difficult where the professional identifies a conflict of interests between parents and child.
For example, the home situation may be seen as the single most important factor ‘causing’ the child's behaviour problems.
Rather than being seen as partners in the search for a solution parents may be seen as part of the problem (Moses and Croll 1987, Wood 1988).
Because they are viewed in this light parents may respond with diffidence to those carrying out the assessment of their child and simply reflect back and reinforce professional perceptions.
In John's case the stated reason for referral for formal assessment was his behaviour in school.
However, underlying this was his teachers' deeper concern that he might be a victim of physical and sexual abuse.
The evidence in support of these allegations was vague and in the event unsubstantiated despite in extensive Social Services investigation which ran parallel to the Statementing procedures.
In drawing her conclusions about the family situation the head teacher pointed to the ‘fact’ that John's parents were only cooperative on the surface.
‘Mum was initially cooperative…and Mr Peel was likewise ‘quite cooperative’’ until the decision was made to Statement…after that he opted out and didn't contact me.’
Mrs Peel, however, saw things differently, saying of the head, ‘She seemed to be assessing me rather than John…it's like she's shifting the blame on to me…she used to speak to me like I was a really bad mother.
I used to come home in tears.’
The school found some support for their interpretation of Mrs Peel's behaviour from a community nurse who tried to work with the family: ‘She thinks there's evidence of sexual abuse; soiling, language and sexually overt behaviour.’
In addition the nurse, too, thought that the parents were uncooperative and that they were hiding something.
She stated in her report: ‘On the occasions of visiting home I have felt most unwelcome and am therefore limited in the intervention I can provide.’
She recommended that a meeting with Social Services would be helpful to alert them to the ‘dynamics’ of this family and to advise them that ‘as professionals we were anxious that we had not managed to engage and intervene within the family and explore deficits in the parenting role’.
Following the nurse's report a meeting was held with Social Services.
According to Mrs Peel who was invited to attend:
All different people went in the meeting — the health visitor, the doctor, teachers — but I couldn't go in.
When I was allowed in the child abuse officer was in the chair and he told me that his behaviour was the behaviour of a child who was being sexually abused.
They said they were not saying it was, but it was the behaviour.
I went home in tears.
They asked me to take the children for a full medical.
I didn't want to but I was frightened they would think it was true, so I let them do it.
I felt because they couldn't come up with anything else they brought this up to show it was something it home…it's all been dropped now I think.
From the perspectives of both professionals and parents the attempt to build a cooperative framework directed towards meeting John's needs had broken down.
According to the professionals the breakdown happened because the parents were the cause of the child's special needs.
Consequently, cooperation was defined by the professionals in terms that allowed them, in the words of the community nurse, to ‘intervene within the family and explore deficits in the parenting role’.
The parents were expected to accept the authority of the professionals even though there is little evidence to support their judgement.
The parents' sense of disempowerment was at this stage complete.
Cooperation with the professionals required acceptance of the framework within which John's needs had been professionally cast: that it was their deficits as parents which had created John's needs.
On the other hand, refusal to cooperate would have been perceived by the professionals as reinforcing the latter's initial perceptions.
The definition of a problem, its source and the ‘needs, that arise from it are frequently established by professionals at an early stage and as we see here the parents, because they lack information and power, may find it very difficult to challenge such assumptions.
John's case also suggests how the perceptions of those professionals involved at an early stage of an assessment and the actions that follow may influence, direct or constrain the later perceptions and actions of other professionals.
The educational psychologist (EP) expressed surprise that on every occasion he had met John the latter had always been attentive and cooperative but felt that ‘We have to accept what we are told about his behaviour by his teachers.’
For this reason when the head teacher eventually excluded John permanently from school because of his behaviour the EP accepted that the school were acting reasonably in the circumstances and that they had made every effort with John.
The EP observed that ‘John's language is so adult and behaviour so violent to other people that the school could not put up with it any longer.’
On the other hand, the psychologist also recognised how the scope for his own intervention was restricted by the school's actions.
‘The exclusion shuts doors in terms of possible recommendation.’
Likewise, the EP, after visiting the family on a number of occasions, said that the community nurse's impressions ‘don't ring true with my  own experience’.
He also felt that the evidence of abuse was unconvincing but given the involvement of other agencies in this area it was beyond his remit to challenge it in compiling his advice for the Statement.
Mrs Peel thought the EP to be more sympathetic than the other professionals she had encountered and that made it easier for her to convey her views to him.
None the less her experiences with those other professionals led her to believe that she could nut affect the result of their deliberations.
She felt she had no power to determine or influence the decisions taken by the LEA and its professional advisers.
To her the prospect of a Statement is ‘a load of rubbish.
It's a legal document…but they've been telling me that all along.
I get a bit of paper and it's more official but I still don't get anywhere.’
However strongly she felt about the rights and wrongs of her situation she had no sense of power over its outcome.
George: who needs support?, what support is needed?
In this section, by looking at the case of George, we examine the interactive process and power relationships underlying the development of an apparent consensus.
We show how this consensus was identified as strong from the perspective of a professional, yet fragile and disempowering from the perspective of George's parents.
George is a 9 year old attending a primary school in a working-class part of town.
According to the head teacher ‘It may look very nice but we have a lot of difficult families and children.’
George comes from a large family and the home situation is acknowledged by his parents to be stressful because of overcrowding and financial difficulties.
One of George's brothers was recently placed in a residential school for children with moderate learning difficulties as a weekly boarder.
The family have experienced a lot of conflict with George's school and since moving home some twelve months ago have made efforts, unsuccessfully, to transfer their children to a different primary school.
George was referred to the LEA for formal assessment under the Act on the grounds of emotional and behavioural difficulties as an ‘urgent case’.
His teachers reported that the problem was ‘behaviour in class and at home’.
In school, George was described as ‘aggressive…he wanders about instead of getting on with his work…he won't conform…he's like his brother…generally he disturbs other children.
He disturbs their work.’
Those behaviours were identified by his teachers as arising directly from the problems George faced in the home.
At the outset the willingness of George's parents to cooperate with the school staff in discussing the home situation and how this might affect George's behaviour in school was used by the teaching staff as evidence in support of their case that George's needs could not be met within a mainstream school.
As the assessment progressed those two factors were at the forefront of the school's case to the educational psychologist:
(a)
Disruptive behaviour in school.
(b)
Management problems at home identified by the parents themselves.
We can see here how, at an early stage, the discourse of needs was established.
The main feature of this discourse was that George's needs were conceptualised within the framework of the teachers' perceptions of their own needs: in particular the threat George was seen as presenting to order and discipline within the school.
The EP's role was seen by the teaching staff as being to advise the school.
The EP was ‘brought in’ in response to the teachers' perception that they lacked the skills to manage George's behaviour.
However, despite the way teachers represented their views Mr and Mrs Shod doubted the severity of the problem: ‘I don't think he's any worse than other kids — he's picked on by the school.’
Their stated wish was for him to be moved to another mainstream school.
As regards the home situation their perspective was subtly and significantly different from that of the school.
They acknowledged the stressfulness of the family situation but wanted help toward removing the stresses rather than to have George removed from the home.
It is important to recognise their willingness to consider residential school in this context.
When it was suggested to them as a possibility it was understood by them as an opportunity for a breathing space in the absence of any other alternative .
It was a misperception of the parental perspective that was used by the professionals to legitimise the latter's recommendations.
This is illustrated in the following exchange:
Mr Short : There used to be a place in Scotland where kids could go to give parents a break.
I don't know if there's anything like that round here.
You've got to think of the kids as well.
They've never had any holiday.
EP : I'll try to make some enquiries about holidays.
I do feel that George will need some special schooling — he's not getting what he needs.
Not because of anything to do with the school but he needs special help — I think we should think about your feelings.
Let's try and get some help for you and the family.
Thus the EP links parental desire for respite from family stress with the notion of special schooling.
Once this link is established Mrs Shott is asked to consider a residential placement and the parents' own anxieties about their family situation and needs are used to justify the proposal being put forward.
The different perspectives of EP and parents were reflected in the confusion over what had been decided at that meeting.
The EP wrote in a memorandum to the LEA: ‘I feel that George would benefit from placement in a residential school for pupils with emotional and behavioural problems.
Mr and Mrs Short would be happy with a weekly boarding place.’
When questioned by a researcher Mr and Mrs Short restated their preference for a placement in an alternative mainstream school.
They also reaffirmed their opposition to a residential school placement.
Mrs Short : I couldn't handle George at weekends if he was away all week.
Elder daughter :[referring to John, George's brother, who boards at an MLD school].
It makes him worse.
John says ‘You've sent me away and don't love me.’
Yet Mrs Short, despite her strongly held views, expressed resignation in playing little part in the decision-making process, a resignation based in part upon experience.
‘We didn't bet much to do with John's assessment.
I didn't want him to go to residential school at all.’
The professionals were seen by Mrs Short as decision-makers and therefore when asked about the outcome of the meeting with the EP she was unclear because ‘I haven't been told.’
The parents believed, however, that the outcome of the assessment would be a placement in a special school whatever their own views.
In a later meeting between parents and psychologist the former, in response to the psychologist's efforts to identify/impose a consensus, again attempted to articulate their own understanding of George's needs.
EP : Last time I saw you we felt that we should be looking at some kind of school with weekly boarding.
Mrs Short said she would prefer George to attend a mainstream school.
EP : That's where you would like him to go?
Mr and Mrs Short : Yes.
EP : One possible school would be weekly boarding — if you visited there would be no guarantee.
Mr Short : To be honest with you we have one child already at one of those schools and when he comes home he's a lot worse.
The psychologist in a separate interview with the researcher expressed the belief that this ‘fact’ was evidence of the unsuitability of the home situation.
This contrasted sharply with the parents' belief that the child's poor behaviour at home was a consequence of the latter perceiving himself to have been rejected by the family because he had been sent to a boarding school.
The psychologist suggested that the parents themselves really wanted George to be placed in a residential school but did not wish to appear that they were rejecting him.
‘They see residential school as an alternative to ‘care’ but it has less stigma for them.
I think that's what they've really wanted all the way along.’
The psychologist justified his own persuasive efforts with this belief that he was actually helping the parents to come to terms with a decision ‘they really want to make ’.
EP : What I suggest we do — nothing's going to be decided today — I can arrange for you to have a look at one of these weekly residential schools — at this stage we're saying let's look.
Mr and Mrs Short : That's OK.
The validity of the psychologist's interpretation of parental motives in this case is  difficult to assess.
In the end it depends upon ‘professional judgement’.
Whether or not it is correct, it quite clearly differs from the parents' explicit account of their perception of how the decision has been reached and the implications it will have for George.
Mr Short : As far as I'm concerned they give up too soon.
Mrs Short : The way they were talking at that meeting George is going to residential school.
It's going to make him worse.
Tom: refusing to play the game
Our third example focuses upon conflicting perceptions of the purpose of assessment under the 1981 Act and the relationship between information and control.
It raises questions about how the Act itself can become a controlling force to limit parental action.
Twelve months ago Tom had been placed two half-days each week in an off-site unit for disruptive children.
This placement followed the breakup of his parents' marriage which was acknowledged by his mother, but not his father, as having a serious effect upon Tom's behaviour.
After the breakup the parents were awarded joint custody and Tom resided for part of the week with each.
Mrs Jones felt that this arrangement was itself disruptive and should be changed.
Mr Jones did not agree.
He felt that Tom caused him no problems and it was Tom's relationship with his mother that was at the root of the difficulties he had.
Tom had recently been referred by his mainstream school to the psychological Service for assessment under the 1981 Act because teachers felt they should receive additional support for Tom's periods in mainstream school.
The EP in this case felt that even more drastic measures might be required.
In his view Tom was being used as a pawn in the relationship between his parents and unless his parents did come to an arrangement whereby ‘a more stable home situation’ was provided, Tom would benefit from a residential school placement.
Tom's mother was highly critical of the way the mainstream school was handling him but agreed to the assessment because she felt it might help him.
Initially she welcomed the professionals' involvement because she believed this might result in help and advice in identifying the reasons for Tom's deteriorating behaviour.
Once the assessment had begun Mrs Jones soon became disillusioned.
She complained bitterly about the lack of information she was receiving.
Perhaps this reflected a lack of clarity about the purpose of the assessment and the conflicting expectations participants held of its outcome.
Mrs Jones expected feedback and dialogue about the development of an intervention strategy.
When she later challenged the EP she was told she should have contacted the Education Welfare Officer (EWO) designated by the LEA as being the ‘named person’.
She couldn't recollect having been informed of this.
In any case she had not expected that her role in the assessment would be limited to receiving information back from an  EWO: ‘We didn't ask for it [the assessment]— it was the education system who said it should be done — if I accept them into my home I don't expect them to disappear for twelve months, if they invited themselves in.’
Mrs Jones felt that the slow progress of the assessment and the limited information she received created new problems instead of resolving existing ones: ‘It introduces so much trauma — you're getting all the criticism all the time but you're not getting any information because it takes so long.’
Access to information, however, was not the only problem Mrs Jones faced.
A lack of common agreement over the objectives of the assessment was something Mrs Jones had not anticipated.
Whereas she had seen the assessment as a way of addressing Tom's unsettled home situation, establishing an objective base line from which she and her ex-husband could identify how their differences were affecting Tom, the EP refused to become involved in this area.
‘It's difficult if I'm to remain neutral.’
Yet the EP was willing to use this dispute as a justification for his recommendation for residential schooling.
In addition, Mrs Jones was dissatisfied that little attention appeared to have been given to Tom's problems in school.
She had been told on one occasion by the EP that Tom's behaviour problems might have been the result of frustration over reading difficulties.
She had found this information to be very positive ‘because they can focus on dealing with it now, it spells out a lot of hope’.
Yet she felt little had been done to address this problem in school and if in these circumstances she now accepted residential school she would be giving up on Tom.
None the less the EP continued to recommend residential schooling.
Mrs Jones's response was ‘No way am I going to agree with that.’
On the other hand, on a different occasion she expressed feelings of depression and powerlessness in the face of professional opinion, conceding that she might allow him to go to residential school if it could be shown that it was in his best interests.
Once the EP had recommended residential schooling in his report Mrs Jones expressed little confidence in her ‘rights’ under the law.
But she remained determined to play an equal part in defining the nature of her child's needs.
She had seen the initial stage of the assessment process as an opportunity to enhance her role in the decision-making but saw it as restricting her power.
She therefore decided to abandon reliance on official procedures.
She moved house and with the cooperation of the new local head teacher changed Tom's mainstream school, and withdrew him from the off-site unit.
The EP and LEA were now presented with a fait accompli .
According to Mrs Jones they had little option in the circumstances but to allow her decision a ‘chance to fail’.
DISCUSSION: DISEMPOWERMENT BY PARTNERSHIP
The 1981 Education Act clearly states the procedures that must be followed to maximise parental involvement in the decision-making process.
It identifies the range of information that must be made available to parents and the right of  parents to contribute their own advice and evidence to the assessment.
Moreover, procedures are established for parents to seek clarification, state objections and appeal against recommendations.
A strong case can be put forward to demonstrate that no decision can be taken without full consultation with parents and due deference to their views.
In practice there is increasing evidence that the rights of parents under the Act are not always given prominence.
A number of commentators have suggested that once the assessment procedures have been initiated parents become increasingly marginalised in the process.
Dyson (1986), for example, drew attention to the ways in which professionals' confidential files often contain materials contributing to the social stereotyping of children and their families.
This information might be circulated informally amongst professionals but parents remain ignorant of its existence.
Chaudhury (1986) and Rehal (1989) identified how parents of ethnic minority children may be disadvantaged during special needs assessments by the failure of LEAs and professionals to take account of language and cultural factors.
Goacher et al .
(1988) found marked differences between LEAs in the role parents are allowed to play.
‘It seems certain that even the small change in the balance of power between professionals and parents brought about by the Act have yet to be realized in a number of Authorities’(Goacher et al .
1988: 59).
It might be suggested that the disempowerment of parents arises from a combination of LEAs seeking to maintain control over the distribution of resources and professionals seeking to secure the autonomy of their professional role.
Yet we can find evidence of LEAs taking their responsibilities under the Act for involving parents very seriously, presenting information and reports in ways designed to make the assessment meaningful and accessible to parents.
None the less, even in these cases parents may find the concepts of ‘disclosure’ and ‘involvement’to operate implicitly as disempowering forces.
Mittler and Mittler (1982) make a similar point when they argue that a clear distinction should be drawn between the concepts of ‘partnership’ and ‘involvement’.
Whilst the former emphasises the sharing of power as well as expertise, the latter contains an implicit assumption of professional expertise and control.
Swann (1987) has argued that as long as segregated provision exists, a means to select and allocate children will be needed.
This, he suggests, is the main purpose of Statementing.
Because Statementing is concerned with the allocation of resources rather than with the identification of needs strict limits are placed on the power of parents to affect the Statementing process.
If Swann is correct the identification of needs will be resource-led.
The 1981 Act itself may be read as implicitly setting out this principle, and Galloway and Goodwin (1987) have demonstrated its operation in practice.
As Swann (1987) argues, without the power to make decisions about resources, parent involvement within the 1981 Act is concerned ‘with recruiting parents as resources in the education of their children, pursuing goals defined by professionals’(Swann 1987: 193).
The way in which the concept of ‘need’ is defined by the 1981 Act may also  serve to reinforce the limits on parental power.
The Act abolished the ten categories of handicap identified under the 1945 Handicapped pupils and School Health Regulations (DES 1945) and replaced them with the concept of ‘special educational need’.
‘Need’ was redefined in terms of learning difficulties significantly greater than those of the majority of children.
This shifted the conceptual focus away from needs as defined in relation to the child's handicap towards educational needs arising from learning difficulties.
None the less, there remains a focus upon the child as having needs rather than upon the situation as creating needs (Oliver 1988).
An important implication of this is that while a particular situation may give rise to various differing, and sometimes conflicting needs (the needs of teachers, parents, other pupils, the LEA and indeed the LEA's professional advisers), the conceptual focus upon the child encouraged by the Act inhibits the development of a theoretical framework within which the interplay of needs can be examined.
On the other hand, psychologists frequently have the task of mediating between the needs and interests of the different participants involved with the child and their key role in the decision-making process.
Despite the ‘rights’ parents are given under the Act this is a form of power that parents are rarely able to exercise.
Parental involvement in decision-making is often restricted to identifying those aspects of the child's behaviour that fit or do not fit with the views of the professionals.
Parents are marginalised, not because professionals deliberately exclude them but because they are denied the opportunity to influence how need is conceptualised.
Moreover, in practice, they may lack the power to negotiate on equal terms with professionals about the interrelationship between the needs of different participants in the assessment.
By conceptualising the child's needs in a way that fails to acknowledge the significance of this wider context the Act reinforces and legitimises the disempowerment of parents.
We can see how this occurred in our first two case studies.
In both cases the parents' resignation to the inevitability of the assessment outcome arose from their having no opportunity to determine or seriously influence the objectives of the assessment nor to contribute to the conceptual framework within which their children's needs were being assessed.
In the third case Mrs Jones refused to accept the proposals put forward by the professionals for meeting Tom's needs.
Whereas at first she had welcomed the assessment she later came to the view that she was being given no say in the objectives of the assessment.
She, too, felt that she was denied the opportunity to make a genuine contribution, in cooperation with the professionals, to the understanding of Tom's needs and the circumstances in which they were being created.
Ultimately, this led her to challenge the way the professionals conceived Tom's needs.
In her eyes, she could only do so by stepping outside the framework imposed by the Act.
Her direct challenge to the authority of the professionals forced them to acknowledge an alternative conceptualisation of Tom's needs which carried with it quite different implications for the outcome of the formal assessment of those needs.
In addition her action outside the assessment  procedures also gave Mrs Jones the power to negotiate with other participants.
By securing the support of the head teacher and staff of a different mainstream school she was able to place her opposition to a recommendation for residential schooling on a firm footing and insist that her understanding of Tom's needs be tested in practice.
Thus Mrs Jones's power inside the assessment process was increased by her having identified and pursued sources of strength outside that process.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This article arises out of a research project on the ‘Identification of Emotional and Behavioural Difficulties: Participant perspectives’, funded by the Economic and Social Research Council, Research Grant No.
R 000 23 1393.
In addition we are grateful to the necessarily anonymous educational psychologists, and to their clients, who agreed to take part in this research.