

INTRODUCTION
Penal reform and prison realities
ANDREW RUTHERFORD
Between 1773 and his death at Kherson in the Ukraine in 1790, John Howard travelled, mostly on horseback, at least eighty thousand kilometres, and probably a great deal further, as a self-appointed inspector of prisons.
While much of the journeying was in Britain and Ireland, his half-dozen ventures abroad took him across much of continental Europe.
His method was simple and direct.
He visited, at considerable risk to his health, prisoners at their place of confinement.
Not for Howard the prison tour which, avoiding the darker recesses, steered clear of the conditions endured by all those confined.
Howard's accounts received such widespread attention at the time and are still read two hundred years after his death because he so precisely ‘set down matter of fact’.
His general purpose was to humanize prison conditions and to provide prisoners with opportunities for personal reformation.
He became keenly aware that there was much to be learned from practice overseas but his method remained essentially descriptive, allowing his meticulously detailed reports to speak for themselves.
This volume is published as a tribute to the genius and humanity (borrowing Edmund Burke's words) of what remains the most exhaustive enquiry into prison conditions in Europe.
These essays on prisons across the world follow Howard's  descriptive method.
Each addresses an individual prison and in most of them the author is either an ‘outsider’ or a foreigner, or both.
Although the focus is on individual prisons, some account is taken of the wider prison system and, in at least some cases, the overall criminal justice process.
The most striking aspect of prison reform over the last two centuries is how little of it there has been.
In most instances, the gains have been modest, tenuous and often short-lived.
Even the more substantial changes pale against the broad sweep of political, social and economic progress over this period.
There can be little doubt that John Howard, rising from his grave, would find much more that is familiar to him within the prison than across society as a whole.
To enter the prison is, more often than not, to step back in time.
In exploring why this should be, this introduction seeks to identify the choices for contemporary reformers.
The inherently authoritarian structure of the prison, deriving from its main functions of control and security, relies upon explicit threats of force which would be unacceptable elsewhere in a liberal democratic state.
An American lawyer has graphically underlined this point by observing that the prison displays many features of the police state (Marin 1983: 75).
It is this gap of values, arising from the use of imprisonment in a free society, that largely sets the prison reform agenda.
That reformers are often frustrated testifies to the reality of what prison is about.
As a former minister of justice in Sweden remarked, ‘I do not mean that it is wrong to ‘humanize’ the stay in prison — but a cage is still a cage, even if gold-plated' (Ward 1979).
Winston Churchill, that most remarkable of Home Secretaries, summed up the point with characteristic eloquence:
As associated reality is the regressive character of prison conditions.
For every step forward, the institution often seems to slip back two steps.
John Howard, acutely aware of such slippage, argued that good staff and external vigilance were essential if reform efforts were to be sustained, but this view, as we look back over the last two centuries, may have been unduly optimistic.
A less sanguine conclusion was reached by Jerome Miller, who for two years attempted to transform the young offender institutions of Massachusetts into therapeutic communities before coming convinced that the only appropriate course of action was to empty them.
Miller observed that penal institutions ‘cannot sustain their decency over an extended period of time.
They tend ultimately to move towards repression and violence at worse, and apathy at best.
And apathy is ultimately violence’(Rutherford 1986: 72).
This regressive phenomenon has also been highlighted by Her Majesty's Chief Inspector of Prisons in a report on Feltham Youth Custody Centre.
For many years, Feltham had sought to engage staff constructively with especially challenging and often mentally disordered young men.
The Home Office decided to rebuild the institution, at a cost that exceeded £25 million.
The ‘new generation’ prison architecture promised small living units and close involvement of staff.
The inspector, however, found that any bonuses deriving from this design ‘have been lost and also much of the experience and skill of the ‘old Feltham’ which coped well with a difficult borstal population'.
The opening sentence set the report's tone.
‘It seems particularly unfortunate to find within the elegant and modern buildings of Feltham, so carefully landscaped, all the defects of poor regimes’(Home Office 1989).
Even though there were some special local problems to take into account, to a large extent the regime at Feltham, where teenagers spent most of their time locked up in their cells, was victim to the malaise endemic to the prison system as a whole.
In 1926 Fenner Brockway, who had been imprisoned during the First World War, wrote in a newspaper article: ‘The object of penal reformers should not be to reform the prison system but to abolish it’(Priestley 1988: 175).
Brockway was writing in the context of a prison population for England and Wales that had declined by two-thirds over the previous fifty years.
This assertion is important for two main reasons.
Firstly, the endorsement of penal as distinct from prison reform implied that the target for change had shifted from the prison to the  criminal justice process as a whole.
The need for a wider focus had been signalled five years earlier when the merger of the Howard Association and the prison Reform League resulted in the establishment of the Howard League for Penal Reform.
prisons, it was being insisted, should not be regarded in isolation from the wider picture.
To do so was to invite disappointment if not disaster.
Before pursuing this theme, attention should be directed at the other issue arising from Brockway's declaration, the abolitionist stance, which eschews efforts to improve life within prisons in favour of seeking to be entirely rid of the prison system.
Later abolitionists, most notably Thomas Mathiesen, have argued that only ‘negative’ reforms (changes that may reduce the debit side of the prison's legitimacy but add nothing to the credit side) be encouraged.
By contrast, ‘positive’ reforms (changes that improve the system so that it works more effectively) should be resisted (Mathiesen 1984).
The abolitionist stand does provide a warning beacon against which penal policies, such as prison building programmes, might be assessed.
Less radical than the abolitionist, but perhaps more realistic, the reductionist seeks a minimalist prison system (which it might be argued England, with a rate of 28 prisoners per 100,000 inhabitants, was not far from at the time of Brockway's article) within which reasonably decent standards might be maintained.
THE PENAL TRINITY
Any realistic attempt to improve prison conditions must take full account of two pivotal aspects of the prison system, namely population and capacity.
Indeed, the inter-connections of this penal trinity of population, capacity and conditions form the heart of the reform quagmire.
Massive prison population expansion in recent years is by no means unique to the United States, but it would be difficult to find other examples where during the 1980s the annual rate of growth exceeded 11 per cent.
Between 1950 and 1989 the total number of people held in gaols and prisons across the United States leapt from 264,500 to 999,400.
In 1989 the rate of prisoners per 100,000 inhabitants was 422, considerably in excess, as reported in this volume, of the rates for South Africa (373) and Poland (177).
For England and Wales, this has also been a period of considerable growth, with the prison population more than doubling between  1950 and 1980, from 20,400 to 50,000.
In September 1988, for the first time, Britain led the Council of Europe table with rates for England and Wales and for Scotland of 97 and 99 per 100,000 respectively (Council of Europe 1988).
The profound consequences of escalating numbers of this kind reach across the country; an ever-widening circle of people is touched by, if not directly caught up within, the prison system.
No predictable relationship exists between prison population and the level of recorded crime, and disproportionately large prison populations scar the landscape of any state with pretensions to liberal values.
Furthermore, expanding prison populations have crippling consequences for prison regimes.
Pressure of numbers impinges on every facet of the prison system, and in some institutions has resulted in overcrowded conditions that would not have been tolerated a century earlier.
Not least has been the impact upon staff, often reduced to a warehousing role in conditions of acute stress.
Building new prisons is often presented in terms of reform.
John Howard's proposals for a national penitentiary, RA.
Butler's building programme announced in his 1959 white paper,Penal Practice in a Changing Society , and the contemporary notion of the ‘new generation prison’ have each, in their own time, promised a new dawn.
In England and Wales, France and the United States huge prison building programmes were underway during the 1980s.
A fairly modest plan in England, announced in 1980, had by 1989 been expanded to 25,000 new places, an increase, at a cost of £1,000 m., of almost 60 per cent in total capacity by the mid-1990s.
At first there was support for this construction from some liberal quarters, encouraged by the government's commitment to ‘eliminate’ over-crowding.
However, the vehement opposition to prison building by penal reform groups appears to have been vindicated in the light of a worsening of overcrowding and the further deterioration of regimes.
While in France there were signs of a reassessment of the building programme (which was reduced in the late 1980s from 15,000 to 13,000 new places) the expansion in the United States has continued unabated.
Between 1978 and 1985 some 165,000 new prison places were created and extensive additions are planned for the remainder of the century.
There is the danger that new prison space may prompt additions to the prison population.
While such Parkinsonian notion has an attractive simplicity it has so far eluded empirical verification (see Blumstein, Cohen and Gooding, 1983, for the refutation of one such claim), it is clear that under certain circumstances capacity may act as a brake on population expansion.
The mechanism of the ‘waiting list’ worked in this way in The Netherlands during the twenty-five years up to 1975 (Rutherford 1986) and the logic of rationing scarce custodial space is at the heart of the Minnesota Sentencing Guidelines Commission.
The Guide-lines Commission interpreted an ambiguous statutory injunction that it take correctional resources into ‘substantial consideration’ as a mandate that its guide-lines not increase prison population beyond existing capacity constraints (Tonry 1988).
Although it appears that sentencing became more severe during the first three years the guide-lines were in use, Minnesota remains one of the very few states that has avoided huge increases in prison population size (Parent 1988).
Far from leading to improved conditions, building new prisons may often have the contrary result.
In part, the high-cost squalor that characterizes many expansionist prison systems results from a trade-off between capacity and conditions with respect to the allocation of public finances.
Pumping much of the enhanced capital expenditure into new prison building often has the effect of draining the prison of vital resources.
Nor does the intention of building in order to replace obsolete prisons tend to work out in practice.
In reality, the new prison is built and the old prison remains.
Not all efforts to improve prison conditions are futile, but any success is likely to be at the margins and will depend upon full regard being given to the capacity and population side of the reform equation.
Some progress can, in these circumstances, be made to reduce what David Downes has called the ‘depth of imprisonment’(Downes 1988).
On the basis of interviews with prisoners in The Netherlands and England, Downes concluded that there was less ‘depth’ to imprisonment in the former, a parallel to John Howard's conclusion two centuries earlier: ‘I do not know which to admire most, the neatness and cleanliness appearing in the prisons, the industry and regular conduct of the prisoners, or the humanity and attention of the magistrates and regents.’
Much, however, remains elusive about the quality of life within prison, as was observed in a study which found a generally negative impact on prison regimes in England resulting from ‘Fresh Start’, the new staff working arrangements (King and McDermott 1989).
If the primary object of penal reformers is not to abolish prisons  it is certainly to secure reductions in prison population.
The starting-point is to recognize that the size and composition of the prison system, far from somehow being predetermined, are the consequence of action taken at every stage of the criminal justice process.
Practitioners, to a very large degree, hold the keys to reform.
Much depends upon their feeling empowered to reverse expansionist trends.
While a great deal depends upon reform efforts outside the prison system (and indeed these efforts are often located outside the criminal justice process), prison personnel do not have to play the passive roles in which they tend to be cast.
REFORM FROM WITHIN
Shining examples of prisons as decent and constructive places generally are brief episodes, often associated with particular staff members who display a combination of exceptional vision, determination and charisma.
Within larger prison systems, such regimes can, at best, usually be counted in single numbers.
The names of certain prison governors whose personal positive qualities permeated every aspect of their prisons tend to be long remembered.
Most such British lists would probably include Alan Roberton, David Hewlings and Bill Perrie.
In the United States, Frank Wood, the Warden of Oak Park Heights prison in Minnesota, comes to mind, as, in Denmark, does Erik Anderson.
While it is not suggested that this roll of honour is exhaustive, a list would, even on a world-wide basis, be strikingly short.
It is notable that in the prisons featured in this book, the head of prison emerges, if at all, as an anonymous official.
In some instances the stride forward is restricted to one section, often quite small, of the prison.
The special unit at Barlinnie prison, near Edinburgh, which opened in 1973, is especially well known.
For this eight-bed unit, the inspirational force was a senior prison officer, Ken Murray.
However, Murray left the Scottish prison service prematurely and the problem is always one of whether such pioneering work can be sustained or indeed survive much change.
Much of the impetus for improving conditions within the prison and for creating a regime that is built upon mutual respect between staff and prisoners depends upon initiatives taken by prison staff.
Aspects of this process are described in a remarkable essay by Michael Jenkins, written just before his departure as Governor from  Long Lartin Prison.
That an ethos of this kind exists at Long Lartin has, since the time of its first Governor, Bill Perrie, been widely recognized, and it is one of only two top security prisons to avoid serious control problems.
Jenkins argues that
the prison system has a tendency to create more problems than it receives and has an equal tendency to fail inmates because, out of its survival fear, it tends to respond to corporate threats, real or imaginary, rather than the real problems of inmates.
(Jenkins 1987)
Of crucial importance is an ‘unwritten contract’ between staff and prisoners, the primary function of which is ‘to get people sensibly through their sentences’(Jenkins 1987: 270).
Jenkins believes that ‘we can genuinely offer prisoners more than an antidote to the deterioration they fear’ and that a regime is possible that engenders ‘hope and optimism’(1987: 277).
However, the prison and the system of which it is part tend to resist internal reform initiatives.
Occasional collective efforts by prisoners to improve their lot have mostly been sharply put down.
The events associated with the prisoners' rights movement that flourished for a time in the late 1960s and early 1970s in parts of the United States, Scandinavia and Britain had by the early 1980s largely disappeared without trace.
The authoritarian and mechanistic character of the prison system also ensures that the staff reformer is vulnerable to being co-opted, marginalized or driven out.
Very occasionally, reformers are found in the higher reaches of the system, but in these instances their effectiveness tends to be compromised and their occupancy of top positions short-lived.
Among the few notable and recent examples of reforming leadership within prison systems, mention might be made of H.H. Brydensholt in Denmark, Hans Tulkens in The Netherlands, Ken Schoen in Minnesota and, with respect to youth prison systems, Jerome Miller in Massachusetts.
To be effective, the internal prison reformer has to reach out and encompass not only conditions but the related issues of capacity and population.
The connections between these three issues need to be kept in mind, although opportunities for the internal reformer to make them effectively will greatly vary.
Internal reformers need to be in contact with like-minded people located across the criminal justice process and in particular with persons making decisions  about the use of custody.
This means they must actively encourage a more selective approach to custodial remand and sentencing.
They must also endorse an openness and frankness about conditions within the prison and the likely negative impact of the experience of imprisonment.
It almost certainly means they must counter those forces within the prison system which have a vested interest in expansion.
How, for example, can a debate be generated within expansionist prison systems about the merits of seeking additional funds for capital expenditure?
Certainly, in essence this is a political decision, but it would be naive to play down the extent to which this and other aspects of the policy agenda is shaped by officials.
Internal prison reformers cannot divorce themselves from these issues, however sensitive they might be.
There is also the associated and delicate issue of contact between internal reformers and reforming pressure groups.
Such contacts are likely to be discouraged if not banned by the system and will necessarily need to be handled with the utmost discretion.
Reforming officials within both the prison system and the criminal justice process cannot afford to be merely reactive.
A proactive stance is essential in terms of setting and maintaining the mood for change across the various agencies of justice.
That such a mood, primarily among prosecutors, judges and defence lawyers, has been a critical feature of the recent decline in the prison population of the Federal Republic of Germany is now well established (Feest 1988, Rutherford 1988).
What professionals discuss informally at conferences and on other occasions, within and across agency lines, is as important as contributions to journals in setting and sustaining this mood.
Recent explorations of the roots of Dutch reductionist penal policy highlighted the distinctive influence of the Law Faculty at Utrecht University for a generation of criminal justice practitioners.
An intermingling of policy makers, practitioners and academics created an anti-penal ambience that continues to pervade the Dutch penal scene.
Juvenile justice practice across much of England and Wales during the 1980s has displayed somewhat similar features (Rutherford 1989).
Criminal justice practitioners need also to be proactive on the wider public stage.
According to David Downes, Dutch elites have ‘a distinct appreciation of the extent to which community tolerance cannot be taken for granted, but needs active elicitation and encouragement’.
He goes on to observe that 
the roots of reductionism seem to drive not so much from a free-floating tolerance on the part of the people in general but from the convictions of the most influential elites that crime is best combated by social and institutional, rather than specifically penal means.
(Downes 1988)
Many efforts by practitioners to achieve criminal justice reform are based upon adaptations, alterations and additions to the formal structure.
An example of the prosecution stage in England is the Public Interest Discontinuance project initiated by the Vera Institute of Justice in 1988, in close cc.operation with the Crown Prosecution Service and the Inner London Probation Service.
By providing the prosecutor with additional information about the defendant, the scheme seeks, in appropriate cases, to suggest alternatives to prosecution.
At the bail stage, the Vera Institute has also been active on a number of fronts.
The Bail Information Schemes being developed in England and Wales also provide the prosecutor with additional information that might reduce requests for custodial remands.
It is at the sentencing stage where formal strategies are most often to be found.
Examples range from efforts to structure sentencing decisions through legislative criteria (for example, Criminal Justice Acts 1982 and 1988) to the far-reaching Minnesota Sentencing Guidelines Commission.
Guidelines methods are also to be found at later decision-making stages of the process, governing, for example, emergency release, temporary release and parole practice (Gottfredson 1987).
Structural reform by itself, however, is unlikely to deliver the required change of direction and it is certainly not a substitute for the commitment of inside reformers to shape policy and practice.
We should, perhaps, not be surprised that such modest progress has been made in improving prison conditions since John Howard's time.
Prison reformers have been slow to adapt to prison realities, and to accept that they must address the wider canvas of the criminal justice process.
The reductionist position is that, within a system spared down to minimal size, prisons can sometimes, at least for a while, be made reasonably decent places.
But this state of affairs can be achieved not only by people working within the prison system, but by activating and empowering a much wider spectrum of practitioners.
MAIDSTONE PRISON, ENGLAND
DICK WHITFIELD
I
John Howard visited Maidstone Prison twice.
By the time of his first visit in 1779, there had been a county gaol in the town for over two centuries but although the building he visited was only thirty-three years old he was very critical of the facilities it provided.
The original prison, inconveniently situated in the High Street, was small, overcrowded, without an exercise yard and incapable of expansion.
Yet the ‘new’ prison which Howard visited was equally poor.
The small, mean courtyards meant a lack of light or air and despite the use of a sail ventilator to remedy the poor air circulation, Howard foresaw further problems.
Without great attention to cleanliness and the separation of the sick, he warned, there was a great danger of gaol fever.
The ‘awful, contagious disorder’ struck in 1783 and killed twenty prisoners and a carpenter who was working in the gaol.
Despite remedial work, which Howard acknowledged on a second visit in 1786, the prison was clearly still inadequate.
Finally, in 1806, the West Kent justices conceded that the prison would have to be completely rebuilt.
Daniel Alexander, the architect of Dartmoor prison, was appointed and it was decided that the new building should be constructed on the lines recommended by Howard: individual sleeping cells for prisoners, with day-rooms, courtyards and offices: a strict separation of different classes of prisoner and careful attention to problems of water supply, sewerage and ventilation.
The architect, having toured a number of prisons, reported to the justices: ‘In the gaol I have endeavoured to adopt, after much pains and meditation, the good parts of every gaol I have visited, preferring, I own, the principle of Ipswich by  Blackburn, Howard's disciple’(Melling 1969: 208).
Alexander's new gaol remains the nucleus of Maidstone Prison today.
It was completed in 1819 at what was then the staggering cost of £163,457 and was the largest and most imposing building in the town.
Nineteenth-century prints show how it dominated the skyline and the area around.
Now, offices, the County Hall and even a car park make a bigger impact but the prison retains its huge central site.
Solid and secret behind a high stone wall it remains a world apart from the crawling traffic which skirts it on the routes out of town.
II
Probably the most overworked word in any description of the British prison system over the last decade or more has been ‘crisis’.
A crisis of inmate unrest, with recurrent rooftop protests or rioting; a staff crisis, with the Prison Officers' Union forcing thousands of prisoners to be held in police cells; above all, a numbers crisis, with successive Home Secretaries announcing, at various times, that the breaking point of the system would be reached when the prison population passed the 40,000, or the 44,000, or the 50,000 mark.
Throughout this time, prison staff and managers passed the various ‘crisis’ totals, got on with the task, absorbed everyone sent to them by the courts and, somehow, despite a crumbling prison estate, avoided total chaos.
The reason for this inexorable rise in numbers lies in the use of imprisonment by British courts both before and after trial.
In simple numbers the annual average prison population has grown as shown in Table 1.1.
Within these figures there have been peaks as high as 51,000, necessitating the short-term use of military camps to contain the new army of prisoners.
The proportion of those on remand, that is, being held prior to trial or sentence, was 14.5 per cent in 1979 but in 1988 had grown to 23 per cent , with the average waiting time for trial at the Crown Court also increasing.
Some of those held on remand will be found not guilty and a significant proportion do not receive custodial sentences when their case is finally heard — points not lost on the government, which is investing in additional bail hostels, special bail information schemes run by the probation service and, more controversially, pilot schemes malting use of electronic ‘tagging’ equipment; these are all   ways, it is hoped, to reduce what many see as an unnecessary and wasteful use of prison resources.
An equal problem is created by trends in sentencing.
Between 1983 and 1988 the number of men serving short sentences (defined in Britain as 18 months or less) fell by 27 per cent.
In the same period the number of men serving medium sentences (18 months to 4 years) rose by 34 per cent and of long sentences (4 years or more) by no less than 82 per cent.
The sheer length of sentences imposed, especially when contrasted with our European neighbours, presents enormous management problems in prisons, as the description of Maidstone Prison will show.
Beneath these lengthening sentence trends, however, are other equally disturbing problems.
Twenty years ago, only 10 per cent of the prison population was aged under 21 years.
The proportion now is 33 per cent.
Similarly, ethnic minorities are disproportionately represented in prison.
The figure had reached 15 per cent of the prison population by 1988 and Afro-Caribbean and African men seem to be most at risk.
A belated but growing recognition of both of these problems has seen the development of some special initiatives designed to relieve them; it is too early to tell whether sentencing trends can be reversed but there are early indicators with the under-21s, who are being especially targeted by the probation service in offering courts non-custodial options, that are encouraging.
In comparative terms, Britain's use of imprisonment as a sanction remains high (Table 1.2) and current statistical projections on its continued use remain uniformly gloomy.
Every year, the Home Office, as the government department responsible for prisons, publishes two sets of projections for long-term trends in the prison population.
The ‘non-demographic’(NDM) projections only take account of expected trends in crime and the numbers sent to prison; the ‘demographic’(DM) projections also take into account expected changes in the age structure of the general population.
The main change is likely to be a fall in the number of young people, which ought to be reflected in the prison population.
These projections give a prison population in 1997 of between 64,000 (DM) and 67,100 (NDM)— an increase of between 28 per cent and 34 per cent on current figures (Home Office 1989a).
It is a scenario which drew the following comment from the minister responsible:
For over a hundred years, penal policy in this country has appeared to focus on custody.
If a fine is not enough, custody is said to be the only adequate penalty.
Other orders are described as non-custodial penalties and assessed as alternatives to custody.
All this reinforces custody in a central position.
Why do we do this?
I hope one of the outcomes of the debate will be to move the focus of penal policy away from custody.
Let us think rather of a twin track approach, in which custody is reserved for those who commit serious offences.
It should not be the final sanction to which all persistent criminals progress, however minor their offences.
It will be a long haul, but we want to make out of date the notion that the only punishment that works is behind bars.
(The Home Secretary, quoted in NACRO Annual Report, November 1988)
The cost, in both human and financial terms, has been high.
The prisons budget of £775 million in 1988 was set to rise by 42 per cent to £1,140 million in 1989, to cover the cost of expanding the prison building programme, emergency measures on overcrowding and the costs of keeping prisoners in police cells.
It is a rate of growth no other public service could match.
In human terms, the results of Britain's reliance on custody are soberly recorded in the annual reports of the Chief Inspector of Prisons.
His report for 1988 concluded that ‘in prison after prison men were still having to exist in conditions which offend against any standard of decency’, and he remarked, ‘Properly fitting clean clothes and regular baths or showers are not luxuries but they remained out of reach for many inmates in 1988’(Home Office 1989b).
On training prisons such as Maidstone he found, generally, that most establishments were struggling to provide a basic level of regime activities.
He thought the quality of life for such prisoners was generally reasonable in that there was ‘no deliberate neglect, no conscious inhumanity and no wilful omissions.
The defects that existed in regimes resulted generally from staff shortages, concentration on other priorities, lack of good management or, at worst, lack of concern’(Home Office 1989b).
The response by government has — primarily — been to embark on a massive prison building programme, despite hopes of malting the Home Secretary's ‘twin-track’ approach more of a reality.
The building programme, the largest undertaken this century, provides for the construction of 26 new prisons between 1983 and 1995, at a total cost of £870 million at current prices.
Together with a programme of expansion and refurbishment at existing prisons there will be an additional capacity of 21,000 places.
In terms of relieving over-crowding and dealing with the decay of older prisons, new and refurbished buildings clearly have something to offer but the sheer scale and cost of the proposals (an average capital cost per place of £69,000 and thereafter £13,000 per prisoner per year to run) has drawn much critical comment.
This, then, is the backcloth against which Maidstone prison needs to be considered.
Within the broad overall picture, built up from the 129 Prison Department establishments in England and Wales, Maidstone occupies a distinctive and significant place.
Adult prisons (for those aged 21 or over) are divided into ‘local’ prisons, which receive people from the courts, whether on remand or at the start of a  sentence (and where short sentences may be served in their entirety); closed ‘training’prisons of which Maidstone is one, and ‘open’prisons, which have a minimum of security and are for prisoners perceived as posing no real risk to the public.
The main problems of overcrowding are in local prisons, which act as holding centres before inmates are moved to training or open prisons.
But even closed prisons vary greatly, from the very high security (Category ‘A’) dispersal units to lesser security categories ‘B’ and ‘C’.
Maidstone, behind its high stone wall, is a Category ‘B’ prison.
III
The first impression of any visitor to Maidstone prison must surely be one of confusion.
The five and a half hectare site contains an astonishing jumble of over fifty separate buildings, ranging from the solid stonework of the 1819 prison to Victorian brickwork and a bewildering variety of modern additions, including the kitchens.
There are four main residential blocks, or ‘wings’ with single cell accommodation; Medway, which takes 171 men, Kent (166), Weald (99) and Thanet (102).
There is also a Segregation Unit, used both for punishment and to isolate men for their own protection or for other reasons; a hospital unit, and a hostel from which eleven men can work in the town during the day, returning to the prison each night.
The prison's capacity, or certified normal accommodation (CNA), is 550.
In some ways, however, Maidstone is several small prisons within one perimeter, for in addition to being a training prison it has two special functions.
The first, in Thanet wing, is to act as one of three Vulnerable Prisoner Units in the country.
This is a national resource and prisoners are sent here who staff believe would be at risk of violence (because of their offence) in a normal prison setting, or whose fear of violence has led them, themselves, to request such a transfer.
Many will have committed sexual offences that other prisoners find abhorrent; some will have been informers who helped the police in the hope of obtaining a shorter sentence and still others may have built up debts inside prison that they cannot repay.
It means Thanet wing has to be a ‘sterile’ area, with staff at Maidstone always conscious of the need to keep its occupants separate from the rest of the prison or — when contact is inevitable — well controlled.
At the time of my visit about half the men had been  convicted of heterosexual offences, mostly rape; about a quarter for offences against children and about a quarter were the ‘grasses’ or informers.
Thanet wing attracts additional staff to Maidstone Prison, especially for the Psychology Department, of which more will be said later.
It ought to be able to offer more psychological and psychiatric help to the men who inhabit its strange, grey world; more group work as well as individual help is acknowledged as being required by the staff, including the Probation Officer, who have a special responsibility for it, for these are men for whom the risk of reconviction is often very high.
Thanet wing, however, has as its primary purpose to keep its inmates from physical harm; the good work that is undoubtedly done there with individuals is almost a bonus.
All men at Maidstone are long sentence prisoners, serving more than four years, and it is at the top end of the scale, with life sentence prisoners, that Maidstone performs its second specialist task.
Maidstone is one of a number of designated prisons able to take ‘lifers’ and it can provide up to 100 places for them, although there were only 80 at the time of my visit.
Most are concentrated on Medway wing, but not all, and there is no sense of a special regime so far as they are concerned.
The growing number of life sentence prisoners has been a considerable problem for the prison service for some years now.
Life imprisonment is the mandatory sentence for murder but it is also the maximum sentence for a number of other offences, including manslaughter, armed robbery, wounding with intent, arson, rape, Kidnapping, and causing an explosion.
In 1957 there were just 140 lifers in prison; thirty years later, in 1987 the number had grown to over 2,200, of whom about one in five had received their life sentence for an offence other than murder.
The life sentence is indeterminate and although the average length of time served is just over ten years, many men stay in prison for much longer periods.
Maidstone prison contains one man who has already served 33 years and staff seemed torn between two beliefs; one, that the risk he posed (of further offences against children) meant that further incarceration was inevitable, the other that his extraordinarily long period in custody meant he would be unable to survive outside the prison walls, anyway.
Not all life sentence prisoners follow the same ‘career path’ through prison but most spend three to four years in two initial centres, then progress to training prisons and — possibly — open prisons before a final release date is in sight.
By the time they arrive at Maidstone, there  fore, most have settled into the routines imposed by a long sentence of imprisonment and most do at least feel that some progress through the system is being achieved.
The fife sentence prisoners are not the only ones serving long sentences; Maidstone also contained 133 men serving sentences of 10 years or more when I visited.
For all kinds of prisoner, however, the daily routine is the same:
07.45 Cells unlocked
08.15 Breakfast
08.45 Work starts
1.15 Exercise period
1.45 Lunch (in the dining room or in cells)
2.00 Prisoners again locked in cells
3.30 Cells unlocked
3.45 Return to work
or 14.00 Visits for those who have visitors that day
or 14.00 Use of sports area for those working on the wing
6.15 Work ends
6.30 Evening meal
6.45 Prisoners locked in cells
7.45 Cells unlocked for evening association, classes, television or church
20.00 Prisoners return to cells; locked up for the night
The weekend routine varies, with no work to occupy the day and with extended exercise periods available to those who wish to use them.
Exercise is, in fact, well provided for, with an indoor swimming pool, a gymnasium, a sports area for football (with teams from outside the prison involved in both football and weightlifting), and like most long-term prisons, Maidstone has its share of those who keep fanatically fit.
Work plays a large part as the centrepiece of the daily regime and both its opportunities and its shortcomings were made clear to me.
The prison offers a mixture of straight employment and trade training courses, together with the many jobs which are essential to the daily running of an institution: cleaners, cooks, maintenance parties for both the buildings and the grounds.
The work opportunities are primarily in the tailors' shop, a laundry (which services a number of other prisons), a printing shop and an assembly shop.
The last is not fully operational yet; the hope is to undertake a wide range of light  assembly work on outside contracts.
But the men themselves, who call it ‘the muppet shop’, remain unconvinced that it really has anything to offer.
‘It's just a form of brain death’, said one lifer scornfully, and indeed for many men the repetitive, soul-destroying nature of much of the work would indeed seem only to add to the pains of imprisonment.
There is also a book-binding shop and a Braille Unit, which transfers a wide range of books into braille for the blind, and which really does serve a useful purpose.
The notice-board in the workroom contains heartfelt letters of thanks from those who have received their new books and it is clear that the sense of involvement in the lives of real and unfortunate people in the outside world draws a very positive response from the men involved.
I watched a man working on a special cookery book for a mother who is both blind and diabetic; he made it so obvious that he valued the opportunity to make some reparation that I wonder whether more opportunities like this could not be created.
The printing shop is, in many ways, typical of prison industry.
It operates mostly on labour-intensive, repetitive government forms rather than the wider variety of commercial printing work which would give men a marketable skill on release as well as a good work experience.
The civilian in charge was philosophical about this and recognized the limitations.
‘We're just about to have a new camera and darkroom’, he said, ‘and then we shall only be about ten years behind the times.’
Until more interesting work was available he felt he had no option but to keep the men in his charge fully occupied and if it meant using eight men to undertake a task which could be accomplished in a fraction of the time by a machine, well — the men weren't going anywhere.
Much more popular with the prisoners are the range of Vocational Training Courses (VTC) which take men for a period of 20 or 26 weeks, give them a thorough training in a particular skill and enable them to take outside examinations.
The certificates they obtain do not specify the centre as Maidstone Prison; they can be safely shown to employers and are much prized.
At present, courses are run in bricklaying, painting and decorating, welding, and sheet metal fabrication, and as far as I could see the standard of work was generally very high indeed.
The bricklaying course has some interchange with a local college and the prison instructor, surrounded by test pieces his charges had made (ornate archways, window frames  and decorative walls) took pride in recalling that the prison ‘pupils’ often outshone their tree counterparts.
The major frustration for prisoners is that these courses are so much in demand.
Waiting lists of 80 or 100 men, many from outside Maidstone Prison, are commonplace.
Prisoners made it clear that, from their point of view, ready access to such courses is one of the major improvements they would seek.
The Governor and his staff have long recognized this and plans for two new courses, one in arts and crafts, the other on computers, are planned to start in 1990.
They will go at least some way to removing the bottleneck.
For their work, prisoners receive minimal sums — between £2.20 and £4.60 per week, depending on the work and the hours involved.
At the bottom end of the scale are the cleaners and those in full-time education; the printing shop pays £3.60 per week and the kitchen staff earn most, in recognition of the seven-day working week required.
Food, of course, remains a topic of passionate concern — the focus of minor complaints and disagreements which rumble on for long periods — and outbursts of contentment which are extremely short-lived.
Most men seemed to find both the quantity and the variety quite acceptable and to recognize that, with a large institution and central kitchens, the variable quality was only to be expected.
The very substantial meat pie, with vegetables (followed by sponge pudding and custard) that I saw served on Weald wing drew generally favourable comment.
‘Well, perhaps the presentation could be improved’ was the wry comment of one prisoner.
Discontent seems to be centred more on those on special diets and, with vegetarians, vegans, Hindus, Muslims and Jews to cater for there is clearly scope for problems.
To some extent this has been ameliorated by providing cookers on each of the wings.
This enables men either to buy small stocks of supplies from the canteen with their earnings in order to cook for themselves, or to re-cook prison food in new and exciting ways.
This has become something of an art form, with some prisoners acquiring an enviable reputation for transforming prison fare into spicy and original ethnic dishes.
With up to 30 per cent of prisoners coming from minority backgrounds (mostly black and Asian, but with Polish, Irish and other groups also represented) this is one way of allowing for — and even valuing — cultural diversity and may be one reason why racial tensions do not seem to be as evident as one might expect.
There is a much higher  concentration of minority groups in Kent wing, together with a mosque and synagogue and it may be that this also helps.
So far, I have concentrated on some of the standard aspects of prison life and routine — in some ways no more than a mirror image of other large institutions.
As an American writer observed recently, ‘It was hard to distinguish hotels in England from prisons or hospitals.
Most were run with the same indifference or cruelty and were equally uncomfortable’(Theroux 1984).
There are other features of prison life, however, which could only occur in this especially artificial environment, but before moving on to them it may be useful to concentrate on some of the prisoners' own views of Maidstone.
I was allowed to disrupt a ‘social skills’ course — one of a number of educational opportunities for men apart from the usual classes — and took the opportunity to test out some of my impressions against their own, well-informed ones in a session that, in the end, lasted twice as long as its scheduled time.
Some of their views came as something of a surprise.
Maidstone Prison has embarked on a long and costly process to bring integral sanitation to cells, to avoid the ‘slopping out’ process and the need to have chamber pots in cells.
Prisoners were scornful about the sense of priorities this demonstrated, and about the supposed benefits.
A system which allowed electronic unlocking of cells so that they could use shared toilet facilities seemed preferable to most.
In any case they were quite clear where their own priorities lay:
1
The availability of telephones came easily top of the list.
At present special requests have to be submitted and justified if calls are to be made; they are made in the presence of an officer and they are charged at far in excess of the ‘normal’ rate because of the need to ask the operator to ring back with the cost — for which a surcharge is made.
Freer use of the telephone is being extended to prisons with a lesser security category; men in Maidstone cannot believe it would jeopardize security there if it were available.
2
Better access to trade training courses : One of the few ways that prisoners can feel that some positive benefit has been gained from a sentence.
3
A fairer ‘canteen’ system : The current system (which the Governor acknowledged was unsatisfactory) is particularly resented because prices are often higher than at other prisons, let alone outside shops.
Men feel exploited (‘We earn less and pay more’) and their inability to change things exacerbates the position they are in.
4
Better education opportunities : There was a general sense of dissatisfaction with education provision which seemed to relate more to whether it met people's needs than the actual range of classes provided.
There were also acknowledged strengths, of which the Social Skills course was one.
This took the place of a pre-release course (which would be impossible to plan in an institution where some men were so far away from release and others might be released on parole licence at very short notice) but it covered many of the same topics.
Overseen by two prison officers with help from the psychology Department, it runs for two weeks, full time on perhaps ten or twelve occasions per year.
It uses outside speakers from the Social Security office, the Job Centre, and the Citizens' Advice Bureau and covers a wide range of current affairs and other topics in a relaxed and friendly way.
Men use video cameras and produce and film ‘news bulletins’ as a useful way of learning to work in small groups, to see how they present themselves and to gain confidence generally.
A similar special course, known as the ‘Summer School’, runs for life sentence prisoners and also tries to stimulate interest and enjoyment in equal measure.
All these are part of what might be termed the ‘quality of life’ and the prisoners' preoccupation with this vital but ill-defined subject is shared by the Governor, Graham Gregory-Smith.
Rehabilitation is not a real term for staff [he said], especially when men are serving such long sentences.
Keeping them alive in mind and body is a much more accurate description of what we do.
prisoners have a genuine fear of becoming cabbages.
Sustaining men through a long sentence is much more than providing work or classes, important though they are.
Prisoners have to start getting used to talking to staff here, to malting some of their own decisions and to finding out how Maidstone is different.
He agreed that the prison had a long-standing reputation of having a liberal regime and added, ‘I would have been mad to try and change it radically.
Altering it at the fringes and working hard on prisoner/staff relationships was much more what was needed.’
The springboard for these changes was ‘Fresh Start’, a concerted move in the prison service to change working practices, deployment of staff and work patterns; to move towards local accountability and control and to deal with industrial relations problems which otherwise looked to be endemic.
Prison officers are now salaried and take time off in lieu rather than accumulate high earnings on overtime; they can purchase their own houses, and they can be promoted to governor grades rather than remaining a secondary uniformed branch.
As the Governor observed, it takes more time to change attitudes, but he thought that progress was being made here too and that the new recruitment would accelerate the process.
Above all, ‘Fresh Start’ has encouraged the use of shared casework schemes in which prison officers and probation officers share work concerning prisoners much more effectively.
The probation service's task in prison is primarily to provide a social work service to those imprisoned and there has always been a conflict between the day-to-day, mundane but pressing needs of prisoners cut off from family and friends, and the more reflective analytical and purposeful work related to offending behaviour in which Probation Officers wanted to engage.
Maidstone now has a ‘casework officer’ scheme in which each prisoner has a particular officer on the wing to whom he can relate, as well as the services of the wing Probation Officer.
Sharing work, yet retaining a clear sense of role, is obviously more difficult but potentially rewarding and in Maidstone seems to be working well.
For the Governor, though, the main benefit has been that it gives prison officers ‘permission to be concerned’ in a structured and consistent way.
Job status and job satisfaction, for most officers, is significantly improved.
There are eight governor grades and 174 uniformed staff at Maidstone.
Add specialist and administrative staff, from clerks to teachers, to instructors and Probation Officers and the total is about one hundred higher.
Only two of the current prison service staff are female, a fact much regretted by the Governor, who believes that up to 20 per cent of female staff would be beneficial in terms of that elusive ‘quality of life’ inside.
Two groups of specialist staff have a particular role to play in this same area — psychologists and Probation Officers.
There should be five psychologists and one assistant at Maidstone Prison, but recruiting difficulties mean that two psychologist posts are vacant at present.
Although based in Maidstone, they also have  to provide a service to other prisons in the area and the problems posed by the over-stretching of this resource means that there is a limited impact on the prison.
Much of the Psychology Department's work is concerned with research and management issues and their computer-based inmate data base is central to this.
The department monitors the inmate population, offences against prison rules and the penalties awarded; it assists management in determining security grades and in assessments on life sentence prisoners; and it has been looking at the structures of meetings, the effectiveness of communications and the problems of stress in staff.
Clinical work with prisoners depends partly on demand and partly on the willingness of psychologists to undertake it, for none are trained as clinical specialists.
Nevertheless some valued individual work is undertaken and I was told it was often most effective when carried out jointly with a Probation Officer, each undertaking specific but complementary work.
The Probation Department has four Probation Officers and a Senior Probation Officer to provide a service to the prison.
Although very much part of the probation service generally they are operationally responsible to the Governor for their period of secondment to the prison and this uncomfortable structural position — with one foot each side of the prison wall — brings both problems and opportunities.
‘It's hard’, said one Probation Officer,; ‘we're not actually part of anything and have to operate in a sort of no man's land.’
Work with individuals can capitalize on not being part of ‘the system’, however, and from their offices on the wing the Probation Officers have easy and direct access both to prisoners and to other staff with whom they work.
With long-term prisoners and lifers much of their work is centred on the understanding of offending behaviour and the risks of re-offending; with others, the whole range of family and personal problems call for tact, understanding and a good deal of dogged, patient work.
‘Knowing when prisoners are ready to respond is the skill you learn to develop here’, said one; ‘the staff are a good lot and there is a positive culture in which to work — but you still have to work out when real work is possible and it's not just meeting institutional demands.’
The major frustration, for prisoners even more than Probation Officers, is the parole system.
All the men on determinate sentences at Maidstone are eligible for parole, theoretically when one third of their sentence has been served.
It is ‘theoretically’, because the then  Home Secretary introduced new guide-lines some years ago which severely restricted the application of parole to men serving sentences for offences of violence, sexual offences and the supply of illegal drugs.
Henceforward these prisoners could be routinely considered (and the process is long, costly and complex, involving interviews, a local review board and then the national Parole Board) but would only be released before almost the end of their sentence in very exceptional circumstances.
The result, for a man serving a twelve-year sentence in one of the new categories, would be that parole review at the four, five and six year mark would be a hollow charade.
Even at the seven year mark there would be very little expectation of more than a few weeks on parole licence in the community, instead of prison.
The potential gain if one was ‘exceptional’, however, and qualified for an early release is so powerful that few men are prepared to forego it The result is a shabby, futile process that Probation Officers feel makes subsequent work with inmates more difficult, that exasperates prison officers who see the time and energy in compiling reports as wasted, and infuriates prisoners for whom the probable refusal of parole, with its tiny element of uncertainty, makes prison life even harder to bear.
The problem is compounded at present by the bureaucracy of parole, which results in decisions being anything up to six or eight months late.
Yet, overall, parole has been a substantial success in terms of successful supervision in the community.
The complex arguments which lay behind the present situation — and the possible solutions — are, however, beyond the scope of this chapter.
I can only record that prisoners and prison staff displayed a rare unanimity in condemning the present system.
IV
How can a complex institution like a prison be judged?
My task was to record it as objectively as possible and leave the reader to judge, yet not to provide some indication of the effect it had on me would be to paint a very incomplete picture.
Maidstone has the kind of problems which beset most prisons; illegal brewing remains a constant problem in which the ingenuity of prisoners is constantly pitted against the watchfulness of staff and the balance shifts constantly.
Over 1,300 litres of highly alcoholic brew had been seized from one wing alone, in nine months.
Drugs are equally  problematic and with ‘open’ visits are almost impossible to contain.
(Most prisoners come from the Greater London area, so family visits are relatively easy; a liberal visiting policy also means that up to three visits can be made during a month.)
The attitude of wing prison officers to drugs was interesting.
‘It's almost always cannabis’, I was told, ‘and I suppose if the Governor really wanted it stopped, he could — or near enough.
But at what cost?
It would mean searches on every visit, more restrictions, more repression and it would work against everything else we are trying to do.
If it's manageable and doesn't get out of hand I reckon we accept it.
There are problems, too, in the way in which different prisons have come to deal with long-term prisoners.
This means some men transfer from Category ‘A’ prisons and find new rules at Maidstone which they believe are petty and restrictive, and facilities which seem less than those they enjoyed elsewhere, in supposedly stricter regimes.
(Some were used to having freezers and food storage facilities as well as cookers on the wing and this restriction on individual choice, in a system where it is precious, hit hard.)
Yet others, especially from the London prisons, found it relaxed, humane and positive.
It all depends on their starting-point.
I suppose my starting-point was a phrase in a national newspaper, the Sunday Times , some years ago.
Reviewing Britain's prisons, the paper summed them up as ‘a decent sort of warehouse, doing its best not to let the stock deteriorate’.
Given the pressures of numbers, limited resources for positive work in education and trade training, limited work opportunities and staff and prisoner unrest, even that modest aim has often seemed unattainable.
Staff and prisoners at Maidstone were acutely aware that, in a training prison, they were relatively well off compared to the overcrowded local prisons, whose barren regimes often mean prisoners being locked in their cells twenty-three hours each day.
Both groups seemed equally aware that they had a joint investment in making it work, for all its faults, as well as possible.
In my view they do so with commitment and humanity.
Who and how many people we imprison, for how long and in what conditions are questions that politicians and sentencers must answer; those in the prisons must make it work as well as they can.
In Maidstone, they do.
THE INDIAN PRISON
MIKE MAGUIRE
My starting-point was a search for details about ‘conditions in a typical Indian gaol’.
Despite problems of access, I gathered sufficient information about the physical conditions and regime in a particular central gaol to produce at least a poor imitation of John Howard.
However, it soon became clear that, not only are Indian gaols so varied that to describe any one is to create a false picture, but a description of ‘conditions’ alone would give readers outside India little real insight into the country's prison system or how it is experienced by inmates.
To achieve such insight, it is essential to understand something of the social and historical context.
There will be space here only for the briefest discussion of external forces which have shaped life in Indian prisons, but it is difficult to overestimate their importance.
These include the ‘legacy of the British’, who promoted an overtly punitive penal philosophy, more concerned with the repression of dissent than with ordinary crime, and who ran the prisons as cheaply as possible; a labyrinthine criminal justice system, which causes many accused persons to spend years in gaol before their trial is completed; widespread political interference with the police, whereby criminals with ‘connections’ often escape justice, leaving the gaols populated predominantly with poor rural labourers; the designation of prisons, under the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution, as primarily the responsibility of the thirty-one individual states and union territories rather than the Indian government — which has perpetuated gross differences in practices and standards; and the generally low priority attached to ‘non-productive’areas like penal reform in a country with 250 million people below the poverty line, where economic development dominates planning and expenditure.
In the following pages, I shall first present a broad picture of the Indian prison population and the institutions in which it is held.
This is followed by some general remarks about the history and philosophy of imprisonment in India, and a summary of previous writers' conclusions about gaol conditions.
I shall then describe conditions in the central gaol I visited, ending with some comments about the possibilities and prospects for change.
I
The convicted prison population in India is remarkably small.
In a country of around 800 million, with over one and a half million police officers and nearly 1,200 gaols (not to mention a Draconian penal code drafted by the British in 1860), only about 60,000 people are serving sentences of imprisonment at any one time.
In relation to population, this is five to ten times fewer prisoners than in European countries.
Sadly, though, the gaols do not stand half-empty.
Convicted prisoners are outnumbered by the euphemistically named ‘undertrials’— remanded prisoners for most of whom trial is months (if not years) away and many of whom, detained pending police investigations, have not yet been charged with an offence (Diaz 1977).
In recent years, the officially recorded — and probably under-recorded — number of undertrials has frequently exceeded 90,000.
There are other categories of prisoner, too, smaller in number but whose presence raises serious questions about human rights.
‘Detenus’— people held without trial under various Acts sanctioning preventive detention — have sometimes attracted international concern, particularly during periods of internal tension when allegations of torture have accompanied protests about the detention of political prisoners.
But when the number of detenus returns to a more ‘normal’ level of 400–500, consisting mainly of suspected drug smugglers and ‘dacoits’rather than political activists, interest tends to fade.
‘Non-criminal lunatics’ and ‘criminal lunatics’(the continued use of archaic terminology betraying attitudes towards them) officially numbered 2,077 and 318, respectively, at the end of 1980, according to figures collected for the All-India Committee on Jail Reforms (1983).
However, only half the states produced any  statistics, it not being standard practice to record lunatics as part of the prison population.
(The Punjab Jail Manual (1975: 345) even states specifically that ‘Non-criminal lunatics shall be entirely excluded from all statistical returns relating to jails.’)
If the figures produced by the state of West Bengal, which show non-criminal lunatics making up one in eight of its prison population, are a better guide to the true situation, the picture is grim indeed.
Non-criminal lunatics, as the name implies, have committed no offence, but are people designated by a magistrate as ‘wandering and dangerous lunatics’ under the Indian Lunacy Act 1912 and sent to prison to await transfer to a mental hospital.
As there are fewer than fifty such hospitals in the whole country, with long waiting lists and high proportions of permanent inmates, the ‘6 to 8 months’ average waiting time reported by Guha (quoted in Baxi 1982) for a gaol in Assam may be shorter than the national average.
Meanwhile, where ‘criminal lunatics’ are concerned, the All-India Committee (1983: para 3.24) produced the finding that ‘Some have stayed in prison for more than 20 years without their trial even having begun.’
While the mentally ill remain very much part of the prison scene, the central government has recently taken action (Juvenile Justice Act 1986) to exclude another group who should certainly not be incarcerated.
For many years, both prison reformers and official reports regularly condemned the presence of children in gaols, some below the age of 10.
Many were homeless or orphaned, held in gaol owing to a lack of children's homes; others, it was even alleged, were deliberately arrested on flimsy pretexts to be exploited as unpaid servants or sweepers when the gaol population rose.
Kuldip Nayar, a journalist detained during the Emergency, described the practice in Delhi's Tihar gaol thus:
Even more shocking than the corruption was the ingenious ‘slave system’ we found in the jail.
The slaves were boys between ten and eighteen employed as ‘helpers’, and there were scores of them…
They would be woken up before 6 a.m. to prepare the morning tea and would be allowed to sleep around 10 p.m.
…They were herded into a ward which had no fan and no proper sanitary facilities…
These boys were undertrial prisoners; many had been there for eight months and at least one had been there for two years.
They were taken from one court to another to be tried under one  charge or another and kept in jail all the while.
The aim was to keep them in as long as possible, for without them the people employed to do the menial duties would have no time to relax…
One morning I was woken by the sobbing of a boy…
I asked him what he had done to land himself in jail.
He was too racked by sobs to reply, but…the warder explained that whenever the number of prisoners in jail went up, the police were asked to bring in boys to help with the chores.
For the past several days, the warder said, jail authorities had been pestering the police to get more helpers….
The evening before, when the boy was buying a betel-leaf from a shop, the police had hauled him up as a vagabond; they were responding to the jail authorities' appeal to book more helpers….
It was unbelievable that this could happen in the 20th century.
(Nayar 1978: 33)
While there is no evidence of such practices being widespread in the country, the fact that it could happen in the main prison in the capital of India was a matter of scandal.
Moreover, even as late as 1985, an unpublished government document reveals, there were 989 children among one day's population in Indian prisons, on 30 June 1985.
According to criminologists I consulted, doubts remain whether the Act has entirely remedied the situation (magistrates and police are not always meticulous in determining offenders' ages), but it has certainly alleviated it considerably.
Finally, another category of prisoners — those held in ‘protective custody’— has been greatly reduced in size recently, partly by the Juvenile Justice Act and partly as a result of the case of Hussainara Khatoon v.
Bihar 1979, which declared their detention unconstitutional.
Some of these were vagrant children, others victims of crime required as witnesses.
In the Hussainara case, it was revealed that a number of destitute women had been held in prison for several years awaiting the trials of men accused of raping them.
Convicted prisoners, undertrials, detenus and ‘lunatics’, together with civil prisoners and various other small groups, make up an unknown total population in Indian gaols.
Prison statistics are poor in quality and, like crime statistics, are published several years late.
According to government officials I consulted, the prison population has settled down since 1977 (the end of the Emergency) in the range 150,000 to 180,000.
However, this refers only to under  trials and convicts.
Allowing for the categories omitted (not to mention possible undercounting in some of the slackly administered sub-gaols), the true total could be several thousand higher.
For a breakdown of the characteristics of the prison population at any one time, one of the few available sources is the statistics collected for the All-India Committee on Jail Reforms 1980–3.
These describe the population in all Indian gaols on 31 December 1980.
To Western eyes, the composition of the convicted population appears extraordinary (see Table 2. 1).
Over 40 per cent were serving life sentences for murder, while at the same time, almost as many were serving very short sentences.
The extent of the turnover of short-termers is illustrated by statistics showing receptions into prison, as opposed to daily population.
For example, Datir (1978: 212) found that, in the state of Maharastra, over two-thirds of all admissions of convicts to prisons were of people serving one month or less; and a third of admissions were for ticketless travel on the railway, usually through inability to pay fines.
By contrast, the type of prisoner most familiar in European and North American prisons, the habitual property offender serving a short-to medium-term sentence, is a comparative rarity in India.
Among the total convicted population at the end of 1980, only 11 per cent were ‘burglars’ and 10 per cent‘thieves’.
Around three-quarters of all convicts were first offenders.
There is a higher proportion of people from poor rural backgrounds in prisons than in the general population.
Around half are illiterate.
Indian prisoners are also generally older than prisoners in many other countries.
A quarter of convicts are over 40 (Table 2.1), mainly because of the exceptionally long periods that ‘lifers’ spend in gaol: the minimum period to be served is fourteen years.
The available information about undertrials is rather less detailed.
However, their plight is one that has moved many writers, including judges and compilers of official reports, to angry, emotional language.
For example:
Hundreds of them are dumb, simple persons, caught in the web of law, unable to comprehend what has happened, what the charge against them is or why they have been sent to jail.
(National Police Commission 1981)
Justice Bhagwati's leading opinion burns with red-hot anger; the Court is appalled and ashamed that such a thing should happen   in a democratic, socialist India, over a quarter of a century after the inception of its Constitution.
Such judicial expression of anger is not to be found anywhere in India, and, one would even say, the common law world.
(Baxi 1982: 230, describing the Hussainara case)
At the end of December 1980, the returns to the Committee on Jail Reform indicated that almost 7,000 (8 per cent) of the 92,000 undertrials had been in gaol for over one year, and 2,500 of these  had been held for more than two years.
The situation was particularly disturbing in the state of Bihar, which alone accounted for three-quarters of the latter group.
Moreover, Bihar had been forced a year earlier to release over 27,000 undertrials, following orders from the Supreme Court in Hussainara (Shourie 1980: 137–8).
The hearing revealed that undertrials had been held in Bihar gaols for up to ten years, in some cases spending years longer on remand than the maximum possible sentence.
Justice Bhagwati commented:
For example, one Lambodar Gorain has been held in Ranchi Jail since 18th June 1970, for an offence under Section 25 of the Arms Act…with the result that he has been in prison for eight and a half years for an offence for which even if convicted, he could not have been awarded more than two years imprisonment….
What faith would these people have in our system of administration of justice?
(Supreme Court:H. Khatoon v.
Home Secretary SCC 1980 (1))
It should be noted that there is a legal limit of ninety days, which can be extended only in exceptional circumstances, for suspects to be remanded in judicial custody pending police investigations and the presentation of a charge-sheet.
However, despite this law and despite the publicity following the Hussainara case, many magistrates continue to authorize long extensions at the request of the police.
Consequently, a large proportion, perhaps the majority, of undertrials have yet to be charged.
There is not space here to delve deeper into the reasons for the unusual profile of the Indian prison population as described above.
However, most informed commentators agree that the key factors include the inefficiency, and sometimes corruption, of an outmoded police force, in combination with the failures of a court system clogged up with cases and handicapped by immensely complex procedures.
Not only are victims, particularly of personal theft or burglary, usually reluctant to become entangled with the bureaucratic nightmare that can follow the reporting of a crime to the police, but it is extremely difficult to convict anyone who possesses either a good lawyer or ‘influence’.
Many cases are mysteriously dropped, the vast majority of accused persons, in all but the most minor cases, plead not guilty, and the majority are found not guilty.
Broadly speaking, the only people likely to become convicts are the very poor: either sentenced summarily in magistrates' courts for  minor offences, or, after long delays, convicted of serious crimes.
The undertrial population, too, mainly consists of the most disadvantaged sections of society, who cannot pay the sureties demanded for bail.
The more resourceful tend to escape charges through influence over the police, to escape custodial remand through bail, and to escape conviction through employing good lawyers.
Before discussing prison conditions in more depth, an important preliminary point must be considered.
It should not be forgotten that although India has made remarkable economic progress over the last thirty years, it is still a Third World country in which enormous numbers of people live in conditions of severe poverty.
This means first of all that prisons compete with other government responsibilities for extremely precious resources and secondly that the question of ‘lesseligibility’ inevitably raises its head.
Can prison diets and living conditions reasonably be judged by the same criteria as those in western countries, when the quality of life for the ‘honest poor’ outside is so much lower?
The realistic answer must be ‘no’, although this does not defeat the argument of Richardson (1985) among others, that the drastic loss of civic rights suffered by prisoners puts a duty upon the state to compensate by giving them ‘special rights’ when incarcerated.
In other words, the less-eligibility argument should never be used to justify deliberate neglect or harsh treatment of prisoners.
Thus, for example, while many inmates may sleep in worse conditions outside, this is no argument for making them sleep on concrete if it is not excessively expensive to provide them with cots or hammocks.
Even when making full allowance for the cultural context and resource limitations, nearly all independent commentators agree that, at least until very recently, conditions in Indian prisons have been appalling.
The 1983 report of the All-India Committee on Jail Reforms, headed by Justice A.N.
Mulla, makes this clear.
Every chapter of this carefully researched document, itself a tribute to the democratic institutions and traditions which make India so special among developing countries, reveals further horrors of a harsh and neglected prison system.
A few sentences from chapter III, headed ‘Realities in Indian Prisons’, will give the flavour of the report:
Conditions of living in most of the prisons are sub-human….
Shortage of water supply, open drainage systems, conservancy  latrines and dearth of scavengers make prison environs unbearable in a large number of institutions…
While the lot of the average prisoner leaves much to be desired, that of the criminal lunatic is much worse.
These individuals are huddled together under the most unhygienic conditions, totally uncared for and quite frequently ill-treated…
Prison industries and work programmes…are ill-planned, antiquated, wasteful and unproductive and are little suited to equip inmates with any useful skill…
The prison staff has generally become callous and insensitive.
It even uses bad characters, hardened criminals and ‘dadas’ in perpetrating atrocities on other prisoners and indulging in corrupt practices…
In most of the prisons, corruption has become a way of life and inmates believe that without taking recourse to corrupt practices they cannot cope with the culture that prevails.
Prisons are run on archaic methods of management….
Training of prison personnel has remained woefully neglected…
But for making certain general platitudinous statements,[senior prison administrators]could not make any significant contribution in suggesting solutions to the chronic problems of prison management.
This is indicative of a very casual and superficial approach to problems of prison at the level of policy formulation in most of the States and Union Territories…
After an overall view of the existing conditions in prisons, we are constrained to record that prison organisation in India does not conform to the required standards of a correctional department.
(All-India Committee 1983: paras 3.18–3.45)
Although the most comprehensive, this was only the latest in a long series of hard-hitting reports on Indian prisons, most of which echoed familiar themes.
Official recognition of the need for gaol reform dates back to 1919, when a major report by the Indian Jails Committee heralded a change in government pronouncements about the aims of imprisonment, renouncing the retributive philosophy which had been enshrined in police and legislation since the report of Lord Macauley's prison Disciplinary Committee in 1838.
Macauley's report had rejected reform, education and moral teaching, in favour of a punitive regime based upon deliberately ‘dull, monotonous, wearisome and uninteresting tasks’.
This had set the tone later reflected in the harsh rules of the Indian Penal Code 1860 (prescribing long sentences of ‘rigorous imprisonment’), in the Prisons Act 1894, in gaol manuals allowing cruel punishments for the smallest breach of discipline, and in a lasting policy of spending as little as possible on the gaols.
The 1919 report introduced an era of lip-service to ‘reform and rehabilitation’, but neither the British, preoccupied with ‘law and order’ as the independence movement gained strength, nor any Indian government after 1947, found the time or the resolve necessary for dismantling the old Draconian system.
Even today, most convicts are sentenced to ‘rigorous’ imprisonment, and, although some revisions are currently being made, the gaols in most states are run according to manuals dating from the nineteenth century.
Critics of Indian prisons have continued for years to point out the incongruity of attempting to run an avowedly ‘correctional’ prison system with structures, rules and physical conditions created for quite different purposes.
Among the most frequently condemned aspects have been the following:
1
Unsuitable buildings, half of them now over fifty years old and 18 per cent over a hundred years;
2
Poor water supply, sanitation, drainage and electrical supply.
In 1979, only 15 per cent of gaols had tap water, 33 per cent had septic latrines and 25 per cent were electrified.
(However, these are areas currently being improved with central government grants — see below);
3
Poorly funded and poorly organized state management and administration, often in neglected branches of larger departments, employing ignorant, inefficient, and sometimes corrupt staff.
Inspector-Generals of Prisons drafted in from other fields with little knowledge of, or interest in, prisons, while ‘high flying’ young administrators see the prison department as one to be avoided (Sharma 1985);
4
Virtually untrained and sometimes brutal warders, without the influence of a fully-trained national ‘cadre’ of officers (as in the police) to encourage higher standards and to disseminate new ideas.
Assisted often by ‘convict warders’, who add to an atmosphere of fear and connive in the corruption which is endemic in many institutions.
Occasional allegations of torture;
5
Indiscriminate mixing of prisoners of all kinds, with only rudimentary classification, often in overcrowded conditions;
6
Lack of rewarding work, meaningful education, vocational training, ‘prison career’ planning, or any serious rehabilitative programmes, including provisions for after-care;
7
Poor quality and monotonous diet;
8
Primitive medical facilities and dearth of welfare workers, counsellors or psychiatrists, even where considerable numbers of mentally ill prisoners are held;
9
Capricious and ungenerous systems of furlough, parole and remission;
10
Harsh disciplinary systems giving prisoners few rights of defence, combined with ineffective and unused grievance procedures;
11
Infrequency of inspection, by experts or by appointed visitors, helping to foster a hostile, secretive attitude towards outsiders.
Of course, by no means every one of these problems is to be found in every one of India's hundreds of gaols in its thirty-one independently governed states.
While some are grossly overcrowded, others are half-empty; some are riddled with corruption but others are tightly run; and while some are undoubtedly filthy and unhealthy in the extreme, others are kept very clean.
The gaol I visited was neither overcrowded nor filthy.
But although I chose it virtually at random, this does not make it ‘typical’, any more than the horrific Bihar gaol described by Sinha (1978) in which 143 people had died within three years.
In the face of such variety, it may appear that any attempt to generalize from a description of one institution is doomed to failure.
Nevertheless, certain features of the gaol I saw seemed to reveal something more fundamental about imprisonment than did the state of the drains or other physical conditions, which may vary widely between institutions or, indeed, in the same institution over time.
I was particularly struck by aspects of the regime that, to some Indian colleagues with whom I discussed them, were ‘routine’, but to a foreigner seemed to reveal fundamental assumptions in the country about how prisoners should be treated.
The following account summarizes the factual information I obtained about the prison, as well as the general impressions I gained during the necessarily short time I was able to spend inside it.
II CONDITIONS IN A CENTRAL GAOL
Few visitors are welcome in Indian prisons, and it is particularly difficult for foreigners to achieve access.
I was fortunate enough, with the help of contacts in the academic world, to persuade the relevant central government and state authorities to allow me to visit an institution informally, on condition that neither the prison nor any individual would be identified in anything I wrote.
In the end, I spent two afternoons in a central gaol (the highest category of prison, intended primarily for long-termers) in a major town in the south of India.
The first afternoon was spent mainly with the Superintendent and the second incorporated a full and relatively leisurely tour of the prison, seeing whatever I wished.
Naturally, such visits can allow only the most superficial understanding of prison life, any conversations with prisoners and warders being cursory and inhibited by the presence of a senior officer.
Nevertheless, the staff were open and co-operative and I found the visit productive, gleaning more information and obtaining clearer impressions than I originally expected.
Inevitably, I saw the prison through the eyes of a western visitor, but after three months in India I had acquired at least a superficial understanding of the country and its penal philosophy.
The gaol was situated not far from the centre of a large and fast-growing industrial town.
Built around the turn of the century, it had been designed originally as a soldiers' barracks.
There was an outer compound, in which relatives waited for their turn to speak to prisoners through the bars of the main prison.
The gate to this compound was guarded by an unfriendly warder in khaki uniform, similar to that worn by police and soldiers.
He refused to let us pass, and my companion and I waited an hour before being rescued by a passing senior officer.
While waiting we watched a small number of trusted prisoners in ragged white cotton shirts, shorts and head-dress come and go apparently freely through the outer gate, engaged in errands or in work in the nearby gardens.
The main prison, into which few outsiders were allowed, was guarded by armed officers.
It was divided into three compounds, as well as a small section for high security prisoners (there were only three of the latter at the time I visited).
One of the compounds held primarily undertrial prisoners, one convicted short-termers, and the  third convicted long-termers.
However, this was not a strict division, and there was a certain amount of mixing of categories, mainly because of the large numbers of undertrials.
The long-termers were housed chiefly in single cells, the others in dormitories containing forty ‘beds’(or stone slabs).
Most of the buildings in the prison were single-storey.
At the time of my visit, there were about 600 prisoners in the prison: 350 undertrials and 250 convicted prisoners.
This was nearly 50 per cent higher than the latest official statistics for the prison that I was able to obtain: on 31 December 1987, just over a year earlier, there had been a population of 405.
The official return did not give any details about the population on that, or any other, day, but there was a breakdown of the characteristics of all prisoners admitted during 1987.
The year's admissions had consisted of 947 convicts, 2,018 undertrials and 15 detenus.
No fewer than 708 of the convicts (75 per cent) had been aged 31 or over, and 573 (61 per cent ) had been illiterate.
As one would expect, the majority of the sentenced prisoners coming in through the gates had received short terms, but 121 (13 per cent) had been admitted to serve sentences over five years and 84 of these had received life imprisonment for murder.
Only 23 were classified as ‘habitual offenders’ by dint of having one or more previous convictions of substance.
To guard the 600 prisoners, there were just under 200 uniformed warders, who worked three eight-hour shifts.
They were not required to escort prisoners from court or to other prisons, this being a police responsibility in India, so during the day there might be 70 or so warders in the prison at any one time.
We went first to the short-termers' section, which consisted of several barracks in a surprisingly spacious compound.
Nearly all prisoners were out of their cells, either employed in the workshops (see later) or standing around talking or exercising on the sparsely grassed areas between the barracks.
Despite this apparent freedom, the discipline was clearly strict.
There were numerous warders in sight, all armed with sticks, and every prisoner within range stood to attention and saluted as the Deputy Superintendent passed.
The barracks were single-storey huts, each with forty raised stone slabs to serve as beds. prisoners were allowed no personal possessions such as photographs of their families, let alone items like radios or hobby materials, so, apart from some religious paintings on the walls, the dormitories had an austere look, each ‘bed’ furnished only with a jute mat and pillow, together with the prisoner's plate, spoon and mug.
At the end of each barracks were latrines, which, like all in the prison, drained into septic tanks.
The latrines were generally clean.
The other two sections of the prison also contained barracks, but many of the long-term prisoners lived in blocks of single cells.
These were quite large, and some prisoners chose to share with two others rather than face solitude.
The cells were generally bare with stone ‘beds’, but were clean and had integral toilets and water taps.
The prison kitchen was located in the short-termers' compound.
Later in the afternoon I saw a meal for all 600 prisoners being cooked in one gigantic iron pot over a blazing fire.
The pot was taller than a man, and a prisoner had to climb up on a table in order to extract a sample with a huge ladle.
It looked and tasted exactly the same as the previous day's meal which I had sampled in the Superintendent's office — a medium-hot vegetable curry containing a mixture of root and leafy vegetables.
There was also a bitter tamarind soup.
A group of prisoners was carefully picking foreign bodies from a mound of rice before cooking.
The diet in this, as in all Indian prisons, was laid down in very precise terms.
The entitlements per prisoner were printed in English and in the local language on a large notice outside the kitchen.
The following was the diet laid down for working prisoners (those not working received 100 grams less rice per day):
On Sundays and on nine festival days each year, prisoners received a special diet, including 175 grams of meat per man.
For the festivals, there was a budget allocation of one rupee per head (about 4p in UK currency).
In order to gain some idea of the adequacy of the diet, I asked several people from poor families outside how much rice they ate and whether they would find the prison food acceptable.
It appeared that, in terms of weight, it was roughly the equivalent of an agricultural labourer's daily intake of rice.
It was also over 50 per cent more than that laid down in codes for the relief of famine as a basic subsistence diet (Kynch 1989).
The main criticisms made by most people I spoke to who had experience of prison food concerned not its quantity but its quality.
The food was described as tasteless and monotonous, and often cold by the time it reached people housed some distance from the kitchens.
More important, it was not high in protein or calories, and many of the longer-term prisoners looked thin and weak.
Of course, it might be argued that most of them come from very poor rural areas, and that their diets outside would be equally poor, if not poorer, in nutritional value.
But these ‘less-eligibility’ arguments are surely at their weakest when applied to food, and virtually untenable when one is talking about people incarcerated for fourteen years or more.
It should be noted that, while the budgets and weight of food items were calculated per prisoner, this did not mean that each inmate was given an individually weighed portion: the uncooked food was simply weighed in bulk on leaving the stores for the kitchen.
I am unaware of any allegations of malpractice at the prison I visited, but it has often been claimed elsewhere that frauds are common among both staff and prisoners responsible for storing, weighing and distributing food, and that the actual consumption per prisoner can be up to 20 per cent below that laid down in the regulations.
To these risks of malpractice can be added further risks in discrimination further down the line.
Inmates were divided into groups of five, and usually lived, worked and ate as a group.
The leader of each group collected the food and was responsible for  distributing it among his ‘team’.
Obviously, this kind of system allows opportunities for abuses and oppression of some prisoners by others.
The practice of giving some inmates power over others is not unusual in Indian prisons.
As elsewhere, the gaol I visited appointed ‘convict overseers’ to assist the staff, a system much criticized in recent years.
However, there were only four of these, and their role was restricted to supervising prisoners in work and vocational activities, rather than the disciplinary roles undertaken by the more controversial ‘convict warders’ employed in many other gaols.
Although they had no power to punish prisoners themselves, the overseers reported any misdemeanours to staff and their word would almost always be taken against that of another prisoner.
They therefore had a certain amount of power over others and were also known to receive ‘perks’, for example extra food from the kitchen.
A healthier kind of ‘prisoner power’ was to be found in the ‘panchayat’system, whereby prisoners elected representatives to put their collective views to the Superintendent.
Elections for six places on the panchayat were held every six months, staff reserving the right to exclude from consideration any prisoner they considered unsuitable.
III WORK, EDUCATION, WELFARE, PAROLE
The normal daily routine for a convicted prisoner was constructed as follows:
05.30–07.00 Reveille, ablutions, breakfast
07.00–11.00 Work
11.00–13.00 Lunch and rest
13.00–16.30 Work
16.30–17.30 Recreation
17.30–18.30 Evening meal
18.30–21.30 Locked in cells/barracks, lights on
21.30 Lights out
All convicted prisoners sentenced to rigorous imprisonment (the great majority) were obliged to work seven-and-a-half hours per day.
Undertrials and any short-termers sentenced to simple imprisonment were allocated only domestic duties.
They could, however, volunteer for work, which entitled them to wages and to a better diet (the same as convicted prisoners).
There were five main types of ‘vocational’ work in the prison: weaving, carpentry, printing, bookbinding and textile work.
However, not all of these were ‘going concerns’ at any particular time.
At the end of 1987, the distribution of jobs among convicts was recorded as follows:
Normally, the ‘vocational’ jobs, which carried slightly higher wages, were given only to men serving over two years, and the Superintendent stated that little attempt was made to ‘rehabilitate’those sentenced to less.
The equipment in all the workshops was rudimentary, but items of reasonable quality were produced and sold, some of them on a stall outside the front gate of the prison.
In most cases, prisoners worked in their groups of five, and were paid (or not) according to how well the group performed.
In the weaving shop, for example, prisoners were paid three rupees each day, but only if the group completed thirty yards of woven sheeting.
Staff estimated that this very stiff target was attained relatively rarely, so that, at most , one in five of the prisoners actually received pay on any one day.
When they did enough to earn wages, they were allowed to keep or spend half, the other half being saved for them on their release.
The level of pay, which fell from three to two rupees per day for non-vocational work, can be judged from a comparison of the  prison wage with the typical wage of an agricultural labourer in the area.
The latter would receive around fourteen rupees per day.
The allocation of work was in some cases based upon people's skills outside; for example, prisoners who had been barbers, washermen, gardeners or ‘sweepers’(refuse collectors and cleaners from the lower castes) were given similar jobs if available, but, generally speaking, new inmates were assigned a task without much deliberation or consultation.
Thereafter, it was difficult for them to change.
As the Superintendent put it, ‘Rehabilitation means learning to work’, which included work which they did not like or to which they were not suited.
This reflects a common tendency in India to think of rigorous imprisonment and vocational work as meaning the same thing: little distinction is made between punishment and rehabilitation in the prison context.
There was one teacher employed in the prison, who undertook education at all levels from basic literacy to assisting with open university degrees.
He also distributed library books to those who asked for them — although I saw few books in the cells or barracks and it was stated that few prisoners were interested in reading.
Prisoners were not normally allowed to visit the library to choose their own books.
But although the educational services were supplied to only a few inmates, several of these were undertaking advanced work: three had completed BAs over the past few years, another an MA, and nine were embarking upon university degrees by correspondence.
Welfare provision, apart from that provided by the prison staff themselves, was non-existent.
There were two posts allocated for social workers, but these had not been filled for a long time.
The only recourse for prisoners with social or practical problems, including those involving families outside, was to make an application to see the Superintendent or another senior officer.
There was a prison hospital with twelve beds, but this had little equipment and only basic drugs.
Seriously ill prisoners were transferred to outside hospitals.
In 1987, 233 had been admitted at some time into the prison hospital.
The main recreational activities in the prison were volley-ball, ring tennis, chess, kabaddi and other board games, but limited numbers of prisoners actually engaged in them.
There was also an outdoor stage on which occasional concerts, plays, or other entertainment or religious functions were held.
There are in India a variety of systems of home leave, furlough, early release and parole, but in practice relatively few prisoners benefit.
During 1987–8 in the prison I visited, twenty-three prisoners had been granted home leave, mainly for reasons of death or serious illness in their families.
Early release was possible on the recommendation of an Advisory Board, made up of representatives from various agencies, but in 1987, while 458 were released on expiry of their sentence, none at all appeared to have been granted early release on licence.
(Similarly, Datir (1978: 245) found that only five of 644 released prisoners in a sample in Maharastra had been granted this.)
Most, however, had earned remission, which is given at a rate of five days per month, so long as the prisoner works to a satisfactory standard.
Lifers were entitled after two years to apply for furlough to maintain contact with their families, but this was in the hands of the police department, not the prison authorities, and was rarely granted — a matter of some concern to the gaol Superintendent.
Finally, formal punishments were used relatively rarely.
During 1987, only twenty-six prisoners had been officially punished, twenty-five of these for ‘minor’ offences — although these included fighting, stealing and ‘sodomy’.
The punishments included forfeiture of remission, single cell confinements, restrictions upon access to the canteen and, more controversially, the stopping of letters and visits for up to a month.
(In normal circumstances each prisoner was allowed one visit and one letter per week.)
On rare occasions, too, handcuffs could be applied as a punishment.
The rarity of formal disciplinary hearings is perhaps one indication of the strict control of inmates achieved by the continual presence of considerable numbers of warders armed with long sticks.
It may also reflect the nature of the inmate population.
As one informant put it, most are not ‘hardened criminals’ but uneducated rural dwellers who would rarely show open disrespect to people of higher caste or to those they perceive as ‘sahibs’.
One must, of course, be cautious in drawing conclusions from only two visits to an institution, but I can perhaps summarize my general impressions.
The basic living conditions were clearly above average for Indian prisons, judging from published and oral accounts of those elsewhere.
In terms of space, sanitation and general cleanliness, conditions seemed acceptable, and I have certainly seen worse in British prisons.
The food, although mainly low  in nutritive value, unappetizing and depressingly monotonous, was at least adequate in quantity.
On the other hand, the features which stood out most starkly to a western visitor were the harshness of the regime, the lack of stimulation for long-term prisoners, the absence of welfare provisions, and the exclusion of even minor personal comforts such as the display of family mementos and the pursuit of cell hobbies.
Although some lip-service is now being paid to the concept of rehabilitation within prisons, there was little evidence of serious efforts to prepare prisoners for life outside.
The lack of welfare officers, the rarity of home leave, the concept of visits and letter-writing as a privilege which could be withdrawn as a punishment, and the denial of permission to keep family photographs, were all indications of an absence of serious interest in helping to maintain a prisoner's contacts with the outside world.
Similarly, ‘vocational’ training was regarded more as a means of making prisoners work hard than of training them for a task to which they were individually suited.
And the absence of systematic programmes to teach basic literacy added to the impression that the prison was regarded in reality as little more than a ‘warehouse’ for inmates, not a vehicle for their improvement.
Above all, there seemed to be little recognition of the special needs of people who were destined to spend very long periods behind bars: the long-termers were treated not very differently from the short-termers, and relatively little thought seemed to have been given to the risk of mental deterioration in an environment without stimulus.
Thus, while the basic living conditions were markedly better than I had expected, it has to be recorded that the ‘psychological’ character of the institution (as, I suspect, in most prisons in India) appeared to me harsh, negative and even cruel.
IV PROSPECTS FOR REFORM
While the institution I visited may not have been entirely ‘typical’— indeed, was in a state with a relatively good record on prisons — the above observations highlight some of the difficult issues facing penal reformers in India.
Prisons not only carry the weight of a bleak, punitive tradition dating from the days of the British, but the long years of neglect and lack of investment mean that any significant reforms demand a massive injection of resources.
The fundamental  problem here is that, as in many other countries, prison reform occupies one of the lowest rungs on the ladder of political priorities.
India's major government policy is set and its large-scale capital expenditure is committed in a series of Five Year Plans.
Unsurprisingly, these are dominated by schemes for economic development.
prisons, being regarded by most planners and politicians as ‘non-productive’(short-sighted a view as this may be), did not until very recently achieve even token inclusion in a Five Year Plan, and this came only after a lengthy battle by individuals within the Ministries of Home Affairs and Welfare to include a meaningful package for development in the correctional field.
Budgets for prisons have hardly kept pace with inflation, and, despite occasional lip-service commitment to reform, the policy of the British before 1947- to run gaols as cheaply as possible — has not changed significantly in practice (Baxi 1982; Khan and Chilad 1982; Bhatacharya 1985; Gokhale and Sohoni 1988).
The problem was exacerbated by the decision in 1950 to leave prisons as primarily the province of the states, which gives the central government something of an excuse for its half-hearted approach to reform.
A further deep-seated reason for neglect lies in the unforgiving attitudes of the general population towards criminals, which, although fostered and maintained by the British, existed long before and after they left (cf.
Chhrabra 1970).
Many prisoners continue to be rejected by their local community upon release, there is very little voluntary involvement in after-care, and, except when political activists are imprisoned, few public pressure groups demand reform.
Criminologists, too, have largely neglected the prisons.
In an excellent review of the literature, Srivastava (1982) concluded that, while there were some useful ph.D.
theses, only two published books (her own (1977) and that of Singh (1978)) were based substantially upon primary empirical research within prisons.
The vast majority of academic writers, as I discovered myself in a trawl of more recent literature, tend to recycle old material, relying upon out-of-date statistics and official reports.
This has greatly reduced their potential for instigating change.
Instead, the only effective exposure of prison conditions and pressure for reform have come from journalists, lawyers, judges and, indeed, international organizations such as Amnesty International.
For example, ex-detenus such as Nayar (1978), Tyler (1977) and Kumar (1979) have written graphic  accounts of their time in gaol, another journalist Sheela Barse has fought determinedly (including initiating law-suits) for the removal of children from gaols, and Justices Bhagwati and Krishna Lyer made wide-ranging pronouncements — as well as damning general comments — in celebrated Supreme Court cases such as Hussainara Khatoon and Sunil Batra .
Despite these praiseworthy efforts, only the tip of the iceberg has been noticeably affected.
The hugely daunting size of the problem — nearly 1,200 gaols under the control of thirty-one different states — ensures that even unequivocal instructions from the Supreme Court are anything but universally implemented.
Unless there are local people with the time, resources and energy to file petitions of contempt, matters are likely to remain unchanged in many parts of the country (Dhagamwar 1987).
The one glimmer of light on the horizon at present is the possibility of a positive reaction by the government to the Mulla Committee's comprehensive report.
Certain periods in the past have seen minor bursts of prison reform, and it may be that this will produce another.
One such followed the 1919 Indian Jails Committee report, and another came shortly after Independence; many of the new leaders had spent time in gaols, and devoted some attention to the problem in the 1950s (including the drawing up of a Model Prison Manual in 1959).
The flurry of critical publications by ex-detenus after the Emergency helped to attract some extra finance towards prisons, as well as fuelling the pressure which led to the setting up of Justice Mulla's committee.
Khan and Chilad (1982: 49) saw these developments as the ‘modest beginning’ of a new phase in prison reform, in which, at last, ‘institutional correction was accorded the status of an issue , worthy of being discussed by the political executive and the bureaucracy’.
In the six years since the Mulla Committee's report, there has been a certain amount of further progress, including increases in the prison budget, some new instructions from the central government to the states, and the setting up of a small policy section within the Ministry of Home Affairs to consider the implementation of the recommendations.
The Eighth Finance Commission in 1985 recommended the allocation of more funds for the restructuring of prison buildings, and the Ministry of Welfare put forward a plan for improving the welfare of prisoners, including some attention to after-care, under the Seventh Five Year Plan.
Instructions to the  states included a timetable for the rewriting of outdated gaol manuals and recommendations for the improvement of staff training, as well as a demand for quarterly reports on progress.
It is not yet clear whether this is the beginning of significant changes, or merely another short-lived period of interest.
It has to be noted that gaol conditions are no longer newsworthy and the clamour for reform has largely faded.
After six years, the Mulla report is still ‘under consideration’ by the state governments, and has yet to be laid before Parliament.
Despite the encouraging signs mentioned earlier, there is a danger that it may meet a similar fate to all its worthy predecessors.
In sum, effective penal reform will not be achieved until the central government takes it really seriously and
1
Injects a vastly increased amount of money into the prison system;
2
Enacts major new legislation, completely recasting the punitive Indian Penal Code 1860 and Prison Act 1894;
3
Creates a national cadre of properly trained prison officers;
4
Sets up effective inspection machinery.
Ultimately, this may be best achieved by transferring full responsibility for prisons from the states to the central government, or, if this remains politically unfeasible, by building more federal prisons as ‘models’ for the remainder (an engine of reform in other countries with a similar federal structure).
Such a programme of reform requires a firm ‘political will’, which in turn depends upon demands from the people.
Unfortunately, in present-day India, despite its openness in many areas of government and its generally good record on human rights, the state of the prisons remains a rather shameful secret, surfacing now and then, but basically an issue in which neither the politicians, nor the vocal pressure groups, nor the public, have an abiding interest or concern.
MATAGALPA PRISON, NICARAGUA
GINNY BAUMANN AND KEVIN BALES
INTRODUCTION
Nicaragua is a nation in transition, and its prison system reflects the remarkable and sweeping changes in life and government since the end of the Somoza dictatorship in 1979.
These changes, such as the transfer of land to co-operatives and poorer peasants, the literacy campaign and the present drive to clean up the country's water sources, all demonstrate a thrust of government policy very different from the regime which ended in 1979.
In many ways the Nicaraguan prison system is an exemplar of this shift in political philosophy and policy.
Many of the current members and officials of the Nicaraguan government were held in the nation's prisons prior to the revolution.
A government with such a high proportion of its members having first-hand and intimate knowledge of prison life is rare, and explains, in part, the equally rare views of the Nicaraguan government on the nature of imprisonment.
On the continuum of penal philosophy which stretches from the punitive to the reformative, the Nicaraguan penal system has placed itself on the far edge of reform.
The pursuit of these principles by the Nicaraguan penal system occurs within strict shortages of basic resources.
Two political situations have detracted from the physical improvement of the prison system.
The first of these and the most immediate was the war which was fought along the Honduran border and elsewhere between the Nicaraguan forces and the ‘Contras’, who were armed and supported by direct grants from the US Congress.
Government resources have been constantly diminished by the need to prioritize defence.
In addition to the consumption of resources by the Contra war, it might well be expected that military invasion would harden government  attitudes towards those whose actions were deemed anti-social or anti-government.
It is certainly true that a State of Emergency was in effect for most of the period of hostilities, being lifted in January 1987.
This State of Emergency restricted certain freedoms, including the right of habeas corpus(restored in non-political cases in 1985).
However, the State of Emergency did not suspend other significant sections of the Statute of Rights and Guarantees of Nicaraguans.
In particular those articles of the statute survive which forbid cruel, inhuman, or degrading punishment.
The abolition of the death penalty following the revolution remained intact.
As will be discussed below, the treatment of detainees suspected of security offences is still open to serious questioning, but the operations of the penal system itself continue within the bounds set by the Statute of Rights.
The second limiting factor was less immediate, but of greater potential impact.
This was the trade embargo which was enforced on Nicaragua by the United States.
Before the revolution the USA was, by far, Nicaragua's most important trading partner.
Today the impact of the embargo is to be seen everywhere in the economy, as well as in the prisons.
Despite the fact that the government has greater calls on its meagre resources than building more comfortable prisons, the physical plant of the prisons has been steadily improved.
Workshops and gymnasiums, for example, have been added to the main prisons.
Most prison facilities are now operating below their capacity and, unlike those in many more industrialized countries, do not suffer significantly from overcrowding.
In Central America it stands out as a model of high quality provision drawn from a small resource base.
THE PRISON SYSTEM
In 1980, just after the revolution, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights visited Nicaragua and inspected ten prisons around the country.
Seven of these ten they regarded as ‘deplorable’— overcrowded, poorly serviced, and dilapidated.
Their report explained these conditions in terms of the inheritance of the crumbling Somoza penal system.
‘Of necessity’, they wrote, ‘the Government had to use the former regime's detention institutions, which in the best of times had been rudimentary and which deteriorated notably in the years prior to the fall of Somoza’(IACHR  1983: 99).
Americas Watch also found crowded prisons in 1982, primarily in the two main prisons which were used to house ‘Somocistas’.
Since the inspection of the system in 1982 many changes have taken place, particularly in the physical plant and in the organization of the prison regime.
In broad outline: the prison population of Nicaragua is estimated at a little over 7,000 inmates.
About 235 of these are members of the Nicaraguan army or police serving sentences imposed by military courts.
Of the remainder about three-quarters (5,328) are common-crime offenders.
Another one-fifth (1,515) are either charged or convicted of security-related offences.
This latter number had been much larger; it included, until the recent amnesty, more than 2,000 former National Guardsmen and others convicted by the 1979–81 special courts; of these only 39 remained in prison in October 1989.
There are two main prisons in Nicaragua, fifteen small prison farms, and a number of detention centres run by the Directorate General of State Security.
The prison at Tipitapa, near Managua, is the largest.
Until the recent amnesty it housed just under 3,000 inmates at 80 per cent capacity; some 2,000 of these were former members of the National Guard.
The other major prison, Heroes y Martires de Nueva Guinea (or ‘Zona Franca’) is also near Managua, and is used for those awaiting trial.
The fifteen prison farms, including one for women, are recently-built, low security facilities.
In addition to the main prisons and prison farms there are gaols in several cities.
The prisons are classified as open, semi-open, or closed.
The allocation of inmates to any one of these depends on their participation in the five-stage programme which leads to probation and release.
The five stages are:
Stage 1: A closed ordinary prison system, without work;
Stage 2: A closed prison, but the inmate is allowed to work and receives privileges and more family visits.
If an inmate demonstrates good behaviour he or she may, after serving 30 per cent of the sentence, progress to a semi-open system.
Most inmates progress to this second stage immediately after conviction and sentencing, depending upon their willingness to join in work programmes and education;
Stage 3: A semi-open prison or low security gaol, the inmate being free to move about the grounds and working outside the  facility during the day.
After serving a further 20 per cent of their sentence in a semi-open regime, inmates are moved on to an open system;
Stage 4: An open system with no security measures.
Prison officials do not carry arms and the facility is run by an elected council of inmates.
There are weekly visits, once a month the inmate is given a weekend leave, and once every six months is allowed home for a week.
After another 10 per cent of the sentence is served in the open system of Stage 4, the prisoner is placed on probation and allowed to go home;
Stage 5: A probationary period in which the prisoner continues to report to the police, but lives and works normally.
The prison officials are supposed to provide each probationer with employment at this stage in the rehabilitation process, but it is unclear whether or not this is possible in the current economic crisis.
As can be seen, the total sentence can be reduced by as much as 60 per cent if the prisoner is placed directly into Stage 2 after conviction.
At all stages good behaviour and a good work record make possible the earning of more privileges.
All prisoners are urged to pursue educational and cultural activities.
Pardons and commutations are also granted on the basis of good behaviour, and there is a reasonable expectation of a sentence being reduced once a prisoner has progressed to the open system of Stage 4.
As an example of the reduction of sentence, some inmates, including ex-National Guardsmen, serving twenty-to thirty-year sentences, had reached the open system of the fifth stage within eight years of incarceration.
There has been one independent study of the open farm system (McCabe 1986).
This study, conducted between 1982 and 1984, found a recidivism rate of 15 per cent among participants.
It also stated that ‘90 per cent of the respondents indicated that their experience in the programme had helped them to see more clearly the forces at work in their lives and had in fact helped them to take more control over their lives’.
The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) has made extensive and unrestricted visits since 1985, three or four times per year, to Tipitapa and Zona Franca.
The Red Cross primarily visits those inmates who are former National Guardsmen or who have  been sentenced for counter-revolutionary activity.
In addition, since 1985, the Red Cross has run seminars, with government agreement, for members of the National Penitentiary Programme and the police.
Despite some criticisms which will be considered below, the basic assessment of the Nicaraguan Prison System must be positive.
The Catholic Institute for International Relations, who inspected the system in 1986, stated that
In a continent notorious for appalling prison conditions, where brutality and corruption are the norm, Nicaragua's penal system stands out as a genuine effort to find a more humane yet affordable alternative.
Such criticism as there is concentrates on lack of resources, which is a feature of the Nicaraguan economy as a whole and is not limited to the prison system.
(1987: 66)
The Nicaraguan penal system has several features unique in Central America and, in the case of Matagalpa Prison, these special features are examined in more detail.
MATAGALPA PRISON
The prison in Matagalpa had been built to hold a maximum of 600, and in January 1989 there were 530 occupants.
Food consisted of a relentless but sufficient diet of rice and beans (typical of the population in general).
Most of the prison seemed to be laid out in large open ‘wards’ with bunk beds rather than individual cells.
There was a high standard of cleanliness throughout the prison.
By the standards of some prisons in economically developed countries, Matagalpa prison was spartan and comfortless, but conditions seemed no worse than those faced by most of the rural population in Nicaragua.
Underlying the programme at Matagalpa is the belief that people are able to change in fundamental ways.
The analysis of crime put forward by the present Nicaraguan leadership is one based mainly on social deprivation, lack of opportunities and corruption by values of greed and individualism.
The Education Officer of Matagalpa Prison went as far as to say that when systems of exploitation can be brought to an end, crime as a major social phenomenon will disappear.
This philosophy is matched by the general willingness of the Nicaraguan people to accept ex-offenders back into the community.
It may be concluded that without the experience of events since  1979, this ‘faith in the possibility of change’ could not have become the guiding principle of the prisons.
If the aim of the prison system is to reform the individual, the method is education.
This understanding of the role of education can partly be explained by the experience of the literacy campaign which was carried out throughout Nicaragua shortly after the revolution.
This massive mobilization against illiteracy, mainly put into effect by older schoolchildren, brought basic reading and writing skills to all but 12 per cent of the population.
Only months before this campaign, over half of the population were illiterate.
The Nicaraguan government explains that this immediate involvement of the rural population and the huge changes and challenges which literacy brought to their lives is one of the main reasons that the revolution has been sustained.
In the prisons, formal education is available in the subjects taught in Nicaraguan schools, so that prisoners can complete the six grades of elementary schooling.
It is worth stressing that all of this teaching is done by the prisoners themselves rather than by prison officers.
Likewise any prisoner with skills in a basic trade will be encouraged to share them with other inmates.
In the prison at Matagalpa, prisoners spoken with there seemed proud of the responsibilities they held as teachers and trainers in the prison.
Prisoners being trained in woodwork explained that their major frustration was with the shortage of tools and materials.
Prisoners' education is enhanced by a wide range of cultural activities.
The performance of dance and drama attended during the inspection of Matagalpa Prison was a good testimony to the efforts being made to draw out the creativity and self-expression of the prisoner.
Inmates had the chance to join special groups for music, drama, dance and art.
Complaints were of insufficient guitar strings, paints and brushes.
Until the United States sanctions on Nicaragua and its backing for the Contra war come to an end, these limitations on living standards will continue to affect prisoners as much as they affect the rest of the population.
The education programme is an essential part of the five-stage progression through the prison system.
The prisoners' willingness to participate in cultural, training and education activities is partly what determines the speed with which they move through the system and the frequency of access to various benefits.
Equally  important in deciding their progress is their willingness to join in work schemes.
At the bottom end of the ladder are those inmates, mostly Somocistas and ex-National Guardsmen, who refuse to work or join in education.
They end up simply serving out the full term of their sentence, unless affected by the various amnesties.
For those prisoners who co-operate, the regime is semi-open after the first third of their sentence.
This means they are taken on a daily basis to farms and other work-places outside the prison.
Prisoners are later transferred to open farm prisons.
Each of these farms has only about fifty inmates, under very light surveillance by unarmed staff.
Prisoners have a full-day visit from their families once a week.
Those in open prisons have a 48-hour pass each month to go home, and have eight days ‘holiday’ twice a year.
Last year, only 2 per cent broke the rules and disappeared.
This frequent contact with families is given strong emphasis by the prison authorities, who see it as one of the key elements both of encouraging prisoners to participate and in preparing them for successful reintegration.
Even as early as the second stage of imprisonment conjugal visits are permitted every fifteen days.
There is an attempt to involve the families in improving life in prisons and there are ‘Family Councils’ attached to each prison with the right to make proposals on education programmes, living conditions and on ways to resolve problems within prisons.
It is hard to be accurate about the ‘success’ of the Nicaraguan prison system in reforming offenders and reintegrating them into society.
The government claims its success is shown by a remarkably low 5 per cent rate of recidivism.
THE RIGHTS OF PRISONERS IN NICARAGUA
Part of Nicaragua's claim to be a ‘freer’ society lies in its treatment of offenders.
Given the challenge to this claim by those who label the country ‘totalitarian’, the state of the prisons takes on a special significance.
It is as true for Nicaragua as for any country that the full political importance of its prison system lies in its possible role as an instrument of social terror.
The best way to illustrate this point is to show the role of prisons in the pre-revolutionary Nicaraguan regime.
Somoza's gaols were a central component of a huge apparatus of fear.
They were, and were intended to be, a massive deterrent to political opposition.
Under Somoza, there were scarcely any official prisons as such; rather, the National Guard command posts were used for detention.
Reports from human rights organizations at the time indicate systematic abuse of prisoners, especially of political prisoners.
The pervasive nature of torture, disappearance and killings and the fact that they went unpunished suggests that these violations were officially sanctioned.
Men and women were not held separately and women in detention faced rape and physical abuse.
A Matagalpa prison official claimed that the US government arranged for officials who had served in the Korean and Vietnam wars to go to Nicaragua to teach the National Guard methods of torture.
Advisers came from Argentina for the same purpose.
The Nicaraguan government states that it has made a clear break with the use of imprisonment as a means of political repression.
Chapter 1, Article 4 of the 1985 Ministry of Interior guide-lines sets out that the penitentiary system must completely end all types of torture, violence, physical or psychological mistreatment of prisoners.
All prisoners are made aware of these rights.
At the head of the prison system is Tomas Borge, the Minister of the Interior.
Just before the revolution he spent seven months in detention chained to a wall.
At this time, his wife Yelva was tortured to death.
Many of the present officials of the Nicaraguan government have their own horrific experiences to relate about Somoza's prisons.
After these experiences they set out to rebuild the prison system, from the perspective of prisoners turned gaolers.
After the marking of Nicaragua's ‘Tenth Year of Freedom’ in 1989, how do the prisons measure up to the government's claims?
The Nicaraguan government does not suggest that all abuses of prisoners have been overcome.
As in any prison system, violations still occur.
What it does claim, and what there is evidence for, is that anyone, of whatever rank, who uses violence or brutality against prisoners will be tried and punished if convicted.
The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights reported that any prison warders found guilty of beating prisoners were punished.
In the two principal Nicaraguan prisons, Tipitapa and Zona Franca, Americas Watch in 1982 ‘encountered no credible reports of beatings or similar mistreatment’(1984).
TREATMENT OF FORMER NATIONAL GUARD MEMBERS
If any section of the Nicaraguan prison population were at risk, it would be those prisoners who had served in Somoza's National Guard.
It is clear that the main prisons in which they are held are no longer overcrowded and that if they choose to do so, these prisoners can participate in the full range of activities.
Until recently the most serious problem noted by outside observers was the approximately 1,000 former members of the National Guard who were held in Tipitapa and who refused to take part in the five-stage programme of rehabilitation.
With a sizeable number of these prisoners now pardoned, this situation has apparently been resolved.
As well as those prisoners given an amnesty, the Catholic Institute for International Relations estimates that at least 260 ex-Somocistas have already worked their way through the five stages of imprisonment and, although given long sentences, have now been released on the basis of their behaviour.
In 1989 most of the former National Guardsmen were released by the Nicaraguan government.
This amnesty was part of an agreement made by Nicaragua with four other Central American countries in an effort to bring peace to the region.
In March 1989 some 1,900 of these Somocistas were pardoned.
Previously, in November 1987, 985 prisoners had been released.
The Nicaraguan government has found this policy of amnesty hard to make acceptable to the general public.
Memories of National Guard atrocities are fresh in the popular mind; in the last year of the dictatorship between 40,000 and 60,000 people died at their hands.
At the time of the pardon the Minister of the Interior, Tomas Borge, met many groups of the war-wounded and the relatives of past victims.
In a speech made to one group he argued that they had need to ‘give up some of [their]justifiable rage’(Independent 1989).
On the same day President Ortega addressed a gathering that included women who held pictures of relatives killed by the Contras.
In his address he stated that ‘he wouldn't be in favour of the pardon, but peace is worth much more’(Independent 1989).
PRE-TRIAL DETENTION
While there is sufficient evidence of protection of prisoners within the prison system itself, questions must be raised about the use of  pre-trial detention.
Under the State of Emergency, the Directorate General of State Security (DGSE) was allowed to hold people suspected of political offences indefinitely in detention for investigation.
Serving inmates are also sometimes removed to these centres when they are suspected of involvement in other crimes.
In some cases that were drawn to the attention of the Juridical and Human Rights Commission of the main Protestant organization (CEPAD), people had been held for as long as three months without being interrogated.
Americas Watch estimated in 1986 that at any one time, 300 or more prisoners were held in DGSE facilities.
This tallies fairly well with government figures.
It is disturbing that until recently there was no access to DGSE holding centres by Red Cross officials.
But at the same time lawyers and family were generally permitted to make regular visits.
Americas Watch stated that ‘As best we can determine, torture as that term is generally understood is not practised in Nicaragua as a means of eliciting information or confessions, nor as a form of punishment’(Americas Watch 1984) but its report goes on to detail cases where harsh interrogation techniques were used (see also Amnesty International 1982).
Americas Watch gives as examples prisoners put several days in small darkened cells, and the use of sleep deprivation and threats.
Those testing to these abuses often explained that their treatment was due to the intrigues of local government officials, who were accusing them of collaboration with the Contras.
Talks between the government and opposition parties in the summer and autumn of 1989 led to improvements in the detention centres.
Inspections were carried out by outside groups for the first time, and changes, such as putting windows into dark cells, took place.
INVESTING IN BETTER PRISONS
It is a commonly understood element of the rights of prisoners that prison conditions should be such as to maintain life and health.
It was particularly on the grounds of overcrowding and poor physical conditions that Nicaraguan prisons were severely criticized in the opening months of the new government.
In 1979, when it came to power after a long and vicious civil war the new government detained between 7,000 and 8,000 former members of the National Guard.
Of these, 4,300 were tried and  received prison sentences, and the rest were released.
There was nowhere to put these prisoners except back into the former regime's gaols, where they did indeed face sub-human conditions, especially of overcrowding.
In October 1980, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights reported on this situation.
By the time the report was published, three out of ten of the inspected prisons had already been shut down.
Americas Watch said that by 1986 overcrowding had been solved in the largest prison (Tipitapa), and inmates had more facilities for work and recreation and for family visits.
As explained above fifteen new ‘open farm’ prisons have been constructed and more of these are essential if the Sandinista prison guide-lines are to be fully put into action.
In Matagalpa, the achievements of the prison system were reflected in the very positive attitude of inmates and in the aspirations of prison staff.
The general message was not to look back at past crimes but forward to a more worthwhile place in society.
In sum, the Nicaraguan penal system is one which deserves closer examination, not just because of the option it presents for other developing countries.
The use of open and semi-open prisons, as well as the rehabilitation and education programmes, means a lower cost to the community both economically and socially.
Prisoners tend not to re-offend, family relationships are maintained, and above all, through education prisoners are provided with the opportunity of a different role in society.
GEURRERO CENTRE FOR REHABILITATION, MEXICO
BRIAN SMITH
Mexico is a country with over three thousand years of continuous civilization, but knowledge of its history, culture and people has tended to be either minimal or — worse — affected by the kind of stereotypes we acquire from film or television.
People and even nations are often pigeon-holed according to people's preconceived ideas, which are of course seldom accurate.
This is certainly the fate of the Mexican people.
I have visited Mexico on a number of occasions and seen both major cities and rural areas.
In both, a warm, dignified and considerate people provide a marked contrast to the simple peasants or scruffy bandits who are all too often seen on screen.
As a magistrate on the Nottingham bench, I had visited a number of English prisons and young offenders' institutions during the weeks immediately before my visit to Mexico.
I would not claim specialist knowledge of penal systems in Britain or overseas but offer my observations as those of an interested and reasonably informed member of the general public.
I last visited Mexico for almost a month during May and June 1989.
I chose to try to see the system and situation in a more rural area of Mexico.
The country is divided into thirty-two states which are in many respects self-governing, with laws differing from state to state, although all are subject to the national federal law.
The area I visited, Geurrero State, is in the south-west coastal area of Mexico and includes that idyll of jet-setters — Acapulco.
It was from there that I began my efforts to enquire into the operation of the judicial system in the area.
My interest was entirely personal and motivated by my recent visits to, and my impressions of, the English prisons and young offenders' institutions.
It took almost three days to make the appointments necessary to  meet three local judges.
Until recently very few Europeans and hardly anyone from England had visited this area and they did not appear to have had any previous requests from foreign visitors for information, visits to courts or access to their prisons.
I had taken a letter of introduction from my own bench and from the Magistrates Association.
Without at least some form of official introduction it would have been almost impossible to get the co-operation and approval necessary to visit any government penal centre or institution.
The three judges I met included the first woman judge to be appointed in Geurrero State.
I was most impressed by their apparent concern for the individual and his or her rights.
Ample opportunity appeared to exist for local people to obtain free advice on basic legal problems.
A constant flow of people was being seen by various clerks and secretaries, while at regular intervals one or other of the judges would be called away to advise on a particular problem or situation.
Because of the way in which my visit to the judges and the prison was arranged, I am quite confident that no ‘set-piece’ situations or activities had been organized just for my benefit or to create a more favourable impression of the judicial system or the detention centre.
The basis for the Mexican legal system is the Napoleonic Code which means a supposition of guilt until proved otherwise.
My first reaction to this basic precept was that it must be a difficult and sometimes hopeless task for the average ‘campesino’(worker) to cope with.
Despite the fact that the Mexican government spends almost 25 per cent of its budget on education, a high proportion of the population is still relatively poor, semi-literate and ill-equipped to grasp even the fundamentals of the legal system, let alone to take it on in what would appear to be a very one-sided battle against the establishment and its administration.
That they have managed to cope with it at all is perhaps some credit to at least a reasonable level of fairness within the system.
The prisons do not appear to be full to overflowing as in so many European countries.
There are not constant outcries against the police, courts and prisons, so perhaps the Code works in a sufficiently balanced way, so as to blend at least reasonably well with the democracy so fervently fought for in Mexico's history.
The judicial system is at the primary level operated by locally appointed judges who seemed to have very similar power and jurisdiction to English magistrates.
The next level are in fact magistrates, who appear to have a similar area of responsibility to our Gown Court judges.
Finally there are federal judges, who have a general and overriding authority over the other levels of jurisdiction.
They also handle those cases concerned with major crime or of national concern and interest.
As far as I could discern none of the courts operates on any form of jury system.
All cases are handled by one of the three levels of jurisdiction, someone usually sitting alone.
An arrested person must be brought before a judge within forty-eight hours, who will then decide if there is a case to answer.
If so the alleged offender may be held in custody to await trial.
In Geurrero State this waiting period was apparently not too long but it appeared that in other areas delays and crowded court lists inevitably meant some people spending a considerable time in custody.
Defendants who do not have their own lawyer may select one, from a list, who will then represent them entirely free of charge.
However, these state lawyers tend in many cases to be the newest and very often amongst the least experienced in the profession.
The prosecution is handled by the state.
On the morning of my visit the courts were only dealing with a limited number of very minor matters, mostly drink related.
These resulted in fairly short sentences to the local prison, often of only 3 to 7 days, or up to 3 months for the more habitual drink offender.
The Mexicans seem to be following a general trend in renaming their penal institutions, and many prisons are now referred to as ‘Centres for Rehabilitation’.
One of the judges agreed to accompany me on a visit to one of these centres.
The Geurrero Centre for Rehabilitation is located in a comparatively deserted, rugged area of the mountainous region some thirty to fifty kilometres from Acapulco.
The first impression was, to say the least, somewhat awe inspiring — smooth, dark grey, concrete walls stretching up about ten metres with raised gun-towers approximately every 100 metres.
These were manned by guards whose only access to the towers was by way of a single rope which they had to climb in a gymnastic fashion; they then pulled up the rope and remained in the towers for the rest of the shift.
They could therefore spend a considerable period of time in the towers, in full uniform, in temperatures of anything up to 100 degrees Fahrenheit, or more.
Virtually all the guards carried at least a side-arm and, usually, a semi-automatic rifle.
I questioned the need  for such a display of guns and they seemed to find it difficult to justify them.
It certainly did not appear to be because they had any great fear of violence or mass escapes.
The guards were apparently not given any regular weapons training and I felt that they really carried the weapons more as part of their uniform and tradition than because of absolute necessity.
The group I talked to could only recall one prisoner escaping in recent years; he had been shot during his escape and even then was not recaptured.
Admission into the complex followed a similar pattern to that I had seen in the English prisons: searches, registration, allocation, different coloured uniforms for the various categories of prisoner, etc.
I met the governor — although he is now more generally called the ‘Principal’, apparently in keeping with the educational and rehabilitative emphasis which this particular centre tried to use with its inmates.
As we walked around the complex, the Principal dressed informally in shirt sleeves, no guns or armed guards with us at all, the whole atmosphere appeared to be very relaxed.
Many of the prisoners smiled and exchanged a few words either directly with the governor or with people in our party.
Despite this I still had a strong impression that the Principal was clearly in control of the centre and that he would be unlikely to tolerate breaches of the rules.
A noticeable feature of the Geurrero Centre was the relative freedom the inmates had to move within quite large areas of the complex.
But access outside their own particular areas was only achieved by those issued with special access cards that had to be signed by one of the guards.
A very limited number of guards was apparent around the centre.
Considering the extensive area the complex covered and the large and varied number of the inmates, considerably more guards or prison officers might have been expected, with a much more rigid control over the movements and integration of the prisoners.
The Principal offered me complete freedom to visit and photograph any part of the complex.
It occupies an area of approximately 20 hectares and includes an administration block for the courts and associated administrative staff.
Men, women and juveniles are all housed in the same complex, although in segregated areas.
The centre can accommodate up to 2,000 inmates at any one time.
The centre is almost entirely self-sufficient, growing a wide variety of crops, raising animals — it included a very sophisticated pig breeding and rearing programme — and literally hundreds of rabbits and  chickens.
A number of large and efficiently run workshops made a wide range of products for use in the centre and for sale in nearby towns.
I was most impressed with the quality, variety and complexity of some of the items prisoners were making and the apparent pride they had in the quality of workmanship.
The work did not appear to be just one of those relatively soul destroying, ‘anything to keep them occupied’ jobs that many prison inmates are forced to undertake.
The prisoners were actually making complete items of furniture, doors, window frames, pottery and jewellery.
They also made most of the furniture and fittings used in the prison buildings.
I understand that they were working to commissioned orders for a very wide range of goods and products, which were then sold in government-run shops in local towns.
The proceeds were used to maintain, run and develop the prison.
All the buildings I saw in the complex were well maintained, clean, light and well ventilated.
The female inmates were mainly employed in a domestic capacity as cleaners, cooks, etc., or in the laundry.
Women made up only a minor proportion of the prison population in Geurrero and I was assured that this situation was reflected throughout Mexico.
The prisoners are allowed out of their cells from around 5.30 in the morning until 6.30 in the evening, during which time a majority of them would be involved in some type of work; this is because for every two days they work they can earn one day's remission of sentence.
I was told that they receive three meals a day and a very small amount of payment, although this did not appear to be directly related to the amount of work they did.
I did not have an opportunity to see any meals being served whilst I was there so I cannot be sure of either the quality or quantity.
On my way out, however, I saw dozens of plastic bags full of fruit and other food, which had been left by family and friends for the prisoners.
This extra food seems to have been provided more as a gesture by the family, than as basic sustenance.
Ample time is allowed for sport and recreation and various football pitches, basketball courts and other facilities were dotted around the complex.
There was even a well equipped playground which could have been dropped into any English park almost unnoticed but which looked rather incongruous in the centre of a Mexican prison complex.
Basic education now seems to play an increasingly important part in the rehabilitation of offenders.
The Geurrero Centre apparently  made every effort to ensure that all the inmates received at least some form of educational tuition during the period of their sentence.
Those inmates classed as illiterate were obliged to take a compulsory form of basic education, with the aim that they would at least be able to read and write by the time they were released.
Those offenders taking part in this more intense form of education were also expected to work, not towards a reduction in their sentence, but in order to support the education they were receiving.
This was apparently reasonably well received by the offenders involved, as even this basic standard of education would be sufficient to improve considerably their potential for employment and thus for higher earnings after their release.
I was told that the incidence of re-offending was very low but I was not given any actual figures in support of this.
Cell accommodation is divided into single or two-storey blocks, each comprising 60 to 80 cells of approximately 2m in width and 3 to 4m long, with a barred, ‘gate-type’ door at each end.
This allows at least a reasonable throughput of air; the mid-day temperatures are usually around 80 to 100°F, sometimes more.
Each cell housed two or, in some cases, three people.
There was little or no evidence of ‘home comforts’ in the cells, the walls of which were plain concrete, with cot-type beds and what really amounted to a hole in the wall to house each occupant's personal effects.
The only forms of decoration were photographs of family, children and, in a majority of cells, some form of religious symbol, usually a picture or statue of ‘Our Lady of Guadalupe’.
The cells did not have any form of integral sanitation and each block had a central toilet and shower unit.
At the time of my visit virtually all the cells were open and those prisoners in them were free to move around, certainly in the area of their own cells and blocks.
Virtually all the inmates I saw and spoke to were friendly, smiling and quite pleased to show me the work they were doing.
I certainly felt much more at ease moving around this institution by myself than I did when visiting some English prisons and institutions.
There was certainly not the constant locking, unlocking and clanging of doors nor was there the feeling of oppression that is so often felt when moving around most prisons.
The oppressive regime I had anticipated was not apparent and the whole complex seemed clean, active and designed as far as  possible to provide reasonable conditions and amenities for its inmates.
There were, however, no signs of television, a cinema or the usual indoor recreations.
Visitors are allowed on Thursdays and Sundays for just thirty minutes.
I was assured, though, that this time is seldom adhered to, with most visitors remaining for most of the afternoon.
After this visit to the Geurrero Centre, I discussed the prison and its regime with people both inside and outside the criminal justice process.
Geurrero cannot be described as ‘typical’ in that it does not include the most serious offenders, including those convicted of serious violence or large-scale drug offences.
But it does illustrate the trend towards the rehabilitation of offenders which the Mexican authorities seem to be making, and the increasing efforts which are being put in towards improving accommodation and educational facilities.
THE TEXAS DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS, USA
R.W. BURNHAM
When John Howard died, ‘Texas’ was known only to a small number of Mexicans, American Indians and the occasional settler who had been thrown out of, or wandered away from , the established ‘colonies’to the north and east.
In historically accurate terms these settled states had ceased to be colonies fourteen years before Howard's death, but that probably did not much matter south and west of the Red River which forms the north-east boundary of what was then known as Tejas, or Tehas.
More settlers of North European stock gradually moved into present day East Texas at the end of the eighteenth century.
A Spanish-dominated civilization had already spread north and east from Mexico.
There was a continual potential for conflict between the two cultures, which eventually came to a dramatic crisis in the San Antonio area.
The Spaniards had earlier established a chain of missions to ‘civilize’ the local population along the San Antonio River.
Those beautiful mission buildings are still a major feature of Texas architectural history.
One of them is called the Alamo and in 1836 became one of the shrines, not only of Texan history, but of the history of the United States.
The Mexicans, under General Santa Anna, tried to retake some of the land that the newcomers had taken over.
About 150 of those North European settlers chose to barricade themselves inside the Alamo Mission, turn it into a fortress, and to defy Santa Anna's army of around 5,000.
Instead of ignoring the Alamo and its small garrison, and pressing on to fight the main Texan army, Santa Anna decided to take the Alamo by storm.
He succeeded, and all the resisters, including the famous Davy Crockett, died.
Officially they are national heroes, but there are revisionist versions of history which make some, including Crockett, rather less heroic.
The stand at the Alamo, however, did its  job.
Santa Anna lost so much time and so many men in a pyrrhic victory, for which he need never have fought in the first place, that when he finally met the full Texan force under General Sam Houston he was utterly defeated.
Thereafter Texas became an independent country, with its own embassy in London, and ultimately a state of the Union.
That summary of early Texan history is included, not just for general interest, but to illustrate several factors which have always been characteristic of Texan culture, and so have influenced the history of prisons in the state.
These factors are: conflict between cultures; a high proportion of displaced people and difficult arrivals; speed of social change; and perhaps above all, and certainly the most publicized, violence.
People from other cultures have compared living in the United States with living in a speeded-up film.
That is perhaps strongest in California, where the feeling takes the form that the future has arrived before it was due.
In Texas it may be described as the past constantly almost catching up with the future, leaving no stable present time.
The Texas prison system may well have been one of the fastest expanding systems in recent history.
That makes it very different from the prisons and bridewells about which Howard wrote.
One of the themes running through The State of the Prisons is that with a few exceptions, neither numbers nor conditions of prisoners have changed very much since Howard first visited.
The ratio of prisoners, primarily adult males, to the population of Texas as a whole has usually been high, and higher than for most other American states.
Prisons are big business in Texas.
There can be few jurisdictions where the location of a major university programme was determined by the location of the oldest prison.
The prison population now stands at around 40,000, which was that of England and Wales prior to the 1980s increase, against a total state population of rather more than half that of England and Wales.
In keeping with the tradition of doing things in a big way, the Texas authorities have always built large prisons.
The Huntsville Unit, which is the original prison and is still in use, and known unofficially but universally as The Walls, accommodates close to 1,800.
Huntsville was then a small agricultural town, and the population of the state probably a lot less than one million.
Wandsworth and Pentonville, in London, with rather less capacity, were built at  about the same time to serve what was then the largest city in the world.
The Texas Department of Corrections (TDC) has continued to build big, and presumably Howard could not even have begun to imagine something like the Ellis I Unit, of over 2,000 beds.
In Ellis I there are more people (300) on death row, than the total in any single prison that Howard saw.
Death row is actually a prison within a prison.
These details are given to emphasize the enormous difference of scale between any problem Howard dreamed of and the problems facing recent TDC directors.
The size of the state in the early days of the administration of justice led to a remarkable form of attempted  committal to prison.
According to one of my sources, it is the origin of the American term ‘railroading’, which has long been used as a slang term throughout the USA to mean compelling somebody to do something they do not want to do, and for which the legal or other administrative justification is marginal or dubious.
In the late nineteenth century, the railroad network across the state was complete.
The story goes that trains from distant towns had special coaches attached (or there were even dedicated special trains) to bring those sentenced to imprisonment for serious offences to Huntsville.
Sometimes a resident of one of those towns was thought by one of his fellow citizens to be particularly obnoxious or dangerous, even though it was not possible to prove anything against him in law.
A few of his fellow citizens would wait until the train was about to depart, nobble him and throw him on the train, slip the guards a few dollars and wave goodbye.
When the train got to Huntsville, the prison authorities refused to admit him as there was no committal warrant.
He therefore had the choice of making a new home somewhere or making his way back to a town about whose public feelings he could have no doubt, but knowing that if he did not change his ways the whole thing might happen again.
It would be interesting to know the ‘success rates’ of such informal justice, but statistics are, understandably, lacking.
One long-standing feature of Texas prisons dating from the early times, and which occurred intermittently in many American prison administrations in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, was that of ‘leasing out’ prisons.
Under that system an entrepreneur would pay the state to utilize the labour of the prisoners, normally  by contracting them out to local farms.
That frequently led to abuses and indeed sometimes to bizarre results.
When in California, I was told that the site of San Quentin prison was determined by the fact that a leased prison hulk was inadequately tethered on the north-east side of San Francisco Bay.
During a violent storm it broke away and drifted westwards until it hit land on the barren headland of San Quentin.
It was easier to transport the guards there and order the convicts to start building their own new prison than to build new ships and take them back to Vallejo.
As with the railroading story, I could find no confirmation, but the story of privatized prisons floundering without control or direction across San Francisco Bay, landing close to where Sir Francis Drake's memorial plaque was later found, may not be without a criminological moral.
The starting-point of that digression in time and place was that of leased prisons and the problems they increasingly raised for a socially responsible legislature.
The development of a civil service style of correctional administration can serve as the starting-point for my main theme, a comparison of Howard's concerns with the changes, reforms and setbacks of prison administration in Texas since the Second World War.
We could start with a review of his most famous chapters at the beginning of The State of the Prisons , especially the chapters entitled: ‘General view of distress in prisons’; ‘Bad customs in prisons’; ‘Proposed improvements in the structure and management of prisons’.
Those chapters summarize his main concerns, which are then illustrated in the narrative of the text with descriptions of individual institutions.
As I discussed the history of changes in prisons with officials or ex-officials of TDC, or colleagues at the Criminal Justice Center, I came to think that the most logical order in which to look at the contemporary response to the questions that Howard raised was not the same as that which he followed in those chapters.
Therefore I have taken the different topics in the order that my sources thought appropriate and provided references to at least some of the specific instances of those problems that Howard gave in his text.
The main question to which I return intermittently throughout this chapter, and with which it concludes, is one raised by implication in Howard's writings, but not addressed directly by him.
That is the question of whether, in respect of prisons at least, people make the system what it is, or the system makes the people what they are.
The history of TDC in the last decades has provided a remarkable  case history of that problem, with examples of the arguments for and against each point of view.
Such a review naturally includes questions of staffing quality, rules and regulations, classification, control of different kinds of abuses, prison employment and cleanliness, system comparison and where ultimate decision-making power is located.
The first step in the modernization of TDC was to appoint someone to improve what was widely acknowledged to be an unacceptable situation.
Lee Simmons became director of TDC in 1930 with a reputation of being a hard but completely honest law enforcement officer.
The ‘straight cop’ took over the ‘bent screws’, but lasted only four years; the explanation given being that he was a catcher, not a keeper.
It seems a frequent theme in penal history that the two professions do not trust each other, at least as regards doing each other 's job.
After Simmons's departure in 1934 the situation deteriorated and escapes became a major problem, to such an extent that a most unusual political event occurred.
Some ten years later the main plank in the platform of Beauford Jester as candidate for State Governor was prison reform, and he was elected on that campaign issue.
Modern Texas prison administration essentially dates from the steps Jester took to ensure that the prisons were run by an accountable board of people with a strong social conscience.
Both the way he selected people and the status and accountability he gave them might have been suggested to him by John Howard.
Jester, his successor and the director they appointed, O.B.
Ellis, all placed their central emphasis on the quality of staff, and the higher the grade, the more the quality counted.
Ellis, according to his successor Beto, had two overriding overt concerns.
The first was to enable the prison system to feed and clothe the prisoners through its own efforts.
The second was with humane conditions in prisons, demonstrated above all by cleanliness.
Howard would surely not have objected to either, although the idea of a department of corrections would have been very strange to him and the idea that it could act as a system to feed and clothe itself would presumably have seemed a desirable but unreal and irrelevant objective.
Ellis was succeeded by Beto, who has become a man of considerable controversy, both with supporters and detractors, in writings about the history of prisons.
He was, and is, a strong advocate of the position that the right people make the system.
One recent  penal scholar, Di Julio, in his analysis of what is wrong with American prisons, regards Beto as a desirable role model (Di Julio 1987).
A recent book by Martin and Ekland-Olson is much less positive (Martin and Ekland-Olson 1987).
The reforms which have characterized the post-Ellis-Beto era derived from the actions of the believers in the supremacy of detailed legal guide-lines.
The focus of the next sections is on those areas where the Ellis-Beto doctrine is seen at its best, and when it dominated TDC policy for twenty-five years.
Ellis's obsessions, as noted, were self-sufficiency and cleanliness.
One big advantage of self-sufficiency in food and clothing was that the demand on the public purse was much reduced.
The state legislature was thereby able to be much more generous in capital grants for future building, and for improving the salaries of correctional officers.
The quality of staff was a recurring theme with Howard, and he placed emphasis on both appropriate remuneration (Howard 1792: 128, 129, 140, 158) and training (145, 173–4, 206, 222).
In Howard's time, the main problem in respect of remuneration was that the gaoler was expected to generate his own income, by what often amounted to extortion from those in his charge or their family and friends.
Howard was, therefore, in favour of a civil service system, although that concept was relatively new in the administration of Britain.
Texas faced a similar problem throughout the ‘leasing’ period of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
The standing of TDC officers as worthy of the wage of a respectable craftsman was not established until the Ellis era.
As an example, when Ellis died in 1962, a newly-recruited TDC guard received $256 per month with fringe benefits such as uniforms, and cannot have been highly regarded in a society which measures status by money.
Both Ellis and Beto were as proud of their success in raising the salary and status of guards as they were of any other achievement.
Howard would surely have approved of all that, but as so often in penal reform, the very advance of which the reformers were so proud led to an ironic and unforeseen development.
An urgent need arose in the late 1970s and early 1980s to recruit many new prison guards.
That crisis coincided with the beginning of an economic crisis, which saw south-east Texas in particular transformed within two years from one of the boom areas to one of the depressed areas of the USA.
For some decades, working for TDC had been a family tradition, and I met officials who were proud to be third generation prison men.
In the towns around the main prisons, above all Huntsville, a culture of loyalty to TDC and a commitment to integrity and consistency had become established.
The standards of humanity and gentility expected of guards, or shown towards prisoners, may not have been those of Alexander Paterson or the Howard League; but there were standards, which were informally learned and informally but forcefully demanded of the guards.
In the early 1980s that tradition was broken by the need for new guards in combination with the growing unemployment rate.
It is widely believed both within TDC and by its critics that the relatively high pay levels established by the reforming directors of the 1950s and 1960s led to applications by, and the recruitment of, men who did not know of or subscribe to the old codes.
The result was that the informal system of control by mutual understanding, with some mutual respect between prisoner and guard, was greatly weakened.
The same good pay and conditions also coincided with the equal opportunities legislation which declared, in essence, that for all practical purposes there is no difference between the sexes.
The recruitment of women therefore added to the degree of unsettling change experienced by the TDC system.
Women guards supervise showering and conduct body searches on male death row.
These guards seem unmoved, while many of the prisoners object, one can only speculate on what Howard's views would have been.
If there is a moral in the sequence of events as recounted above, it is that in penal reform there is always the potential for more influences to operate than those the planners have in mind.
Howard's second concern with the quality of staff was with training, although he did not use that word.
The improvement of the quality of work performed by criminal justice personnel through improved training has been much talked about and advocated since at least my own days as a trainee assistant governor almost thirty years ago, and probably well before that.
Examination of what is entailed and what is expected have produced ambivalent conclusions, less clear than the raw conviction that training is a good thing: but overall the evidence is favourable.
Beto has very definite ideas on this.
Pre-service training is essential so that the staff know the rules and how to work in a disciplined system.
In-service training is desirable only when it fulfils a felt need.
Staff in a contemporary prison service or department of corrections come to believe that  further training, or advanced training, or some other form of in-service training, is necessary if they are to become more ‘professional’.
One TDC guard remarked to me that it is like fibre in the diet.
You don't miss it until somebody tells you that you need it, then you regard it as indispensable.
It is easy and almost certainly wrong to be cynical about in-service training.
It is the only way yet devised to improve the professional morale and standing of a criminal justice agency, but, especially with lower ranking staff, it is extraordinarily difficult to demonstrate results.
Howard would have approved of the improvement in pay and conditions of service and greater emphasis on training but he might have been quite surprised at the eventual outcome of well-meaning initiatives.
He would probably have been less confused or surprised at the implementation of some of his other priorities.
One of the most fundamental of those was the importance of clearly-stated and widely publicized rules of conduct for both staff and prisoners (Howard 1792: 148, 152, 154, 166–9).
Howard continually pointed out the arbitrariness of prison discipline, and the fact that such an evil was made possible primarily by the absence of formal, written, and published rules.
He might have been surprised to know that before Ellis became director in 1950, the same was true in Texas.
The importance which Ellis laid upon the drafting and promulgation of such rules is generally regarded as one of his major contributions to the civilizing of Texas prisons.
In addition to his open priorities discussed above, Ellis took office with two unpublished goals: the elimination of brutality and the elimination of petty theft.
Both evils were perpetrated by both staff and prisoners.
The abuse of prisoners by staff was a serious problem before Ellis took over.
A major item in his creed was that prisons should be lawful.
Each is a mini-society, and any society should be safe for all the members of that society.
He considered that, since society had the right to lock people up, it had a corresponding obligation to ensure the safety of those locked up.
Critics of the Ellis-Beto era contend that they traded off abuse by staff for abuse by inmates, in order to achieve a controlled and disciplined prison environment.
That conflict of views has its fierce advocates on both sides, and I am neither well informed nor dispassionate enough to comment on it From the presumed perspective of John Howard, the Ellis-Beto administrations overall emerge with credit, because  they did insist on the publication of official rules, and that was a big breakthrough.
To refer once again to the unpredicted and possibly counter-productive side effects of the legal reform movement, the effect on the ‘rules’ question has been at most unfortunate in the eyes of many basic grade staff.
In the earlier regime it was accepted that rules had to be general to some extent, and open to change to allow for adaptation to changing circumstances.
After the courts intervened, the concern of the administration has to be not to leave itself open to any kind of charge of ignoring court rulings.
To quote an anonymous source: ‘The first rule in running prisons has always been to cover your arse.
It is now the second, third and fourth rule as well.’
In the more elegant terminology of another source, fossilization has set in and the push to drive out abuse has stifled the exercise of initiative.
One feature of prison rules as published in most administrations is that they require different provisions for different categories of prisoner.
The concept of different categories requires the concept of classification, and that was one of Howard's preoccupations (Howard 1792: 127, 219).
In his day, the main problem, to which he referred frequently, was the separation of adults from juveniles.
In TDC institutions that separation was established and maintained many decades ago.
It is apparently still the case that in some local, county gaols adults and juveniles are housed together, sometimes for periods of several weeks.
The little evidence I could obtain suggested that the explanation was the usual one in criminal justice short-comings: a rising demand not met with increasing resources.
Also the problem is increasingly severe the more local the gaol.
Howard might well have been impressed by the importance given to classification by TDC, despite the fact that it seems to be unfashionable in western European administrations.
Its associations with the treatment model, which has been so widely rejected, render it unacceptable.
TDC has a Diagnostic Unit through which all newly sentenced prisoners pass.
Beto describes diagnostic units as the Ford Edsells of American corrections, although he does not claim to have invented the metaphor.
He still defends their use on the grounds that ‘For selfish reasons a prison administrator needs to know as much as he can about each prisoner, especially incoming prisoners.’
The priority of the TDC classification scheme is to establish the needs of each individual prisoner.
That diagnosis is not  so much for therapeutic reasons as for administrative and management purposes.
The classification exercise provides another arena for the conflicting points of view as to the relative importance of good people as opposed to good systems.
It is a debate which presumably would have appealed to Howard although his own views seem to have been that they are equally important.
In the history of TDC since the Second World War, the struggle for supremacy of the contrasting viewpoints has been a Leitmotiv .
The Ellis-Beto-Estelle (Estelle was Beto's successor) era was one in which the primacy of getting good people to do the important jobs was unquestioned.
Since the Federal Court in the Eastern District of Texas, and subsequently the Fifth Circuit Federal Appellate Court seated in New Orleans intervened, the pendulum has swung and the emphasis has been on detailed rules to cover all contingencies, the implementation of which is far less dependent on the quality of individual personnel.
One of Beto's constant themes is that classification is something which can be carried out properly only by staff who have both human insight in general and a specific knowledge of the prison system and the background of most of its clients.
Classification by computer, howsoever sophisticated the algorithm, is not appropriate.
It is notable how classification is used as an instrument of control.
That is clearly true and officially acknowledged in TDC.
It could well become equally true in other systems as they grow to the size, complexity and pressures of TDC.
In TDC the classification status of all prisoners is reviewed at least once a year, and sometimes as often as every ninety days.
The decision resulting from that review can lead to a change of housing, work, and other living arrangements within an institution, or a change of institution.
Not surprisingly it is regarded as an important and effective management tool.
The visibility and accountability of the decision, or lack thereof, might have caused Howard some anxiety, but again he was not faced with proposing reforms for a prison system anything like as complex as TDC.
Another of Howard's themes was the damage done by mind-altering substances in prison (Howard 1792: 126, 135, 145, 159, 234).
That rather ponderous phrase is used because in an unknown but not insignificant number of contemporary prisons the problem still exists, but the actual substance has changed.
Howard protested  against the use of alcohol in prisons, whereas the substances of abuse today in most administrations are drugs which are taken in small quantities and therefore can be smuggled in.
The sale of beer by the gaoler in late eighteenth-century Britain was apparently universal — Howard called it the ‘tap’ and seems to have regarded it as a necessary evil.
His aim was to eliminate the importation of distilled spirits, for which his main rationale was the damage they did to health.
That damage occurred in two ways.
First was the direct effect of the dosage level on the general health of the prisoners.
Second, and less obvious, was the diversion of resources from their ‘proper’ use of obtaining good food, to that of acquiring the drink.
The situation in TDC today is very different.
Food is provided by the administration, while no alcohol is allowed, and it is difficult to smuggle it in.
The main anxiety about diet which I heard expressed, at least by the administration, was that with the introduction of ‘fast food’ facilities, prisoners were showing the same dietary self-destructive tendencies as young teenagers traditionally have done.
They prefer ‘junk food’ laden with additives, cholesterol and calories, but with very low nutrition value, to the less exciting but more nutritious food offered by the institution.
Abuse of alcohol seems to be almost non-existent.
TDC officials believe that TDC is less badly affected than other prison administrations with respect to the smuggling in of narcotics and other drugs.
Regular and thorough cell searches reveal syringes, hypodermic needles and other components of ‘the works’ only rarely.
The drug problem is mostly limited to substances which produce recognizable behavioural patterns, normally some sort of muddled state or light-headedness.
The explanation is either imported marijuana or the diversion of inhalants such as glue and paint stripper from the workshops.
The sudden increase in staff from outside the prison culture may have resulted in there being more guards who themselves use marijuana in a limited recreational way, and who may not be averse to sharing a few joints with their charges.
While senior officials recognize this as a problem requiring constant monitoring, the level of anxiety about it remains low, and it is not seen as the forerunner of a future threat.
While substance abuse has changed in both scope and nature, one of the other problems that vexed Howard (1792: 124, 128, 216) is still a major, and similar, difficulty for the TDC authorities.
That  is the need to provide employment for prisoners.
In medieval Christendom the appropriate saying was ‘The devil makes work for idle hands’.
The idea was expressed in several languages.
The version with which I was introduced to my housemaster role in the prison service by an experienced principal officer was ‘One thing more difficult than a busy Borstal boy is an idle Borstal boy.’
I believe that it is as close as we can ever come to a universal truth in the history of prisons — that lack of work for prisoners is the greatest cause of indiscipline, unrest and unhappiness among the prisoners.
Idleness is feared there with good reason, and also to an obsessive degree, for, as has been observed, if men believe something to be true, it is true in its consequences.
One of Howard's obsessions was indeed that idleness and unemployment was the cause of many of the problems facing a prison administration.
He would find an immediate echo in the different administrative offices of TDC in 1989.
I have rarely if ever met a prison administrator, who does not subscribe to the doctrine that work for prisoners is the best training for life after release, and that it is also the best mechanism for running a humane and tidy prison.
Neither have I come across much evidence to show that they are wrong.
One of the reasons advanced for the absence of meaningful work for prisoners in some administrations is that of the resentment of the outside world.
The products of prisons are seen as taking over the market for the products of honest working men.
That argument has been very forceful in some countries for the last three or four decades at least.
Another of the ironies of penal reform is that it seems not to apply in Texas, one of the spiritual centres of capitalism.
The weak tradition of trade unionism in Texas has been a major cause for the profession of the prison officer to develop in a very different way from in Europe.
That same absence of union power has resulted in the absence of opposition to the marketing of TDC inmate products, either cotton measured in hundreds of tonnes or individually carved armadillos.
Howard was strongly opposed to prison unemployment in the different circumstances with which he was familiar.
He would have disapproved of it equally in contemporary western Europe and contemporary TDC, but he would have had to look for quite different explanations for its occurrence.
Agricultural hard labour, primarily the cultivation of cotton, had long been a prominent feature of TDC activity.
The policy of Ellis, to feed and clothe the prison population from its own resources, has already been mentioned.
Beto continued the policy but expanded the scope of inmate productivity to include building on a large scale.
For many years new TDC plant, and some other related buildings, were built by prisoners; this included making the bricks.
One of those buildings is the Criminal Justice Center at Sam Houston State University.
The prisoners who built it left their own rather macabre memento by incorporating a hangman's noose into one of the rafters, with a nearby door leading into empty space and a four metre drop.
In the late 1970s the policy of building by prisoners was abandoned and the work put out to contract, as in most other jurisdictions.
The usual explanation offered was the sudden need for more prisons.
That need arose partly from the increasing number of convictions and sentences, and partly from the measures necessary to satisfy the newly-imposed court requirements.
Prison labour may be efficient in terms of costs, but it is slow and requires a high degree of commitment of the staff at all levels.
Organizing prisoner labour is, in fact, a very demanding job and one reason for the decline in its use was the effort it required of staff, including high level staff, to make it work properly.
Whatever the reason, the practice has now largely disappeared, and prisoner idleness is at a much higher level.
As we can be sure that Howard would have approved of the constructive use of prisoners' time and energy and training in work habits, so we can probably also assume that he would have been disappointed in and disapproving of the latest trend.
One aspect of the TDC policy which seems to me to be both enlightened and enduring is the trouble which is taken to identify markets for work projects, particularly from the public sector, which again may sound surprising in capitalist Texas.
For instance, one small independent public sector agency, the local school bus system, has made a contract for the maintenance of the buses, with another public sector agency, TDC.
While the two agencies save each other money, they also keep out private business.
The end result is curiously close to the situation which might be expected in a much more left-wing administration and with a high degree of efficiency and accountability.
The TDC administration is increasingly gearing its work programmes to the requirements of the State Purchasing Agency, as well as the expanding parts of the private sector.
A successful field of trade training for prisoners is computer maintenance and utilization.
Thus, while painting and decorating courses have rather faded because people do not want ex-prisoners inside their houses to decorate them, it is apparently much more acceptable to have an ex-prisoner in your house to repair your word-processor.
At the time of writing, I understand that the computer training course has the highest rate of job placement for discharged prisoners of any vocational training programme in Texas prisons.
Along with unemployment and idleness, Howard hated dirt and over-crowding (Howard 1792: 135–7, 142–3, 151, 171–2).
Beto is again a fellow spirit, for his recipe for the basic necessary conditions for a good prison, or any other total institution, consists of four absences:
1
Absence of idleness;
2
Absence of noise;
3
Absence of filth;
4
Absence of odour; the smell of disinfectant is a bad sign.
It is a way of simulating cleanliness while actually covering up other odours of far less salubrious origin.
Cleanliness in TDC institutions has been a priority with the administration since Ellis's time at least.
It was ensured primarily through the ‘building tender’ system: Some prisoners had a special status, half-recognized officially, derived from their job of ‘tending the building’(hence the name), that is, to make sure that the cell blocks were kept clean.
They were rather like the red-bands or trusties in British prisons.
Their role included keeping an eye on the conduct of their fellows.
Perhaps in accordance with the less gentle side of Texas culture, ‘keeping an eye on’ was extended to forceful physical control, including arranging for ‘necessary’beatings; and this abuse of power brought the ‘building tender’system into disrepute.
The issue became a central topic in the court rulings of recent years and the ‘building tender’ role was abolished.
The cause of cleanliness has, however, not suffered because the function has been reintroduced, with strong safeguards.
Certain prisoners, known as ‘support service inmates’, who have no authority, are responsible for cleanliness and some minor clerical work.
But they are no longer the hard men who unofficially run the prison.
One cause of overcrowding in contemporary prisons, not only in Texas, has been the rise in the number of sentences of imprisonment imposed by the courts.
Howard protested about overcrowding in conditions of a more or less stable prison population.
The extent to which it could have been foreseen and thus pre-empted by a more alert administration, which tried to foresee coming trends, seems to be a matter of disagreement among prison administrators, critics and researchers in many jurisdictions.
Beto is very proud, and I think justifiably so, that in the early 1960s he asked the Texas legislature at every session for a considerable amount of money to build for the future, and received it.
Thus TDC was able to cope without overcrowding with the inexorable but still moderate increase in demand for capacity during the period 1955 to 1975.
It is less sure that anyone in 1975 could have foreseen the dramatic increase in the demand for places in the ten years to follow.
Likewise, if they had foreseen it, persuading political authorities to react on anything like the required scale and at the required speed would have been very difficult.
I think it can be said fairly, that the management response, in a political climate moving steadily to the right, was always likely to be too little too late: but that observation applies in many jurisdictions other than Texas, and has the advantage of being based on hindsight.
The need for more prisons has appeared in many jurisdictions over the last fifteen years.
If the overcrowding which Howard so decried is not to become worse, let alone be diminished, either courts must change their sentencing practices or more prisons must be built (Howard 1792: 170, 221, 224–5).
There are, of course, the alternatives that people behave better and commit less crime; or that the police become less effective and catch fewer villains.
But the former seems regrettably unlikely and the latter, over all, undesirable.
More prisons entail more ground on which to build them.
Public resistance to having a new prison near them is a common experience of administrations.
It is known in Texas by the increasingly common term of NIMBYism —‘Not In My Back Yard’.
Howard might well have experienced some kind of contemporary equivalent, and therefore, have been interested in the latest turn of events in Texas.
The effect on TDC of the change in the employment pattern of the state when the oil boom failed has already been mentioned.
One discovery in the wake of that economic crisis by local communities is  that prisons mean jobs, and a general boost to the local economy.
I understand that more local communities have applied to TDC to be considered as ‘host’ towns for new prisons than TDC has plans to build them.
The belief -that unemployment increases both crime and the prison population independently as well as directly has long been held by criminologists of different persuasions.
While the evidence for the validity of the hypothesis is much debated, the evidence against it is almost non-existent.
It seems that in the case of Texas there is yet another irony of penal reform: unemployment increases the prison population, but also makes it possible to provide the new prisons for which the need has been created.
Alas, there are no grounds, literally, for optimism on the part of European prison administrations from that example.
There is still a lot of spare or marginally used land in Texas.
The increasing control of TDC by the Texas courts has been referred to several times already.
The crucial case, something of a watershed in Texas prison history, was Ruiz v.
Estelle .
It was first brought in 1972, but its implications became clear only several years later.
The case was so complicated that it has already generated at least two books (Crouch and Marquart 1989, Martin and Ekland-Olson 1987) and more might be on the way.
It would be appropriate here simply to give a brief outline of events, and then limit any review to the ways in which it is relevant to John Howard and his cause.
There is a much stronger tradition in American society than in British of rectifying perceived private wrongs by means of litigation.
When the defendant is a public body of some kind, the chief executive officer is quite often named in the law suit.
When Ruiz v.
Estelle appeared in the court lists in front of Federal Judge Justice, it seemed a fairly run-of-the-mill event, for several prisoners had filed suits before.
Ruiz sued TDC for violations of his rights under the first, fourth and eighth amendments to the Constitution of the United States.
The state decided to defend the charges.
Opinion in Texas prison circles, with hindsight, seems to be that TDC should simply have admitted that various provisions for prisoners were unsatisfactory and inadequate.
It could then have pleaded force of circumstances and lack of resources, not as a defence but as an excuse.
As it was Judge Justice had to rule against it with all the authority of the Supreme Court of Texas.
Instead of a telling-off, with time to put  things right, TDC found itself under a much more strict court order with which it could not negotiate and which gave it little flexibility.
Through some clever legal work on behalf of other prisoners bringing litigation, various other cases were incorporated into the Ruiz decision.
The results of the decision are still making themselves felt.
As far at I could judge it, the general feeling among the present day staff is that there have been some gains to both the prisoners and the system, and some losses, but the gains have been bought dearly and slowly and the losses may be irreversible.
The main gains are a better staff-inmate ratio, and a greater focus on programmes for inmate recreation and on putting the prisoners' time to better use, apart from compulsory work.
The main losses have been in the relations between staff and the prisoners.
Most prison reformers, including Howard, have emphasized that any rehabilitative effect which prison may have will derive primarily from the quality of the relationship built up between a respected member of staff and an individual prisoner.
It seems that on human relationships within the prison the long-term effects of the Ruiz decision have been mostly negative.
I should emphasize that the summary account given above is not at all official, and has no claim to comprehensiveness or objectivity.
I have simply reported the reactions of various past and present TDC officials with whom I spoke, and of some of my colleagues on the faculty of the Criminal justice Center.
Those interested in an authoritative and detailed account are referred to the books cited, but are also advised that the whole issue is one on which sides have been taken, and disinterested views are rare.
The significance of the Ruiz case and its aftermath for any analysis of the significance of the work of John Howard lies within the example it gives of a certain approach to penal reform.
To pick up on an earlier theme, there are two main traditions in penal reform.
The first, stretching from Howard through Paterson to Ellis and Beto, is, as observed, that the crucial step is to find the right people, particularly for the top jobs.
With good men, goodness will trickle down, and discretion will be wisely used to allow flexibility and fairness to coexist, even in a prison.
The critics of that view ask what happens if, or indeed when, goodness fails to trickle down far enough or fast enough.
They tend to answer by pointing to such undesirable developments as the ‘building tender’ system.
The alternative to the ‘good men’ model is the ‘good rules’or  good system model.
The unfolding of the implications of the Ruiz decision illustrate the weaknesses of that approach.
Perhaps the most important of these is the difficulty of long-term planning, because it is impossible to predict what events will be brought before the courts, and how the courts will decide upon them.
There is a permanent element of uncertainty built into the situation, which undermines the willingness of administrators to make long-range commitments or plan for flexibility.
It tends to encourage any tendency to the suppression of initiative, and to foster cautious conservatism, perhaps to the point of atrophy.
I have represented both approaches simplistically, to draw out the contrast specifically because it seems that Howard favoured both approaches, but did not have the experience of both to see the contradictory implications.
For instance, ‘I am persuaded that a good gaoler can more easily manage his prisoners by humane attention than by severity and heavy irons’(Howard 1792: 145)(writing about Maidstone County Gaol).
Four pages later, when writing about Aylesbury Bridewell, he said, ‘the prisoners here wished that the magistrates had made rules also for them’(Howard 1792: 149).
(The ‘also’ refers to the fact that the magistrates had made rules for the county gaol close by.)
It is possible to infer from these passages and others in The State of the Prisons that Howard believed in both the good man theory, and in control by the courts.
On the local scale in which he was operating, the two approaches may indeed have been symbiotic.
My experience in Texas and with other large contemporary prison systems leads me to wonder whether in future the best we can hope for is to obtain some kind of a mix of the two, and avoid the worse features of each.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
I wrote this chapter as the George J. Beto Chair Professor at the Criminal Justice Genter, Sam Houston State University, Huntsville, Texas for the spring of 1989.
I wish to record my gratitude to the Dean and Faculty of the Center for that opportunity, and for my professionally valuable time in Huntsville.
George Beto, now in semi-retirement but still teaching at the Center, is one of the main actors in the story.
He was also my main source of information, and a personal friend; he could be considered the co-author of this chapter.
In so far as it comments extensively on his main life work, usually but not always positively, it seems more appropriate that his contribution, while fully acknowledged, should be classified as ‘informal’.
He also put me in touch with the other two main Texas Department of Corrections (TDC) or academic sources whose knowledge I have used.
I should mention in particular Associate Warden J. Lampert of TDC, and my faculty colleagues at the Criminal Justice Center.
JOHN HOWARD
A biographical note
DICK WHITFIELD
The bi-centenary of the death of John Howard in 1990 has given rise to a number of commemorative events in varying parts of the world, of which this book is one.
That in itself is some indication of the influence his life and work still bring to bear — and, perhaps, an equal indication of the lack of progress which makes it still necessary.
His book,The State of the Prisons , a uniquely systematic description of conditions in British and European prisons in the last part of the eighteenth century, is an astonishing monument.
In the course of this odyssey, and at a time when travel was usually uncomfortable and often dangerous, he travelled nearly eighty thousand kilometres on horseback and spent some £30,000 of his own money in his determination to improve prison conditions; he entered prisons in disguise in defiance of governments who feared the power of his pen; was captured by pirates; quelled a riot single handed and more than earned John Wesley's tribute to him as ‘one of the greatest men in Europe’.
This account of his life and work is included as a reminder of how one man, from unremarkable beginnings, could have such a remarkable impact in a sphere characterized only by indifference.
Sir Walter Scott later wrote, ‘Without courage, there cannot be truth; and without truth there can be no other virtue.’
Howard had the courage to put his conviction into practice.
He saw the pains of imprisonment and used truth as the agent of change, not from any intellectual theory or ideology but through a sense of compassion for other human beings.
His own story provides a fitting conclusion for this book.
Reliable facts about John Howard's early life are hard to come by; his birth, on 2 September 1726, is variously located at Enfield in  Middlesex and Hackney in East London.
What follows are the most reliable facts which his early biographies (John Aiken, 1792 and James Baldwin Brown, 1823) provided and which have subsequently been checked and accepted, as far as possible, from his own works and from later accounts.
The Howard family background was solid, middle class and prosperous.
Howard's father was a London merchant and small business man who specialized in upholstery and carpets and the family also owned a small farm at Cardington in Bedfordshire, some 80 km north of London.
John's formal education began at the age of six, when he was sent to the school of a Mr Worsley in Hertford.
It continued at Mr John Eames's Moorfields Dissenting Academy in London, but it seems that young Howard did not take readily to formal learning and to the end of his life he remained only indifferently literate.
His published works were normally edited by a friend before being submitted for printing.
He did not proceed to university in his seventeenth year but was instead apprenticed for £630 to the London wholesale grocery firm of Newnham and Shipley, in Watling Street It was a large indenture payment and coming, as it did, soon after his father's death in March 1743, was probably intended to secure a profitable mercantile future for him.
It was certainly a comfortable start; his allowance permitted him an apartment, a body servant and two horses.
However, he got out of the commitment and at the age of 20 embarked on the first of many journeys to Europe.
It seems to have been an independent version of the Grand Tour and was an early indication of the restless urge to travel which he never lost.
Howard later said that ‘my continuing long…in any place lowers my spirits’, and he tried to cure what was described as ‘a species of nervous fever and of a general weakness of the whole system’ by visiting resorts such as Bristol Hot Wells.
It was a debilitating time and he felt he survived it for two reasons — a ‘rigorous regime’, which included a vegetarian diet, and the devoted nursing of his widowed landlady, Sarah Lordore (or Lardeau) at his lodgings in Stoke Newington.
They married on 15 October 1753, but it proved to be a short-lived union for she died only two years later.
Shortly afterwards Howard left Stoke Newington and moved back to central London, to St Pauls Churchyard, where he owned several houses in the neighbourhood.
His reaction to his new situation was perhaps predictable — he  decided to travel again, both for interest and to reflect on his own future.
Early in 1757 he sailed for Portugal, intending to view the results of Lisbon's great earthquake but his ship, the Hanover , was captured by a French privateer and passengers and crew were all taken prisoner and held in France, first at Brest and then at Morlaix.
John Howard became the spokesman for the group and was eventually released on parole to return to England to negotiate the exchange and release of his fellow-prisoners — a task he successfully accomplished.
There followed a rather more conventional period where his activities seem to have differed little from the other young gentlemen of his day; he studied scientific works on medicine and the natural sciences and pursued a particular interest in taking thermometer readings under varying conditions, including some from the craters of Italian volcanoes.
In 1756 he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society and he continued his temperature recordings, contributing to its journal on three occasions.
His second marriage was more conventional.
His bride Henrietta Leeds was a distant cousin, then aged 32.
She came from an eminent legal family and the wedding took place at Croxton, Cambridgeshire, where her family had a home, on 2 May 1758.
Perhaps it was this legal background which encouraged Howard to enter into a formal agreement with Henrietta which laid down that ‘to prevent altercations about those little matters which he had observed to be the chief grounds of uneasiness in families — he should always decide’.
How much Henrietta kept to the terms of the arrangement we do not know.
The couple returned to the Howard estate at Cardington in Bedfordshire at first but moved for a time to Lymington on the Hampshire coast later, for the sake of her health.
Henrietta's frail constitution could not withstand the rigours of childbirth, however, and after seven years of marriage she died soon after giving birth to their son, John.
The infant John was to become the disappointment of his father's life.
Little is known for certain about his early upbringing or education although we do know that John Howard was criticized for both neglecting him (because of his many absences) and for imposing an unduly repressive regime when he was at home.
John, Junior, went to school at Nottingham and — briefly — to the University of Edinburgh.
It was at St John's College, Cambridge, which he entered in the summer of 1784 that matters really came to a head, however.
He was dismissed for gross misconduct, which seems to have  centred on drug taking and homosexual activities.
The following year, while Howard was on a tour of prisons in Europe which was to last 14 months, his son became psychotic.
He was committed to a private asylum in Leicester, where he remained until his death in 1799.
The seven years of his second marriage were a stable and satisfying period for Howard and the time when he largely established himself as a country gentleman.
He became a model landlord, a horticulturalist (he won a gold medal from the Royal Society for some successful experiments with a variety of potatoes) and he began to put into practice some of the notions of public service which he felt appropriate to his station in life.
He became the road supervisor for his parish and oversaw the construction of a unique causeway road to Cardington; the model cottages on his estate for industrious and sober tenants were much admired and his considerable energy and interest in education were put to good use locally.
Cardington parish at that time was a small agricultural community of some 900 people, mostly concentrated in Cardington village or the three surrounding hamlets.
Most were labourers and were tenants of either Howard or the lord of the manor, Samuel Whitbread.
Howard, who was becoming a country gentleman with some town property (as opposed to his father, who would have seen himself as a London merchant with a country house), set about enlarging and redecorating his ‘country seat’.
But it was the ability to become a socially responsible landlord which gave him most satisfaction.
Some two dozen of his tenants were re-housed in new brick, thatched houses, each with its own garden, and he was careful to look after their employment, health and education needs in return for steady work, church attendance and sober habits.
By 1782 he was paying for 16 boys and 7 girls aged 4 to 11 to attend the local school, and contributing money to build the local workhouse.
After his wife died, Howard again took to travelling; but Cardington was now firmly established as his base and he had sufficient esteem in the eyes of his neighbours to be appointed High Sheriff of Bedfordshire in 1773.
So began the chain of events which ensured that his name remains so widely known, two centuries later, because with the title of High Sheriff came the responsibility for the county gaol.
Most High Sheriffs regarded this responsibility as purely nominal, impinging rarely and normally only when a new gaoler had to be found.
The gaoler was appointed, made his living as best as he could from bribes, favours, anxious relatives and profits from the already  meagre food allocation — and was allowed to get on with it.
Yet everyone knew of the abuses which had grown, flourished and even became institutionalized in this laissez faire prison system.
There were probably around 5,000 prisoners on any one day in England at that time, spread between almost 250 gaols, prisons and houses of detention.
Up to 500 were in the largest establishment, Kings Bush Prison in London, but most were in small town and provincial lock-ups in which only a handful of prisoners were kept.
Many of the smaller gaols formed the rear of public houses with the publican doubling his duties with that of gaoler.
To avoid the window tax many were either devoid or severely deficient in natural light.
That, in many ways, was the least of the problems.
Among the customs prevalent in gaols were those such as garnish, fotting or chummage, which all gave the same message to newcomers —‘pay or strip’.
Those having no money were forced to give up their clothes and sleep on the bare floor, often with fatal results.
Prisoners were loaded with irons, which made walking and sleeping painful or near impossible; gaolers would, of course, grant dispensation for those who could pay sufficient to have them removed.
Howard, writing in 1775, notes:
Worst of all were the arbitrarily imposed ‘delivery’ or discharge fees which often meant innocent people spending substantial periods in prison (having been found not guilty) until hard-pressed relatives raised the necessary cash for release and the gaoler was prepared to let them go.
The net result of a system which mixed young and old, debtors and criminals, men and women, first offenders and old lags indiscriminately was, inevitably, that prisoners were exploited, brutalized and deprived of even the few rights that the law allowed them.
In turn, prisoners survived by exploiting and  brutalizing their weaker fellows, thereby reinforcing all the anti-social tendencies which had driven them there.
Howard probably knew some of this, even if vaguely, long before he became High Sheriff.
Most of his contemporaries would have shrugged their shoulders and let it remain as part of the natural order of things.
Instead, Howard visited Bedford Gaol and, shocked by what he saw, determined to do something about it.
He was particularly disturbed by the practice of detaining prisoners until their ‘board and lodging’ fees had been paid to the gaoler and wondered why a salary could not be paid to avoid the corruption inherent in the fee system.
It was typical of the thoroughness of his approach that he immediately decided to visit sixteen gaols in nearby counties so that he could gauge the extent of the evil, look for alternative solutions and make out a proper case for reform.
It was a shocking experience and to the abuses of the gaolers was added the deadly lottery of gaol fever and smallpox, pneumonia and diphtheria.
Of gaol fever, which we now know as typhus, Howard later wrote:
This was no understatement: the problem went back at least a century to the ‘Black Assize’ at Oxford where ‘all who were present died in 40 hours; the Lord Chief Baron, the Sheriff and about 300 more’(Pettifer 1939: 17).
In 1730, at the Somerset Assizes, the deadly fever similarly affected judges, barristers' clerks and prisoners until several hundred were dead, and in 1750 there was a virulent outbreak at the Old Bailey.
Among those present at the trials, the Lord Mayor, two judges, an alderman, an under-sheriff and fifty others, from prisoners to jury-men, all perished.
Howard subscribed to the contemporary theory that the disease was transmitted by vapours (it is, in fact, caught by man through the bites of body lice) and well knew how much at risk he put himself  each time he entered the noxious cells.
A handkerchief drenched in vinegar was often all that could be done but he added, ‘I seldom enter an hospital or prison before breakfast; in an offensive room I avoid drawing my breath deeply; and on my return sometimes wash my mouth and hands.’
The emphasis in Howard's books on simple hygiene, on ventilation, sanitation and the whitewashing of interior walls is hardly surprising.
Some biographers have commented on the excessive detail in which he considers every part of the physical aspects of imprisonment — the air supply and water and sewage arrangements, bathing, sterilization of verminous clothing, beds, bedding and diet.
Yet Howard saw, all too often, that the effect of a prison sentence might be health so broken that the ex-prisoner was unemployable.
There were other issues, too.
‘In some gaols you see’, wrote Howard, ‘boys of twelve or fourteen eagerly listening to the stories told by practised and experienced criminals, of their adventures, successes, stratagems and escapes.’
Howard not only proposed segregation by sex and of hardened felons from the younger, more tractable ones; he proposed day rooms, useful work and single cells.
These were not the ideals of a humane but impracticable observer — Howard pursued the problem with unusual rigour and much to the amazement of many of his friends.
Within a year he had given detailed and authoritative evidence to the House of Commons and been instrumental in the passage of two bills which abolished gaolers' fees and enabled counties to pay for a proper service; which allowed discharged defendants to be set at liberty in open court; and which not only improved sanitation and health arrangements but made it obligatory for justices to have a concern for the health of prisoners.
It was a startling achievement in such a short time.
Howard was not only thanked by Parliament for his humanity and zeal; he even had copies of the Act printed at his own expense and distributed to all gaol keepers.
In doing so, he probably realized how difficult the process of change was likely to be.
The new regulations were, at first, systematically evaded by all those with vested interests and he recognized that to pursue the path he had begun he was going to have to reinforce the need for change again and again.
During 1775 he continued prison visiting in England and expanded his enquiries to the continent.
Two years later his most famous work,The State of the Prisons in England and Wales, with preliminary observations and an  account of some foreign prisons , was published.
It provides an extraordinarily careful and detailed picture and records — factually and unemotionally — the abuses which characterized the whole system.
Above all, he made sensible, measured recommendations for improvement.
As noted earlier, many of these concerned the design, construction and physical requirements, but he had an equal amount to say about the administrative aspects.
Pressing for the abolition of the pernicious fee system had been an obvious target but he also pressed for liquor taps to be banned and the sale of drink to inmates to be closely regulated; for the gaolers to be resident at the gaol instead of offering only minimal supervision if they lived away from it; for the provision of chaplains and doctors and the detailing and publishing of prison rules and regulations.
He also advocated the appointment of prison inspectors and made it clear that he expected them to be as thorough as he himself had been, probing every corner and speaking with every prisoner.
His great virtue was that he did not rely on a single visit, but frequently returned after a period of years and was able to comment on progress — or lack of it— and the way in which new legislation was being implemented.
He remained an extraordinarily influential one-man pressure group and continued to give evidence on prison conditions to the House of Commons.
Howard had to deal with criticism, too.
The usual views were advanced — that he would make prison too ‘soft’ and too attractive; that treating lawbreakers well would encourage more crime and that prisoners were undeserving and irredeemable, anyway.
He met these full on.
He was adamant that his proposals would not destroy the deterrent value of prisons; on the contrary, the prohibition of all ‘riotous amusement’ would ensure that they were ‘sufficiently irksome and disagreeable, especially to the idle and profligate’.
His statement on the handling of prisoners is worth quoting in full:
Howard practised what he preached.
During one of his European tours he arrived at a prison in the Savoy where a full-scale riot was in progress and two warders had already been killed.
Despite vehement advice to stay out, he insisted on entering the prison on his own, where the calmness and mildness of his approach enabled negotiations to begin.
He listened to grievances, gave some measured advice of his own and enabled a savage dispute to be settled by both sides with dignity.
Howard's reputation in Europe was, if anything, more influential than at home.
He visited prisons in France, Holland, Austria, Prussia, Denmark, Sweden and Russia — but it took time to establish his authority and certainly his relationships with administrators and staff were often initially imbued with deep suspicion or outright opposition.
He had to use subterfuge and bluff on many occasions, and was not above resorting to disguise.
He sometimes smuggled in a small set of balance scales in order to be able to weigh the prisoners, rations when he discovered how much the system was open to abuse; he was also quite capable of openly exploiting the rules, if needed.
Refused admission to French prisons, he discovered an ancient regulation which permitted entry to those giving alms to the prisoners, so promptly made use of it.
In fact, only three significant prisons remained unvisited by Howard: the Bastille, the Prison of the Inquisition in Rome and the Doge's Prison in Venice.
Elsewhere, his reputation and his persistence opened all gates, even in Tsarist Russia.
The State of the Prisons went through four editions as Howard's travels and experience grew and a second book,An Account of the Principal Lazarettos in Europe , reflected his later interest in military hospitals, lazarettos for the sick, and ways of combating the plague.
He was very much involved in the process of publication as this account makes clear:
It was a spartan regime.
Howard himself told an interviewer in 1789 that his daily diet consisted of ‘two penny rolls with butter or sweetmeats, one pint of milk, five or six cups of green tea and at bedtime a roasted apple’.
Although tolerant of the religious beliefs of others, his belief in the work ethic and his intolerance of alcohol made him insist on a stern regime for others.
There is a record of a severe lecture he delivered to Capuchin monks in Prague whom he found were living far more expansively than his own abstemious style would permit.
The cost of his travels and his books (many of which were distributed free or sold at a subsidized price) was heavy.
His annual income when he died was £496, which may seem a fortune compared with the £20 earned annually by a farm labourer but was modest compared with that of most country gentlemen.
His son's incarceration at the Belle Grove Asylum cost £200 per year and by the 1780s he was having to dispose of properties in London and Middlesex in order to pay for his European journeys.
For the final tour he even borrowed £1,000, interest free, from his friend and neighbour, Samuel Whitbread.
In all, between 1773 and 1790, he is reckoned to have spent £30,000 of his own money and to have devoted a third of his time to his crusade to record and improve prison conditions.
This short, thin, sallow man went quietly and doggedly about his business; observant, methodical, fired by religious enthusiasm and a passionate conviction until his message  was too insistent to be denied.
He believed in self-reformation, a voluntary rather than a coercive process, and wrote:
Howard saw many of the practices he wanted to introduce already being used in Europe.
In Holland, he reported that ‘there are so many rooms, that each prisoner is kept separate’; in Switzerland felons had a room to themselves ‘that they might not tutor one another’.
He added:
Holland was the country that impressed him most:
Howard's influence as a kind of unofficial gadfly and inspector of prisons was significant; his parliamentary and legislative contribution more so, although in retrospect there seem to have been missed opportunities and errors.
He was at least partly associated with the  decision to introduce ‘hard labour’ into prisons, but far from providing regular, steady discipline and useful work it became drudgery of the hardest and most servile kind, a hated example of the additional pains of imprisonment.
And he advised parliament, when a House of Commons committee was enquiring into the provisional continuance of the prison hulks system in 1778, that conditions had improved since his earlier criticisms and that he would support continued use of the hulks until transportation could be resumed.
Considering the wretchedness for which these floating prisons later became infamous it was an unhappy endorsement and one can only assume that his short-term view of a particular problem was allowed to obscure his longer term aims.
Perhaps the best judgement comes from one of his contemporaries, Burke, in a speech at Bristol:
Apart from prisons, Howard's abiding interest was in the prevention and treatment of contagious diseases and his later visits to hospitals and lazarettos (port-side institutions where suspect goods and personnel could be quarantined) were just as important to him as his continuing battle against gaol fever.
He had no formal medical training but had physicians as close friends, carried a medical kit on his travels and actually prescribed treatment on occasions.
His work in this area won him honorary membership of the London Medical Society.
Perhaps inevitably, he eventually contracted typhus at Kherson, in the Crimea, in January 1790 and was dead within a few days.
He was touring Russia and Eastern Europe in search of new material and had already accumulated notes on forty-one prisons and hospitals.
Such was his reputation that 2,000 people attended his funeral in Russia and one of the first statues in St Paul's Cathedral in London was not of a sovereign, statesman or saint — but a simple, teetotal, vegetarian traveller who, as the inscription notes:
Had the fortune to be honoured whilst living
In the manner which his virtues deserved;
He received the thanks
Of both houses of the British and Irish parliaments
For his eminent services rendered to his country
And to mankind.
Our national prisons and hospitals,
Improved upon the suggestions of his Wisdom
Bear testimony to the solidity of his judgement
And to the estimation in which he was held
In every part of the Civilised World
Which he traversed to reduce the sum of
Human Misery.
All of this is a world removed from Howard's own wishes.
‘Lay me quietly in the earth’, he requested, ‘…no monument to mark where I am laid.
Place a sundial over my grave and let me be forgotten.’
His work has ensured a different fate.