

Forms and meanings
Rites of passage in Shakespeare's prose
In every Shakespeare play where prose appears (as it does in all but four:Henry VI, Parts 1 and 3 ;King John ;Richard II ), characters constantly move from prose to verse, or from verse to prose, and back again.
In all but five plays verse is the statistically dominant form and prose has the role of the essential but inferior complement.
If we establish a hierarchy of social ranks, with kings at the top, servingmen, citizens, sailors, pirates at the bottom, then prose as the normal medium extends upwards to a given point but no further.
If we establish a hierarchy of psychological normality, those characters who predominantly speak verse can fall down into prose when they lose their reason: Ophelia, Othello, Lear, Lady Macbeth.
(Characters from the prose domain never go mad — their dramatic status would not warrant it.)
If we think of expressiveness, or emotional seriousness, or danger to the state, these again are higher realms from which prose is largely absent.
If prose is the lower medium, then the movement up to verse is a movement to a higher rank, and can be described in terms of the rituals known in anthropology as rites of passage.
When boys reach puberty, in primitive societies today as in ancient Greece, a group of them will go away into the mountains, jungle, or other hostile environment to undergo hardship and trials which, if successfully endured, allow them to return to society at a higher level, as adults.
In his pioneer study Les Rites de passage (1908), Arnold van Gennep defined three stages within such rituals:séparation , separation from society;marge , the transitional period of testing, outside society; and agrégation , the reincorporation of the individual into society in his new status.
No such event occurs in Shakespeare, of course, and my use of this model is meant to stimulate thought about how we might classify the many shifts between verse and prose that take place in Shakespeare, most frequently in the middle-period plays.
One preliminary point that may still need to be made is that the switches between the two media are not arbitrary, but motivated according to a series  of conventions practised by other Elizabethan dramatists.
The motivation, however, can come from a number of sources.
The ones I have so far mentioned might be called mimetic, that is, the distinctions king/servant, sane man/madman, are distinctions that exist in real life, outside the theatre, and are rendered within a Shakespeare play by the distinction between verse and prose.
To speak English verse is the sign of a minimum control over reason and grammar, so that, for similarly mimetic reasons, in Shakespeare drunks do not speak verse (the barge-scene in Antony and Cleopatra shows some famous men teetering on the verge of prose, and indeed relapsing into it), nor do foreigners, nor those with strong British regional accents.
But in addition to such external mimetic motivation, where the dramatist renders distinctions from life in the appropriate stylistic medium, we must differentiate various internal motivations, internal to the play as an aesthetic unit and to the characters as autonomous individuals.
As an example of the first, changes dependent on effects of atmosphere or mood within a play, I would instance the way in which, in Measure for Measure , the Duke, in his disguise as a Friar, intervenes at the point where Isabella, realizing that Claudio is not wholly willing to die so that she should retain her chastity, collapses into hysterical abuse.
At this point (III.i. 151) the Duke-Friar steps forward with his composed and rational prose outlining a complex plot by which Angelo can be brought to book, and the play recovers its balance.
Here prose has the effect that Leo Spitzer attributed — in my view, wrongly — to verse as a whole in Racine's drama, that of ‘Dämpfung’, muting or damping down emotions.
As for character-inspired motivations for the change of media, to which the rest of this essay will be devoted, some of these can be described as socially induced, reflecting the social hierarchy within the play.
Nobles and gentry speak verse among themselves, but when a servant enters speaking prose it is presumably a sign of good breeding, or adaptation, to descend to prose with them.
It constitutes a gesture of respect not to make social inferiors conscious of their inferiority.
Examples of this category of adaptation would be the entry of Constable Dull and Costard (Love's Labour's Lost , I.i.181), which reduces the assembled company to prose, or the more serious cross-examination performed by Angelo and Escalus (Measure for Measure , II.i.45).
When the judges speak to their fellows on the bench, they do so in verse (Love's Labour's Lost , I.i.304ff.;Measure for Measure , II.i.
134ff.).
The fact that Olivia speaks prose to Malvolio underlines his status as a domestic servant (Twelfth Night , 1.
v.etc.), and that she does so when he appears cross-gartered may be an instance of humouring a madman by descending to his level (III.iv. 16ff.).
Yet when Malvolio, much abused, enters in the final scene (V.i.328ff.)
Shakespeare permits him the dignity of verse, showing that the gulled and cured vain man nevertheless deserves some sympathy.
Two prose characters for whom sympathy has wholly evaporated by the final scene are Parolles (All's Well ) and Lucio (Measure for Measure ).
Parolles, who has  had his moments of verse during the play, enters the final scene wholly discredited, and speaking prose.
The King addresses him in verse to start with, but then comes down to Parolles' level in prose, the medium in which Lafeu and Diana also address him, recognizing his inferior ethos (All's Well that Ends Well , V.iii.238ff.).
The parallel pretender and deceiver, Lucio, who has occasionally aspired to verse, begins the last scene, indeed, speaking verse, his more respectable front still intact (Measure for Measure , V.i.
1 34ff.).
But as the Duke cross-examines Mariana, Lucio's natural licentiousness comes out in bawdy jokes (179ff.), for which he is silenced.
When Escalus cross-examines him, this is done in prose, as befits his true status (260ff.), and when Angelo invites Lucio to state what he can witness against the Friar-Duke, the medium drops to prose for all four speakers (327–33), to be catapulted back to verse as Lucio pulls off the hood and reveals the Duke's identity.
Yet when the Duke addresses Lucio and sentences him, he replies in suitably chastened prose (500ff.), relegated to the medium where he belongs.
A special class of prose-speakers for whom verse-speakers descend to the lower level are clowns, who may sing lyrics or speak verse for satiric purposes, but who are almost invariably addressed in prose the moment they appear.
Clowns seem to have a lower centre of gravity, or a magnetic field that converts everything to prose.
This convention, so standard in the comedies that it escapes notice (especially in modern theatre-productions, where it is very rare to be able to hear any difference between prose and verse), stands out in the tragedies, where the clown's reduction of the medium imposes an often uneasy mood of relaxation or verbal indulgence, outside the time of the tragic action, frustrating its rhythm.
In the comedies prose appears with Speed and Launce in Two Gentlemen , Biondello in The Taming of the Shrew , Launcelot Gobbo in The Merchant of Venice , not to mention Lavatch (All's Well ), Feste, Touchstone, Thersites, Falstaff, and Autolycus.
Internal social considerations can govern the converse shift, from prose to verse.
When the servant or clown for whom the medium had descended leaves the stage, discourse can revert to its normal level.
This phenomenon can be seen in the rather similar clown-scenes in Titus Andronicus and Antony and Cleopatra , on which Jonas Barish has commented, as in the comedies in general.
On the exit of a servant, Malvolio, Viola reverts to verse, ending the scene with a soliloquy (Twelfth Night , II.ii.), as she does again after the exit of a clown, Feste (III.i.).
In both cases the soliloquy conveys important self-reflection, a move from light-hearted banter to serious self-revelation that is made with even more significance by Cressida, after the exit of Pandarus — the spirit of prose at its most banal (Troilus and Cressida , I.ii.281)— and by Hal, after the exit of Falstaff (1 Henry IV , I.ii.195).
In these cases verse takes on another dimension of seriousness by its juxtaposition with the prose of jest and the evasion of responsibilities.
The problem that Hal faces with Falstaff is in part a problem of media.
When he and Poins scatter Falstaff and his robber band they speak verse to each other at the end of the scene (II.ii.104ff.), and as soon as Falstaff has gone into hiding Hal addresses the Sheriff searching for him in verse (II.iv.506).
Yet as the responsibilities of public life invade Hal's apprenticeship to pleasure, the distinction — prose with Falstaff/verse without him — breaks down, as we see when he addresses his fat friend in verse to urge him to the wars (III.iii.199ff.), a change of tone so marked that Shakespeare makes Falstaff reply in a couplet — as Milton Crane noted, Falstaff is only given verse for mockery.
In the scenes before battle Hal and Westmoreland address Falstaff in affectionate prose (IV.ii.49ff.), and on the eve of battle Hal still shares that medium with his old crony (V.i.121ff.).
But once the fighting begins, with Falstaff in shameless prose (the soliloquy describing how he has led his ‘ragamuffins where they are pepper'd’), Hal enters in the heroic medium and rebukes him for his idleness (the cowardice he can't see, as we can): ‘What, standst thou idle here?
Lend me thy sword’(V.ii.40.).
Brought down to prose by Falstaff for a few lines of word-play, Hal leaves him with another line of verse, marking the difference of ethos between them.
When Hal discovers Falstaff's ‘corpse’, feigning death to escape Douglas, he speaks a verse epitaph over him — the wrong medium, but that doesn't matter since the death isn't real, either, and when Falstaff receives his true epitaph it will be in prose (Henry V , II.iii.9ff.).
As far as Falstaff is concerned, leaving prose for verse is a true rite de passage for Hal, so that when we see him together with Poins in the sequel speaking prose without Falstaff present (2 Henry IV , II.ii.) we realize that his metamorphosis is not yet complete.
The move up to verse can be made for the exit of a person from a lower but also for the entrance of one from a higher rank.
If characters who have the ability to speak either prose or verse have been talking prose among themselves, or if the medium is prose for some other reason, the entry of a person of rank or status can be the signal for the move to the higher level.
Petruchio's servants, speaking prose among themselves, go up to verse for the entry of their master returning with his bride (Taming of the Shrew , IV.i.120), as do Valentine and Viola on the entry of their master, Orsino (Twelfth Night , I.iv.9).
The two murderers sent to dispatch Clarence speak prose to each other for their semi-comic, semi-serious dialogue on conscience (Richard III , 1.
iv.86–160), but when Clarence awakes they quite properly address him in verse.
(In any case, hardly any serious murder in Shakespeare is plotted or executed in prose, and no serious or admirable character is denied the resonance of verse at his death.)
Here the convention of changing media out of respect for the person merges into another category, that of changing to the higher medium for a more serious subject-matter.
In two cases involving admirable heroines and dubious companions it is hard to separate the two categories.
When Lucio goes to prompt Isabella on how to persuade Angelo — a scene in which persuasion has much of the ambivalence that Shakespeare commonly associated with rhetoric — he moves up to verse (Measure for Measure , 1.
iv.16ff.; II.ii.43ff.); and when Cloten, one of the most ruthlessly mocked prose-characters in the late plays, woos Imogen he, too, is allowed to ascend to her medium (Cymbeline , 11. iii.86ff.).
She is indeed a princess ‘out of his star’: all the more reason not to drag her down to his level.
The move up to verse can be ineffective, deservedly so.
In All's Well that Ends Well Parolles' use of verse seems to have connotations of falseness, as when he relays to Helena the news that Bertram is leaving Rossillion without consummating their marriage.
and so on through a honeyed and insincere figure (II.iv.41ff.).
Prose is Parolles' natural medium, and when he is captured and blindfolded, apparently by the enemy, moving up to verse reveals his desperation: ‘O, let me live, /And all the secrets of our camp I'll show’(IV.i.69ff., 83ff.)
But when he has been exposed as a liar and a traitor, left alone on stage, Shakespeare allows him to end the scene with a soliloquy in verse:.
While noting that Parolles is given some kind of dignity in verse, we should also observe that Shakespeare seldom ends a scene with a soliloquy in prose — Thersites and Falstaff are the only characters who do so more than once.
Yet Falstaff finally aspires to verse, not for mockery this time, but for ingratiation:.
Where Falstaff has spent his life deceiving others, here he deceives himself, and is thrust out of this medium so far above his resources, social or moral: ‘I know thee not, old man, fall to thy prayers’.
Falstaff is forcibly returned to prose, ‘knapp'd o'th'coxcomb’ by verse, and subsides to his own level: ‘Master Shallow, I owe you a thousand pound’.
If the move from prose to verse for a person of a higher rank represents — when honestly carried out — a gesture of respect, the failure to do so can signify deliberate disrespect.
An amusing instance of this comes when Orlando, romantic lover whose normal level is verse, enters unknowingly on to a prose-scene with one blank-verse line: ‘Good day and happiness, dear Rosalind!’ at which Jaques instantly observes with disgust, ‘Nay then God  buy you, an' you talk in blank verse’, marching off the stage in a huff (As You Like It , IV.i.30f.: his exit is unaccountably not marked in the Riverside edition).
Far more insulting is the behaviour of Achilles in Troilus and Cressida .
The alternation of scenes in that play establishes verse as the appropriate medium for the Greek leaders engaged in the vita activa in their council-scene (I.iii.), while for those hanging out in the vita inactiva in Achilles' tent — Thersites, Ajax, Patroclus, Achilles — all too often the medium is a scabrous unheroic prose.
We first see Ajax and Thersites trading metaphors of boils and scabs; Achilles enters in verse (II.i.55f.), but soon comes down to their level.
They revert to verse when Thersites leaves, but in the next scene Achilles is discovered indulging himself in a prose catechism with Thersites, when Agamemnon, Ulysses, Nestor, Diomed, and Calchas appear.
Faced by the Greek leaders come to manipulate him back to the war Achilles stalks off before they can reach him, pointedly speaking prose: ‘Come, Patroclus, I'll speak with nobody.
Come in with me, Thersites’(II.iii.69f.).
Unlike Achilles, Patroclus answers Agamemnon respectfully, in verse: only Achilles is powerful enough to ignore the Greek generals.
Another instance of disrespect involving the refusal of verse concerns Hotspur, reading the letter from a fellow rebel who has had cold feet — the letter is in prose, and Hotspur interrupts it with angry comments in prose, an unusual effect in Shakespeare — and then being confronted with his wife.
Where we might have expected him to grant her the respect of verse, he goes on in the same business-like prose: ‘How now, Kate?
I must leave you within these two hours’.
The casualness, and implicit disvaluation of her contained in that form, are exposed by her reply in verse: Even after her thirty-line speech of pathos and wifely love, describing his disturbed dreams, when Hotspur answers it is in the verse of public business, ignoring all that she has said: ‘What ho!
Is Gilliams with the packet gone?’
(II.iii.65.).
Hotspur's refusal of verse is less a deliberate snub, as with Jaques and Achilles, than a sign of how the illegality of rebellion can destroy family and loving relationships, as the sequel demonstrates all too clearly.
As these last few examples show, gestures of respect or disrespect, moving from verse to prose or back again, are often caused by the entry of one or more characters, with the result that those characters on stage have to readjust themselves, choose which medium they are going to use.
Changes of media are most often precipitated by entrances and exits.
But the switch can also be motivated by changes of mood.
The move from verse to prose can often signify a drop in seriousness, to mockery or ridicule; from tension to relaxation; or from public to private discourse.
As instances of mockery we  can cite the reaction of the court of Navarre to the Pageant of the Nine Worthies (Love's Labour's Lost , V.ii.484ff.), or that of Athens to ‘Pyramus and Thisbe’(Midsummer Night's Dream , V.i.106ff.).
In both cases prose underlines the distance between the conversational style of the courtiers and the variously absurd verse-styles of the inset play.
In The Merchant of Venice , in a verse-scene, when Gratiano tries to cheer up Antonio with an ‘exhortation’ that misfires, as soon as he has left Bassanio drops into prose suddenly, for five lines of mocking comment: ‘Gratiano speaks an infinite deal of nothing, more than any man in all Venice.
His reasons are as two grains of wheat hid in two bushels of chaff’…
(I.i.1 14ff.).
The scene then continues in verse.
A more consistent use of prose for mockery in this play is Portia's satirical review of her suitors (I.ii.), a scene echoed in Troilus and Cressida with the heroine's mockery of the Trojan warriors (I.ii.
177ff.), which includes even Troilus.
One of the striking features of that play, indeed, is that no one is spared mockery, and hardly any one fails to mock others.
Thus in the scene where the Greek leaders visit Achilles in his tent, the oafish Ajax remains in prose, to which even Agamemnon descends.
Having duped Ajax into thinking that he is their chosen man against Hector, the Greek leaders, who had earlier made such a fuss about being mocked by Thersites and Patroclus, now mock Ajax in asides (also, naturally enough, in prose):
The use of prose for mockery in Much Ado about Nothing is so widespread as to make illustration superfluous.
After the emotional upset of the church scene, with Claudio's mistaken denunciation of Hero, and her apparent death, it does not surprise us that when Beatrice and Benedick are alone they revert to their natural medium of prose.
Yet, as they finally declare their love for each other— having been tricked into so doing — Beatrice asks one favour: It seems to me that the fact that this request comes in prose is a sign that it is not to be taken seriously, since it, too, like so much else in the play, is based on false appearances.
(It is hard to recall any seriously intended murders in Shakespeare being plotted or executed in prose.)
For the same reason, perhaps, although Leontes' jealousy in The Winter's Tale reaches painful extremes, the fact that he never speaks prose means that he is not really mad, just temporarily disturbed.
The reverse move, from prose to verse, is usually the sign of increased  seriousness.
Sometimes this is within a light-hearted context, a move from jesting about love to declaring a more serious passion.
So in the opening scene of The Taming of the Shrew , after the business-like prose conversation of Gremio and Hortensio about Katherine as an obstacle to their wooing Bianca (I.i.105–45), when Lucentio is left alone with his servant Tranio he moves up to verse to declare his true and romantic love: ‘Tranio, I burn, I pine, I perish, Tranio’(148ff.).
Similarly, in Much Ado , Claudio waits until Benedick, the mocker of love, has gone before he moves up to verse to reveal to Don Pedro his love for Hero (I.i.290ff.).
The convention is sustained, but subtly mocked, in Twelfth Night , where Viola, bearing the suit of Orsino, waits until Maria leaves before launching into the higher style appropriate to romance (I.v.167ff.).
At first Olivia answers mockingly, in prose, but as Viola warms to the task Olivia comes up to verse, the stronger emotion lifting the medium with it.
Indeed, at the end of the scene it is Olivia who is left alone on stage — in that key situation of the end-of-scene soliloquy that tells all — to declare her newfound, misbegotten love in verse.
In All's Well Helena goes up to verse whenever she talks of her love for Bertram, moving in and out of prose several times within a scene (I.i.; I.iii.; II.v.; III.ii.; III.v.), in the flexibility that marks the mid-period plays.
The move up to verse can herald a darker mood, though.
In The Merchant of Venice Shylock and Bassanio have been discussing Antonio's desired bond of three thousand ducats in prose, with some bitter mockery from Shylock on being invited to dinner: ‘Yes, to smell pork, to eat of the habitation which your prophet the Nazarite conjur'd the devil into.
I will buy with you’, he goes on, but not eat, drink, ‘nor pray with you.
What news on the Rialto?
Who is he comes here?’
At this point Antonio enters, and Shylock instantly switches to verse in an aside to us: This is a crucial moment, revealing to us alone at this point his real hatred, so strong that only verse can express it.
Another angry man is Duke Frederick.
He first appears speaking prose (As You Like It , I.ii.149), but when Orlando not only defeats his wrestler but reveals his identity as the youngest son of Sir Rowland de Boys, the Duke moves up to verse to give his displeasure more force (224ff.).
In the scene following, Celia and Rosalind are conversing in prose about Orlando when Duke Frederick enters in verse, ‘his eyes full of anger’, to banish Rosalind (1.
iii.41): as the girls discuss their plight the scene remains serious in verse.
In Much Ado the shift to verse expresses the bitterness and sense of betrayal felt by Claudio at Hero's supposed infidelity.
In the masque scene, with its dancing and witticisms in prose, Don John delivers his slander under pretence  of addressing Benedick.
Left alone to digest the news Claudio moves up to verse (II.i.
172–82), dissimulating his upset by reverting to prose on Benedick's return.
A similar but more dramatic shift occurs in the wedding scene, which begins in a relaxed prose until Claudio takes over, with his mistaken hurt dignity: ‘Give not this rotten orange to your friend, /She's but the sign and semblance of her honour’(IV.i.23ff.).
Since the infidelity is illusory, an evil plot, Claudio in verse is in the wrong medium, as it were, but unknowingly.
Leonato, Hero's father, knowingly compounds confusion by being party to the plot announcing Hero's death.
He and Antonio whip Claudio's emotions up in verse with their threatened challenge, a level of seriousness from which Claudio gratefully subsides into prose for the scene in which he and Don Pedro mock Benedick ‘the married man’, gulled by them into loving Beatrice.
Conscious of being the trapper here, and unaware of being the gull of Don John's plot, Claudio moves uneasily between verse and prose, comedy and seriousness, not fully at home in either.
His ambiguity contrasts with the certitude of Ford, once he has been made to confront his mad jealousy, putting aside his suspicions to beg forgiveness in the most eloquent and sincere form that he knows:
Ford's embracing of verse and forgiveness are both authentic, learned from corrective experience.
The move upwards can be a sign of insincerity, as with Parolles and Falstaff, or one of honest self-revelation, as with Cressida and Hal with their end-of-scene soliloquies.
The choice of prose can accompany a deliberate disguise, as with Julia in Two Gentlemen , who adopts it to support her new role as a boy in her search for Proteus (1V.ii.26ff.).
The Duke turned Friar in Measure for Measure cultivates at least two different prose-styles, a plain and business-like one for his benevolent deceptions, and that of a moralist disappointed with the world — a persona within which he can also rise to more serious denunciatory verse as the occasion warrants (for verse within this prose role see III.ii. 19–39; 261–82; IV.ii. 108–13).
The Duke's shifts between the media are too flexible to admit of any tidy categorization.
More deliberate (as one would expect) is the oscillation of another ruler disguised to enquire into the behaviour of his subjects, King Henry V. On the eve of Agincourt, dressed as a commoner, the King moves among his soldiers speaking prose.
He first meets Pistol, that illegitimate verse-speaker, in a bizarre confrontation (Henry V , IV.i.35–63), but then becomes involved in a long discussion with soldiers Williams and Bates on the rights and wrongs of war, and the responsibility of the ruler for the death of his people.
Although in prose — as one says, perhaps too much influenced by the conventions of the comedies — this is one of the most serious scenes in the play (91–229), and  when the soldiers have left the King ascends to verse for what is to me the most deeply felt speech of all: In his own persona the King speaks verse, entering on to a prose-scene between Fluellen and Gower to express his anger at the French murder of the luggage-minders, and continuing in verse to Fluellen (IV.vii.55–118).
Yet when he reverts to the business of his night-watch, which included his challenge to Williams, and Pistol's to Fluellen, he descends to their level in prose (120–67).
His public status is reasserted in the final confrontation with Williams, where he speaks verse to the common soldier's prose, yet rewards his honesty (IV.viii.24–72).
Who would not have been deceived by a king disguised, and in prose?
In Shakespeare's plays people receive, by and large, the medium they deserve.
It would be as inconceivable to find Richard II speaking prose as it would be to meet Thersites in verse.
As with Elizabethan concepts of society, where each man was supposed to labour in his vocation and place, each character usually belongs to one medium and only moves out of it for special and clearly defined purposes, love, hate, respect, mockery, dissimulation, self-revelation.
Usually, too, people adjust to the governing medium out of politeness or indulgence, or with an ear for over-all harmony.
These being the conventions whose occurrence is so regular that we barely notice them, the exceptions to them are the more striking.
I want to consider, finally, two anomalies: characters using a medium that doesn't belong to them; and two or more characters inhabiting different media simultaneously.
For the first category, people outside their true medium, let us return to Pistol.
This camp-follower, rogue turned soldier about to become beggar, has no right to speak in verse.
Elizabethan audiences would presumably have spotted at once that he was ‘putting on the style’ with his phrases cobbled together out of distant memories of Kyd, Marlowe, and Greene.
Whatever Shakespeare's source or inspiration, Pistol is a brilliant invention, locked as he is in a verse-form and range of reference derived from the heroical plays in the London theatres of the 1580s and 1590s, as far removed as could be from his debased reality.
One never knows with the half-lines in Pistol's verse whether they represent Vergilian hemistichs, portentous silences, or lacunae in his memory.
The sense of his living in a closed world, stylistically speaking, is beautifully conveyed when Falstaff, frustrated in his attempts to get a  simple answer to a simple question, wanting to know his ‘happy news’, is forced to move up to Pistol's manner:— an effect not unlike that if W. C. Fields had turned up in a performance of Mourning Becomes Electra !
Yet Shakespeare has prepared a come-uppance for Pistol by confronting him with Fluellen, honest soldier and proud Welshman.
In their first scene together, where Fluellen begins with a feeling of respect for Pistol's bravery at the bridge (how obtained we know not), they dispute about the iconography of the goddess Fortune, Pistol in verse, Fluellen in prose, more coherently (III.vi.20–60).
Gower has seen through Pistol, and Fluellen vows revenge should he be abused.
That opportunity arrives with Pistol's reckless threat to ‘knock his leek about his pate/Upon Saint Davy's day’(IV.i.54f.), dutifully relayed to Fluellen by the King.
When Pistol appears, ‘swelling like a turkey-cock’, perhaps like the old tragic actors who ‘strutted and bellowed’, Fluellen beats his pate and forces him to eat the leek raw (V.ii.).
Honest prose defeats dissembling verse, and the braggart goes off to be a thief.
A more violent end meets an earlier pretender to verse, suitably violent as befits the rebel Jack Cade.
He harangues his followers in prose, yet is deflated by mocking asides from them, Shakespeare leaving us in no doubt what to think of his pretensions (2 Henry VI , IV.ii.31ff.).
When confronted by Sir Humphrey Stafford and other representatives of law and order, in order to challenge legitimacy at its own level Cade ‘knights’ himself, and ascends to verse: But he cannot sustain his usurped style for very long, soon relapsing to prose, in which he conducts his grotesque inquisition of Lord Say: Say responds in verse, as a true humanist: ‘Kent, in the Commentaries Caesar  writ, /Is term'd the civill'st place of all this isle’(60ff.).
Say is so eloquent that even Cade feels remorse (104f.), but still has him killed.
Having shown Cade's pointless destructiveness Shakespeare reins him in by confronting him with more speakers who exemplify the old definition of the orator as a vir bonus peritus dicendi .
First Lord Clifford harangues the mob in verse, appealing to their patriotic instincts to fight France.
After his energetic verse Cade's prose shows that medium at its most laboured and puffy: ‘Has my sword therefore broke through London gates, that you should leave me at the white Hart in Southwark?’
(IV.viii.20ff.).
Cade is left in the baser medium, running for his life (55ff.), only to meet his nemesis in Alexander Iden, an esquire of Kent, who has inherited his land legitimately and envies no other man's possessions.
It is no accident that Iden speaks verse, Cade prose, and that the verse-man should kill the prose-man: the hierarchy of order matches the hierarchy of styles.
The pretensions of Cade and Pistol are exposed by representatives of legitimacy.
Less thoroughgoing and less dangerous aspirations to verse can be allowed to subside of themselves.
Thus, in the Induction to The Taming of the Shrew — a unique example of a play outside the play, not to be taken as a measure by which the rest of the play must be dismissed for lacking seriousness — the tinker Christopher Sly, brought back in a drunken stupor to the house of a mischievous lord, is deceived into thinking that he is really a gentleman.
As the delusion begins to work (Ind. ii.1–67), Sly gradually levitates up to verse, as if hypnotized, or like someone in an early painting by Chagall, just taking off: Yet, when confronted with his supposed wife, desires of the flesh begin to reassert themselves, and he relapses into prose and bawdy (125ff.).
If deception and disguise bring Sly up to verse, Ajax is metamorphosed by flattery.
He has been established as a prose-character in the first scene at Achilles' tent (Troilus and Cressida , II.i.), where even Agamemnon addressed him in prose, by the law of adaptation to the lower centre of gravity.
However, when the Greek leaders, intent on humiliating Achilles, flatter Ajax with the prestigious combat with Hector, Ajax sees a heroic future beginning to form for himself, and slowly, ponderously, after several moments of silent thought, moves up to verse: ‘If I go to him, with my armed fist/I'll pash him o'er the face’(II.iii.202f.).
Yet, like Sly, he can only sustain the unfamiliar medium for a few speeches, and sinks back to his true milieu.
Both tinker and soldier are innocent gulls, deceived but not deceiving.
They lack the pretentiousness of a Parolles or a Pistol — or even an Autolycus, putting on the style to match  Florizel's borrowed clothes in three lines of verse, to assert his superiority over the shepherd and the clown (Winter's Tale , IV.iv.745ff.).
In these scenes where characters attempt to break out of their proper medium, the audience or reader should feel a sense of impropriety or disorder, as if some basic law were being denied.
In some cases — Pistol and Fluellen, Cade and Iden — Shakespeare underlines the unnaturalness by confronting two characters each in a different medium, setting up a gap of ethos and style.
Such ‘split’ scenes can achieve widely differing goals.
When Benedick mocks love he does so in prose, naturally enough (Much Ado , II.iii.6–36), but as he overhears Don Pedro, Claudio, and Balthasar in verse, beginning the plot against him, we are conscious of the gap between mockery and romance.
Benedick stays in prose, however, after the overhearing — perhaps there is something in him truly resistant to romance — whereas Beatrice moves up to verse after her duping (II.i.107–16).
Together, the two wits tricked into love speak verse at the débâcle of Hero's wedding (IV.i.1 l0ff.), but that is in response to the general seriousness.
When they meet at the final masking, the atmosphere is again one of ceremony and solemnity, and they speak verse to each other(V.iv.72–83).
But as they gently mock the truth of their attachment they relapse into prose, which in their mouths lacks many of the anti-romantic, realistic, mocking connotations it has elsewhere in Shakespeare.
One of the great achievements of Much Ado is the transformation of prose to a medium in which romance can exist, aerated by wit.
Beatrice and Benedick can speak verse, but their love seems much more natural in prose, neither limited nor coarsened by that vehicle.
This new tool was honed still more sweetly for Rosalind.
The normal association of prose with the lower elements — no one could say in prose ‘I am fre and air; my other elements/I give to baser life’(Antony and Cleopatra , V.ii.289f.)— is revealed most amusingly in the case of Bottom.
Temporarily transformed into an ass, with Titania drugged into loving his new shape (Apuleius' Golden Ass must be somewhere in Shakespeare's mental world), Bottom persists in the good-humoured prose of l'homme moyen sensuel , utterly oblivious to the fact that the Queen of the fairies is in an erotic tizzy over him.
After Titania's quatrains — the most artificial verse-form in drama, presupposing as it does that the speaker has four lines already prepared, with rhymes, confident of not being interrupted — Bottom's prose truly belongs to the world of unromantic everyday appetites: Bottom may have been ‘translated’ in shape, but nothing can elevate him to verse and romance — apart, ironically enough, from his role as Pyramus, out of whose Pistol-like doggerel he is ever ready to step in order to explain the play: ‘She is to enter now, and I am to spy her through the wall.
You shall see it will fall pat as I told you’(V.i.185ff.).
Bottom is the antithesis not only of romance but of any appeal to the imagination.
Troilus and Cressida is a kind of adult version of Pyramus and Thisbe (in Dryden's adaptation Cressida is made to kill herself, indeed, as both vindication and punishment).
The gap between Titania and Bottom, erotic excitement and the matter-of-fact, recurs with much more force here: The contrast is functional to the whole play, for from their first juxtaposition (I.i) Troilus' super-charged verse (like the music of Richard Strauss or Scriabin at their most sensuous) shows that he over-dramatizes himself, in tune with the whole excessively emotional Trojan ethos.
Pandarus' prose not only proves that he doesn't take Troilus seriously, so turning our reaction towards a scepticism that stands off from full involvement, but in time it establishes the speaker as a matter-of-fact fixer, who is not only alien to romance but coarsens whatever he touches.
At their first meeting his innuendo on such words as ‘fight’, ‘tame’, ‘deeds’, ‘activity’(III.ii.39–59) seems to be contagious, for in an encounter unique in Shakespeare two lovers who have previously spoken verse actually descend to prose for their first conversation, to exchange bawdy double meanings on words like ‘monster’, ‘monstrous’, ‘will’, ‘execution’, ‘act’, and ‘performance’(62–99).
We recall Sonnet 129, with its bitter puns on ‘expence’ and ‘action’, or the sniggers of Lucio or Pistol.
Shakespeare is making the same point as Donne —‘Love's not so pure, and abstract, as they use/To say, which have no mistress but their muse’— as he has done obliquely in Venus and Adonis with the picture of the horse exuding desire (259–324).
Pandarus, who had instructed Troilus —‘You must be witty’— seems to have infected the lovers with his fondness for dirty jokes (in him, perhaps, a sign of impotence or disease), and seeing him again they are  reminded of this and go up to verse for their protestations of love and fidelity (113ff.).
Pandarus, the ‘pitiful goer-between’(200), remains in prose, though, here and at their parting (IV.iv.)
He cannot transcend his limitations.
Nor can Thersites.
One of the remarkable features of Troilus and Cressida is that Shakespeare has developed, out of sources as diverse as Chaucer and Chapman's Homer, two prose characters, one for the Trojan, one for the Greek camp, whose function it is to reduce the two great themes of epic, love and war, to their lowest common denominator: appetite.
As in one of those New Yorker cartoons, when Pandarus sees a young couple together he has a mental image of a bed, organized by himself.
When Thersites sees soldiers — we would have to change the modern parallel to those semi-pornographic animated cartoons like Ralph Bakshi's Heavy Traffic and Fritz the Cat , or sado-masochistic literature — he sees a degraded struggle over a whore by men running with disease.
He who wants to ‘see some issue of my spiteful execrations’(II.iii.6)— any word in Thersites' mouth can have distasteful implications, so here ‘issue’ is the pus from an infected wound — imagines Agamemnon as having boils over him, which ‘did run…
Then would come some matter from him’(II.i.2ff.).
To Ajax he says: ‘I would thou didst itch from head to foot; an’ I had the scratching of thee, I would make thee the loathsomest scab in Greece' (27ff.).
Thersites is a walking manifestation of the ‘leprous distillment’ that Claudius poured into his brother's ears, a ‘tetter’or scabby eruption ‘bark'd about, /Most lazar-like’(Hamlet , I.v.64ff.).
He is a scab on the play, a scab speaking prose.
In peace-time Achilles and his cronies come down to his level of prose abuse and mockery (Troilus and Cressida , II.i.; II.iii; III.iii; V.i.), but when the fighting restarts Thersites takes no part in it, and is left alone to direct his poisoned breath straight at us.
In fact, he increasingly leaves the stage after a prose-soliloquy, an unusually unresonant way to close a scene, especially given his sordid world-view (V.i; V.ii; V.iv.
— which begins and ends with his soliloquies; and V.vii., where he is finally chased off by another bastard).
A significant parallel, which says much about the degradation that Falstaff reaches, is that he, too, ends scenes with unheroic, self-satisfied prose soliloquies, if not so vicious (1 Henry IV , V.i.; V.iii.;2 Henry IV , III.ii.; IV.iii.; V.i.).
No two prose characters exert so much influence on a play as do Pandarus and Thersites, and only one other play that I can think of (King Lear ) makes so much use of a simultaneous gap between the two media.
In both cases the result is discord, but in Troilus their joint influence adds to the effect of the whole play, which leaves no values standing.
The difference between the two lowerers is that Pandarus cannot help speaking prose, since he is incapable of verse, heroism, or true love, being limited to ‘handling’ others' affairs.
But whereas he merely wants to help people satisfy their baser appetites, Thersites would wish to reduce everyone to his poisonous and diseased state.
A telling detail which his creator put in his mouth is the ending to one of his earlier soliloquies: ‘I have said  my prayers, and devil Envy say amen’(II.iii.20).
What envy cannot have itself it wishes to destroy in others.
After Troilus and Cressida almost any play is a relief, even the brothel scenes of Pericles .
Here we are in the world of Mistress Overdone and Pompey, with no Thersites, at least.
Once again the ‘split’ use of verse and prose has the connotations of nobility versus degradation.
Marina, having escaped being murdered due to the intervention of pirates, is sold to a brothel, her virginity to be auctioned to the highest bidder.
By contrast with the calculating prose of the bawd, listing the attractions of his new acquisition, Marina's verse stands out with greater pathos (IV.ii.64–6).
After a hundred lines of the coarsest prose the final juxtaposition shows a gap of ethos as wide as that between Troilus and Pandarus, but more threatening: Her intended customer is the nobleman Lysimachus, and to begin with Marina speaks a docile prose with the bawds (IV.vi.51ff.), continuing with aggressive word-play in order to shame Lysimachus into naming the vice he is engaged upon (66–91).
When he loses patience and wants to adjourn to ‘some private place’ she suddenly rises to verse: ‘If you were born to honour, show it now’(92ff.).
He, good man that he is, instantly returns to verse and to his better self: ‘Had I brought hither a corrupted mind, /Thy speech had altered it’(104ff.).
He has been so forcibly returned to his true ethos that when Boult returns, speaking prose, Lysimachus rebukes him in indignant verse (118ff.).
His moral superiority over this ‘damned door-keeper’ re-established, Lysimachus leaves, and Marina remains in danger.
While the bawds are deciding to have her forcibly raped she says little, but when Boult wants to lead her away she again rises to verse, her secret weapon, and appeals to his better sentiments.
Over-awed, converted both by her persuasion and her gold, Boult remains in prose (any change would have been too great a transformation), yet agrees to help her.
Verse is here the morally superior medium, but at least Boult redeems prose from its worst associations.
In The Tempest verse again stands for a superior ethos in stark juxtaposition with prose.
Since Caliban is often performed in the modern theatre as if he were a later version of Thersites, we tend to expect him to be a prose-speaker.
In fact, as a true ‘salvage man’(a point well made in Giorgio Strehler's production), he belongs to a much higher niche in creation, albeit hating Prospero's forcible civilization or (depending on one's critical stance) colonization of the island.
As such he is a natural verse-speaker, as we see from his first appearance (I.ii.321ff.) and from the soliloquy cursing Prospero during the storm (II.ii.1–17).
Yet when he is confronted with Stephano and  Trinculo, the good-for-nothing drunken servants, Caliban is so frightened that he cowers and speaks prose (55ff.).
This may seem paradoxical, but it represents a gesture of adaptation.
When he speaks an aside to us, in his own person, it is in verse: He continues in their prose, but when he wants to express his respect for them and offer his services, he moves up to verse: ‘I'll show thee the best springs; I'll pluck thee berries; /I'll fish for thee, and get thee wood enough’(160f.).
Caliban's affection is as misplaced as that of Titania for Bottom, yet it obeys the normal Shakespearian convention of moving from prose to verse to express respect.
Stephano and Trinculo cannot go above prose, being ‘below stairs’ in every sense.
The juxtaposition of high and low recurs in their next scene.
Caliban begins it in prose, at their level, and also slightly tipsy.
But when Ariel intervenes, invisible, to accuse Caliban of lying, in indignant self-defence he moves up to verse: His naturally superior medium re-established, Caliban continues in verse, appropriately enough since his speech includes a plan of murder, and that marvellous description of the beauty of the island: ‘Be not afeard, the isle is full of noises, /Sounds, and sweet airs, that give delight and hurt not’(135f.).
The limitations of Stephano and Trinculo are in part the limitations of their medium.
This we see when they return.
Caliban is in verse, as befits the dignity and danger of a killing, they in prose, easily side-tracked by a clothes-line of gaudy apparel (IV.i. 194–257).
Caliban's intelligence far exceeds theirs, to ‘dote’ as he puts it contemptuously, on such ‘trash’and ‘luggage’.
In the proper mouths — Lafeu, Henry V, Duke Vincentio — Shakespeare's prose can be rhythmic and expressive.
But for such degenerates as Cade, or these two, Shakespeare can also deprive his prose of rhythm, make it flaccid, shapeless, a difficult mouthful to get out: Caliban's verse stands out with the greater force, cured as he now is of his delusions: But — so at least the juxtaposition suggests — that is in part the judgement that verse can make over prose.
It is now time to confront my anthropological model with the experience of reading the plays.
Obviously, the two do not wholly coincide, since the rite de passage is performed once only — no one, so far as I know, ever had to undergo an initiation ceremony twice!
As a one-way passage the model clearly does not square with the repeated movements between verse and prose that we find in Shakespeare.
While it is tempting to see Hal's rejection of Falstaff and his world as a rejection of prose, the issue is never as linear or straightforward as that; indeed in Henry V the King uses prose in four or five scenes, both for his nocturnal tour and for his wooing of Katherine.
One can, perhaps, speak of a fall into prose followed by a recovery, as in the case of Lysimachus, or Caliban.
This has the advantage of stressing that the two media, especially when simultaneously juxtaposed, can symbolize a vast difference in ethos, quite apart from the social differences mentioned earlier.
It will not do to suggest that prose is always the inferior state, of course, since Edgar in prose is a better man than Edmund (King Lear ), as he is in verse, and Iago (Othello ) works equal havoc in both media.
But the shifts between the two levels are often significant of shifts of value, or collisions between value-systems.
Since anthropology is so much involved with recreating alien belief-worlds, with all the varied and competing value-systems that exist in other cultures, just as in our own, literary critics who would wish to acquire more flexibility in dealing with that collision of view-points which forms the basic experience of drama could do worse than to consult the anthropologists.
The difference between verse and prose in Shakespeare, as in literary theory generally, it seems to me, can be helpfully understood in terms of such major cultural distinctions as those between male and female, right and left, the pure and the impure, the sacred and the profane.
These distinctions are hierarchical, but they are relative, not absolute.
In many situations the male is thought to be superior to the female, but not in all; in some situations an object or person can be profane, in others sacred.
The terms are complementary, but their relationship can shift from context to context.
In reflecting on the varying complementarities of verse and prose in  Shakespeare, then, we might ponder over van Gennep's analysis of what he called ‘the pivoting of the sacred’.
As he shows, ‘the presence of the sacred (and the performance of appropriate rites) is variable.
Sacredness as an attribute is not absolute; it is brought into play by the nature of particular situations’, existing in both space (such as the movement to and from town, or to a foreign country), and time (between birth and initiation, say).
We can, then, apply his metaphor to our studies: ‘Thus the ‘magic circles’ pivot, shifting as a person moves from one place in society to another.’
So the media of prose and verse ‘pivot’ too, shifting in value or significance as a character moves within the society of the play, or within its internal hierarchy of language and values.
The anthropological model allows us to detect within the lived experience of the play a system of complementarities which obeys its own laws, creating at the level of style a scale of discriminations that reinforce those perceived, perhaps intuitively, at the level of action.
The decision that Shakespeare faced hundreds of times — whether to put his words, as Dryden expressed it, into verse or into ‘the other harmony of prose’— is one that the reader ought always to be alert to, for each decision signals an element of dramatic meaning that we can yet recover.
‘MUTUAL RENDER’: I AND THOU IN THE SONNETS
In his Sonnets Shakespeare achieved the rather remarkable feat of turning to new and individual ends a genre that had flourished throughout Europe for several centuries and was in effect beginning to die at the time when he wrote, in the mid 1590s.
At the risk of stating the obvious, we could describe the situation presented in the Renaissance love-sonnet as one in which the poet adores, often from afar, a woman who either surpasses the worth of the poet to such a degree that union with her is inconceivable, or else rejects his advances with scorn and cruelty.
This tradition had been reanimated by Sir Philip Sidney in his Astrophil and Stella , but even he, pioneer and inventor though he was, was content to reproduce the standard man-woman relationship while devoting his energies to creating an idiomatic English-speaking voice for Astrophil, and to filling out the persona of the frustrated lover, with all his follies and self-deceptions, hope and disappointment.
One way out of this dead-end situation, denying as it did the possibility of a human relationship, was taken by Donne in his love-poems, where the woman is no longer on a pedestal but is discovered in bed with the poet.
She is no longer desired, yearned after: she has been ‘had’, ‘got’, ‘cast off’, and in turn can have, get, and cast off the man.
The situation in the traditional poem, as exemplified by Sidney, is an I —She one, where the pronouns reveal the gap between the lover and his mistress; in Donne, as I have shown elsewhere, l it is an I-Thou , and above all a We/Us/Our relationship, where the lovers exist, after the consummation, as a unit, a model to others, from which point Donne's wit takes off in a brilliant sequence of rhetorical strategies.
Shakespeare evidently shared Donne's dissatisfaction with the extant convention, agreed with him that unfulfilled love was a trope that could only lead to a limited number of stereotyped situations.
I suggest that Shakespeare reacted critically against the whole European tradition of the sonnet as a form of impotent adoration or frustrated lament by striking out, like Donne, towards fulfilment.
Like Donne, he wrote poems to a mistress with whom a  relationship had been consummated, was continuing on a carnal basis, with many fluctuations of desire and love.
(I had better say now that readers who identify the I of the Sonnets with Shakespeare's own personality not only encourage that futility of speculation about the identity of a real-life ‘Friend’ and ‘Dark Lady’which has pestered discussions of these poems for so long, and is now in the last stages of senility; but in so doing they also destroy one of the essential principles of literary criticism in modern times, the independence of the I in lyric poetry, its existence as a persona or mask behind which the poet is free to impersonate any human situation without being identified with each or all of the mutations — often contradictory — taken on by his persona.)
But while writing about a sexual relationship between a man and woman Shakespeare does not continue with Donne towards celebration of the beloved, effecting a union between sex and love.
In another sharp break with convention, the protagonist of Sonnets 127–52 (I set aside 153 and 154, two sonnets on themes traditional since the Greek Anthology , which do not seem to belong to this sequence) gives his mistress not compliments but insults, or mock-compliments, and that at the level of the body alone: sex without love, as it were.
More remarkable than his treatment of the mistress as recipient or subject-matter of the sonnets is Shakespeare's treatment of the man who fills that role in the first 126 poems.
Victorian editors, embarrassed by the imputation of homosexuality, argued that it was quite customary in the Renaissance for men to write sonnets to men.
While we know of certain special cases (the sonnets of Michelangelo to Tommaso Cavalieri, for instance), it is now clear that this was not at all customary, and that the imputation of homosexuality in the Renaissance could have as destructive an effect on a man's life as it has had until recently (if, indeed, there has been any real change of English attitudes in these supposedly liberal times).
Of course, individual sonnets of compliment to a male friend or patron exist in Renaissance poetry, but, as J. W. Lever wrote, summing up previous researches, ‘there is no parallel in the whole corpus of Renaissance poetry to Shakespeare's sustained exploration of the theme of friendship through more than a hundred and twenty sonnets’.
This radical break with tradition had far-reaching effects on the tone and substance of the poetry.
These are, to state the obvious again, not homosexual poems.
That much is made clear by Shakespeare, early on in the sequence, as if to forestall suspicion or criticism, in Sonnet 20, which his protagonist addresses to the deuteragonist (if I may borrow the terminology of the historians of drama to stress the fictive, dramatic status of the personae in these poems): That is as clear a statement of the non-sexual relationship between the two personae as could be wished for, and a wittier one than most.
Whereas the sonnets to the mistress express sex without love, those to the friend express love without sex.
That opposition is a neat one, and neatness in verbal formulations commonly arouses suspicion.
Yet one of the striking characteristics of Shakespeare's Sonnets is that they exist on an almost universal level; they are generalized (with none of the depersonalization that usually goes with generalization); they are widely, perhaps indefinitely applicable.
Here again Shakespeare challenges the Renaissance concept of the sonnet's content and function.
While the norm was in effect a type of seduction poem, in which sexual love is frustrated and unrealized, Shakespeare drops that whole area of human behaviour yet shows that love-poetry is still possible — only a new kind of love.
The ‘Poet’ cannot marry the ‘Friend’(to use the conventional terms for our two personae), does not wish to seduce him: in the first seventeen sonnets he urges him to marry, indeed, but not (as elsewhere) choosing the writer of the poetry, but someone else, a woman (obviously!).
And whereas other Renaissance examples of the exhortation to marriage dwell on the delight and solace of the married state, our poet's argument, by contrast, is directed to the friend's reproduction of himself for the benefit of posterity.
(The woman is noticeable by her minimal status as co-agent of reproduction.)
That is, the poet is concerned solely with the existence and perpetuation of the friend, is writing a peculiarly selfless form of love-poetry —‘peculiar’, I mean, by comparison with the egoism and self-satisfaction inherent in the usual specimens of this genre.
These poems offer, then, not care for the self but care of the other.
As C. L. Barber once put it, in an essay remarkable for its sensitivity to the kinds of human relationship postulated or implied by the poems, As Barber says, the ‘universality of the part of love which here becomes the whole’ makes these poems available to all readers.
To report on my own experience, I have found a surprising number of English people outside the  academic world who have lived with the Sonnets , have taken them into their own experience, can quote with ease ‘To me, fair friend, you never can be old’, or ‘Shall I compare thee to a summer's day?’, or ‘When, in disgrace with Fortune and men's eyes’, or ‘Let me not to the marriage of true minds/Admit impediment’.
C. S. Lewis noted the same phenomenon, writing of Sonnets 25 and 29 that they are  These poems are not only read but used, applied to individual lives.
It is at this stage that the specific aspect of the Sonnets which I wish to explore begins to emerge.
These are generalized, universalized poems, which deal with love-situations in a way that transcends the limitations of poetry written to a special occasion or with a specific individual in mind.
They are like blank cheques, or Christmas cards: the sender, or the receiver, can fill in the amount, or the name, just as he or she wishes.
This is because they are fundamentally ‘you and me’ poems, and any You or any Me can be substituted for the personae.
To make that point in another way, in terms of tradition, it is striking, when you come to Shakespeare's after a reading of other Renaissance sonnets, to note the absence of proper names.
No Laura, no Beatrice, no Hélène, Cassandre, Marie, Stella, Mira, Delia, Licia, Diana, Geraldine, Phillis, not even Idea.
True, there is a Will in Sonnets 135 and 136, and if the italicization in the 1609 Quarto is significant it can be seen to represent Shakespeare's own name, or that of the Friend, or even the Dark Lady's husband.
(And it is in any case a  singularly unromantic name!)
But otherwise the absence of specific characters defined in the third person underlines the universality and also the particularity of these poems.
C. S. Lewis saw this point too: the poems express ‘simply love, the quintessential of all loves whether erotic, parental, filial, amicable, or feudal.
Thus from extreme particularity there is a road to the highest universality.’
The particularity derives, I shall argue, from their being poems imagined for a series of concrete life-situations; in literary-critical terms they are examples of that minimal dramatic form, the monologue.
But the particularity, as Shakespeare formulates it, also creates intimacy.
If a poet writes about ‘Stella’, what she does, what her attributes are, by the use of the third-person form he has acknowledged a certain distance separating himself from his beloved.
She is going about her business, while he is writing about her to the world, and we are seeing her through his eyes.
The relationship with the reader is a direct one, but that with the beloved is indirect.
The I-You form, on the other hand, although the poetry is clearly written to be read by the public at large, presents the relationship directly, face to face.
The beloved is not separate, absent, but present, at the moment of the poet's writing or speaking, as of the  beloved's hearing or reading the poem — as, indeed, of the reader's reading, now and always: he or she is always there as we read.
We can put ourselves in the place of the poet or the friend; we can be either the sender or the receiver.
My distinction between the effects of second-person and third-person pronouns can be made clearer, perhaps, with some diagrams.
In the Sidneian sonnet form the relationship between poet, mistress, and reader is as follows (where a single-ended arrow denotes a one-sided relationship, a double-ended one mutuality):
In Shakespeare's sonnets to the friend, by contrast, the relationship is on one level only:
That is, the reader is absorbed into the experience, does not stand outside it.
In the sonnets involving the Dark Lady, however, with their tortuous triangular structure, the reader does stand apart, watching the poet's attempt to come to terms with deception and exclusion:
We can distinguish, then, between those Shakespeare sonnets addressing the recipient directly, in which writer and addressee form the couple defining a relationship, and poems addressing a recipient who is engaged in a triadic — or perhaps, better said, two dyadic relationships.
The effect of this intense focus on modes of address is that personal pronouns become unusually prominent.
I had often noted this characteristic in reading, but until I once calculated the extent to which the Sonnets depend on pronouns I had no idea of its magnitude.
This is a case in which one turns to computation in order to verify an impression gained in reading, and in the Appendix (pp. 85–8) I have recorded the results of my count.
Statistics alone are of little use in literary criticism, and I present the table more as a finding-list than anything else.
By using it one can locate, for instance, the sonnets in which the I dominates, or those where the You overpowers the I. From that point onwards analysis and interpretation must take over.
Yet a mere glance at the list will  reveal the predominance of the I form (960 times in my count, taking all first-person forms:I/me/my/myself/mine ) and the You or Thou form (890 times, including thou/thee/thy/thine/thyself; you/ye/your/yours/yourself ), over the third-person forms, where these imply either a third-person account of the beloved (He in Sonnets 1–126: 51 times;She in Sonnets 127–52: 31 times) or a reference to some third party with whom the poet or his beloved is having a relationship (She in Sonnets 1–126: 11 instances;He in Sonnets 127–52: 22 instances; total 33).
Extremely small are the figures for We/Us/Our , where this refers to an aspect of experience shared by the poet and his friend (Sonnets 1–126: 10 times) or mistress (Sonnets 127–52: twice); also the plural You or Ye (once only) and the plural They (twice).
In other words, the I and Thou forms predominate over all other personal pronouns by a factor of more than 13 to 1.
The statistics confirm what a detailed reading will tell us, that the majority of the Sonnets move with astonishing frequency on the axis from I to You and back again.
They enact a transaction, one that is constantly being made, broken, and remade, coming under doubt and suspicion, collapsing with proof of infidelity or betrayal by either side, being slowly rebuilt as doubt gives way to confirmation.
The phases of the relationship are reflected in the constellation of the pronouns — or rather, they are created by the pronouns.
Critics vie with each other in discovering the dominant qualities of the Sonnets : one chooses imagery, another stresses repetition, or symmetry, or antithesis.
But the truly dominant, characterizing feature is the use of pronouns and the movement between them: take those away and you destroy the relationship out of which the poems derive.
Discussion of Shakespeare's use of pronouns has been, so far, largely focused on the plays, in particular on the distinction within the second-person form between singular and plural,Thou and You .
There are scattered remarks on this topic in the standard reference books on Shakespeare's grammar, an early American dissertation, and several articles of greater or lesser linguistic expertise.
To anyone familiar with the conventions of the second-person singular in modern European languages it is no surprise to learn that Shakespeare preserves the distinction You/Thou primarily to express the relationship far/near, as when a parent addresses a child (or a master a servant) as Thou and receives You in reply.
These have been called the pronouns of power and solidarity respectively.
More interesting is the discovery that while You is the stylistically unmarked form, more matter-of-fact, ‘not impolite’ or ‘not informal’,Thou can express both intimacy and anger, or indeed any increase in the emotional tone of a conversation.
We find scenes in which two characters on an equal footing move back and forth between Thou and You according to mood (Hal and Falstaff); others where both characters use Thou , one expressing affection, the other hostility (Richard III wooing Lady Anne); others where the shift from You to Thou expresses a crucial shift of intimacy (Goneril to Edmund) or acceptance (Brabantio to Roderigo).
The critic of the plays must pay attention to register, those variations in language  as used in particular social contexts, but also to rises and falls in the emotional temperature within a scene.
Neither of these approaches is relevant to the Sonnets , obviously enough, but a third certainly is, namely the question of euphony, the difference between ‘Do you think that they are threatening?’ and ‘Thinkst thou that they threaten?’
As Vivian Salmon has shown, awkwardness in pronunciation, ‘where the —st suffix of the Thou- form stood in close proximity to consonants whose assimilation was difficult, or would have resulted in syntactic ambiguity’, led to a preference for the You form or for one retaining Thou but adding an unstressed do , as in ‘What didst thou lose?’ or ‘It was ourself thou didst abuse’.
The question of variations between Thou and You in the Sonnets has been discussed rather fruitlessly.
Just as characters in the plays switch from Thou to You and back in a way that seems to us to have no evident rationale, so in the Sonnets Shakespeare uses both forms indifferently, and indeed switches from one to the other within one poem (Sonnet 24).
Attempts have been made to distinguish the two forms by close reading of ‘groups’ or ‘sequences’within the collection, but such attempts either to arrange the order of the 1609 Quarto into some new scheme, or to read a consistent development within it are equally misguided.
It is not a coherent and steadily developing sequence but a collection of poems, including variations on themes which result in both repetitions and overlapping.
Attempting to distinguish the two forms, Frances Berry arrived at the strange result that Thou in the Sonnets is ‘remote’ and ‘betokens distant admiration’, while You is ‘more intimate’.
Andrew Gurr claimed to detect ‘a rather remarkable pattern of shifts between ‘you’ and ‘thou’’, only to admit that the ‘sequence’as a whole showed ‘a remarkable display of inconsistency’and so concentrated on Sonnets 1–17.
There he found a whole drama of ‘switches’ and changes, ‘the first open declaration of a real intimacy’coming in Sonnet 13, with ‘the humble poet’thereafter oscillating between Thou and You according to how things stood between him and his ‘wealthy aristocrat’.
By this close reading Gurr could claim that ‘the phrase ‘your image’ in 59 becomes ‘thy image’’in 61, in a change marking a distinct chill in the relationship'.
These changes, switches, and sequences seem to be wholly illusory, caused by misapplying the linguistic criterion of register (not to mention the biographical fallacy).
One criterion ignored by both critics is that of euphony, although its relevance to the Sonnets has long been clear.
Sonnet 13 begins: Recast this in the second-person singular and we have: ‘O that thou werst thyself, but love thou art/No longer thine than thou thyself here livest.’
Not only do we have an almost unpronounceable cluster of ‘th’ sounds but we  ruin both rhymes.
I can find no other principles for distinguishing You and Thou in the Sonnets : Shakespeare can use either without implying greater or lesser formality.
A more promising approach would be the comparative one, starting from the total distribution of pronouns in Shakespeare compared to other Elizabethan sonnet-writers.
So far three critics have attempted this comparison (with varying statistics), but none of them has done justice to the intensity and range of Shakespeare's pronouns.
Giorgio Melchiori rightly sees pronouns as ‘semiotic pointers’ towards a ‘network of relations’, and notes the far greater proportion of second-person pronouns in Shakespeare (some 37.2 per cent compared to other poets' average of 20 per cent, with 40.3 per cent for the first person).
He is the first critic in print to notice the ‘balanced predominance of I and thou ’ in Shakespeare's Sonnets , in the proportion 51.1 per cent to 48.9 per cent.
However, he then interprets his statistics in rather dubious socio-literary historical terms, seeing Shakespeare as ‘breaking with the tradition of the sonneteer as a court poet or an aristocrat’ by involving ‘his interlocutors…in debate’and dialogue.
Melchiori then explains the ‘balance between I and thou ’ reductively, as an instance of Shakespeare's ‘dramatic and theatrical’genius: ‘it is simply his profession as a playwright, as a man of the theatre’which places him ‘on a totally different plane’in the social hierarchy of his time.
This argument would deny Shakespeare any powers of invention, making him the creature of his profession, another version of the biographical fallacy.
Melchiori in one place actually describes ‘the I ’ as being ‘the poet who voices his own feelings’, and says that the absence of the I form in some sonnets ‘is an impediment to the dialogue, to the theatrical quality’, which he describes in disappointingly literal terms: ‘Normally in Shakespeare's Sonnets we find a truly dramatic dialogue between two characters: the persona of the poet himself (the speaking I, not the man William Shakespeare)’— a welcome disclaimer!—‘and a ‘you’, the actor playing the role of a lovely boy, a worthy or unworthy mistress, possibly a rival poet'.
Apart from the irrelevant actor there, it seems worth observing that the sonnets are not in fact dialogues, but either monologues or poems of direct address, and that their dramatic quality is due to a sustained effort of imagination rather than the conditioning of a career.
Melchiori uses statistics in attempting to define the ‘norm’ of I — Thou in Shakespeare and the exceptions, the twenty-one sonnets lacking I , and the twenty-five lacking Thou or You (he also sees no distinction between singular and plural forms).
His particular interest, it turns out, is in the ‘non-You Sonnets’, the ‘dramatic meditations’ of his title, in other words the exception to the norm, to which he dedicates most of his space, studying in detail Sonnets 94, 121, 20, 129, and 146.
Both in the exclusion of the I-Thou relationship and in the critical method, an uneasy union of formalist grammatical analysis, highly idiosyncratic diagrams, and a belief that his approach  is ‘scientific, or ‘objective’ when it rests on a whole series of unargued critical assumptions, this remains a learned but peripheral book.
David K. Weiser has been more consistently involved with the central I- Thou poems, although his analytical categories are derived from Martin Buber's essay on modern theology, ‘I and Thou’(p. 107), rather than from Renaissance grammar.
The absence of second-person pronouns may make a poem a ‘soliloquy’, but their presence in poems does not make them ‘dialogues’.
Poems may be addressed to someone but, lacking a respondent, a lyric or sonnet remains, as Donne called one of his poems, ‘this dialogue of one’.
Weiser divides the 112 sonnets using I and Thou into four groups: those using the pronouns infrequently, without the sense of a personal relationship, amount only to four poems.
Second, those emphasizing Thou more than I , a larger group, sixteen in all, in thirteen of which the Other outnumbers the Self by more than two to one.
Third, the opposed relationship,I dominating in twenty-seven sonnets, in nineteen of which by a ratio of at least two to one.
Last, those balancing the two pronouns ‘quantitatively while developing a reciprocal relation between them’, the largest group, consisting of ‘more than one third of all the sonnets: 57 of 154’.
Weiser is the first critic to see the full significance of the pronouns in the Sonnets , and every reader will benefit from many pages of sensitive criticism in his book.
Where I differ from him is on the nature of the collection as a whole, which to me seems a collection of poems differing in method and indeed quality, written over a period of years, and having two distinct sequences, to the Friend and to the ‘Dark Lady’.
Beyond that I believe we cannot go, although there are occasionally tantalizing groups of poems on related themes, either brought together by the editor/printer or composed as deliberate variations on a theme, and perhaps copied out on a ‘sheet’ of paper, folio size, folded (which we know was a unit of composition and occasionally payment in Elizabethan poetry and drama).
Weiser, however, claims to find ‘a well-defined dramatic character’ as speaker of the poems, with the arrangement of the 1609 Quarto reflecting ‘a steady pattern of growth and final disintegration in the speaker's personality’.
There is one sonnet sequence with such a coherent persona, of course: Sidney's Astrophil and Stella .
But that is truly a narrative, including a series of songs that advance the action in definite stages before it collapses in the lover's rejection by his (married) mistress.
All the stages that Weiser finds of ‘advance in personal knowledge’, a ‘basic transition’ here, a ‘discovery’there, one which ‘begins to dissolve’the speaker's ‘coherent identity’(a development which the sceptic may see as a rationale for the failure of an analytical method)— stages of awareness that lead to a final collapse: all this seems to me fictitious, revealing the critic's categories rather than the poet's.
Similarly, when G. P. Jones moves from noting the greater prominence of pronouns in Shakespeare compared with other Elizabethans to the statement that his sonnets have ‘a substantial autobiographical element’, and that the ‘fluctuation between thou and you ’ shows ‘the poet's uncertainty about his personal, social and professional connection with his patron is at its most acute’, then I feel that such speculations deflect attention from the real focus of interest, the pronouns as forms of relationship.
My own approach is not biographical, and assumes neither a clear-cut persona nor a narrative sequence.
Since the Sonnets are, in an important and unique way, poems of direct address, we should start by considering them in terms of the appropriate Renaissance genre.
The literary form that they most nearly resemble, or the situation in life that they come nearest to recreating, is that of a letter.
Each poem is a verse-epistle, as it were, and together they  constitute a whole collection of correspondence.
Looking at them in this light it is natural to turn to that Elizabethan model for letter-writing, Angel Day's The English Secretorie (1586).
There we read the following definition: Subsequently Day repeats this concept in terms that seem especially relevant to the quiet tone and intimate atmosphere of the Sonnets .
A letter is ‘the familiar and mutuall talke of one absent friend to another’(a definition taken from Erasmus, who took it from Libanius), and ought therefore to be ‘simple, plaine, and of the lowest and meanest stile, utterly devoyde of anye shadowe of hie and loftye speeches’.
Day divides epistles into the categories ‘general’, which are ‘familiar letters’ passing between people of ‘long acquaintance or auntient familiarity’; and ‘speciall’, which ‘do admit both higher stile and more orderlye deliverance’, since they bear ‘a resolute purpose and intendment seriously to discourse, aunswere, implye or avoyde, any certain matter or causes, importing the present affaires whereupon the direction is framed’.
In this second category we might place the first seventeen sonnets, with their persuasion to marriage, a sequence that may in fact draw some of its arguments and images from a model epistle, Erasmus's Encomium Matrimonii , Englished by Sir Thomas Wilson as An Epistle to perswade a yong Gentleman to mariage, devised by Erasmus, in the behalfe of his freend .
Angel Day transposed the exercise for the opposite sex in An Epistle Swasorie, wherein a Gentlewoman is councelled to mariage .
These are clearly more formal models than those which the modern letter-writer is used to, yet Shakespeare's range stretches from the intimate and occasional to just such formal rhetorical structures as Day's category of the ‘Epistle Deliberative’, which uses a mixture of praise and criticism in its ‘Hortatory’ or ‘Dehortatory’intent, and may legitimately subject the recipient to moral pressure: Yet, while acknowledging the relevance of Day's treatise on letter-writing and its tactics of persuasion, we may note that in Shakespeare one of Day's categories is absent, namely the ‘Responsory Epistle’, which ‘dependeth of the partes of a former letter’and must refer back to it.
The poet receives no replies: the Sonnets are one-half of a correspondence, as they represent one-half of a relationship.
This one-way traffic gives them their uniqueness but also a certain poignant quality: the I is always striving towards the Thou or You , but the second person never replies.
Since so much emphasis falls on the pronouns, it seems to me natural to turn next to the basic grounding of education and humanity in the Renaissance, the trivium (grammar, logic, rhetoric) and to ask what these grammatical categories meant in Shakespeare's time, and what they mean today, so joining the history of grammar — a subject whose importance to the study of literature is seldom realized — to modern linguistics.
If we turn first to the best-known Tudor textbook, the so-called ‘Royal Grammar’ originally produced by Lily and Colet for St Paul's School, but becoming virtually ubiquitous after a proclamation by Edward VI in 1548 ordering its use in all grammar schools — it was undoubtedly used by Shakespeare — we find that a pronoun is said to be ‘a parte of speeche, much lyke to a noune, whyche is used in shewyng or rehersyng’.
That is, pronouns which ‘shew’ are called ‘Demonstratives, because they shew a thynge not spoken of before’, while those that ‘rehearse’are called ‘relatives’, because they relate or refer back to something already mentioned — we would call them antecedents.
Further, ‘A pronoune hath thre persons’: These are the traditional grammatical definitions of the pronoun, as first made by Dionysius Thrax in the second century BC, and systematized further by Priscian (c .
AD 500), whose account Lily is quoting word for word.
Later English theorists of grammar bring out more clearly the implications of ‘shewing’ and ‘rehearsing’, distinguishing which of the pronoun's functions are substitutive (‘rehearsing’) and which not.
As Ian Michael puts it in his admirable history of English grammar, This function of pronouns, as John Wilkins saw in 1668, is to ‘represent things…
Immediately and in kind, without respect to the names of those things’.
The I will ‘represent to our thoughts the person speaking’ without any loss of immediacy, or any deflection of address.
What takes place between the I and the You is a human transaction which can also be thought of in terms of gesture.
James Harris, writing in 1751, saw that ‘all Conversation passes between Particulars or Individuals ’, and argued that when, at the formative stages of human language, a speaker met another whose name he did not know he addressed him by using ‘, that is,Pointing , or Indication by the Finger or Hand , some traces of which are still to be observed as a part of that Action which naturally attends our speaking’.
To point to myself I use the pronoun I , to point to ‘the Party addrest ’ I use Thou .
Harris perceived that the I-Thou relationship is represented perfectly adequately by  By frequently limiting his scope to I and Thou Shakespeare is creating an interpersonal field which is so restricted that thoughts, ideas, feelings move back and forth between sender and receiver without the need for any other delimitation or definition.
The rest of the world is excluded: these two are all that matter.
The function of the pronoun, then, is neither to name nor to act as a substitute for a noun.
As Michael says, these two main discoveries by English grammarians were both negative.
It seems to me, if a literary critic may be allowed a comment on these linguistic matters, that the function of the first- and second-person pronouns is rather to relate two people, to set up a plane of relationship which includes them and excludes all others.
The pronouns do not ‘stand for a noun’, nor indeed for anything else, but map out paths of communication between human beings, transactions.
Yet, as we have seen by reference to epistolary theory in the Renaissance, the Sonnets are I utterances which receive no replies.
To complete this brief survey of the linguistic status of the pronoun we need an account of its function that will do justice to the first-person perspective.
For this purpose I draw on a wide-ranging survey by John Lyons, which carries on naturally from the analysis by James Harris that I have just quoted.
Lyons writes, Lyons calls this ‘the subject of discourse’.
In Shakespeare's Sonnets , we could say, the ‘subject of discourse’ is largely the speaker and hearer themselves; thus the field of discourse is identical with the two people constituting the language-utterance.
The personal pronouns, according to Lyons, form part of ‘the ‘deictic co-ordinates’ of the typical situation of utterance’; that is, they help to define (along with such adverbs of place and time as here, there, now, then ) the spatio-temporal location of the act of communication.
Thus: Since the centre of the deictic system switches, personal pronouns are known as ‘shifters’, which ‘means that they have a double structure, uniting conventional and existential bonds within the same sign’.
That is, the linguistic categories anchor communication in the real world and in the relationship between speaker and hearer/reader.
As Lyons says, the grammatical ‘category of proximity is typically determined in relation to the category of person….
Both this and here are to be interpreted as ‘proximate’ with respect to the speaker.’
The speaker evaluates time, distance, and person from his own point of view.
But of course he does not stand alone.
Our two personae may have the roles of speaker and hearer, yet they ‘may also stand in a certain linguistically-relevant relationship of status vis-à-vis one another(parent: child, master:servant, teacher:pupil, etc.).’
These status relations can interact with, reinforce, or undermine the speaker-hearer relationship.
In the Sonnets , clearly, the speaker is sometimes placed in a respectful relationship, the disinterested friend advising a brilliant young man to marry; at other times he is an equal, celebrating a friendship or reproaching its betrayal; but he is never the superior.
I have described the difference between the sonnets of Shakespeare and those of Sidney, say, as being that between first-to-second person and first-to-third person poetry.
My diagnosis of the increased gap between the participants implied by the Sidneian constellation is strengthened by Lyons's argument that ‘whereas first and second person are the positive members of the category of person, third person is essentially a negative notion’, because ‘it does not necessarily refer to participants in the situation of utterance’.
To me ‘positive'/ ‘negative’ seemed too sharp a distinction, for which I should have preferred the category ‘included'/ ‘excluded’.
Happily Lyons himself  subsequently used the more moderate opposition in making the important suggestion  That formulation makes an interesting link between linguistics and phenomenology which more knowledgeable readers might care to pursue.
For the moment it is enough to underline the relevance of this suggestion to the Sonnets , the whole experience of which is presented from the point of view of ego alone, from which perspective the third person is indeed a sign of a double absence, both of the I and the Thou .
But Shakespeare is capable of more complex patterns.
What if the Thou has gone over to the She : are the two then at the same level of estrangement from the I ?
And if the I joins the She , how will the Thou see it?
This would be the appropriate point to call in some modern philosophers who have discussed these issues, and an excursus into the work of Edmund Husserl, Max Scheler, Alfred Schutz, Georg Simmel, and others would be of undoubted value.
Suffice to suggest that the ego -experienced world of the Sonnets , despite the enormous time devoted to the Thou , creates what is essentially a single vision, a self-dedication to the other, which in effect results in an exposure and analysis, not only of the other but also of the self.
One thing we experience in reading these poems is the many ways one human being can care about another.
Not all the personal pronouns in the Sonnets , of course, are significant of personal relationships, and for this reason it is not enough just to tot up the figures in a computer-made concordance.
He and She can refer to the third party in either of the triangular relationships, but in Sonnet 2 He refers to the Friend's future child, while in 3 She refers to the Friend's mother; in 50 and 51 He refers to the poet's horse!
Both pronouns can be used to refer to ‘a man’ or ‘a woman’in the abstract (e.g. Sonnets 3, 21, 32, 38, 41) and They can also refer to ‘men, women, the world’(e.g. Sonnets 20, 25, 69, 121, 123, 124, 125).
Similarly We, Us, Our can refer to the protagonists in the poems but it can also describe the opinions or reactions of mankind at large(59, 60, 116, 118).
Thou or You forms are frequently used to address personifications, at which point the Friend or Mistress often slips into the third person, as part of an imagined triangle.
Such are the sonnets which include addresses to Nature (11, 20, 67, 126), Time (12, 15, 19, 123, 126), Love (1, 137, 148), the Sun (7, 18), Night (27), Day (28), the Soul (146), or the Muse (100, 101).
In some poems the poet addresses parts of his body in the third person, the eyes or the mind (24, 113, 114), or his ‘flesh’(151).
Some sonnets contain no pronouns at all; others do not refer to the poet's relationship with either party, But the absence of pronouns is not in itself proof of the absence of a relationship.
In Sonnet 5, for example, when we read ‘Those hours that with gentle work did frame/The lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell’ we take the second line as meaning ‘Thy lovely gaze’(similarly with 137, to the Mistress).
Equally, the presence of a pronoun does not prove a relationship.
Thus while we could take 123 as being about the Poet's constancy to his Friend, even though we have neither Thou nor He form referring to the Friend (‘No, Time, thou shalt not boast that I do change/…
I will be true despite thy scythe and thee’), in Sonnet 116 the Friend seems to have receded into the background while the poet stands up for all men; Although the poet's love is included in the affirmation, I would agree with Ingram and Redpath in seeing the poem rather as ‘a meditative attempt to define perfect love’.
This said, the number of sonnets which are not specifically about a human relationship is remarkably small.
The single philosophic-religious poem is 146: While we can easily relate this sonnet to the meditative tradition, or to Stoic-Christian mortification patterns, it is an outsider in the Sonnets , which are otherwise a collection of love-poems.
This poem is not even a palinode to love.
The three other sonnets which present no personal relationships are all generalizations about love.
They are 56: ‘Sweet love, renew thy force; be it not said/Thy edge should blunter be than appetite’ which expresses a feeling of temporarily spent force.
It clearly might apply to the poet's relationship, but it is not specifically said to.
From love's satiety we move to an indifference to feeling: ‘They that have power to hurt and will do none’.
This is Sonnet 94, ‘which at no point  addresses the Friend directly, stands back from the group much as a contemplative soliloquy does from the dialogue of a play’.
However, its calculatedly oblique and enigmatic avoiding of a direct statement — a withholding made all the more tantalizing in that it includes no less than eighteen declarative verb forms — could have a remarkably powerful effect if we imagine it being read by the person whose unnatural behaviour it describes.
‘How smart a lash that speech doth give my conscience!’ he might say, with Claudius (Hamlet , II.i.150).
An equally studied absence of deixis is sustained in the exceptionally rhetorically structured Sonnet 129: ‘The expense of spirit in a waste of shame/Is lust in action’.
Of course, this could apply to the Mistress or to the poet, but in its absence of relationship it stands apart, as do the other sonnets of this type, as general observations on phases of human love, common at certain times to all men and women.
This group is the exception, and a very small one, for the Sonnets otherwise express personal relationships in a highly concrete manner.
The sequence to the mistress is explicit in its various phases of relationship, Shakespeare making almost all possible permutations on I/Thou/She/He/ You .
Yet while we make this point we must immediately see that these pronouns do not characterize the relationship.
The pronouns relate people, create a path of feeling, and vary as that feeling varies.
Since the pronouns are used to express a human encounter they derive their nature and value from the human beings, and not vice versa.
In the group to the mistress, as every reader has seen, the feelings expressed are bitter, cynical, degraded; so the pronouns suffer the same change.
At times the degradation is not serious, more a quizzical down-valuing of the woman by comparison with conventional norms of ‘fair’ beauty (127, 130).
But elsewhere she is seen to be ‘black’ in more than one sense.
This might be in a direct indictment, as at the end of 147, where after twelve lines describing the poet's state of fever and madness (‘frantic-mad with evermore unrest’), the couplet finally reveals the cause of his derangement: ‘For I have sworn thee fair, and thought thee bright, /Who art as black as hell, as dark as night.’
Or it might be by indirection, as in 131 with its apologia: ‘In nothing art thou black save in thy deeds.’
The linguistic form there appears to excuse but in fact indicts her, a rhetorical device found also in the sonnets to the Friend.
But elsewhere the poet prefers direct attack, as in 152: Obscure though the details may be (have both the Poet and the Mistress broken their marriage-vows? is the Friend implicated?), the man certainly vaunts over the woman.
But his superiority is short-lived, for the next line shows a recoil against the self: In the penultimate line Shakespeare achieves a fine double effect, the spelling ‘eye’ linking up with the ‘eyes’(his eyes, be it noted) in the preceding lines, while the heard sense, ‘more perjur'd I’looks back to ‘I am perjur'd most’.
The final insult is that he has not only forfeited his ‘honest faith’ in taking up with her but that his eyes have even deceived him about her beauty: she is ‘foul’in every sense.
Thus we note that the recoil against the I in the second quatrain was merely a ploy, resulting in an even more bitter attack on the Thou .
In many of these sonnets the poet accuses himself of a gross failure in judgement in having formed a relationship with this woman.
The opening of Sonnet 148 again criticizes his own powers of sight and discrimination: It is not only a failure in perception: as we have seen in 152, the eyes were merely agents or instruments of the will or judgement, from which self-deception flowed, forcing the organs of perception to see what they are told to see (as in the political conformity enforced in George Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four ).
In that bitter paradox, he has given ‘eyes to blindness’, made his eyes ‘swear against the thing they see’; similarly here, his judgement ‘censures falsely’ what his eyes ‘see aright’.
The conceits point to a monstrous self-perversion, the forfeiting of integrity and the living out of a lie at which, moreover, his mind or heart knowingly connives.
Not only does he connive, she does so too, as in that most disturbing poem, 138, where the second-person form is strikingly absent.
The mistress is seen here in Sidneian terms, from without, her motives wholly opaque, with no access to her feelings.
The poet's relationship with her is what a judge would call an ‘intimate’ one but quite lacking in openness, trust, or love.
Italicizing the pronouns may help to indicate the remarkable symmetry of the poem, if we read it as three quatrains and a couplet: each pronoun balances the other in frequency, as each person matches the other in self-deception and deception of the other.
It is a peculiarly appropriate irony that this should be the only poem in this group with the Our/ We form, establishing on the grammatical plane a congruence with the semantic one: seen from the outside, held up for inspection, they are united — at the level of mutual deception.
Several of these poems express doubts about the Mistress's ‘truth’, that is, both honesty and chastity.
He lies with her, as he lies to her, and she with and to him.
The logical development of this suspicion is the series of sonnets presenting a triangular relationship.
(Critics assume that the other man involved is the same man to whom Sonnets 1–126 have been addressed; and some also assume that the three people involved in this series (133, 134, 135, 143, 144) are the same three involved in the earlier series (41, 42).
Although 133 refers to ‘my friend’, I see no way of settling this issue in either direction; but I do see the danger inherent in treating both groups as autobiographical.)
These are evidently not the greatest sonnets by any criteria, but they are both ingenious and fleet.
That is, if one were to attempt to visualize the three personae involved in terms of a novel or play one would need pages to describe the kinds of interchange that Shakespeare renders in a quatrain: ‘Trice threefold’, too, are the number of lines taken up by editors trying to pin down the multiple shifts of identity which take place in these four lines.
This shuttling back and forth between the personae could only be done so adroitly by a poet exceptionally sensitive to the status and function of pronouns.
The sheer density of appearance of the three pronouns in this  group is impressive (see Appendix), as is their distribution.
They represent a triangle of forces, in which the movement of any one point affects the other two.
Their frequency results from Shakespeare's imaginative involvement with the relationship that they mediate.
Sonnet 143 begins with a leisurely analogy involving a housewife putting her child down in order to pursue a runaway chicken.
In the same way, the Poet tells his Mistress, There, curiously enough, although the Mistress is pursuing the Friend, the Poet is pursuing the Mistress, not the Friend; he wants to be kissed and consoled by her.
One could also argue that the Poet is using the Mistress as bait to induce the Friend to remain: this three-way relationship is as complex as that in Sartre's Huis clos (two women, one man) and in some ways equally claustrophobic and degrading.
In the sonnet just quoted, for instance, Shakespeare presents the Poet in a humiliating situation, indifferent to the behaviour of the Mistress with other men just so long as he gets some share of the action.
In 144 the situation is even more degraded.
The poem is egocentric both in the strictly linguistic sense in which John Lyons uses the word and in its normal sense.
The speaker sees the world from his own perspective, praises his man friend and does his best to damn the woman: The emotional tone increases, from this relatively cool opening (although ‘suggest’ has the sinister connotation of diabolic temptation) as the poet's indignation at the woman grows (‘my female evil/Tempteth…would corrupt…with her foul pride’) until he reveals the sexual suspicion which motivates his anger: ‘I guess one angel in another's hell’.
The allusion to the famous novella in the Decameron (3 , 10), in which ‘to put the devil back in hell’ was a euphemism for sexual intercourse by using which a hermit seduced a young novice, is given an application quite the reverse of Boccaccio's warm-hearted celebration of the flesh: ‘Yet this shall I ne'er know, but live in doubt/Till my bad angel fire my good one out.’
This last line has the overt meaning ‘till the woman casts off the man’, but in fact it is far more savage.
As Ingram and Redpath note, ‘Fire out’ was common usage for ‘infect with a venereal  disease’, so the line means that ‘the poet will not know whether the Friend has slept with the woman until he sees whether he has contracted venereal disease’.
This is a sentiment worthy of Juvenal, or some Restoration satirist (indeed the deliberate transmission of the pox was known as a form of revenge in the court of Charles II).
But whereas those satirists recreated a context with omniscience in such a way as to justify their final attack, the poet here can give us no such context.
He is merely expressing a suspicion, and in a sense a hope (‘when she has given him the clap, then he'll come back to me ’, to modernize it somewhat).
The appallingly self-centred nature of this conclusion can only rebound against the man who has uttered it, and Shakespeare was too sensitive a poet and human being to be blind to such a reader reaction.
The revenge of the self on the others here (for assuredly the Friend will not enjoy the experience either) acts to lower the self to their level, or even beneath it.
It is sometimes a relief to leave the sonnets to the Mistress.
We admire their brilliance of language and psychology, but we do not necessarily like them.
This is not to say that only poetry with ‘positive attitudes to life’ is acceptable, since anyone who has thought about the representation of evil in literature, whether in satire or tragedy or in the novel, will know that an apparently negative attitude can be in fact profoundly positive.
The sonnets to the Mistress, though, do not deal with evil in a profound way; they are often cynical, self-accusing, and self-mocking.
Since the Poet indicts himself, we are tempted to reject his artefacts on the same basis, as being either sordid or trivial.
The whole series is a tribute to Shakespeare's dramatic imagination, but it does not inspire affection.
The sonnets to the Friend, by contrast, elicit warmth in us by the warmth that they contain.
As C. L. Barber has finely said, in these poems ‘poetry is, in a special way, an action, something done for and to the beloved….
Many of the sonnets are wonderfully generous poems; they give meaning and beauty’ The generosity resides in the act of celebration, a process by which the Poet can fade himself out as an actor, reducing himself to the role of recording agent.
In Sonnet 17, indeed, he seems quizzically aware that his dedication to panegyric may result in a loss of credibility: ‘Who will believe my verse in time to come?’
The point, though, is not that his poetry exceeds the truth but that it fails to keep up with the truth, since it cannot fully express the Friend's merits: No one was ever taken in by Shakespeare's disclaimers of ability, and few people will imagine that, whoever the Friend was — if indeed there was a real-life Friend — Shakespeare has failed to do justice to him; if anything, rather the opposite.
But the celebration of the Friend, which sometimes takes the form of an apparent self-abasement by the Poet, has not been to everyone's liking.
Yvor Winters pronounced, in characteristically forthright manner, that  Even C. L. Barber found that ‘sometimes the activity of the poetry alone makes endurable the passivity of the attitude expressed by the poet’.
As I see it, the ‘passivity’ is in one sense a consequence of the decision to write the sonnets from a man to a man — as Sonnet 20 made clear, no ‘activity’is contemplated.
But, more important, I believe that celebration of the other and devaluing of the self is one of the oldest, as it is one of the permanent ways by which human beings express love or admiration for each other.
‘And John…preached, saying, There cometh one mightier than I after me, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to stoop down and unloose’(Mark 1:7).
In Dante's Purgatorio XXVI, 117, Guinicelli points to Arnaut Daniel as ‘miglior fabbro’, an elevation of the other that Eliot appropriated to indicate his indebtedness to Pound.
In acknowledging the greater value of the other one is giving away a part of oneself: that is surely neither servile nor passive, but active generosity.
In the opening sequence the Poet is so concerned with the Friend and his future existence that he seems to write himself out of the picture.
Simple statistics are revealing.
In Sonnets 1 to 17 the first-person forms appear twenty-five times; if we compute the second-person forms by treating Thou and You as of equal value they appear 161 times.
Of the first seventeen poems those with the maximum possible abnegation of the self (that is, with no I/me/my forms at all ) number no less than eleven; the first reference by the Poet to himself comes in Sonnet 10.
This is poetry to, for, and about the Friend, and the Poet is merely vox .
Yet despite the enormous preponderance of Thou and You forms the addressee is under constant criticism.
The ‘cherishing love’ that Barber has spoken of here takes the form of arguing that the Friend should cherish posterity, the world at large, by begetting a child on some anonymous and otherwise unimportant woman!
(I sometimes wonder whether there is not an element of satire addressed by Shakespeare against  the persona of the poet here, who can argue with such single-mindedness a case that seems the height of egoism in its intention to exploit the other — a woman — merely in order to reproduce itself.)
The criticism is at times sharp, and the Friend is indicted of self-love, ‘the most inhibited sin in the canon’, as the Clown says in All's Well , doubtless aware of the seriousness of his words.
So this poet attacks his Friend for hoarding his beauty until it will be ‘self-kill'd’(6.4).
In Sonnet 3 he asks ‘who is so fond will be the tomb/Of his self-love to stop posterity?’
(Of course, a ridiculous exaggeration: posterity will do fine without him!).
The Friend is like a ‘profitless usurer’(a violent paradox in the Renaissance, as today): ‘For having traffic with thyself alone —Thou of thyself thy sweet self dost deceive’(4.9f).
The pronouns seem to turn in on themselves in a solipsist dead-end.
The Friend is like the phoenix, yet without the life-giving or self-sacrificing qualities of that mythical creature: Again, ‘thou consum'st thy self in single life’: for Shakespeare images of self-division were always among the most potent signs of disorder.
The pronouns describe a narcissism which is doomed to destroy itself.
But this is to concede the argument of Shakespeare's Poet without further thought.
Surely the Friend would be justified in rejecting the case by saying that he was living in the present and that whatever happened in the future, whether he married and had a son or not, would be of doubtful relevance to his own mind or body now.
‘What man in the whole world’, C. S. Lewis asked, ‘except a father or a potential father-in-law, cares whether any other man gets married?’ and he partly answered his own question by saying that the ‘self-abnegation’and ‘anxiety’of the Poet for his Friend's good was ‘more like a parent's than a lover's’.
The persuasion to marriage, then, is a criticism of the Friend (whose reasons for not marrying may have been honourable or dishonourable), but it tells us something about the Poet.
As I have already indicated, I am not sure whether there may perhaps be some mockery of the over-solicitousness of the Poet's desire for this marriage and the begetting of a (boy-) child, as indeed of the appeal to the egoist's desire to perpetuate himself.
I see no way of deciding this issue, but it shows again the point made earlier, that the self in dealing with the other defines the other and itself reciprocally and simultaneously.
What I want you to have tells you what I value, tells you — and me, perhaps — what kind of a person I am.
To write a biography of another can involve one in autobiography.
This first sequence is problematic, even though the generosity seems overwhelming and unquestionably sincere.
For the most part the later sonnets of celebration of the Friend impute no such extraordinary motives to the Poet.
One way of getting at the varieties of relationship in these poems is to group them, not too dogmatically, into poems where the I dominates, and those where the Thou carries more weight.
Statistics are not always a reliable guide since, as every reader knows, frequency of utterance is not the same as intensity.
Further, if one makes such a rough-and-ready division then one finds that the same categories of relationship occur in both groups.
There are poems of celebration of the other where the I dominates, and others where the Thou does; there are poems of criticism of the Friend in both groups.
Yet certain distinctions do emerge, certain patterns of relationship.
For instance, adoration of the Friend without — to give, for the moment, a hostage to Yvor Winters — the Poet abasing himself, but retaining instead his own dignity, is expressed more often in poems where Thou forms dominate.
It is as if the Poet were concentrating so strongly on giving an adequate image of the Friend that he ceases to think about himself and his own unworthiness by comparison.
Such is 53: The reader will have noticed the complete absence of the first person, as the Poet, fully caught up in his task, existed merely as vehicle for the other's praise.
In the sonnet following the I appears only in the last line: ‘And so of you, beauteous and lovely youth, /When that shall vade, my verse distils your truth.’
In two other sonnets, 77 (‘Thy glass will shew thee how thy beauties wear,) and 84 (‘Who is it that says most which can say more/Than this rich praise,— that you alone are you’) the I is also totally absent.
If we were now to consider the many sonnets of celebration of the Friend where the Thou outweighs the I we would find a similar dedication to the other without, I feel, any disabling by modern tastes — self-abnegation.
This would be the relationship that we find in 104 (‘To me, fair friend, you never can be old’) or 106 (‘When in the chronicle of wasted time’).
Turning now to the poems where the I dominates we find some instances  of apparent self-abnegation.
But they are not all to be interpreted literally: in some the imagery is conventional, in others the self-abasement is ironic.
In the sonnets on the Rival Poet, for instance, whether the first or second person dominates, the technique of praising the other poet while denigrating oneself is clearly ironic, as J. W. Lever's discussion has shown.
As he says of 80 (‘Oh how I faint when I of you do write’), ‘the lavish praise of the rival…serves to destroy this writer's reputation by its very hyperbole’.
In this poem, as in 85, the Poet claims that his Muse is ‘tongue-tied’; in 76, 102, 103 and 105 he gives conflicting reasons, all ingenious, why he writes such repetitive or uninspired poetry.
By the conceit he is making a serious point: his poetry is repetitive because the virtues of the Friend are semper eadem .
As 105 puts it: It is hard to miss the wit in such poems, or in the earlier profession of incompetence: It would be a dull-witted reader who interpreted such poems literally, or who took au pied de la lettre such conventional statements of bondage as this: Self-depreciation (sometimes called ‘the modesty topos’ has been a rhetorical device since the beginnings of literature and continues in full flourish today.
There is one poem in which the I dominates to a remarkable extent and which, since it has been read literally, might seem an exception to my argument, namely 62: If one reads only as far as this point, or reads the rest of the poem inattentively, one might indeed take this as an attack by the poet on his own narcissism.
But it at once destroys such a reading: And now it is clear that as in other sonnets (20, 36, 39), the Poet's best or true ‘self’ is the Friend.
It begins to seem as if Winters's ‘servile weakness’ was rather over-stated.
To be faithful to the over-all impression of the celebratory poems we ought to note that the effect is often the reverse of abnegation.
Particularly in the sonnets where the Poet confronts time and age, we find the affirmation that his verse will perpetuate the Friend's memory to eternity, and it follows — as history has indeed shown — that his verse itself, and the poet who wrote it, are also guaranteed immortality.
In celebrating the Friend the Poet is celebrating himself and his own power: Here again Shakespeare has personalized the Friend while depersonalizing the Poet.
He does not write ‘my rhyme’ but ‘this’, ‘these contents’; his poem is ‘The living record of your memory’, ‘You live in this’.
Slightly more personal is 60 (‘Like as the waves make toward the pebbled shore’), but only at the very last gasp, as it were, defeating time: ‘And yet to times in hope my verse shall stand, /Praising thy worth, despite his cruel hand.’
Indeed, a striking quality of the sonnets against time is their less personal quality.
In some of them the Friend is described in the third person (often as ‘my love’) and time addressed as Thou .
It is as if the Poet were tackling time face to  face, confronting, wrestling with time, with his Friend standing apart as the prize in the competition.
The poet's aggression towards time is marked in 19: It is a challenge ‘in the teeth’, as an Elizabethan might have put it.
Elsewhere time is also in the third person, and the field of utterance is concentrated on the Poet alone, his fears and hopes: experience has taught him ‘That Time will come and take my love away’(64.12).
In the matching sonnets, 63 and 65, Shakespeare calls up great reserves of language and feeling to create the corroding power of age and ‘sad mortality’: ‘Against my love shall be as I am now/With Time's injurious hand crush'd and o'erworn’(63).
The Friend is now no longer the hearer but the subject of discourse.
The Poet's care for him is manifested in his absence, not to his face; there can be no suspicion of flattery.
What is so touching about these poems is the contrast that they express.
On one side is the shattering power of time: This feeling of inevitability becomes so strong that it makes the poem comment on itself in surprised awareness —‘Oh fearful meditation!’— and pushes on to an apparently unanswerable climax: ‘Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back? /Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid?’
The contrast is between all that unstoppable force, irresistible depredation, and the fragility of a poem: ‘Oh none, unless this miracle have might — /That in black ink my love may still shine bright.’
All poets need self-confidence, but not all of them justify their belief in themselves.
What Shakespeare had, in addition, was the self-confidence of a generation, indeed of the whole Humanist ethos, with its belief in the ‘miraculous’ power of works of literature — ink on paper — to survive the ravages of time.
Reading this group of sonnets is to be reminded of the noble conclusion to the first book of Bacon's Advancement of Learning : In describing his Friend as my love or He the Poet could be seen as using the third-person form in order to place him apart, perhaps to place him outside the sphere of time's influence.
If one accepts this interpretation then the third-person form would not have the negative connotations defined so sharply by John Lyons.
Yet in other sonnets it does have those connotations of exclusion and separation.
If we regard He as representing [—ego,— tu ], then we have a valuable insight with which to read those sonnets where the Friend's behaviour is criticized by the Poet from a position of detachment.
Such is 67: The detail in much of this poem remains enigmatic, but here as in 68 I cannot think that the references to false ornament and cosmetics (including wigs made of hair taken from the scalp of corpses) are favourable to the Friend, who seems to be encouraging corruption by his own example or presence in this milieu.
It is noticeable that the He in these two poems represents a ‘minus ego, minus tu ’ situation in literal truth, since neither first-nor second-person form occurs.
The Poet evidently wants to detach himself totally from the Friend, stand away from him as if he might suffer corruption or contagion by going any nearer.
Similarly in 69, which has eleven instances of Thou and none of I , the analysis of the Friend's misbehaviour focuses on the discrepancy between his outward beauty (‘thy fair flower’) and his mind and action (‘the rank smell of weeds’), an inconsistency given more biting expression by the double pun in the couplet: ‘But why thy odour matcheth not thy show, /The soil is this — that thou dost common grow.’
By this suppression of the ego the Poet has disowned the Friend, washed his hands of him, for the moment.
There are other poems attacking the Friend in which the Poet writes from a closer perspective.
Here, indeed, we can see another facet of the relationship, to analyse which Shakespeare uses all possible permutations of dominant pronouns, approaching it now from this viewpoint, now that, and moving between direct attack and ironic excuse.
The third-person form, in its rather more personal state as ‘my love’, is used in 33 to smooth over the Friend's faults.
‘Full many a glorious morning’ has been ruined and disgraced by ‘the basest clouds’: They ‘may’stain: the ambiguity of the verb (‘it can happen’; ‘it is allowed’) points up the ambivalence of feeling, for the poem is clearly another example of a strategy we have already found in the Mistress poems, an apparent exculpation which is in fact an indictment.
In 87 (‘Farewell — Thou art too dear for my possessing’) the Friend's inconstancy and betrayal are excused as a simple error of judgement: Here, though, Shakespeare is not content to let the irony stand, for the couplet, with its sarcastic double-rhyme, dispels both illusion and self-deception: ‘Thus have I had thee as a dream doth flatter — /In sleep a king, but waking no such matter.’
The I-Thou relationship in these poems is poisoned by the Friend's behaviour, so it follows that the Poet's attempt to excuse it degrades himself still further.
This judgement applies to the I- dominant poems (88, 89) as to the Thou- dominant ones, such as 35, where after the first quatrain excusing the Friend's faults (‘No more be griev'd at that which thou hast done’) the second suddenly recoils on itself: This is indeed to bring a plea ‘'gainst myself’, to become an accomplice or ‘accessory’, plunging oneself in ‘civil war’.
So that when we subsequently read 70: ‘That thou art blam'd shall not be thy defect, /For slander's mark was ever yet the fair’, with its conclusion that the suspicion of the Friend's evil is in fact desirable since otherwise the whole world would be in love with him, then we can supply our own ironic commentary.
In this mode of complaint the Thou- dominated poems are the more powerful.
Entire focus on the second person is elsewhere a mark of affection and respect: now it throws a spotlight on the Friend's degradation, isolated so that we can ‘mark’ it better.
As in that sequence (1 — 17), so in this (67, 68, 69, 70) the I is suppressed altogether, the Thou has fallen from a pedestal to the gutter.
A later (later in terms of the Quarto numbering, that is) example of this type of sonnet, with its disgusted ‘withdrawal of the Poet’ gesture, is 95: The exclamatory style, the notably affectionate gestures, the epithets of praise (‘sweet and lovely’, ‘sweets’, ‘beauty's veil’in line 11) almost convince us that the Friend's personal attractiveness can somehow transmute evil to good, a form of paradoxical hyperbole that Shakespeare gives to Lepidus, attempting to excuse Antony's faults to Caesar: ‘His faults in him seem as the spots of heaven, /More fiery by night's blackness’(Antony and Cleopatra , I.iv.13f).
But just as that excuse failed, so does this, and the couplet emerges with a direct warning: ‘Take heed’.
In the following sonnet (one of numerous matched pairs) the excuses come from the world at large: What is the charming, or sinister, power that can turn faults into graces?
As we have already seen by juxtaposing Sonnets 35 and 70, after we have read a poem in which the attempt at exculpation is exploded by the Poet, either by irony or by direct criticism, when we subsequently read one in which the exculpation is made again but with no recoil on itself, then the second poem seems hollow.
So Sonnet 96 ends with a notably weak — I suggest, deliberately weak — couplet: ‘I love thee in such sort/As, thou being mine, mine is thy good report.’
Then the more fool you, we are likely to say.
Two other matched pairs in which the Thou dominates as a focus of shameful action are 57 and 58, 92 and 93.
In both pairs we find a sarcastic ‘overlooking of the beloved's faults’ which draws our attention unerringly towards them.
Sonnet 57 begins: ‘Being your slave, what should I do but tend/Upon the hours and times of your desire?’
After ten more lines of self-abasement to ‘my sovereign’ from ‘a sad slave’it ends with the biting couplet: ‘So true a fool is love that in your will, /Though you do anything, he thinks no ill.’
This gives a carte blanche to sin.
In 58 ‘your slave’, ‘your vassal’ is ready to swallow any insult or neglect, the poem concluding: The second-person pronouns come so thick and fast here that we cannot miss the bitter criticism of the Friend setting himself up as a law unto himself, becoming so entirely obsessed with his own pleasures that he betrays their relationship.
The passivity of the Poet here is pathetic.
In 93, by contrast, the sense of isolation and suspicion of infidelity (92 ends with the line ‘Thou mayst be false and yet I know it not’) takes on that most bitter form, knowing self-deception: ‘So shall I live supposing thou art true, /Like a deceivéd husband’— that is, a cuckold.
It is all too fitting that this anatomy of ‘the false heart's history’ should end with a comparison of the Friend's beauty to ‘Eve's apple’: this sequence describes another grave discrepancy between substance and show, another Fall of man.
Yet the fault is not the Friend's alone.
as if conscious of the damaging effect this group must have on the imagined relationship between the Poet and the Friend, damaging to the Poet and damaging to the reader's view of both the Friend and the Poet (‘why does he persevere?’ readers may ask in some irritation when confronted with such a catalogue of the Friend's faults), Shakespeare sets matters even by writing what seems to be a related group where the Poet describes his own faults (109, 110, 111, 112; 117, 118, 119, 120).
In these poems the I far exceeds the Thou in frequency (nearly three times), and presents as many complexities of attitude.
In 110 we find straightforward confession: Yet in the same sentence we find specious self-excuses: ‘but, by all above’,— this unusual oath, calling the heavens to witness, is an anticipatory give-away — Well, the disbelieving reader will say, to claim that you betrayed your partner merely to test your love for him, which has supposedly been increased by the experiment — this is to add insult to injury.
Who would be so naïve as to believe that?
Evidently the Poet's estimate of the Friend's credulity is rather higher than ours.
The I of these poems is placed in a deliberately false and weak position.
It can only appeal to be welcomed to the Friend's breast (110), to seek ‘pity’ for its harmful deeds (111).
But worse still, just as the Poet and the Mistress connived at each other 's deception in 138, just as the Poet connived at the Friend's deception in 93, so in 112 the Poet is inviting the Friend to complete  the circle: ‘For what care I who calls me well or ill, /So you o'er-green my bad, my good allow?’
The metaphor is unusual, drawing attention to the invitation to whitewash, cover up, turn a blind eye to evil.
It is varied, later in the sonnet, with the traditional image of the adder, which is believed to be able to block its hearing (‘my adder's sense/To critic and to flatterer stoppéd are’), but does so in order not to be deflected by charm or blandishments from destroying its prey.
Whether or not Shakespeare was aware of that piece of lore, the corrupt nature of the invitation is made only too clear.
In the second two pairs devoted to this relationship the same pattern emerges.
The Poet acknowledges that he has betrayed the relationship, but this time claims that he was testing the Friend (!):
‘I did strive to prove/The constancy and virtue of your love’(117).
But in the very next poem he says that he did it for a change of diet, a bout of ‘physic’ as it were, needed after over-indulgence: ‘being full of your ne'er cloying sweetness, /To bitter sauces did I frame my feeding’(118).
If ‘ne'er cloying’, why does he need physic?
It was ‘policy in love’, ‘policy’ being one of the Elizabethans' two or three most derogatory words, denoting hyper-cunning and treachery.
The reader can only reject both the excuses and the man who makes them, tearful and repentant though he seems in 119.
The final poem in this sequence provides a natural transition to one of the most puzzling and problematic aspects of the Sonnets revealed by this analysis of pronoun and relationship, and that is the status of We/Us/Our .
Sonnet 120 begins: ‘That you were once unkind befriends me now’.
In other words, the recollection that the Friend had once been guilty of the same fault is a consolation to the Poet, for he now knows how the other must have ‘bowed’ under his own, ‘transgression’: They are equal, then — but more, they are united: ‘Oh, that our night of woe might have remember'd/My deepest sense how hard true sorrow hits.’
He ought to have been reminded of their joint suffering before he committed his fault.
Now at least they are in the same boat, and the balancing of the pronouns in the last four lines declares their equality: I have quoted extensively from that sonnet in order to give the full context for this Our : what they have in common is that they have sinned, each has betrayed the other.
They finally come together at the lowest level of their  relationship.
Precisely the same union in disgrace happens in the series to the Mistress, as we saw in discussing 138: ‘Therefore I lie with her, and she with me, /And in our faults by lies we flatter'd be.’
The curious nature of the first-person plural relationship in the Sonnets [+ ego, + tu ]is that it is so infrequent (twelve times only) and that even when it occurs it is tenuous, fragile, or, as here, stands for a union in falseness.
The first time that we find it is in 36: They are a We unit, but at once they are split up into two incompatible halves: ‘In our two loves there is but one respect/Though in our lives a separable spite’— that is, some malicious act of fortune keeps them separate.
Each is to the other a source not of delight and solace but of shame and guilt.
It is difficult to work out the ‘plot’ of this sonnet, and one is not sure to what extent it is meant to suggest a consistent relationship.
But the fact is that all the other instances of union are just as swiftly broken up, disunited.
A similar, and equally enigmatic poem is 39: One can understand parts of this poem in terms of the punning elsewhere on Me = Myself = Thee , but still the insistence on their having to remain separate seems to move outside the context of this poem.
The matching poem of the pair (40) performs even more dazzling feats of Self/Other identification: But from this fairly innocuous interchange of terms the mood darkens, as can be seen most economically by isolating the rhyme-words of the next two  quatrains: ‘receivest — usest — deceivest — refusest — thief — poverty — grief — injury’.
The couplet is both resentful of the Friend's sexual betrayal and appealing: ‘Lascivious grace, in whom all ill well shows, /Kill me with spites, yet we must not be foes.’
But the double oxymoron in line 13 suggests that they are already foes, that the poem has either been written to try and restore a lost harmony, or to draw attention to the fact that it cannot be restored.
The only other two references to a We relationship both place it-in the past.
In 89, a poem of infidelity (‘Say that thou didst forsake me for some fault’), the Poet abases himself, vowing to perform all kinds of penance in order to win the Friend back, including never mentioning his name again in case he ‘haply of our old acquaintance tell’: it is over, in the past.
Less discordant, but just as remote, is the recollection in 102: ‘Our love was new, and then but in the spring, /When I was wont to greet it with my lays.’
‘All the true paradises are lost paradises’, perhaps.
Or perhaps the Poet and Friend are separated by unbridgeable gaps of sex and social position, and cannot ever form a unit.
Or Shakespeare may not be making any such point at all, despite the apparent evidence of 36 and 38.
It could be said that the We/ Us/Our form is rather a mode of self-description when the poet wishes to present his beloved and himself to the world (as shown by Donne in the Songs and Sonnets ), and that Shakespeare prefers to keep the relationship on an interpersonal level.
In this case one could argue that I and Thou automatically imply We , since the two of us are sharing between ourselves the field of discourse.
It is ours and no one else's.
This linguistic phenomenon, like so many others, is susceptible to several interpretations, even completely opposed ones.
How we judge will depend on how we see the sequence as a whole, and whether we think of it as a sequence, in fact, or as a collection of poems.
If the former, then the scarcity of the We would merely represent a personal whim of Shakespeare, of no particular significance.
If the latter, and if we took Sonnet 20 as a key declaration of intent, then the paucity of the We might indeed imply that the two halves of this relationship are irredeemably twain.
The massive evidence of the repetition of first- and second-person pronouns entitles us to describe the Sonnets as moving forwards and backwards between I and Thou .
Yet the weak or anomalous We forms may point to a further truth, that Shakespeare conceives of the relationship between two friends as both united and separated.
In this case what keeps them apart is not belonging to the same sex, rather, it is simply a condition of life that in no human relationship can two persons ‘fuse’ into one.
Two separate people are essential for any exchange to take place: you cannot give presents to yourself, just as you cannot give yourself to yourself.
Georg Simmel's analysis of a Zweierverbindung , a ‘union of two’ or ‘dyad’as it is usually translated, defines it as the minimal social unit, which depends always on ‘immediacy of  interaction’, there being no super-individual unit to which either party can also belong (as with larger group-structures).
The two members, Simmel emphasized, are interdependent, for ‘the secession of either would destroy the whole’ social unit, and its ‘affective structure is based on what each of the two participants gives or shows only to the one other person and to nobody else’.
Yet, despite this intimacy, the fact that they exist as a couple with a unique value in each other 's eyes (a point marvellously grasped in Donne's love-poetry), they remain separate, even when man and woman strive to overcome the fundamental dualism of life.
As ‘something essentially unattainable’, their dualism  But it cannot be, their ‘nearness…must remain a distance’, this ‘distance which nevertheless to an infinite degree approaches their becoming-one’— remains a distance.
While phenomenology can describe in philosophical terms the impossibility of entering another person's mind, language, memory, value-system, Shakespeare's sonnets long ago grasped the point that I and You communicate with each other from essentially separate positions.
The striking quality of the final group of poems that I want to discuss is their mutuality and reciprocity.
We have already seen many instances of this, but there are more.
In 22 the Poet is so much a part of the Friend that he cannot age, himself, ‘So long as youth and thou are of one date’.
But when the Friend begins to age the Poet would wish to die: Here the motif of giving and receiving love, central to this group, uses the traditional metaphor of exchanging hearts, but reanimates it by the particularity with which the trope is extended.
The Poet will protect the Friend's heart ‘As tender nurse her babe from faring ill’, but after his death then the Friend's heart may also be in jeopardy: ‘Presume not on thy heart when mine is slain; /Thou gav'st me thine not to give back again.’
That is, the exchange of hearts was permanent, irreversible: if one dies the other must too.
Such an investment cannot be divested.
Given Shakespeare's unlimited verbal energies it is no surprise to find him culling ingenuity from this idea of giving and receiving, as in the dazzling wit of 24:(I have italicized his in line 5 since it refers to the Poet;his in line 8 since it refers to his bosom; and They in line 14 as referring to his eyes.)
Not many modern readers like this sonnet — it is too clever for our tastes.
We are by temperament more favourable to such a simple statement of mutuality as the conclusion to 25: ‘Then happy I that love and am belov'd, /Where I may not remove nor be remov'd.’
Yet the Poet does ‘remove’, in the sense that he takes a journey, or is parted from the Friend, and a whole series of sonnets records the separation.
While separation can give the occasion elsewhere for infidelity and betrayal, in this series we find a serene confidence in the other's faith, the security of mutual trust.
The separation may be more mental than physical, as in the much-loved pair 29 and 30, where the Poet's despair and sadness are dispelled merely by recalling the Friend: ‘For thy sweet love rememb'red’ and ‘But if the while I think on thee, dear friend’, couplets which once read it is impossible to forget.
In physical absence, being separated by ‘injurious distance’, the theme of nine or ten consecutive sonnets (43 to 51 or perhaps 52), to think of the Friend is again a consolation against misery, since he is ‘present-absent’(45) in thought or image: After the parting, the reunion (97): Now the poet juxtaposes with great deliberation ‘actual time’ and ‘actual weather’against personal climate, those subjective feelings which are controlled not by the calendar but by our individual experience.
The last four lines of this sonnet are seldom quoted, but to me they represent Shakespeare at his best, that intimate tone and unforced style of which Angel Day's account of the personal letter is so apt a description: ‘the familiar and mutuall talke of one absent friend to another…simple, plaine, and of the lowest and meanest stile’— yet how expressive: It is rare, even in his poetry, to find traditional tropes reanimated with such freshness and simplicity.
Shakespeare is even able to repeat the trick for 98, the other sonnet of the pair.
‘From you have I been absent in the spring’.
If I am forced to select it must be the conclusion:
Any critic who quotes these sonnets runs the risk of putting himself out of business.
Whereas readers often focus on the text of a critical work and skip through the quotations, here the eye is drawn to the poetry and resents the distraction of the critic's argument.
Indeed, analysis is almost superfluous, since if any poems can speak for themselves these can.
Yet I can perhaps perform a minimal interpretative function by putting together some of these ‘mutual’ sonnets which deal with the act of writing poetry, and in which Shakespeare seems more than usually sensitive to the weight of pronouns.
First, two sonnets on the theme that the poetry will survive the poet's death, 71 (‘No longer mourn for me when I am dead’) and 74.
The earlier of the two identifies the poet with his poetry, praying that after his death he should be forgotten: Sonnet 74 draws a different line, separating the Poet from his work: The point to be stressed at this juncture — forgive the interruption!— is the turning of the other into the self and of the self into poetry, which is at the same time the turning of life into art and of transience into immortality: This marvellous poem can be linked, no doubt, to the series attacking time and proclaiming the certainty of the poet's survival.
Yet to me it is more quietly impressive than all the grand ‘exegi monumentum’ gestures, since it refuses to turn outward to time, or the world, but addresses itself with complete absorption to its subject.
As C. S. Lewis wrote so memorably, ‘this transference of the whole self into another self without the demand for a return [has]hardly a precedent in profane literature’.
It is a gesture which is simultaneously human, literary, and religious.
The I gives itself to the Thou , makes a complete act of dedication, links the two persons through the poetry.
Yet the two remain separate.
For ‘The Phoenix and the Turtle’, another poem, a different problem, Shakespeare could celebrate the union of those two birds on an emblematic, almost mystical level: The paradoxes are as bewildering as the mystery of the Holy Trinity: Mysterious and desirable though such a union may be, it is not given to human beings, and in the Sonnets it does not take place.
To the last — from whichever point you begin, and wherever you end — these poems present an irreducibly double experience, where one admires, and one is admired.
This is Shakespeare's truth about life, and love.
The Poet himself is aware that his situation may seem repetitive, and in 76 answers the question, ‘Why write I still all one, ever the same…?’
Like a good Renaissance poet he replies that this is the principle of decorum; his form merely recreates his subject-matter: We are inclined to smile at the self-depreciation, as we are at the similar joke in 105: He has no need for other forms, other themes.
The repetitiveness of such poems is an obstacle to critics committed to the idea of an ever-developing narrative, and they are not often taken seriously.
I suggest that we take them not only seriously but literally, since they represent the very root of the relationship around which the Sonnets are structured.
‘Nuns fret not at their convent's narrow-room’ was Wordsworth's explanation why he willingly bound himself ‘Within the Sonnet's scanty plot of ground’.
In contrast to some critics who would rather see the collection as a one-directional story, with its ‘phases’ and ‘developments’, I recall readers to the essentially, inherently repetitive or ongoing nature of this as of all deep and long-lived human relationships.
It is the rhythm of exchange, like day and night, sun and moon, systole and diastole.
Simmel refers to the inevitable repetition of the same contents, situations, excitations' within a relationship, yet together with the repetition there is ‘the consciousness that…the value  of this content depends on its very opposite — a certain measure of rarity’.
Sonnet 108 challenges abruptly all the founts of invention: The answer is predictable, inevitable,right : Those four lines could stand as a motto for the whole sequence, with there reworking from a fresh direction of the desire to celebrate the other from which Shakespeare started.
The last line of that quotation inescapably echoes the Lord's Prayer —‘Hallow'd be Thy name’— and religious language has been in the background to other sonnets of this kind (‘consecrate’, ‘spirit’, and ‘memorial’ in 74, ‘idolatry’in 105, ‘The perfect ceremony of love's rite’in 23).
All in all, then, the most fitting place to end might be 125, which rejects the glories of a canopy of state, a desire for eternity, or a profitable life at court.
Instead, the Poet offers the Friend a gift as one would offer a sacrifice to a god, pagan or Christian (Shakespeare used the religious term ‘oblation’ just once in all his writings, for this poem).
It is the ultimate gift that a human being can wish to make:
SHAKESPEARE'S HYPOCRITES
La Rochefoucauld's famous maxim challenges by the precision with which it is formulated.
On further reflection, however, we may apply to it T. W. Baldwin's criticism of the genre as a whole: ‘A brilliant aphorism is a dangerous thing.
It is always a lie and never the truth,’ Questionable though that judgement may be on the aphorism in general, it does seem to me to catch the half-formed nature of this observation — or perhaps, better speaking, its lack of a frame.
La Rochefoucauld gives us an observation on behaviour, but withholds speculation on the causes of that behaviour.
If we consider why people become hypocrites — as far as I know, no one is ever born one — then we would have to suggest a variety of motives.
Shame at what one has done, or is doing, may cause someone to cover his or her vice with the appearance of holiness: this, I suppose, is what is meant by giving homage or paying tribute, to virtue.
Hypocrisy of this kind derives from the agent's conscience telling him of his evil, while his desire not to appear evil causes him to feign goodness.
His goal is no more than to conceal from others the discrepancy he feels between his own behaviour and what he knows to be the standards of his group, wider society, or religion.
Hypocrisy of this kind is familiar to us all, from our own practice of it and from our knowledge of it in others, whether real people or fictional characters, such as the puritan ministers in Ben Jonson's The Alchemist .
This type of hypocrisy is often backward-looking, designed to retain or consolidate what one already owns — I think of Bulstrode in George Eliot's Middlemarch , before his encounter with Will Ladislaw.
Yet, in both life and literature — and especially in drama — such static hypocrisy, while condemned (if discovered or exposed), generates  neither the energy nor the interest produced by a more dynamic dissimulation.
Here the pretence of good is not merely a cover for the continuing practice of one's own faults, whether grave or trifling, but is the method by which a person develops new ones, tries to reach some clearly defined goal.
It is a pretence or imposture adopted in order to achieve power, or riches, or sensual gratification, all types of the fulfilment of desire.
In traditional moral thought hypocrisy, like lying, has always been detested as a sin against the fundamental principle of human communication, namely that language was given to mankind so that we may express our thoughts and feelings openly, honestly.
The standard accounts in the rhetorical tradition of the divine gift of speech associate language with justice and virtue, sincerity and truth.
The liar and the hypocrite are enemies of society since they pervert language to their own gain and other people's harm.
In classical literature and ethics hypocrisy is condemned as undermining the essential distinction between good and evil.
Juvenal warned: Some men show their passions openly, and may be pardoned.
‘Far worse are those who denounce evil ways in the language of a Hercules; and after discoursing on virtue, prepare to practise vice.’
In his moral-philosophical works Cicero frequently denounces pretence.
In De Officiis he describes two ways that men can do wrong, ‘by force or by fraud’, and says that  In order to guard against such destructiveness Cicero urges that ‘pretence and concealment [simulatio dissimulatioque ]should be done away with in all departments of our daily life’.
In his second oration against Verres Cicero describes hypocrisy in terms which sound like a scenario for Iago's undermining of Othello: In the Academica he attacks the simulatio of virtue which is assumed not out of duty but in pursuit of pleasure, and in De Finibus he denounces those whose actions are motivated by personal desire for pleasure rather than respect for the moral law.
Such people ‘will assuredly prefer the reputation without the reality of goodness [iustitia simulationem ]to the reality without the reputation’.
Yet in one of his letters he comments, ‘how far from easy a thing is virtue, how difficult its simulation for any length of time!’
This suggests that hypocrisy cannot be sustained indefinitely, or only at great personal cost.
Quintilian, as ever more complacent about the orator being a vir bonus , declares that  Such moral optimism is hard to square with history.
In Christianity denunciations of hypocrisy are a constant in all ages.
The Old Testament contains memorable diatribes in the Book of Job, including a similarly optimistic assurance of its brevity: ‘Knowest thou not this of old,…
That the triumphing of the wicked is short, and the joy of the hypocrite but for a moment?…
Though wickedness be sweet in his mouth, though he hide it under his tongue’, yet it shall turn sour and be ‘the gall of asps within him’.
Christ attacked the hypocrites in two long and rhetorically structured sequences (as recorded by Matthew), first in the Sermon on the Mount, denouncing their ostentatious alms-giving, praying, fasting, all actions done in public so ‘that they may have glory of men’.
In the temple he launched another violent attack, punctuated with the ritual curse, seven times repeated, ‘Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites!’, including this devastating metaphor: ‘for ye are like unto whited sepulchres, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men's bones, and of all uncleanness’.
In another place Christ, too, forecast that hypocrisy would eventually be exposed: The Church Fathers inveighed bitterly against hypocrisy, associating it with all forms of evil, depravity, and the work of the devil.
As Gregory wrote, ‘hypocritarum corda diabolus tacitus tenet, & quasi ipse quietus ibi dormit, ubi eos quos possidet, quiescere non permittit .’
In Dante's Inferno the hypocrites  are punished by wearing cloaks which are ‘whited sepulchres’ indeed, ‘so gilded outside that they dazzle, but within, all of lead, and so heavy’that they can barely walk: ‘O toilsome mantle for eternity!’
The real threat of hypocrisy to the Christian community, as indeed to all others, is the impenetrability with which it conceals evil.
Fear of this confusion of values was still so real for the Reverend Alexander Cruden in the late eighteenth century that, not content with defining and illustrating the term from biblical texts, he added two paragraphs of solemn warning: Yet there is a cure, if men recognize divine omniscience: Cruden is echoing Christ's words in Luke's gospel, as Milton had done in Paradise Lost , after describing how Satan's disguise deceived the archangel Uriel: Drawing on a pagan tradition, Montaigne passed a similar judgement on lying: ‘To say that a man lieth, is as much as to say…that he is brave towards God, and a Coward towards Men .’
‘For’, Francis Bacon added, ‘a Lie faces God, and shrinkes from Man’.
Yet the paradox is that we only use the word hypocrisy when we have reasons for believing that we have found the thing itself.
Hypocrisy is curiously associated with its own exposure: concealment is simultaneously effected yet discovered.
In works of literature the exposure works on two levels, first in the very act of creation, by which the hypocrite is seen and known to the audience or reader.
But on the second level, in most novels and plays there is a sequence of exposure within the literary work itself.
It is never the case that a writer creates a hypocrite without giving us some clue, however subtle, to his dissimulation; and it is seldom the case that he is not exposed  within the bounds of the artwork.
This may sound like a special aesthetic law, but in fact I believe it is implicit in the very act of pronouncing, or thinking, the word ‘hypocrite’: you only use it when you have caught one.
So many of the literary works having hypocrisy in their title add to it the word exposed , or a synonym.
Ten minutes with a good library catalogue will yield plentiful examples:Hypocrisie Unvail'd and Jesuitisme Unmaskt (1662) by Robert Boreman,Hypocrisis Marci Antonii de Dominis detecta (1620) by John Floyd,Hypocrisie Alamode.
Expos'd in a True Picture of [Jeremy Collier ](1704) by Thomas Brown, or Hypocrisie Unmasked , the title of two works with American associations, one published in 1646 by Edward Winslow relating grievances by the Governor and Company of Massachusetts against Samuel Gordon of Rhode Island , the other published in 1776 with the subtitle or, A short inquiry into the religious complaints of our American colonies .
‘Hypocrisy displayed’, then, is a two-stage process, a masking followed by an unmasking.
In drama one might revise Bacon's dictum to read, ‘a lie shrinks from men but faces the audience’.
While some hypocrites may be known from their outer appearance — Ananias and Tribulation in The Alchemist , say — the dramatist must normally establish a two-level process of communication between the hypocritical character and the audience.
One way of doing this is to use the soliloquy or aside, such flexible resources on the Elizabethan stage.
The aside is a piece of direct address to the audience: it takes place simultaneously with the dramatic action, is produced by, and directed towards, that action, yet stands a little outside it.
We might conceive of the aside as occupying a zone midway between the play and the audience; we continue to experience the play, but we do so via the new information or attitudes given us by the character or characters speaking the asides.
If used frequently, or if used in conjunction with the soliloquy, this mode of direct presentation brings us into closer contact with that person, so that we in part share his or her hopes and fears, become more closely involved with their desire to control the world.
(It seems to me an odd misuse of modern theatre aesthetics to believe that asides and soliloquies are ‘distancing’ or ‘alienating’devices: rather the opposite.)
A significant point about Shakespeare's use of asides and soliloquies in the tragedies based on hypocrisy concerns the allocation of these passages of direct address.
In the comedies that expose hypocrisy (Malvolio in Twelfth Night , Parolles in All's Well that Ends Weld , we typically see the hypocrite through the eyes of the group of people exposing him — Sir Toby, Maria, and company; the soldiers trying to make Bertram see his favourite's falseness.
The exposers form the moral perspective that defines, and reveals, pretence.
In the tragedies, though, Shakespeare gives the direct address to the hypocrites, not to their exposers.
We see the social group from the viewpoint of the person out to exploit and deceive it.
We are made to share his view, and with it his plans and hopes to gain at the expense of good.
So, willingly  or not, we become the privileged sharers of his dissimulating techniques.
This relationship may be expressed in a simple diagram:
The hypocrite is nearer, his dupes farther off, and this in-between position allows him to exploit his skilful two-facedness.
In Othello , it is no accident that Iago swears ‘by Janus’.
Since the hypocrite (it is usually a he: there are few women hypocrites in Elizabethan drama, which may be a comfort to the feminists) tells us the truth, we are able to judge the extent of his lies, his success in duping others.
This set-up can indeed create a moral problem for the audience, for our awareness of the hypocrite's skills may easily pass over into admiration of his performance.
He becomes an entertainer, a manipulator whose victories we watch as if hypnotized, seeing both the tricks and the mesmeric effect that they have on the innocent.
Our enjoyment of his resourcefulness can (temporarily!) blind us to the moral significance of his actions.
Further, since we see his victims through his eyes it becomes harder to keep our own perspective, and judgement, clear.
For the dynamic hypocrite other people are either victims or accomplices.
The victims are people who stand between him and the desired goal, usually some form of power, and who must be set aside, disbarred, or killed.
His superiority over them cannot but make them seem to us inferior, innocent, or naïve, dupes who trust too easily and are soon outwitted.
Apart from the victims are the accomplices, who — knowingly or unknowingly — help the hypocrite to achieve his goals.
Either way they risk being swept aside in turn when he succeeds, when they also seem stupid.
At this point, unless the dramatist is going to allow hypocrisy to triumph, he must bring in some external power to penetrate the hypocrite's disguise.
In The Alchemist Subtle and Face use all the obfuscations of the spagyrical art to deceive a whole cross-section of Jacobean society, from the tradesman Abel Drugger, anxious to establish his business, to Sir Epicure Mammon, that decadent blend of Marlovian hero and would-be Roman emperor.
The hypocrites could continue their spiel for ever, but are destroyed by forces from outside, notably the unexpected return of the master of the house in which they have set up shop.
The roles needed for this kind of plot, then, are Hypocrite, Dupe, and Exposer.
Shakespeare brings hypocrisy and dissembling into several comedies — Proteus in The Two Gentlemen , Don John in Much Ado , Parolles, Malvolio — and uses counter-plots to expose them.
Deception is set against pretence, and the hypocrite, once exposed, is punished, exiled, or forgiven.
Measure for Measure takes this basic pattern and develops it in a new direction.
Comparison with the earlier comedies shows that there imposture is usually  adopted consciously, deliberately — a man becomes a hypocrite for his own gain or/and the ruin of others.
But some men, besides achieving hypocrisy, have it thrust upon them.
At the beginning of the play Angelo, the deputy judge who rules over Vienna in the Duke's absence, is a man of severe habits, whose austerity suppresses desire in himself and would utterly eradicate it in others.
As Lucio, part villain, part commentator, describes him, he is ‘one who never feels/The wanton stings and motions of the sense’(1.
iv.57ff.).
Angelo's judgement on Claudio, a death sentence for having got his bride with child, is severe but consistent with his principles, and he can affirm without hypocrisy, although self-righteously, Yet the confrontation with Isabella, come to appeal on her brother's behalf, fills Angelo with desire for the first time in his life, and a soliloquy gives us this crucial information about his new state: Shakespeare there presents Angelo in a soliloquy nearer the mode of tragedy than comedy.
Like some hypocrites in tragedy, Angelo's readiness to dissemble could be checked by his conscience.
Here he is aware of his fall into corruption, but as yet draws neither conclusion nor consequence from it.
But when we see him next, sexual desire has begun to eat away his conscience, and he feels possessed by ‘the strong and swelling evil/Of my conception’(II.iv.6f.).
In the great tempting scene between Angelo and Isabella the deputy hypocritically exclaims on other men's sins —‘Ha, fie, these filthy vices!’
(II.iv.42)— but proceeds to proposition her with a debased contract, that she should exchange her chastity for her brother's life.
Since he is in truth ‘now, the voice of the recorded law’(61), he can afford to ignore Isabella's outburst against his ‘most pernicious purpose’: ‘Seeming, seeming! /I will proclaim thee, Angelo; look for't!’(150f.).
Whereas hypocrisy in the tragic mode is usually revealed to the audience directly, in advance of the action, here Shakespeare makes Angelo declare himself to a second person, Isabella, confident that — as Falstaff says when he is planning his pretence of having killed Hotspur in battle —‘Nothing confutes me but e-yes, and nobody sees me’(1 Henry IV V.iv.125f): And indeed, Angelo's position is impregnable, unless some force from outside, with superior knowledge, can expose him.
At this point Shakespeare brings back the Duke, disguised as a Friar, who sets in motion a complex plot involving several substitutions: of Mariana for Isabella, in Angelo's bed; of the head of Ragozine, ‘a most notorious pirate’, for Claudio's (IV.iii.69).
The final substitution is of the Duke for the Friar, returning in his own person to act as a tribunal for complaints against Angelo.
This ‘outward-sainted deputy’, as Isabella calls him (in words that recall Christ's ‘whited sepulchres’), who imagines that he has enjoyed the sister and killed the brother — thus breaking even the corrupt contract he had himself proposed — listens with composure to Isabella's accusation that he is ‘a murderer,…an adulterous thief, /An hypocrite, a virgin-violator’(V.i.39ff).
Isabella does not know that the Duke had played the role of the Friar instructing her in the foiling of Angelo's plots, and so, lacking any independent evidence, she realizes how feeble her case must seem; yet she still affirms that  But the Duke, behaving as Angelo had predicted, and as he would have to behave if he had no evidence, sweeps aside her complaint, leaving her with only heaven to appeal to: The evil is indeed finally ‘unfolded’, not by heaven but by the Duke, although Angelo (as if recalling that passage in Luke's gospel) ascribes divine omniscience to him: But the Duke has only used deception and disguise, legitimately, as Shakespeare makes him say: ‘Craft against vice I must apply’(III.ii.270).
Although one might not realize it from some modern accounts,Measure for Measure is a comedy, and Angelo can be dismissed at the end to marry his contracted wife, since his hypocrisy had no evil effects.
In the history plays and tragedies the consequences of hypocrisy are more serious.
Here the hypocrite is often connected with the actor in that peculiar process by which Shakespeare, within a play performed by actors in a theatre, could make those actors refer to acting in terms of insincerity.
This metaphor of the stage or the world as a place for performance and pretence is familiar, but it is often misinterpreted as a criticism of the theatre.
In fact theatrical imagery is, and always has been derogatory, used to expose human pretence, or the futility of secular life compared to some other existence or system.
The metaphor does not in itself debase the theatre, and although Shakespeare is using plays and actors to present insincerity or hypocrisy that does not make him or them corrupt: the medium is not the same as the message.
Rather, the second-level falseness of the role that the dramatic persona adopts serves to legitimize the first-level status of the actor.
When, in the last play of the Henry VI trilogy, the future Richard III is presenting to the audience his capabilities — as if auditioning for the role of hypocrite — he exults at being able to  By grouping all those exempla of deceit Shakespeare makes us unconscious of the initial role-playing of the actor involved, alerting us to the deceptions he is about to foist on others.
Richard III is the first full-scale hypocrite in Shakespeare, using the dramatic structure I have described, based on the dichotomies near/far, truth/lies, with supreme energy and skill.
In the opening soliloquy he declares his true intent: then Clarence will go to prison this day.
— And pat, like the catastrophe in the old comedy, Clarence is seen approaching guarded, on his way to the Tower.
At this point an aside from Richard marks the turning-point between truth and concealment: ‘Dive, thoughts, down to my soul — here Clarence comes!’
(Richard HI , I.i.30–41).
The two-facedness of the hypocrite is expressed not only by his privileged relationship to the audience in his dealings with others but by means of equivocation, a doubleness of language in which an innocuous level of meaning is visible to the dupe, sinister undertones to us.
So Richard assures Clarence that his ‘imprisonment shall not be long; /I will deliver you, else lie for you’(1.
i.114–15).
Clarence hears the sense ‘go to prison on your behalf’, and we that of untruth.
In the brief soliloquy following Clarence's exit Richard keeps up the equivocation: ‘I will shortly send thy soul to heaven, /If heaven will take the present at our hands’(119 — 20).
In one place Shakespeare stretches the hypocrite's resourcefulness to the limits, when an aside about the wisdom of the young Prince meant only for the audience —‘So wise, so young, they say do never live long’— is overheard by the Prince himself —‘What say you uncle?’— forcing Richard to improvise brilliantly: But this superiority of wit places the audience in any uneasy position: if we laugh with the deceiver we could share his dehumanizing of the dupe.
Laughter here might anaesthetize our feelings, deaden us to the moral issue.
The opening scene has no less than three of Richard's ten soliloquies, which inform us at every stage of his dissimulation.
The normal dramatic sequence for this mode of communication is triple:
So in the third and last soliloquy Richard reminds us of his concealed plot, his ‘deep intent’ to kill Clarence — deep to the rest of the world, visible to us and tells us of his further plan to marry Lady Anne (‘What though I kill'd  her husband and her father?’).
He is at pains to assure us that he will do so  We are privileged to share in these Machiavellian plans (the word ‘reach’ has such connotations: ‘overreach’is when the Machiavel attempts too much), and we see them fulfilled in the brilliant wooing scene that follows.
This second stage is carried out in public speech to which we have been given the decoding key, and from our privileged perspective the success of the hypocrite has unfortunate consequences for the dupe.
As the history of Shakespeare criticism has shown, Lady Anne has all too often been seen either as a particularly silly person or as representing the weak and malleable sex.
After the Action comes the Commentary, again addressed exclusively to us: Shakespeare indeed emphasizes the excellence of the performance, as if from a purely aesthetic point of view, with Richard simultaneously producer, actor, and audience celebrating his skill: ‘Tis well done, indeed!— Yet, as the continuation makes clear, success for the hypocrite implies contempt for the dupe: Richard's combination of gloating self-admiration and criticism of his victim makes Lady Anne doubly unfortunate, both gulled and guilty of disloyalty to her dead husband.
Richard's second victim, Clarence, is also taken in by the hypocrite's feigned concern, but since the real plot against him has been done through intermediaries he may seem less blameworthy.
Richard's other dupes seem  culpably naïve, deceived by false appearances.
Hastings affirms his loyalty to ‘my master's heirs in true descent’, despite being explicitly told that Richard intends to be king (III.ii.36–55), and in the face of ominous dreams and omens (III.ii.10ff., III.iv.81ff.).
There is a moment of high comedy, almost, in Hastings' comments at the council scene when Richard has gone out with Buckingham (to plot Hastings' death, as it happens), that  As Hasting soon realizes, he has been ‘too fond’(or foolish) to penetrate Richard's deceit (III.iv.80).
Despite being exercised at such length, Crookback's histrionic powers show no abatement.
Deciding that he must marry Elizabeth, the daughter of his dead brother Edward, he woos her mother on her behalf in a scene which repeats the wooing of Lady Anne, his enormous energies finally overcoming all of her well-merited opposition (IV.iv.199–430).
Once she has capitulated and goes off to gain her daughter's assent he switches faces, turning to us in the middle of a line: ‘Bear her my true love's kiss; and so, farewell/Relenting fool, and shallow-changing woman!’(431–2).
The manipulator's contempt for his victims is hard to ignore.
Richard's accomplice in all this is Buckingham, who shares the same two-faced split between open good and concealed evil.
As he says to one of their tools: When Buckingham presents his credentials for deceiving the London citizens it is in the same theatrical-Machiavellian terms as Richard: But Buckingham himself is deceived, as we realized long ago in the flurry of insincere praise that Richard heaped upon him: Buckingham should have known that such effusiveness from a hypocrite can only bode ill.
Given the dichotomous speech model that Richard uses, one need only invert the sense to discover the true meaning.
The sticking-point for Buckingham is the murder of the princes in the Tower, and in two brief soliloquies Richard resolves to break with this half-hearted Machiavellian —‘High-reaching Buckingham grows circumspect’(IV.ii.31).
The accomplice becomes an enemy, and in due course a victim, at which point he can only salute the irony of his being executed on All Souls, Day: ‘This is the day wherein I wished to fall/By the false faith of him whom most I trusted’(V.i.
16f.).
Richard has gained power by the successful interchange of the two resources that Machiavelli (as so often, drawing on Cicero but ignoring his moral scheme) singled out as the means by which legitimate rule could be overcome, force and fraud: So he recommended that the Prince who wishes to succeed must not only unite the attributes of the fox and the lion, fraud and force, but in addition 
Richard's achievement of the throne necessarily brings him out into the open, where fraud and concealment are of no use and force alone can preserve him.
Once seen and known, he is vulnerable to attack, and the forces of legitimacy under Richmond duly muster against him.
Yet Shakespeare also undermines him from within, in the great scene where the ghosts of all the people he has murdered appear in turn, cursing him and blessing Richmond (V.iii.118–206).
In his anguished soliloquy on awaking from what he thinks has only been a dream, we see that the hypocrite has lost for ever the advantage he has had over other people.
There is no longer any dichotomy of truth and lies that he can manipulate from midway between the audience and the other characters.
He is now wholly caught up in his own sufferings, in a new dichotomy, an agonizing split within himself: Although he rejects conscience as ‘but a word that cowards use, /Devised at first to keep the strong in awe’(309f.), the duality between truth and lies proves too great for Richard to sustain.
The role of the hypocrite becomes too much for him: he is, in the end, ‘o'er-parted’.
As Cicero said, it is difficult to maintain simulatio for any length of time.
The optimism of the secular moralists that hypocrisy will reveal itself, the conviction of a Christian that God can penetrate it, these are reassuring attitudes in the long term.
Yet they are of no consolation to Richard's victims, and as we look back over his career of slaughter we see that for Shakespeare hypocrisy is a particularly sinister vice, often associated with ruthless egoism.
Here, as in the mature tragedies, the hypocrite is ready to destroy anyone if he can benefit from it.
There can be few writers who have so closely linked pretence with destructiveness.
I feign: I gain: you've lost.
In Macbeth the first hypocrite we hear of, the Thane of Cawdor, has already been exposed.
Like Juvenal, Duncan realizes  At this point enters Macbeth, the new Thane of Cawdor, a double irony that critics have long relished.
Macbeth resembles Angelo in many ways, his hypocrisy being similarly fed by desire yet opposed by conscience.
His desire is for the crown, and the way he starts at the witches' double prophecy shows that he already has it in mind.
His reaction puzzles Banquo, but Macbeth explains it to us in an aside: The word ‘swelling’ is sometimes glossed by comparison with a stage thronged with people, but it also suggests pregnancy, and we may recall Angelo's sense of ‘the strong and swelling evil/Of my conception’.
Macbeth also judges himself, and his many asides and soliloquies (structurally as important as in Richard IN , although vastly more compressed) bring us into close contact with his divided claims of desire and conscience (‘This supernatural soliciting/Cannot be ill; cannot be good’).
Our closeness to him involves us in his struggle.
Yet, together with the involvement, his own moral sense establishes a detached, judging position.
So we share his horror as he observes in himself, experiences almost passively — as if it were happening to someone else — the emergence of the tempting desire to murder Duncan (‘suggestion’ still had the sense of diabolic temptation): There, with amazing speed, and as if parenthetically (‘whose murder yet’) we become privy to the secret that sets him apart from the others on stage, the goal to which all his energies will ultimately be directed.
Knowledge of Macbeth's intentions gives us the superior insight to gauge the false appearances that he assumes.
One of the least often discussed aspects of Shakespeare's mastery of language is his ability to present insincerity: whenever anyone in his plays is being insincere, the style shows it.
So Macbeth thanks Duncan's messengers with this affected metaphor: ‘Kind gentlemen, your pains/Are registered where every day I turn/The leaf to read them’(149ff.).
In similarly insincere terms he thanks Duncan for the honours he has received from him: These speeches are subtly calculated by Shakespeare, for their insincerity is obvious to us (the affected metaphors, the flabby repetitions) but not to the  recipients.
Macbeth is using language on two levels, one of which rebukes the other.
Once Duncan has created his eldest son Prince of Cumberland, and named him his successor, we see the real language, the accents of desire: The paradox of these invocations of darkness and deception is that they are being made to the audience: the lies hide from men but face us, and in that respect we enjoy the privilege of God.
The structure of deception takes on another layer when Lady Macbeth learns of the prophecies.
Where Macbeth had been concealed or opaque to Duncan, and was thus in a superior position, manipulating him by pretence, we now see Lady Macbeth putting herself in the dominant position, planning to manipulate her husband: Macbeth is now transparent to her, and she to us.
His ignorance of what she feels about his ‘human kindness’— she rejects any ‘compunctious visiting of nature’(44)— makes him a victim, or accomplice, who has to be instructed in hypocrisy: One of Shakespeare's problems in having to develop an evil conspiracy in the absence of any vocal moral commentary on it is to make it judge or condemn itself.
This is done here, partly directly, as in the injunction to be like the serpent, and partly indirectly, in her perversion of such words as ‘milk’ or ‘nature’, Her parting injunction to him is to ‘look up clear’(71), ‘clear’meaning ‘innocent, spotless’: the stress must fall on the verb, ‘look’or ‘seem,.
The dichotomy between appearance and reality, the continuity of  metaphors for usurpation applied to Macbeth, the incredible number of antitheses (some 400 odd): these are aspects of the play that have been well studied in modern criticism, and all show its persistent operation on two linguistic levels.
It is a textbook for the study of dramatic irony in all its forms.
But irony is always double-edged.
When Lady Macbeth welcomes Duncan, the fulsome insincerity of her verse is by now unmistakable to us: Yet, while feigning gratitude she is also expressing exactly the reasons why she ought to feel gratitude: The unusual and affected word ‘hermits’ points up her insincerity, while the content of the speech establishes the good they have received from Duncan.
Shakespeare shows her feigning, but simultaneously condemns her.
In the next scene Macbeth, speaking alone and with no need to deceive anyone (given the convention in Elizabethan drama that what characters say in soliloquy is true), admits the evil of their ‘deep intent’: Duncan is ‘clear’, really has that freedom from guilt or stain that his wife had urged Macbeth to assume: in a sense he tries to do so here, in his defence of Duncan's right to be treated with love and respect, and in his invocation of ‘pity’, that constant test of humanity in Shakespeare.
Yet when he expresses this moral sense to his wife —‘We will proceed no further in this business.
/He hath honoured me of late (31f.)— she is able to sweep his scruples aside by mocking his cowardice and by showing her own readiness to be the accomplice in this ‘terrible feat’.
Once the murder is done the hypocrisy must continue: in Marvell's version  of Machiavelli, ‘The same Arts that did gain/A Pow'r must it maintain ’.
The same insincere welcome is used by Macbeth to Macduff: ‘The labour we delight in physics pain' (II.iii.48f.), and at the news of Duncan's murder Lady Macbeth is given one of the most brilliant pieces of hypocrisy Shakespeare ever invented: ‘Woe, alas! /What, in our house?’
(II.iii.86ff.).
This is what any innocent hostess would say in those circumstances: Lady Macbeth knows exactly how things ought to look (scheinheilig , as one says in German).
Her husband makes a veritable meal of professing his regrets: The multiple functions of dramatic irony are apparent here, for this speech is both self-fulfilling — Macbeth will not enjoy any ‘blessed time’ from this point onwards — and literally true, since ‘grace is dead’, and Macbeth has killed it (one of its forms is sleep, which he has also murdered).
‘The spring, the head, the fountain of your blood/Is stopped’, he says to the king's sons, but as Shakespeare soon makes clear, the lifeblood of the whole state has been dammed and perverted.
The effects of hypocrisy in Macbeth , compared to Richard III , are far greater, spreading outwards from the king's murder, creating correspondent perversions in the whole realm of nature.
The hypocrisy of the murderers, then, is the means by which they both gained trust —‘Fair and noble hostess, /We are your guest tonight’ were among Duncan's last words — and destroyed it.
The breakdown of trust which they effect is graphically represented by Shakespeare, first by the way in which the king's sons, fleeing the country, are suspected to have been his killers; second, in the scene where Macduff, who has finally fled Scotland (his wife and children are murdered by Macbeth in his absence), is confronted and tested by Malcolm.
The king's son feigns all manner of vice, exceeding even Macbeth  — but professing for himself a list of vices so horrible that Macduff is forced to exclaim that if he succeeds to the throne, Scotland will receive a far worse tyrant.
At which point Malcolm explains that he was merely pretending, in order to test his countryman, who might have been an emissary of Macbeth's: Duncan had trusted his kinsman, and host, and been murdered for his pains.
If trust is to establish itself again, it has to do so by such devious and long-winded means, and it has to use the tools of its antitype.
Paradoxically, only through deception, now, can sincerity be distinguished from hypocrisy.
Malcolm might say, with the Duke in Measure for Measure , ‘Craft against vice I must apply’.
Consideration of the nature of hypocrisy in Macbeth reinforces our awareness that Shakespeare connects it with all other forms of evil, the initial dissimulation leading to treason, regicide, and the never-ending chain of murder by which Macbeth destroys the whole of Scotland: Macbeth, having used fraud and force to obtain power, must now use force openly.
The function of hypocrisy in the initial stage of usurping legitimacy is now clear; once it has gained its desires, evil can afford to declare itself.
Yet in Macbeth's case that declaration was not voluntary, or the result of carelessness.
His guilt has been exposed by his own actions.
The insecurity he feels, knowing that Banquo's children are prophesied to become the lineal kings of Scotland, makes him plan to kill Banquo.
In his professed concern for Banquo's welfare (III.i.11–38), as in his urging on of the murderers (III.i.73–139), Macbeth displayed some of his earlier resource in hypocrisy, although the scene with the murderers is laboured, I believe deliberately, to show how energy and invention are gradually deserting him.
Macbeth's explanation of why they must kill Banquo for him is a perfect description of the tribute that vice pays to virtue: because of That is almost too explicit in its description of the gap between false surface and his true feelings, and in its affected, forced language (‘to your assistance do make love’).
But the level of pretence he sustains after the murder is penetrated and exposed by the arrival of the very being whose absence he so insincerely deplores: ‘Here had we now our country's honour roofed, /Were the graced person of our Banquo present’(III.iv.40ff.).
To accuse Banquo of ‘unkindness’, unnatural ingratitude, in not attending, having just had him murdered, is one of the greatest perversions of truth and goodness in Shakespeare, and is immediately answered by the appearance of the ghost.
Macbeth defends but at the same time accuses himself; ‘Thou canst not say I did it: never shake/Thy gory locks at me’(50f.).
Lady Macbeth succeeds in calming him by her usual tactics of scornful reductivism: ‘When all's done, /You look but on a stool’(67f.), and mockery of his cowardice: ‘What! quite unmanned in folly?’(73).
So he tries again, but is instinctively led toward his own fatal, self-revealing hypocrisy: The appearance of the ghost to unmask Macbeth's hypocritical greetings in the very moment when he utters them is Shakespeare's most brilliant device in the ‘exposure’ sequence.
(In Siegfried Wagner achieved a comparable brilliance in that Siegfried, having been splashed by the blood of the dragon he has killed, wins the ability to penetrate the hypocrisy of Mime, who is made to profess good while simultaneously revealing the real evil he intends.)
The workings of some obscure principle of retribution, Macbeth believes —‘It will have blood, they say; blood will have blood’(122)— have here ‘brought forth/The secret'st man of blood’(125f.).
The exposure of his hypocrisy has been made by an innate moral principle in the universe.
The same principle is at work in the other great invention in this play, Lady Macbeth's sleepwalking.
That she, who has always denied any further consequences of their evil —‘A little water clears us of this deed: /How easy is it then!’
(II.ii.67f.) should now collapse under it, seems to vindicate the powers of good, operating in so many different ways in the second half of this play.
This ‘great  perturbation in nature’(V.i.9f.) causes her to reveal all their deeds, an effect made much more intense in the theatre by the Doctor writing down all that she says, so that hypocrisy is not only detected but recorded.
As she reveals more, the Doctor turns to rebuke Lady Macbeth's gentlewoman for having heard these secrets of state: Yet the audience, divine in that, has known all along.
As the Doctor gives the conventional lore of his day, a blend of ethics and medicine: we see that we are also those ‘deaf pillows’, that the masking and unmasking has been all for our sake.
The superiority of Macbeth over Measure for Measure in this respect is that it needs no external moral force, such as the Duke, to ‘Unfold the evil, which is here wrapp'd up/In countenance.’
Evil expresses and exposes itself now, as an organic extension of its own workings.
In the moral optimism informing this play, evil may corrode trust, but it also destroys the healthy functioning of all who give themselves over to it.
The Ghost of Banquo is more than a figment of Macbeth's imagination: it stands in some way in relation to his conscience.
It lacks the grandeur of Macbeth's earlier apocalyptic image of pity, Yet it is no less the response to what Macbeth knows to be his ‘horrid deed’.
Devastating though it is in its presentation of the destructive power of guilt,Macbeth may be thought a comforting play, finally, in that hypocrisy exposes itself.
No such comforts can be gleaned from Othello .
Indeed, it remains the most uncomfortable play in the English language.
Everyone must admire it as a supreme example of the unremitting development of one basic situation, Iago's destruction of Othello, with a claustrophilic refusal to digress or vary from its path, yet no one is known to have enjoyed it.
Every time I start to read it my spirits sink.
But neither Shakespeare's tragedies nor life itself can be fully understood unless we are prepared to take Iago fully into our consciousness, and make our own attempt to come to terms with what Shakespeare created.
(What hand or eye, we may well ask, could afford to gestate such a thing for the six to nine months Shakespeare usually took to write a play?
To live with Iago as a reader, or in the theatre, is bad enough; to create him shows an ability to conceive evil that almost strikes us as perverse and unnatural.
Except….)
I define the basic situation as that of Iago destroying Othello, since I believe that much modern criticism of the play has gone wrong through beginning with Othello, or through not giving Iago his full measure of dominance.
This is not the place to show the history of this misinterpretation, so I will merely suggest that discussions of the play ought to start from the beginning, as Shakespeare did, with the presence of Iago.
It is a presence that dominates the action, first of all in its intimacy with the audience.
No one else in the tragedies has as many soliloquies as Iago does (not even Hamlet).
Hamlet is given soliloquies for reflection, self-criticism, and for resolves to act, some of which are carried out; Iago has them for self-presentation and for announcements of his actions which — like Richard III in his self-confidence — are first described, then performed, and subsequently commented on.
He is forever telling us what he will do and why, forever taking us into his confidence.
Now, there is no one in the world whose confidence I would rather share less than Iago's, and that is one of the reasons for the discomfort I feel each time I experience this play.
We are confronted with a man whose sole aim in life is to manipulate and destroy others, a dedication to evil that even Macbeth and his wife do not match.
They want power, and will destroy to gain it; Iago wants the power to destroy.
They can work by fraud and open force; he only by fraud, through which his gulls are made to use force.
Whereas they expose themselves by coming to power, he can remain concealed indefinitely.
Every word Iago speaks to us is a demonstration, an exposure, and a revelling in his own hypocrisy, which remains completely concealed from all the other characters in the play.
They only person in the play to whom he reveals some of his real feelings is Roderigo, but only while using him as a tool, spending his money, and working him up to be the accomplice in his attack on Othello.
Iago's first stated reason for hating his master is that he has been passed over in favour of‘a great arithmetician’, a ‘counter-caster’, Michael Cassio (Othello , I.i.19–31).
Iago's contempt for the new breed of Renaissance soldier, necessarily more technical given the increasingly scientific development of warfare in the  sixteenth century, may be intended to show that his complaint is the predictable and irrelevant grumble of the old-fashioned soldier made obsolete by new technology.
There is not enough evidence to decide this issue, but there is enough to be sure what we should feel about the conclusions he draws concerning Othello: One part of this antithesis follows — some men must be servants — but not the other: why cannot all masters be served ‘truly’?
Iago describes those who serve ‘duteously’ with a series of contemptuous images, ending ‘Whip me such honest knaves’(44–9).
He then holds up his own ideal, a calculated inversion which in a normal man might be the text for a denunciation of what Cicero called the treachery ‘lurking under the false show of loyal service’: At this point, normally, the attack on evil would be made; but Iago unconcernedly identifies himself with this group: ‘These fellows have some soul, /And such a one do I profess myself’(53ff.).
The elevation of false appearance is made by no one in Shakespeare with the same fanaticism as Iago, for whom it becomes a principle of life.
He does not serve out of‘love and duty’, but only ‘seeming so’, for his own ends.
And he exults, like Richard III, in his abilities in deception, which have indeed supplanted his real self: It is difficult for a modern audience, which has lost that sense of reverence attaching to ‘service’ that animated Renaissance society, from the glorification of the vita activa down to the duties of bondsmen and tenants, to appreciate fully the shock that these self-revelations would have had.
Iago systematically inverts all the great positives of dedication and loyalty, offers  in their place an unnatural egoism.
(Note the awkward self-reflexive phrasing of such men having ‘their hearts attending on themselves’, doing ‘themselves homage’, or in Iago saying ‘I follow but myself’.
All three phrases describe forms of impossibility: language can say it, but a man cannot do it — unless he has two selves.)
This first scene establishes Iago as a hypocrite and as a rapacious egoist, the same combination that we observed in Macbeth , the one state creating and supporting the other.
Having declared to Roderigo his true feelings about Othello, Iago later explains why he pays tribute to virtue: personal gain.
Immediately afterwards we see Iago telling Othello of Brabantio's anger, and claiming that ‘I lack iniquity/Sometimes to do me service’, else, ‘with the little godliness’ he had, he would have attacked Roderigo (I.ii.3ff.).
That total reversal of the truth is prophetic of Iago's methods.
He deceives those near to him by his professions of love —‘A man he is of honesty and trust’, Othello says (1.
iii.284); Iago calls Roderigo ‘noble heart’(1.
iii.302) and swears fidelity to him:— yet as soon as they have left the scene he turns to us and shows his loathing and contempt: That Othello should trust him, merely makes him a gull: ‘He holds me well; /The better shall my purpose work on him’(392f.).
The cumulative effect of these direct revelations of his intentions is to make us highly alert to Iago's language when he is with other people.
Since we know that he is out to deceive and destroy, everything he says has a second meaning to us.
If the normal description of the linguistic sign, following Saussure, is Signified over Signifier, then when Iago speaks we have to enclose that whole sign in another bracket, which would invert it, opposing surface and real meaning.
(This is a necessarily more complicated formulation than Saussure's, since linguistics is usually concerned with ‘normal’ communication, not with irony, hypocrisy, or lying.)
Listening to Iago is a double process of decoding: deciphering his utterance in the way that his dupes understand it, and decoding it again to understand how he meant it.
The two signals are discrepant, on a scale ranging from partial to total incongruence.
We are somehow able to perform both operations simultaneously.
A clear-cut instance of these inversions of meaning is the sequence in Act II where Iago engineers the downfall of Cassio.
He instructs Roderigo to ‘find some occasion to anger Cassio’: ‘Sir, he's rash and very sudden in choler, and haply may strike at you — provoke him that he may; for even out of that will I cause these of Cyprus to mutiny’(II.i.261 ff.).
(These are the same tactics by which the tribunes eject Coriolanus from office and from society.)
When Roderigo, ‘this poor trash of Venice’, leaves, Iago tells us that his plan is still vague, but that he intends to bring Othello to the point where surface and reality are so inverted that he will ‘thank’ Iago for making him an ass, In the event, Iago succeeds in making Cassio drunk, proceeds to ‘put’him into an ‘action’that — just like the tribunes' manipulation — degrades him yet ‘approves my dream’(II.iii.58ff.)— his fantasy or plan of success.
To Montano, Iago lies that Cassio is always drunk, and professes to ‘fear the trust Othello puts him in’(121–31).
Montano reacts to this inversion of the truth with the correct response (assuming it to be true) which Iago has elicited from him, namely that Othello ought to be told; at which point Iago demurs, with the pretence of friendship: From that declaration, after the ensuing brawl, Iago has built himself a platform from which he can now act the perfect friend: As we alone know, to get the truth from what Iago says about Cassio one must simply invert everything he says.
The climax of his tale is to profess to excuse Cassio —‘But men are men; the best sometimes forget’(237)— an extremely effective way of indicting him in the eyes of those present.
If  hypocrisy formally resembles irony in operating on two levels in its systematic inversion of the truth, Iago here uses an old form of irony, the mock-apologia, which is really an attack.
Othello, who only has Iago's word to go on, falls into the trap: So Cassio is displaced.
But something else is being minced here.
Our feelings for Iago are a mixture of loathing and respect, or fear, at the resource of his deceptions, for there seem to be no limits to his skill.
Only a few moments later he is being sympathetic with Cassio —‘What, are you hurt, lieutenant?…
Marry, heaven forbid!’— and gradually winning his confidence (259–328) until he can, tentatively, enquire whether he is being trusted: ‘I think you think I love you’.
We can better understand this speech by setting out the levels of deception in parentheses:(I think [you think]{I love you}).
Cassio answers ‘I have well approved it, sir’(304ff.).
Caught!
When Iago outlines his plan to regain Othello's respect through the intervention of Desdemona, Cassio is grateful: The point that this sequence establishes is that Cassio, like Roderigo before him, and like Othello, and Desdemona after him, trusts Iago and believes that he has appeared in the nick of time, solely in order to help him.
Iago seems to be acting wholly for the others' good, since, as he challenges us to deny, ‘this advice I give is free and honest.
/Probal to thinking’(330f.).
The gulls can see the help and benefit they receive from Iago's service, but cannot see, or conceive, that Iago could be benefiting himself at the same time; and no one could possibly see that Iago is in fact benefiting himself by destroying them.
As he explains to us his brilliant plot to tell Othello that Desdemona wants Cassio recalled only to satisfy ‘her body's lust’, we see that the more she strives on behalf of Cassio the more she will damage herself.
Iago not only knows no altruism in himself, he blocks and destroys it in others:
Iago's practice of inversion, by which he destroys Cassio while making him and others believe him to be Cassio's friend, and by which he turns  Desdemona's purity into a black, viscous liquid that will catch his victims like birds in quicklime, has been fully established by Shakespeare and shown to be successful.
Whatever Iago predicts he will do, he performs.
Setting Cassio up for his plots, he so manages to present the image of the faithful friend that — as he predicted Othello would — the dupe actually thanks him: ‘I humbly thank you for't. i never knew/A Florentine more kind and honest’(III.i.39f.).
Even Emilia is deceived by his concern on behalf of Cassio: ‘I warrant it grieves my husband/As if the case were his’—‘O, that's an honest fellow’, agrees Desdemona (III.iii.3ff.). in Much Ado about Nothing the villainous Borachio, tool of the malcontent Don John, exults at the success of his deception: ‘I have deceived even your very eyes’ n.i.238f.).
This is what Iago now does to Othello.
He uses the same methods as with the other five people he has so far deceived, his ‘outward action’ being the opposite of the ‘native act and figure’of his heart, but he carries the principle of inversion much further.
Whereas the hypocrite normally deceives other people's vision of himself, making them see good where he means evil, Iago manages to transmit that doubleness into their vision of the rest of the world.
He has convinced Roderigo that Othello's attraction for Desdemona is purely sensual, will soon be satiated, and that then Desdemona will love him; even though the dupe is constantly doubting that vision, Iago manages to sustain it for as long as he needs to.
He convinces Roderigo that Cassio is a rival likely to seduce Desdemona, and makes Othello and Montano see Cassio as a drunken and irresponsible officer.
All these, we know, are inversions of the truth, yet by using himself as a reference point, Iago can convince people to the stage where they accept his view unquestioningly.
He is like the filter used in film-making to reverse daylight and night effects, a technique known as ‘day for night’.
Or, as he puts it himself, in words that recall the Christian association of hypocrisy with the devil's ‘suggestion’ or tempting:
Iago's most brilliant inversion of vision is reserved for Othello — to which, indeed, all the other inversions have been preliminary.
The sequence begins when Cassio, brought to Desdemona by Emilia (the unwitting intermediary of evil), leaves in some embarrassment when he sees Othello and Iago approach: Iago moves from an upper plane (Signifier) to a lower (Signified), from perception to interpretation: subtly doubting the former —Was that Cassio leaving your wife ?— so that Othello, who thinks he can trust his own eyes, takes the latter —so guiltily — with it, accepting a — false!— linguistic sign.
Iago returns to the process, with a series of hints and insinuations, having asked whether Cassio knew of Othello's love for Desdemona:(thus insinuating the possibility of harm).
As Othello tells him that Cassio had even acted as a go-between in their courtship, Iago appears surprised —‘Indeed!’— and takes refuge behind a series of evasive answers —‘Honest, my lord?’
‘My lord, for aught I know’—‘Think, my lord?’(101ff.).
‘Discern'st thou aught in that?’
Othello asks, seeing that Iago (is transmitting the signal that he ) has something on his mind.
(It would be tedious to write it out each time, but the italicized phrase in brackets represents our recognition of the constructed signal that Iago emits.)
Othello sees the surface doubts, is made to suspect that there is something behind them, is led on to discover — what Iago wants him to discover.
The hypocrite offers the gull a surface falseness which he penetrates to discover ‘a truth’, but which we know is another falseness.
Iago's technique of holding off exacerbates Othello's curiosity, arouses his suspicions, and destroys his trust in appearance, in his own perception of reality.
The reason why (to answer an old critical fallacy) he does not go and ask Desdemona whether she is Cassio's lover is that, by the end of this scene, he no longer believe what she — or anyone but Iago — would tell him.
And to answer a more recent fallacy, it is not the case that Othello wants to believe what Iago tells him, or is an accomplice in this destruction of the truth.
He is an accomplice, in the sense that everyone who joins another in decoding a linguistic sign co-operates with them in the establishment of its meaning; but we can see that the sign Iago offers him is just the opposite of what Othello wants to believe, or has believed till now.
(Of course, no utterances are safe from the post-Freudian trick of claiming that they mean the opposite of what they say, but in the interpretation of literary texts we must be given additional, fairly unequivocal evidence of a  discrepancy between speech and meaning, as we are given for Iago, but not for Othello.)
What Iago does is to prove that, in the right context, anyone can be made to believe anything.
Even a slight knowledge of modern political or social or religious history will make us accept this truth, sadly.
Iago works on Othello's vision-interpretation until he replaces it with his own.
It is a form of brainwashing, or what that pioneer in the study of learning processes, Gregory Bateson, called corrective learning, that information-seeking activity whereby a person attempts to ‘achieve a congruence between ‘something in his head’ and the external world…by altering what is in his head’— only in this case it is what is in Iago's head, ‘If thou dost love me’, Othello says to Iago, ‘Show me thy thought’; earlier he had said that Iago hesitated.
‘as if there were some monster in thy thought/Too hideous to be shown.
Thou dost mean something’(III.iii.110ff.).
By being shown Iago's thought.
Othello comes to think it.
The whole process is a transference of vision by which, under the pressure of negative feedback, Othello learns to see, and think, like Iago: ‘I prithee, speak to me as to thy thinkings/As thou dost ruminate’, he begs him, ‘give thy worst of thoughts/The worst of words’(134f.).
The irony of this and similar appeals (145ff., 149ff., 164f.) is painful, knowing what we do of Iago's purpose and methods.
Having brought Othello to the point where he proclaims ‘I'll see before I doubt’, and when he knows, ‘Away at once with love or jealousy!’(191ff.),
Iago can take a stand with every appearance of confidence: Yet from that firm-sounding position he lapses into uncertainty —‘I speak not yet of proof’(ironically true!)— but an uncertainty that suggests far more than it states, with its rash of words for perception and deception (‘look’, ‘observe’, ‘wear your eye thus’, ‘not…secure’, ‘abused’, ‘look’, ‘know’, ‘see…pranks’, ‘show’, ‘conscience’, ‘keep't unknown’).
‘If you dissemble sometimes your knowledge of that you are thought to know’, wrote Francis Bacon, ‘you shall be thought another time, to know that you know not.’
Othello's vision of Iago gives him total credit: With the vision of Iago, Othello also takes over his language, as critics have long noted, with its bestial images, but also his attitudes, especially a generalized distrust of women.
(Iago's misogyny has deep roots in his psyche.)
Iago's transplantation of his own inverted values to Othello is Shakespeare's most remarkable development of the inherent dynamic of hypocrisy.
Iago continues in other, more familiar postures, professing love to Othello and Desdemona (III.iii. 119ff., 136ff., 196ff., 213ff., 218f., 225) and feigning a sympathy for their sufferings which we know to be a covert expression of his gloating: As Cicero said, there is no more flagrant injustice than ‘that of the hypocrite who, at the very moment when he is most false, makes it his business to appear virtuous’.
‘I am sorry to hear this’(346), Iago says, having just exulted to us,en clair , that  will ever restore to him his peace and quiet (328ff.).
The inversion technique works, too, by suggestion.
When Othello swears revenge, Iago offers himself to ‘obey…without remorse, /What bloody business ever’(469f.)— that is, he means, the bloodier the better.
Inversion also works by forbidding what you want the other to do: Iago will kill Cassio, but as for Desdemona —‘let her live’, he suggests, knowing that Othello will immediately say ‘Damn her, lewd minx!’ and look for ‘some swift means of death/For the fair devil’(475ff.).
Iago can turn anything into its opposite: under his tuition even Othello becomes a hypocrite, with difficulty —‘O, hardness to dissemble!’ he says (III.iv.34), like Coriolanus, feigning ‘a salt and sorry rheum’so that Desdemona will give him the handkerchief (III.iv.51 f.).
Since she has lost it, she is forced to lie, too (85ff.).
Iago turns them all into hypocrites.
Iago's technique of offering a false surface, designed to appear false and encourage his dupe to penetrate to what is only another false bottom, reaches its climax at the opening of Act IV, where master and pupil enter, already engaged in conversation: That Othello should be accusing Cassio and Desdemona of hypocrisy, the devil's weapon, is the sign of Iago's total triumph in creating false perception.
Here there is not even anything to perceive, just words that purport to represent deeds.
‘Hath he said anything?’ asks Othello about Cassio, and Iago replies yes, but  Othello's collapse into prose, and madness, comes when his worst suspicions, aroused by Iago, are given verbal form.
Iago's manipulation of the verbal sign was never more brilliant, for he has only to offer the Signifier, ‘Lie’— which could mean ‘tell an untruth’— for Othello to snatch the Signified, ‘lie with’, which has been planted in his consciousness so remorselessly.
It is indeed a case of ‘what you will’ in decoding this and all other linguistic signs, but it is Iago who has made Othello construe it in that manner, and will continue to do so.
Shakespeare makes the point about interpretation that modern research in theories of vision and the education of young children has confirmed — that we are all taught to see — by Iago's prediction of the view that Othello, hidden in the normally superior position of the eavesdropper, will take of his imminent conversation with Cassio: After the scene has turned out exactly as predicted, Iago checks on his victim's responses: The Signifier here, the handkerchief, has been made by Iago to yield a meaning which is totally false, but which he has put upon it with so much circumstantial detail — Shakespeare's diligence in this point risks pushing his plot into the incredible — that Othello can only see it as a present that Cassio has received from Desdemona and has ‘given…his whore’.
Iago's dominance of Othello's eyes and brain is total; indeed he now begins to destroy his memory.
We see Othello clutching at the last flickers of his memory of Desdemona as she was, for him (and as of course she still is ): Not your way, because not my way.
Iago soon brings him back to the ‘foul’ image: ‘I will chop her into messes — cuckold me!’
Othello ends up with the same poisoned suspicions as Iago, who had earlier confessed that he suspects both Othello and Cassio of having cuckolded him with Emilia (II.i.285ff.).
Is there any other instance of a man transferring to another his own sexual paranoia?
From Iago, too, Othello has caught the habit of repeating a word, dwelling on it to debase it or bring out a sinister double meaning (compare Iago on ‘virtue’ and ‘blest’: I.iii.318ff.; II.i.245ff.).
So Othello seizes on Lodovico's request that Desdemona should return with a series of puns on ‘turn’ in its sexual sense (IV.i.254ff.), and, more painfully, on ‘committed’(IV.ii.71ff.).
Othello cannot now see anything but dirt, Iago's dirt.
When he had been keeping Desdemona company, awaiting Othello's arrival from Venice, Iago had entertained them with impromptu (and bitter) rhymes, describing his imagination's preliminary working (the rhetorical process of inventio ) in these terms: Frieze is a coarse woollen cloth, birdlime a viscous stuff used to entangle: the destructive collocation of the two seems an apt metaphor for Iago's ‘invention’.
Shakespeare's remorselessness in Othello , his refusal to be deflected from  his single path, is reinforced by the obsessive nature of his characters.
Iago only ever talks about destroying Othello and Desdemona, has even forgotten about his own career, and Othello takes over his obsessions.
When Cassio has been attacked by Iago, apparently murdered, Othello lauds his master's example: The murder scene, with its marvellously wrought language, a ceremony that Othello thinks of as a sacrifice, is the most deluded, most fictitious scene in Shakespeare — not a word in it that Othello says is true.
Desdemona is not a whore, he is not ‘Justice’(V.ii.17), and when he kills her —‘I that am cruel am yet merciful’(90)— we see that he has even learned Iago's trick of euphemism (cf.
Roderigo's reaction to being urged to effect ‘the removing of Cassio’(IV.ii.228ff.)).
Iago has led Othello to where he had predicted, caused the people he hates to destroy each other.
His revenge (whatever the provocation) seems complete!
But just at this point Iago makes his single mistake.
Following the Machiavellian rule of killing your catspaws before they can betray you, he stabs Roderigo, exclaiming the while, ‘Kill men i’ th' dark!
Where be these bloody thieves?’(that still has something of Richard III's panache), and protests that ‘Here's Cassio hurt by villains’(V.i.62ff.)— namely himself and Roderigo — while offering Cassio hypocritical sympathy.
But Iago's hypocrisy, like Macbeth's, causes his own undoing.
He puts himself too completely into the role of the good man here, behaving.
like Lady Macbeth, as one ought to behave, for he sends his wife on an errand: ‘Emilia, run you to the citadel, /And tell my lord and lady what hath happed’(V.i.126f.).
Perhaps he has forgotten that his lord ought to be murdering his lady just at this juncture; or perhaps he thinks Emilia is as corrupt as himself; or perhaps he does not understand love, The error is great, since Emilia is the only person who knows the truth about the handkerchief.
She has already suspected that Othello's erroneous view of Desdemona is a malicious fiction put out by some Machiavel: and — as we know, but Iago evidently does not — she loves her mistress.
Sent by Iago, coming upon Othello just after the murder, Emilia's love and integrity cause her to denounce her husband, even at the cost of her own life.
It is ironic that the hypocrite, who is seen throughout with a neurotic distrust of women, and whose every second word to his wife is an insult, should finally be exposed by a woman he had trusted, from whom he had snatched the handkerchief without even thinking her worth swearing to secrecy (III.iii.320ff.).
Iago's hatred of women undoes him.
He has not managed to destroy trust.
In the final reckoning, truth is restored.
Emilia reveals that she found the handkerchief (‘Villainous whore!’ and ‘Filth’, he calls her), and with her dying breath — that most crucial of all utterances to Renaissance beliefs — proclaims her integrity: ‘So come my soul to bliss, as I speak true; /So speaking as I think, alas, I die’(V.ii.253f.).
The agony of Othello's realization that he has been duped into killing Desdemona is one of the two or three most intense sequences in Shakespeare.
Lodovico gives an external judgement on him that is essentially right: ‘O thou Othello, that wert once so good, /Fallen in the practice of a damned slave’(293f.).
Yet Othello has the integrity not to make excuses for his error but to accept his responsibility, equate himself with the ‘malignant and turbaned Turk’, and execute himself.
Now and not before, he is Justice with its sword.
Iago, that ‘Spartan dog’, is given his final share of responsibility: Just as Iago poisoned sight, so do the fruits of his action.
In Shakespearian tragedy, hypocrisy is not only a poison in itself but the cause of ever greater destruction.
Two last points need to be made about Othello , the first concerning the hypocrite's superiority over his dupes.
As we have observed with Richard III, the power gained by the deceiver's simulatio makes the dupes seem naïve or silly —‘Relenting fool, and shallow-changing woman!’ was Richard's parting comment on Queen Elizabeth.
Iago's superiority over the six people he directly deceives (and behind them, of course, the whole of society) is so marked that we risk endorsing his contempt for whichever ‘snipe’, ‘knave’, or ‘ass’ he happens to be manipulating.
For characters like Roderigo such contempt may not be unjust.
But I suspect that unawareness of this structural effect within hypocrisy plots lies behind the disparaging attitude, so common in modem criticism, towards Othello and, to a lesser extent, Desdemona.
Critics of the play have failed to notice that, since everything pivots around Iago's plotting, we tend to accept — unless we are very careful — Iago's version of events, and his attitude to his victims.
In some perhaps not fully conscious way critics tend to look for faults in Othello, errors of personality or upbringing (to neo-Freudians his sexual hang-ups), that will explain why he believes Iago and murders Desdemona.
But Iago's ‘practice’ is so assured, his control  of surface and perspective so total, that we have to put him in the highest class of hypocrites, along with Satan.
What could he not accomplish?
Since, as Alexander Cruden put it, ‘men cannot dive into the hearts of others’, critics should be careful not to abuse the privileged vision they enjoy, compared to the false and occluded images that the characters in the play have to go on, and judge them disparagingly.
Second, Iago's terrible silence once his deceptions have been exposed: ‘Demand me nothing, what you know, you know, /From this time forth I never will speak word’(V.ii.304f.): this refusal of language is the logical outcome of the destructive egoism with which Iago has put himself outside, and in his own eyes above, society.
His violations of truth and trust make him, for anyone who conceives of the human community as being based on mutual help, guilty of ingratitude, of breaking those bonds of reciprocity which make life possible.
Iago is ‘hardened’, as Cruden put it, in his hypocrisy, so that his refusal to repent or explain shows great psychological insight on Shakespeare's part.
Expounding Seneca's moral philosophy, towards the end of the seventeenth century, Roger L'Estrange begins by emphasizing the importance of ‘the theme of Benefits, Gratitude , and Ingratitude ’ to the author of De beneficiis .
Then he links pagan philosophy with Christianity, recalling the ‘Apostasie’ of the angels and the feelings of hatred, the ‘Implacable Malice’which Lucifer and co. expressed against the other angels.
The two vices, he points out, are connected, for  That seems to me a fitting explanation for the resolutely ‘Implacable Malice’ of Iago.
And in any case, the hypocrite has abused language so much that, if he offered a show of remorse, who could believe him?
The challenge of integrity against hypocrisy, made by Emilia at the very end of Othello , is placed first in King Lear .
As the king abdicates, he divides up his kingdom as a dower for his three daughters, and orders them —‘Tell me, my daughters’— to declare the quantity of their love: ‘Which of you shall we say doth love us most?’
(King Lear , I.i.48ff.).
Lear speaks again at line 62, and in the meantime not one but two of his daughters speak, one to him and  one to the audience.
Goneril declares an absolute love, beyond expression: and so forth.
It is a speech of effusive praise, which if it were true, would make her an exceptionally loving child.
Its tone is such that Cordelia tells us, alone, that she cannot compete with it: ‘What shall Cordelia speak?
Love, and be silent’(62).
Already we have that dichotomy between words and deeds that typifies hypocrisy, and which runs throughout the play.
Cordelia equates her sisters' words with falseness, her own silence with love, and we have no reason to disagree.
Lear is evidently pleased with what Goneril has said, since he awards her a rich part of England, and moves on to the second movement, where again two daughters speak.
Regan declares her love to be identical with Goneril's, only that she has understated it (we had scarce thought it possible to go beyond Goneril): To claim that your love for your father exceeds all the joys which can be derived from the senses — with your newly wedded husband standing by — is to claim too much.
Cordelia again comments to us, criticizing that profession: Deeds against words, truth against fiction.
integrity against hypocrisy: that is the position of Cordelia.
Her father's loving- (or lying-) competition, designed though it may be to give her the best part of England (which he is also giving himself, of course, since he intends to live in retirement with her), and revealing, in a way, his love for her, is nevertheless so constructed that she would have to compete with hypocrisy in order to win.
Lear is quantifying love, confusing it with other things that can be measured, weighed, counted.
Cordelia, like Coriolanus, is being forced into a ceremony in which she would have to be false to her own nature.
Lear pretends to be offering a gift, but is  in fact extorting a bribe.
She refuses to play the game according to these rules, professing ‘Nothing.
As we experience Act I, Scene i, of King Lear for the first time, it may not be easy to see that Cordelia is right, the others wrong.
By the time we reach the end of the scene we see that this is how it is, for the fulsome praisers of their father put aside their hypocrisy and, left alone with each other, and with us, reveal their true nature, moving down from inflated verse to coldly pragmatic prose: They are not only cold and censorious —‘unruly waywardness…infirm and choleric years…unconstant starts’— but end by planning some form of counteraction: ‘We shall further think on it’—‘We must do something, and i’ th' heat' (307f.).
Structurally, left alone on-stage after the main figures have left, plotting behind Lear's back, they are exactly in the position of Iago, or the tribunes in Coriolanus .
We see that Cordelia's judgement of them was correct: As they taunt her for her disobedience she replies, ‘Time shall unfold what plighted cunning hides; /Who covers faults, at last with shame derides’(280f.).
The metaphor of covering and exposing falseness (as used by Isabella, we recall) describes the whole career of the hypocrite within literary form.
By her stand we judge them, and we see that Cordelia's calm statement of her love for her father, her refusal to compete in extravagant adulation, was the result not of some inherent coldness but of integrity under unusual and unnatural pressure.
She was only like this in response to Lear's perverted claim: the rest of the play shows that there is no one more loving.
As Kent tells Lear, Sent into banishment for opposing his master, Kent can give his moral support to Cordelia (in terms that echo Emilia's dying words): The division is clear-cut, and it is right.
The first scene in the main plot of King Lear opposes and discriminates its protagonists.
Cordelia, Kent, and France, who stand up to Lear, and whose judgement mutually reinforces one another, are right then, and are shown to be right by the way the action develops.
Lear himself soon regrets his decision.
Two scenes later we see Goneril instructing her servant Oswald to be rude to Lear, put on ‘weary negligence’, and bring the issue to a violent state: ‘What grows of it, no matter…
I would breed from hence occasions’(I.iii.8–26).
The tactics of Iago against Cassio, the tribunes against Coriolanus, work, as they must always work, given human nature and the will to manipulate it.
Lear is offended by Oswald's negligence (I.iv.47ff.), and his new servant (Kent, returned in disguise) shows his loyalty by tripping up this ‘clotpoll’.
Goneril thereby gains the pretext she had wanted to ‘speak’, and accuses Lear and his knights of all manner of disorder, ‘epicurism and lust’(209–22, 245–59).
Immediately angry, manipulated by these evidently false accusations (like Coriolanus, Lear cannot see that the whole purpose of them is to make him angry), Lear regrets the ‘most small fault’ that had caused him to disown Cordelia (275ff.), curses Goneril with appalling violence (284ff.), and sweeps off to Regan.
But as we know in advance, the two sisters are in communication by letter, and have established a joint policy of provocation.
Face to face with him (the first time since receiving their inheritance from him), they attack his claimed need for a hundred knights.
Although at one point Lear is willing to return to Goneril, since she seems to be allowing him fifty knights, Regan only twenty-five, so that‘Thy fifty yet doth double five-and-twenty, /And thou art twice her love’(II.iv.260ff.)— a quantification of love that would be comic were its effects not so awful — Lear becomes enraged by the two of them, and prefers ‘To wage against the enmity o’ th' air' than live with them.
So he goes out into the storm and into wild nature, together with ‘the wolf and the owl’, while his daughters and son-in-law close their doors on him (306ff.).
The development of this part of the plot is swift, Lear's impatient anger leading him from one self-imposed crisis to another.
His methods of computation may be ridiculous, but he is right to think that they do not love him, and his sense of bitter ingratitude causes his madness.
They, for their part, attempt to justify their actions to each other, hypocrisy apparently continuing by habit, having become a way of life (since there is no one on-stage whom they need to deceive, perhaps they have come to believe their own lies): The truth is transparent, however; indeed, when Gloucester reports that the king is leaving, Goneril says, ‘My Lord, entreat him by no means to stay’(301).
Having just received the whole kingdom from him, they can't wait to get rid of him.
Lear is now experiencing the truth of La Rochefoucauld's maxim that ‘So long as a man is still in a position to help others he will rarely encounter ingratitude.’
Yet, although sinned against, Lear is also sinning.
He had devised a purely verbal test of his daughters' love, and while a devotee of Practical Criticism could soon have told him what was wrong with Goneril and Regan from their speeches alone, there was apparently no way in which he could discriminate them from Cordelia.
But, as Iago says, ‘Knavery's plain face is never seen till used’(Othello , II.i.306).
Goneril and Regan used fraud to gain power, and now that they have it, no longer need to dissimulate.
Their false show, like that of Iago, is the pivot on which the whole action turns.
Yet while Iago had to start from scratch, foment hatred, poison sight, and invert reality to set his chosen enemies against each other, all that Goneril and Regan have to do to get a third of Britain is to make the kind of noises Lear expects to hear; indeed, since Cordelia won't flatter, they get her part too, and even her coronet as an unlooked-for bonus, Lear's only ‘free gift’, to use the language of modern advertising promotions (‘This coronet part between you’(King Lear , 1.
i.139)).
The hypocrites take, or are given, all, and once they have it, show their real selves.
No other hypocrites in Shakespeare gain so much so quickly, so easily, and can afford to drop pretence so fast.
The first scene of the subplot also opposes and discriminates its protagonists.
Whereas Goneril and Regan had been shown to us first in disguise, and then in reality, Edmund begins in reality, and only adopts disguise when his father enters.
Hypocrisy is a key element in this plot, too, with the difference that while they started near the top of society and were on the verge of receiving power at the very beginning, he — as a bastard son who is only just back from having spent nine years abroad (the typical occupation for one who has no prospect of inheritance in his own country) and is due to go again — starts very much lower down in society, virtually at the bottom.
He has to do more than they do, and he has to keep it up for much longer.
from his first soliloquy (l.ii.) to his last (V.i.),
Edmund's hypocrisy stretches across the play, a freewheeling career of pretence in the service of egoism.
Like Iago, like Goneril and Regan, he pretends in order to acquire.
Since he  is well built, and inventive, he argues (in a travesty of logic that echoes Iago's at a similar point, the thinness of the pretext revealing the strength of the desire), he has a right to the land reserved for the son born ‘by order of law’: Since Gloucester loves both sons equally, that means that both by birth and by nature (to the Renaissance the terms were synonymous) he cannot discriminate good from bad.
His love for Edmund is a trust that the bastard exploits, planting a false letter, which he backs up with false testimony, alleging that Edgar would wish to oust his father, a hypocrite's typical inversion of the truth.
It is a convention in Elizabethan drama that slander is always believed, which can be explained perhaps from the necessities of the limited time available, or is perhaps a truth about life (how many of us instantly disbelieve bad report?).
But we are at liberty to form our own judgement of the person doing so.
Lear is to be blamed for believing Goneril and Regan, yet since they were merely flattering his debased scale of values, in a test which he had himself devised, it is not surprising that he did so.
But Gloucester believes Edmund instantly, in the absence of Edgar, and even engages the bastard son to spy on the legitimate.
As Edmund says.
ending the scene as he had begun it, with a soliloquy, how lucky he is to have  The naked statement of self-seeking reminds us of Iago, as does the confidence with which he approaches the task —‘easy’(‘For'tis most easy/Th’ inclining Desdemona to subdue/In any honest suit' (Othello , II.iii.332ff.))— and the scorn for those taken in by his traps (‘Thus credulous fools are caught!’
(Othello , IV.i.45)).
Shakespeare's villains have it too easy, one sometimes feels.
Edmund's predictions of the success of his plots are, like Iago's, accurate.
The ‘credulous father’ Gloucester is easily manipulated into setting a guard to catch Edgar (King Lear , 11. i.17), and Edmund, who has been ‘sheltering’Edgar (that is, keeping him locked up, where he cannot confront his father), dupes him into fleeing, so that Gloucester can order him to be pursued and killed (56–63).
The systematic inversion practised by the hypocrite is brought  out by Shakespeare, almost with an admiration for its trickery.
Edmund reports to Gloucester how, Since it is all, in truth, Edmund's ‘suggestion, plot, and damned practice’, the inversion is so apparent to us as to make him seem cheeky.
Edmund displays throughout a relaxed, almost dapper manner, far removed from the obsessive Iago, eaten up by the suspicions in his own innards.
Yet their deeds have the same perverted outcome.
Gloucester exclaims ‘O strange and fast'ned villain!…
I never got him’(77f.), and promises to take the necessary legal steps to make Edmund capable of inheriting his patrimony, otherwise closed to a bastard: ‘Loyal and natural boy, I'll work the means/To make thee capable’(84f.).
Edmund now has Edgar's lands.
I earlier described the form of hypocrisy that Shakespeare was most interested in as dynamic, acting on its own behalf to achieve some definite goal.
Yet in the tragedies these villains are never satisfied: Macbeth goes on killing like some automaton, Iago goes on destroying until he has brought everyone down.
The principle of rapacious egoism, Shakespeare shows, does not let up once it has achieved its first-formulated goal.
We see this from Edmund both as subject and object.
As subject, acting for his own interests, the later confusion of events — with Cordelia returned from France with soldiers to seek her father and secret letters passing to and fro— suddenly puts Gloucester in a dilemma.
He is loyal to Cornwall, but he is also loyal to Lear, and is outraged at the way the King has been treated: ‘Most savage and unnatural’, Edmund agrees (III.iii. 1ff.).
Telling Edmund of the letter, Gloucester makes him his trusted accomplice: ‘We must incline to the King.
I will seek him and privily relieve him; go you and maintain talk with the Duke, that my charity be not of him perceiv'd’(III.iii. 14ff.).
No sooner has he left than Edmund moves up to verse to show that he is semper idem : Edmund shares Goneril and Regan's contempt for old age, but he goes  beyond them even, in betraying his own father, knowing that the penalty for helping Lear may be death.
Loathsome as he now is, he becomes still more so as he hypocritically professes to Cornwall his filial embarrassment: ‘How, my lord, I may be censured, that nature thus gives way to loyalty, something fears me to think of….
O Heavens! that this treason were not, or not I the detector!’
(III.v.2ff.).
Yet when Cornwall pronounces him the new Earl of Gloucester, and orders him to seek his father out, Edmund has yet another layer of pretence at hand: Edmund's perversion of such words as ‘nature’, ‘loyalty’, and ‘blood’ is grimly evident to us, but not to Cornwall — who may not understand those terms, in any case — and who now puts himself into the position of an adopted father to Edmund: ‘I will lay trust upon thee; and thou shalt find a dearer father in my love’(24f.).
Knowing what Edmund has done to his real father might have given Cornwall pause before proclaiming himself the next one.
As subject, Edmund acts for himself, doing anything that will advance him: Goneril and Regan live by the same principle.
When Edmund is sent off with Goneril (since.
Cornwall tells him, ‘the revenges we are bound to take upon your traitorous father are not fit for your beholding’(III.vii.6ff.)), he comes into the final stage of his career, moving from subject to object, first of Goneril's love, then of Regan's.
Arriving home, Goneril pronounces herself his mistress, and promises him speedy advancement — which can only mean by the murder of her husband, Albany (IV.ii.17ff.).
To her, as to Edmund, the question of legitimacy is a nuisance to be subverted: When Goneril's ‘trusty servant’, Oswald, bears a letter from her to Edmund, Regan attempts to corrupt him into giving it to her (IV.v.20ff.).
All trust has now been destroyed by these seemers.
Having declared her desire for Edmund to Oswald (28ff.),
Regan declares it to the man himself (V.i.6ff.), as the egoism they each pursue turns the two sisters into deadly rivals (15f., 18f.).
Left alone, Edmund is rather amused by the situation: Rather like Iago, in a soliloquy at a similar stage of the action (Othello , V.i.11–22), Edmund concludes that he will win anyway.
But in fact he has already been exposed.
Oswald, carrying Goneril's letter, and with the added instructions to kill Gloucester should he find him, tried to do so but was killed by Edgar, who discovered their secret plans to kill Albany (King Lear , IV.vi.227–80).
Immediately — before Edmund's soliloquy, Edgar, still in disguise, has given the letter to Albany (40–50), and for the first time the forces of good have a superior knowledge over the hypocrites.
As a result, Albany can arrest Edmund after their victory in battle, and prevent Goneril's marriage plot (V.iii.83ff.).
Then Edgar appears, disguised as a poor knight whose ‘name is lost; /By treason's tooth bare-gnawn, and canker-bit’(121f.), and by defeating him in single combat, completes the exposure of Edmund, the bastard being displayed as a hypocrite and pretender (162–74), who in a fair contest — according to Renaissance optimism about the superiority of right — is bound to be defeated by the legitimate.
The egoistic destructiveness represented by Goneril and Regan destroys itself: one poisons the other, and then kills herself.
Goneril's letter declaring her desire to Edmund is the means by which the truth is finally revealed: again appetite destroys itself.
Yet before it does so it destroys much else, and the devastation at the end of King Lear is a sufficient proof of the destructiveness of hypocrisy, once it is believed, Trusting hypocrites such as these is like offering oneself as a test-bed for the cultivation of some deadly bacillus.
Once established, it will not be got rid of save at the cost of the organism on which it has bred; like Iago's ‘invention’, it ‘plucks out brains and all’.
Looking back over this chronicle of destruction we are struck by Shakespeare's revelation of the unsuspected depths of evil connected with hypocrisy.
After Falstaff or Malvolio or Parolles, we might be tempted to think that dissimulation can lie known, exposed, or controlled, without much harm being done.
But after Richard III we would have second thoughts; after Iago we might begin to doubt whether anyone could ever be trusted again.
Not all the hypocrites are equally resourceful, but they all exploit positions of trust in order to gain at the expense of others.
Goneril and Regan almost have hypocrisy thrust upon them, in that Lear's invitations to flatter for instant profit do impose an intolerable burden on anyone of a less than firm integrity.
Yet once they have collaborated in this verbal insincerity they reveal an extent of human viciousness no one could have expected.
Having shut Lear out in the storm, Goneril and Regan lay ‘a plot of death upon him’(III.vi.92ff.).
In Shakespeare's tragedies hypocrisy is no mere quirk of human nature but the sign of a propensity towards deep and ultimately inexplicable evil.
No one attempts to answer Lear's question, ‘Is there any cause in nature that make these hard hearts?’
(III.vi.78f.), because no one could answer it, then or now.
Iago's exploitation of trust enables him to make Othello kill  Desdemona: all that Othello can say at the end is, ‘Will you, I pray, demand that demi-devil/Why he hath thus ensnared my soul and body?’
(Othello , V.ii.303f.).
Iago's refusal to answer that question puts him outside human society for ever.
The hypocrite, presented in asides and soliloquies, is given the theatrical medium that suits exactly his isolation over and against his fellow men.
In Shakespeare, hypocrisy is linked inseparably with that rapacious egoism that is willing to destroy all in order to advance itself.
We might attempt to complete La Rochefoucauld's maxim by saying that hypocrisy is the tribute that vice pays to virtue, in order to destroy it.