

SNAPSHOT: 1945/1990
British media changed so much between 1945 and 1990 that it may be best to begin with contrasting snapshots of these two years.
1945
There was no television.
About ten million households had a radio set and most were run off the mains, not off a battery.
The compulsory annual licence fee cost ten shillings (50p).
You had a choice of two BBC stations.
One was ‘serious’; the other broadcast light music and entertainment.
The nine o'clock evening news had an audience of half the population during the war, but this fell quickly in 1945.
The BBC had its own foreign correspondents but none yet for domestic news.
Quite a lot of people listened to light music on Radio Luxembourg.
You could also hear music at home on a wind-up gramophone with ten- or twelve-inch 78 r.p.m. bakelite records.
These played for only a few minutes at a time.
Most people read one of nine London-edited, ‘national’ morning newspapers, delivered through the letter-box.
If it was the Daily Mirror or Daily Sketch , it was tabloid.
If not — and those papers had less than a quarter of the total circulation — it was broadsheet.
Because of paper rationing it had only four to eight pages, unless it was The Times , which averaged nine.
Most of the contents were news, not features.
One person in  five, mainly in the big cities, bought a locally published morning paper as well or instead.
Local evening papers were smaller but more numerous (76 compared with 29).
Londoners had a choice of three evening papers.
Even more people read a Sunday paper than a daily, often for the sport.
Nearly 750 towns had weekly papers.
The national dailies differed sharply in style between the low-circulation ‘qualities’ and the mass-circulation ‘populars’.
All nine were separately owned, mainly by elderly barons (barons in fact and in managerial style), such as Lord Beaverbrook and Lord Kemsley.
They also owned Sunday papers.
Lord Kemsley and Lord Rothermere owned chains of provincial dailies too.
The barons were politically partisan — mostly Conservative — and you expected your paper to play a vigorous part for or against Mr Churchill in the 1945 general election campaign.
The BBC did not report the election at all until polling day, but it provided time for nightly talks by party leaders, up to half-an-hour in length.
On the news-stands, there were several popular illustrated weekly news and feature magazines:Everybody's, Illustrated, Picture Post .
There were numerous general magazines and a growing market in women's weeklies and monthlies.
Colour was limited.
The brightest splash in the newsagent was probably the display of orange and green Penguin paperbacks — the main paperbacks available.
6,747 book titles were published.
Boots and W.H. Smith ran cheap circulating libraries, sup-plementing the public libraries.
Regularly you went to the cinema.
Thirty million cinema tickets a week were sold in 1945.
The Times still listed cinemas as ‘Picture Theatres’.
The short weekly ‘newsreels’, a mixture of news and feature stories, gave a foretaste of TV news.
Hollywood products dominated.
In addition to the feature film, you saw a shorter, low budget, ‘B movie’.
Films were censored for decency by Local Authorities, with the aid of an independent board.
In the press, ‘taste’ was largely a matter of editorial discretion.
Four-letter words and topless girls were taboo.
Tasteful, air  brushed nudes appeared in light monthly magazines such as Lilliput and Men Only .
1990
There was almost no escape from television.
Three homes out of five had two TV sets and one person in six had three.
ITV broadcast round the clock.
Viewers had a choice of four channels.
Between them, BBC1, BBC2, ITV and Channel 4 provided some 450 hours of programmes a week.
The licence fee was £71, all of which went to the BBC.
ITV was paid for by advertisements, carefully regulated by the Independent Broadcasting Authority.
If your town was cabled and you were one of 80,000 house-holders who paid a subscription, you could get a variety of extra specialized channels such as sport and movies.
Rupert Murdoch's Sky satellite channel had 600,000 subscribers and the rival BSB satellite service was just entering the market.
A quarter of us had Teletext on our TV.
Ten percent used the set for video games.
More than half of us used it with a video-recorder, chiefly for films and soap operas taped from broadcasts.
Nearly everyone had colour.
We spent twenty-six hours a week watching TV: news, soap operas, films, the House of Commons, endless studio discussion among politicians.
Snooker was the most popular televised sport: only one team game (football) was among the TV top ten.
TV was the nation's main evening activity.
We spent eight hours a week listening to the radio — but mainly while doing something else.
The BBC had four national stations and 32 locals.
There was also a commercial station near most people, licensed by the IBA, and any number of overseas stations.
Stations mostly broadcast music and ‘chat’.
BBC Radio 4 was for news and talk; Radio 3, for classical music.
You could listen almost any time, anywhere — especially with your Walkman headset that filtered nothing but a mildly irritating hiss to passengers in your bus, say, or your train  compartment.
As much as 85 per cent of cars had a radio, and over half were used whenever the car was driven.
Half had a cassette player too.
A quarter of us had four radio sets or more.
Music of high technical quality was available in the home through CDs, cassette tapes, LPs and pop videos.
Older members of a family did not go out of the house in search of music but to get away from it.
Despite TV, most people still read a daily newspaper.
The dominance of the national press had increased.
Of eleven main dailies, six were tabloids with 80 per cent of the circulation.
Your paper had 30 — 40 pages or more; a large proportion of features; pages of small ads (if it was a broadsheet); regular colour.
Your Sunday paper very likely came in sections, some of which you were still reading the following week.
If you wanted an illustrated weekly magazine, you could get one free, in excellent colour, with a Saturday or Sunday paper.
Fewer people now read an evening paper: if they did, it was primarily to see what was on TV.
Only eighteen provincial morning papers survived, so there was less opportunity to read one anyway.
Thirteen towns outside London had a choice of local dailies.
Half of us bought a local weekly paper, and three-quarters received an unsolicited ‘free weekly’, financed by advertising.
Many of these contained little editorial copy.
Their total circulation was 37 million.
In London, only one evening paper survived, despite an unsuccessful attempt by Robert Maxwell to establish a new one in 1987.
The national dailies were bunched into eight ownership groups, headed by Rupert Murdoch, Robert Maxwell, the latest Lord Rothermere and others.
More than in 1945, they controlled multimedia organizations, with interests in TV, radio, film, video, recorded music and book publishing, as well as newspapers and magazines.
Moreover their interests were international, and they generally included non-media businesses too.
In the 1987 general election they presented you with a partisan newspaper, as in 1945: nearly all were rooting for Mrs Thatcher.
The news-stands were a blaze of glossy colour.
In London's Victoria Station, a kiosk displayed over 700 magazines — 40 on  computing, 75 on music and hi-fi, others on skateboarding, home freezers, body-building, and many other categories (including soft porn) that in 1945 did not exist.
The traditional women's magazines, hugely successful in the 1950s, had slumped.
Penguin books had changed their distinctive format.
Paperbacks in general had pushed aside the hardback, except for the specialized and coffee table markets.
The commercial lending libraries had disappeared.
Book publishing had soared to more than 55,000 new titles and reprints.
You very rarely went to the cinema, unless you were young and middle class.
Attendances were down to one million per week.
If you did, you saw one main film and had ample opportunity to buy ice cream.
Film was still censored, but by more liberal standards than in 1945.
Could you be more easily shocked by media in 1990 than in 1945?
It is difficult to know.
If you were, there was certainly more scope to complain.
The Press Council, Broadcasting Complaints Commission and Advertising Standards Authority were at your disposal, though only the latter had teeth.
WHICH MEDIA?
WHAT HISTORY?
How much of those snapshots might a history of mass media study?
The term ‘mass media’ itself was not widely used until the 1960s.
(Its first appearance in the index to The Times , not a bad indicator, was in 1965.)
A history of mass media from 1945 must thus impose a common character upon a set of — what?
Organizations?
Technologies?
Information sources?— which either went by a different name or was not recognised at that time.
Everyone agrees that newspapers and TV are mass media.
Indeed the history of this period could be seen very largely as a process of adjustment by and to TV.
But what about books — and cinema?
Or is film, not cinema, the mass medium?
What is ‘TV’, anyway?
In 1946, when post-war service began, the TV set sat in the corner for most of the time, as the service lasted for only about four hours a day.
Early TV sets sometimes had doors, which you folded back to reveal the screen when it was time to watch.
ITV was allowed about seven hours a day when it started in 1955; and long before the growth of home computers, VCRs and video games in the 1980s, of course, the TV set had become a main focus (often the focus) of the living room.
But with the growth of these other uses, what exactly did it mean by 1990 to say that ‘TV’ was a mass medium?
Was a TV programme the same thing whether it came to your set by satellite, by cable, by terrestrial transmitter or by videotape?
‘Mass medium’ thus turns out to be one of those terms, apparently simple, that grow more elusive upon analysis.
Partly  this may be because the term gained currency precisely in response to the proliferation of media and the lack of a suitable umbrella word to cover them.
Beyond that, uncertainty is caused by the fact that different media commonly take their names from different elements in the communication process.
Any completed act of communication, from a conversation between two people to a summit communiqué beamed by world leaders round the globe, involves (to quote an old formulation)‘a sender, message, medium and receiver’.
A further source of names is the purpose for which the communication takes place, such as advertising or news.
If we say the Sun is a mass medium we name a news organization (a ‘sender’) and a technology for distributing ‘messages’(a ‘medium’).
If we say newspapers are a mass medium, we refer to a particular kind of ‘message — news.
(Contrast the name ‘magazine’, using the same technology but suggesting a less news-based idea.)
If we call the press a mass medium, we refer, strictly, to an ancient technology (a ‘medium’) of pressing sheets of paper against inked type — dominant, in 1945, in the ultimate guise of hot metal typesetting machines, which by 1990 were on the scrap-heap.
If we call the popular press a mass medium, as we might when distinguishing the Sun from The Times , we refer to circulation numbers (the ‘receivers’).
The same product, the Sun , can thus be described in several different ways as a mass medium.
The same game can be played with radio and TV.
We might apply the term ‘mass medium’ to the BBC (‘sender’), or broad-casting (‘medium’), or News at Ten (‘message’).
There is no broadcast equivalent to ‘popular press’, though the term ‘pop radio, was current for a time in the 1970s.
Compared with the press and broadcasting, other media have generally been named by reference to fewer elements of the communication process.
‘Film’ and ‘movie’refer to a technology and ‘cinema’, by connoting a location, to ‘receivers’.
‘Records’, ‘CDs’ and ‘tapes’(audio and video) describe a ‘medium’; ‘pop’(records, videos) describes a kind of ‘message’.
How then can the term ‘mass medium’ be pinned down for the period 1945 — 90?
Those two words emphasize the key  importance of the technology and the ‘receivers’.
Media qualify as mass media if they are good at conveying complex ‘messages’ fast, clearly and simultaneously to large numbers of people.
The ‘senders’ and ‘messages’are the least distinctive parts.
No mass medium can yet serve mass ‘senders’ on the scale of mass audiences; and the ‘messages’delivered in a daily paper could be conveyed in identical terms by typed letter through the mail.
The mass audiences and the technology for reaching them are what give the press and electronic media their character as mass media.
Even so, the term is always flexible because it is relative.
A ‘mass’ audience is large in relation to a maximum.
New technology changes the maximum.
Daily newspapers became increasingly possible on a national, not a London or a regional scale, as railways and faster presses made daily printing and distribution more practical in the late nineteenth century.
The Manchester Guardian was a mass medium in Manchester from its foundation in 1821.
As a mass medium nationally it achieved full status only in 1959 when it started printing in London, dropped Manchester from the mast-head and was distributed nationally like the other Fleet Street dailies.
‘Fast’ and ‘simultaneous’distribution, again, are defined by the purposes of the ‘sender’and the speed of alternative technologies.
Until the 1950s, the news in daily papers had only limited competition from radio and virtually none from TV.
But soon the big stories were written in the knowledge that readers would know at least the bare bones from a news bulletin, and the 24-hour cycle of the daily paper lost much of its point as a news medium.
Apart from a few news and sport items and the TV listings, how much of Monday's Mirror or Sun could not equally well be published on the following Thursday or Friday?
Media qualifying as ‘mass media’ therefore vary, in particular with changes in technology but also with the changing interest of mass audiences and the intricate factor of costs.
Some media at any moment might be on the way in; others on the way out.
Theatre, in past centuries, might have counted as a mass medium: it was an effective way of spreading ideas, and  so it suffered official censorship (not abolished until the 1960s).
Beacons, semaphore, morse code were all in their day rapid methods of sending information.
The elephantine new medium in the 1945 — 90 period was obviously TV.
Its presence in everyday life became so large and so intense, and in such a short space of time — say 20 years from the Coronation in 1953, acknowledged as the ‘take-off date — that its influence is strictly incalculable, over other media and over most facets of life.
The effects — upon violence in society for instance— often seemed self-evident.
But they were very difficult to prove, or to use as the basis of generalization, because of the difficulty of isolating TV as a causal factor.
Beside TV, other media that came or went look mouselike.
Most were variations of existing media.
For example, 78 r.p.m records and wind-up gramophones gave way in the 1950s to LPs and open-reel tape-recorders.
These in turn gave way to stereo, cassettes, CDs.
Bulky portable radios, larger than the portable TV sets of the 1980s and bulbous with valves and batteries, gave way to the transistor radio in the 1950s.
Provincial morning papers continued their slow decline, as TV and the national press ate into their market.
The ‘general interest’ illustrated weekly magazines like Picture Post were killed off in the late 1950s by TV, even before the free colour magazines and expanded feature coverage of the Sunday papers, led by The Sunday Times , were introduced in the early 1960s.
The new electronic media of the 1980s, such as cable, satellite TV and video recorders, were not variations in the product reaching the audience, as were those changes in the press.
They were new methods of delivering the product: changes in media technology.
Some would qualify as mass media on ‘message’ and rapidity grounds, but fail on audience size.
The telephone ‘conference call’ for instance, enabled a widely separated group of individuals to share a telephone discussion, but the groups were too small to count as ‘mass’.
Similarly, telex and faxing were more analogous to mail than to the press.
‘Direct mail’(often known as ‘junk mail’), on the other hand, even though it came through the letter-box dressed up as a personal letter and not as a newspaper, arguably met the mass  medium definition of reaching large numbers of people quickly and simultaneously.
The amount of such mail handled by the Post Office increased threefold from 1975 to 1987, reaching 1,626 million items and making up 7.7 per cent of total national expenditure on advertising.
junk mail can be placed clearly on a continuum with the press.
At one end is the newspaper or magazine, delivered by the newsagent and paid for by the reader.
Next is the publication paid for by subscription and received through the mail.
Next, the ‘free sheet’, unsolicited and arriving by mail or private delivery.
Finally there is the ‘letter’, free, unsolicited and mailed.
Only in size and restricted contents (advertising goods, charities, insurance, unit trusts) does junk mail differ much from the newspaper or magazine as a medium.
Might advertising be regarded as a mass medium on similar grounds?
The widest commercial usage of the word ‘media’ in the post-war period did indeed refer to just that.
‘Senders’(advertising agencies) existed specifically to produce advertisements.
They reached mass audiences, whom their ‘messages’ frequently interested much more than the news or the programmes that the advertisements indirectly helped pay for.
There is no distinct technology of advertising, but this could be thought an arbitrary objection, especially when the boundaries between media technologies that were quite sharp in the 1940s — between print and photography, or film and TV, for example— were dissolving in the 1980s.
Books raise a similar difficulty, for they too have no technology of their own.
Unlike advertising, however, they could be excluded from a definition of mass media because by twentieth-century standards they did not spread their messages quickly and simultaneously, nor to audiences that were large in relation to the communities within which they circulated.
These are arguable cases.
A few other media met the conditions of technology, but simply failed to catch on with a mass audience.
3-D movies were an early example: cinema audiences in the 1950s donned spectacles that produced a three-dimensional image.
Quadraphonic sound sought a comparable multidimensional effect for music-lovers: instead of two speakers  and signals from your amplifier, you had four.
More funda-mental were the videodiscs marketed in competition with videotapes in the early 1980s.
These had advantages in handling and in instant access to a desired image without any winding.
They were no use for recording programmes, however, and the public opted for video cassette recorders instead.
What may be included in the term ‘mass media’ is thus not a precisely defined set of products and technologies, but a rather loose and variable collection.
Newspapers, magazines, TV and radio feature on most people's lists, with the refinements of the ‘new technologies’ of the 1980s.
Books, discs and posters feature less.
Advertising is a key element in the finance and contents of most media but is not always regarded as a medium in itself.
The history of such a loose collection, even for such a short period as 1945 — 90, could obviously be a large enterprise.
Each element in the communication processes of which media are a part has a history of its own: the media organizations, the changing technology, the contents, the audiences.
Then there are the changing relations between each.
What difference to the contents of TV programmes followed from the setting up of the ITV companies, for example?
Did nudes in the tabloid press proliferate in the 1970s in response to readers' demands, or were readers' expectations aroused by the supply, as a marketing device?
Apart from media's own history, there is the wider question of the relation of media to their society.
What needs did they satisfy?
Beneath such general terms as ‘news’ and ‘entertainment’lay deeper needs.
‘I like to hear the sound of voices in my house’ and ‘It's like having a good chat’were the kinds of response given to audience surveys of radio and TV in the 1970s.
These media were clearly better than the press in helping to combat loneliness and isolation, allegedly more common in the 1970s and 1980s than in the post-war decades, especially among an ageing population.
Such responses help to make the important point that just because mass media were good at spreading news and information, those were not the only purposes they served.
The  history of media will look different according to whether you explore their economic and financial character; their links to politics and government and to other possible centres of power; their social aspects, providing certain types of occupation and status and, through their contents, helping to shape their society's culture from one generation to another; or their psychological importance, of the kind indicated in the response to the surveys about TV and radio in the 1970s.
One complicating result of these diverse ways of looking at media is that they can easily seem to have more in common with non -media organizations and products than with each other.
‘Mass media’ can then start to seem an even more incoherent term than has already been suggested.
Going to the cinema in the 1940s and 1950s, for example, was an important part of courtship among young people: it had more in common with other courtship rituals than with other forms of media use, such as reading the paper.
Similarly, the 1947 Royal Commission on the Press, the first official, across-the-board inquiry into the modern press and the first of three in the 1945 — 90 period, judged the press by three standards, one of which was as an industry.
Yet that was not how most politicians pressing for the inquiry had seen it.
They were concerned with variety of opinion, editorial freedom, partisan bias — values having nothing directly to do with economics and industry.
Again, the print and production workers who used union power to force overmanning and inflated salaries upon Fleet Street managers in the 1960s and 1970s, put priority on conditions of work and were not dissuaded by arguments that such tactics risked reducing the range of titles and thus of voices heard in the national press.
To a typesetter, the closure in 1960 of the last Liberal daily, the News Chronicle , might simply mean he must take his typesetting skills elsewhere, and not necessarily to a newspaper.
To Liberal party activists, however, it was the extinction of a lamp, the end of an era.
In production terms, the morning paper perhaps had more in common with the assembly line than with the production of most TV programmes.
In terms of delivery, curiously, it most resembled milk, and in 1990 these two products, uniquely, were still delivered fresh — and perishable — each morning to the doorstep.
If there is a general unifying character to mass media, beyond the relativities of speed and audience size, it may lie in their progressive use, during the post-1945 era, as leisure commodities.
They made employment for a workforce and were used in the work of other occupations; but mainly they were used for recreation.
In this there is a parallel, by no means fanciful, with the motor car — surely the only product that might challenge TV's claim to have made the greatest difference to most people's daily lives between 1945 and 1990.
We did indeed use our cars rather like a TV set.
Most of us drove fairly similar models.
We spent a lot of time looking through the window at ‘pictures’.
These, like the routines of a news bulletin, chat show or soap opera, were a mixture of the familiar and the unexpected: townscapes and landscapes, high streets and roundabouts which, even when we repeatedly travelled the same routes, were never ‘identical’ journeys, never entirely the same experience.
We shared our motoring experiences with friends, as we shared our reactions to TV.
The motor car was a private space, like the rooms in which we watched TV, shared with family and friends; yet, like TV, it was a window on the world — but taking us out whereas TV brought the world in.
Though we each traced individual patterns in our cars, the range of experiences and purposes (shopping, going for a drive, getting to work) gave the ‘content’ of our journeys much in common.
The analogy must not be overstretched, but the fact that it can be made at all shows how integrated mass media were into the rhythms and activities of society.
The amount of time we spent using media, their virtual inescapability and thus the extent of their potential influence, all make their history important.
What is there in the nest that this cuckoo did not touch?
But their character as well as their scale makes them important.
For not only are the press, radio and TV, in particular, a key part of the organism of a society that endlessly recreates itself: they are also the chief means through which a society observes and evaluates itself.
This is obvious in politics.
TV became both an arena in which political discussion is carried  on, like the House of Commons or a party meeting, and simultaneously a medium in which politicians could be held to account before the people.
This dual character makes mass media almost inevitably contentious.
In observing society and providing the means of its evaluation, media tend to change what they observe — to exert influence, unwittingly or by intent.
Sport provides clear examples.
Cricket in 1990 was a somewhat different game from 1945, due to the ‘needs’ of TV.
The finances and popularity of some sports, such as snooker, darts, tennis and athletics, were transformed by that medium.
But not everybody preferred one-day cricket: in sport, as in other social activities, the effects of media were controversial.
When media themselves are put to scrutiny they are therefore judged both on their own performance and also on their relations with the rest of society.
For this reason, most questions about the importance of media turn out to be questions about something else: the interest in media will typically be in its possible role as a cause of some particular effect.
Do media cause violence?
Here the wider concern is the increased violence in society at large.
Has the press been persistently biased against Labour since 1945?
Here the question is prompted by an interest in the competition for political power.
Is Lady Chatterley's Lover obscene?
The concern of the prosecution in 1960 was with the corruption of public morals.
This book does not go into such broader questions.
Many are discussed exhaustively in the literature on ‘effects’ or ‘bias’, for example(see Bibliography).
This is a history of the media, rather than of their times.
Firstly, the book is limited to those media which most absorbed people's attention in the post-war era, and which met most fully the criteria of a mass medium — television, radio and newspapers.
Other media are mentioned only in relation to these.
Chapters 3 to 6 analyse what was available and what people used — the numbers and circulation of the press, the expansion of TV and radio channels, the patterns of ownership and audiences.
Seen in those terms, three main features of the period were media concentration, conglomeration and internationalization.
Concentration of ownership increased both within particular media, from national daily papers to local radio, and between them.
Conglomeration meant that media companies diversified or were bought up by larger corporations whose media interests were only a part of their whole activity.
These often worked on an international scale, and the results showed in their products.
For instance, co-production TV series were scripted and cast to appeal to an international audience.
Publishers calculated their advances for best-selling authors like Frederick Forsyth on the basis of sales hyped in international markets.
Readers of Rupert Murdoch's papers in different continents might read the same syndicated articles.
Those features were not new.
The model British press baron, Lord Northcliffe, ‘bestrode Fleet Street like a colossus, before the First World War, fat with national and provincial daily and Sunday papers, magazines and children's comics.
Films were cast for an international market in the Hollywood of the 1920s; and international press syndication had a long history.
Nor did the post-war trends happen at the same rate in every medium.
Far more than before, however, and far more substantially because of the growth of TV and other new media, they stand out as dominant features.
The book's later chapters focus mainly upon aspects of media accountability.
In 1945 the public arguments were still largely about the nature of a ‘free press’.
Broadcasters and politicians largely left each other alone.
In 1990 the free press argument had become over-shadowed by debate about TV.
For the citizen/viewer/elector, TV could be the sling of David against the Goliath of government.
Or it might be the weapon of Goliath himself, used by governments in the exercise of power.
The 1980s ended not only with disputes about an unprecedented governmental curb on broadcasts by Irish extremists, but with a reconstruction of the broadcasting system that put in question the very principles of traditional ‘public service broadcasting’.
The more media permeated life from 1945 to 1990, and the more they became concentrated in international conglomerates, the more important the accountability of media themselves became.
MEDIA 1945 — 1990: THE PRESS
The general pattern
National daily and Sunday papers dominated British newspaper reading more recently than might be thought.
In 1920, the circulation of the provincial morning and evening papers was still one-third greater than the national dailies.
But the nationals quickly expanded: they overtook the provincials in 1923 and by 1945 sold almost twice as many copies.
Wars makes us hungry for news.
Despite newsprint rationing, fewer pages without any reduction in price, and pegged circulations, sales rose during the war.
They continued to do so among all kinds of paper until about the early 1950s (Table 3.1).
Newsprint restrictions lasted until 1955, initially because of the post-war dollar crisis and the Korean War — both of which hit imports.
Most papers did not mind, however, for the government restrictions kept their paper and printing costs low and enabled them to make good profits from the big demand for advertising space.
1957 was the peak year for total sales, before the competition from ITV for advertising revenue had started to bite.
The next 30 years saw a drop of about 30 per cent, very unevenly distributed and with many fluctuations.
The traditional London evening paper market virtually disappeared.
In 1920 there had been six London evenings.
Post-war there were still three, but The Star closed in 1960 and by 1989 an amalgamated Evening News and Evening Standard survived alone, with a reduced circulation area and no Saturday edition.
The provincial evening papers suffered a steady decline, steepest in the later years.
The biggest drop was among the Sundays — a massive 10 million sales — and the weeklies.
The provincial mornings managed to stay at their 1957 level, but this was already down by one third from their immediate postwar peak.
The national dailies peaked later, in 1957, but fluctuated within a comparatively narrow range.
Apart from fairly intangible external factors like changes in the cost of living or unemployment, the fluctuations were caused by the immediate effects of newspaper closures (the News Chronicle and The Star in 1960, for example), by price increases, and by changes such as ‘tabloidization’, colour printing and the launch of weekend magazines, and by promotional gimmicks like bingo.
The survival of the nationals may seem remarkable, in view of the much greater choice of alternative media at the end of the period than at the beginning, with TV an obvious competitor for the reader's time and the advertiser's money.
Other kinds of attraction altogether — sport, motoring, holidays — consumed time and money too.
This survival reflects the extent to which the daily papers' contents and appeal tied in with these various alternatives: they were complementary more than competitive.
When regular radio broadcasting began in 1922, the press refused at first to publish free the daily programme schedules.
It took the London store magnate Gordon Selfridge, who included them in his own advertising copy in the evening papers, to show that publishing them would increase the value of the paper to its readers, rather than make them desert to a rival medium.
Similarly, in the post-war period, the national dailies managed to adapt their appeal so that people continued to find them useful, and advertisers therefore went on providing the essential economic base for most of them.
What made a paper ‘national’?
The categories of the previous section need breaking down.
What made a paper ‘national’?
The term was purely conventional — and vague.
A London base and nationwide circulation were generally essential, but there were exceptions.
The Guardian , for example, had a national reputation without a London base and with a limited circulation (its home was in Manchester up until 1959).
Similarly, in 1978, the Daily Star was successfully launched as a national tabloid from Manchester.
‘Nationwide circulation’ was also something of a fiction.
The expansion of the London dailies by Northcliffe and his imitators, including Lord Beaverbrook and the Berry brothers (Lords Kemsley and Camrose) was made possible partly by printing separate northern editions.
In 1947 all the London dailies except The Times, Daily Mirror and Daily Worker printed large editions in Manchester, and the Daily Mail and Daily Express also printed in Scotland (until 1966 and 1974 respectively).
Much of the domestic news was different in these from the London editions.
The nationals did not cover the country evenly either, and their contents had distinct biases.
Northern Ireland was largely excluded, both from circulation and, until the renewed troubles after 1969, from coverage.
Scotland had papers like the The Scotsman and Glasgow Herald that were too Scottish to be ‘national’ yet were of a quality that depressed the Scottish sales of papers such as The Times and The Daily Telegraph .
The Daily Mirror did not even pretend that its Scottish edition was the same paper and sold it as the Daily Record .
In England, the north-east region was the last to be penetrated fully by the London papers, with Newcastle and Darlington remaining important newspaper cities into the 1980s.
As to contents, the Royal Commission on the Press in 1947 judged that the nationals ‘tended to reflect the life and interests of three or four regions rather than those of the whole country’(p. 8).
Content contributed to the woolly definition in an extra way.
Was the Financial Times a national daily?
The 1947 Press Commission thought not: its contents were too specialized (no sport, for instance).
The 1961 Press Commission thought diff-ferently, however, for by then the paper had broadened its  range and increased its penetration.
Again, the Morning Star (Daily Worker until 1966) was ‘specialist’ in the sense that its columns reflected strongly its brand of Marxist ideology and the work of the Communist party and parts of the Labour movement.
Its circulation (and perhaps its party's sizeable electoral support) qualified it unquestionably as a national daily in 1947.
By 1961 it was fading: lack of resources kept it to four or six pages when other broadsheets were three or four times as big.
By 1974, the third Press Commission excluded it from its tables and statistics.
The Press Council, on the other hand, continued to count it as a national daily.
Finally, two very small, short-lived papers defined themselves as ‘nationals’ in 1953 and 1960.
These, the Recorder and the New Daily , were idiosyncratic, right wing, anti-trade union papers.
They would have had more chance of getting established in the late 1980s.
One factor which by itself had no bearing on the idea of a ‘national’ paper was circulation size.
In 1947 several provincial papers still had circulations rivalling some of Fleet Street's: the Manchester Daily Despatch (475,000) and Evening News (224,000), the Newcastle Journal (146,000),Yorkshire Evening Post (204,000) and Birmingham Mail (200,000).
The Times , at this point, sold 195,000 and The Daily Telegraph and tabloid Daily Graphic were both under 900,000.
The best example was a Sunday paper, the Manchester Empire News .
This had a circulation approaching two million at the end of the war, ranking it ahead of six out of ten national Sundays.
It was edited in Manchester and was founded as a sporting paper — the Umpire — but the 1947 Press Commission called it ‘distinguishable from a national newspaper only in its place of origin' (p. 13).
Moreover it printed in London as well as Manchester for most of the post-war years until its closure in 1960.
The London evening papers complicated the picture as well.
Their position in the capital meant that insofar as London's affairs were the nation's, they had national contents and a national voice.
They were close to Westminster politics, to City interests, and to national and international gossip about the arts, show business and ‘society’.
People in those worlds  probably treated them rather like national papers, too.
Each was owned, moreover, by one of the national dailies — the Evening News by the Daily Mail , the Evening Standard by the Daily Express and the Star by the News Chronicle .
But of course they did not circulate beyond the commuter belt, so they failed to qualify as nationals on that ground.
The recipe for a national paper was thus a mixture of national reputation, geographical reach and breadth of content.
The precise ingredients changed across the years after 1945, as they had before.
Before the first World War, a London-based metropolitan press had coexisted with a vigorous provincial press, whose luminaries (Yorkshire Post, Manchester Guardian, Scotsman , and so on) were not completely overshadowed by the London papers in either circulation or editorial authority.
The Manchester Guardian in the late 1950s was the last survivor of that era.
The removal of its editorial offices to London and of ‘Manchester’ from its mast-head symbolized the change to a dominant national press with the provincials dwarfed in circulation and resources.
The national press
Numbers
Changes in the number of national dailies from 1945 to 1989 were very few and took three forms: launch or closure, relaunch, and change of status.
The Guardian and Financial Times joined the list, and arguably the Morning Star left it, by change of status.
The Sun , top seller by 1989, was a tabloid relaunch, twenty years previously, of an ailing broadsheet paper with an entirely different character, some of whose readers nevertheless stayed with it and were a base on which the new ownership could build.
Because of abundant advertising revenue and continued newsprint restrictions (which limited competition) the first closure — the News Chronicle — did not come till 1960.
The way it was done, with absolutely no warning, was traumatic for the staff  and startling for its subscribers, of whom there were well over a million.
Moreover it was the last mass circulation Liberal daily and was closed by abrupt merger with the Daily Mail — a Conservative paper.
On 18 October,News Chronicle readers were simply delivered a copy of the Mail , with News Chronicle in small type on the mast-head.
The shock was increased for Londoners by the simultaneous merger of The Star with the Evening News .
Despite gloomy predictions over the next 20 years, including forecasts that only one ‘quality’ daily would survive, with one middle-range paper (the Express , for example) and one tabloid, only two other established papers died.
In 1971 Lord Rothermere merged the tabloid Daily Sketch with his Daily Mail .
The Sketch , in comparison with the Daily Mirror , was thin in size and content and Conservative in politics.
The new Sun was clearly going to provide a Conservative voice for the tabloid market and would eat further into its declining sales, so the Sketch died a quiet and unsurprising death.
The death of the old Daily Herald , the longest surviving Labour daily, founded in 1912 and owned by the Labour party for a period between the wars, was more agony than trauma when compared with the demise of the News Chronicle , but equally disturbing for its supporters.
The paper had an ageing readership and a bad position in the advertising market, because of its working class skew.
Its owners, especially when the Daily Mirror took over, were reluctant to make the contents brighter, less political, less class-conscious.
That might have attracted more women and young readers — but by taking them partly from the Mirror .
Instead, Cecil King, who had pledged the TUC he would keep the paper alive till the end of the decade (providing its obvious description as King's cross), tried to take it up market and appeal to the younger voters, better off but ‘socially radical’, whose support had just helped elect Harold Wilson into office.
The paper was relaunched in a new format as the Sun , but it failed to win up-market readers, while the old loyalists were put off.
It struggled on as an ‘underfinanced, deradicalized hybrid’, in Curran and Seaton's phrase (1988, p. 99), until King's pledge expired and it was sold to Rupert Murdoch in 1969.
The only other closure in the period (leaving aside the Recorder and New Daily ) was The Post .
This was a tabloid launched by the founder of Today , Eddie Shah, which lasted only 33 issues at the end of 1988.
The enormous risks and start-up costs of launching a new daily from scratch prevented anyone trying, until new technology and a successful challenge to the strength of the trade unions transformed Fleet Street economics in the mid-1980s — making ‘Fleet Street’ itself an archaic term, since the construction of production plant elsewhere, notably Wapping, was part of the process.
The one exception was the Daily Star , founded in 1978 by the owner of the Daily Express , Trafalgar House.
The object was to use spare printing capacity in Manchester to compete with the London-based Sun , which the Star was therefore designed to resemble extremely closely.
Sales varied but were well down by the end of the 1980s, and the paper remained a rather marginal venture.
The ‘Wapping revolution’ was truly a transformation — of newspaper technology, industrial relations and costs.
Forces that had kept the size of Fleet Street under continuous pressure for more than 25 years were broken.
Newspaper production was labour-intensive.
Although newsprint (the other major cost) had doubled during 1972 — 5, the Press Commission of the mid-1970s found labour was still the largest cost, at 40 — 50 per cent.
This was partly due to the nature of the business, but partly because management bought off the threat of trouble with high wage settlements in the prosperous 1950s.
The industry was ‘notorious for the generosity of its manning levels, and its workers have traditionally been very highly paid’, com-mented the Press Commission (1977, p. 42).
The production unions' success had various causes, including an effective closed shop and weak newspaper managements.
The strike threat was formidable: there is no way lost production on a newspaper can ever be made up.
The new technology available in the 1970s offered the promise of massively reduced manning levels and higher productivity.
In effect, through com-puter-typesetting, journalists could become their own printers, and whole echelons of intermediaries could be eliminated.
For years unions and managements argued over the terms  of change.
The Mirror Group, for one, invested heavily in plant that stood idle.
The Times and Sunday Times closed down in dispute, for what turned out to be a whole year.
The unions overplayed their hand in the end.
Eddie Shah, who had built up a group of free weeklies based in Stockport, determined to launch a national daily,Today .
His weeklies were produced by new technology in defiance of union opposition, and he planned the same methods for Today .
One advantage of computerized typesetting was the speed with which it could be learned.
Rupert Murdoch decided to do the same thing with The Times .
When the unions took industrial action against a no-strike clause in the latest contract proposals, Murdoch moved production of his papers overnight to the plant at Wapping — previously said to be for the News of the World alone.
This was a classic fait accompli .
Non-print union labour was bused in; ‘Fortress Wapping’ was the scene of picketing, boycott, physical attacks, confrontations with (some said by) the police.
Crucial to Shah's and Murdoch's success was the Thatcher government's industrial relations legislation that limited the unions' power to respond.
Murdoch's success was the cue for the rest of Fleet Street to forge ahead with new investment (sometimes long planned) in buildings and plant.
Workforces were slashed: the Express group, for example, cut one-third of its 6,000 staff.
The flurry involved further new launches.
Today was followed by the Independent, The Post , and a number of Sunday and London evening papers, of which only the Sunday Sport survived.
Right at the end of the period a new Sunday Correspondent and an Independent on Sunday were launched.
There had been nothing like it since the heyday of Northcliffe in the early years of the century.
The attempt to launch new London evening papers reflected an enduring belief that the capital ought to be able to support more than one.
Since 1980 the Standard had been the only survivor of the flourishing trio in 1945.
These had peaked in 1950 with combined sales of 3.8 million but had gone steadily downhill thereafter.
When it closed in 1960,The Star was roughly half its 1950 size.
Its closure provided only a breathing-space.
In 1974 the Standard dropped its Saturday edition and the Evening News went tabloid.
When the two amalgamated in 1980, they had a joint circulation of little more than 600,000.
The 1974 Press Commission suggested the evenings' decline was due to their rapid increase in price in the early 1970s, the effects of TV, changing family budgets in a time of inflation, and the growth of evening papers in commuter towns.
Around 27 per cent of adults in Brighton, for instance, saw a London evening paper in 1963, but only 7 per cent did in 1975.
With the much lower production costs of the late 1980s, small circulation was no longer the same barrier to profitability.
Robert Maxwell launched the London Daily News as a ‘round the clock’ paper in February 1987.
It lasted five months.
Partly it died, no doubt, from its own defects (including distribution difficulties), and partly from the spirited response of the Standard .
But Lord Rothermere, sole owner of the Standard , spoilt the market too by relaunching the old Evening News on the very same day.
He closed it a few months after Maxwell's paper folded — with a circulation of only about 100,000.
Until Wapping, the number of national Sundays contracted quite severely, compared with the dailies.
The economics of Sunday journalism were different, being much affected by what happened to the staff and printing plant during the rest of the week.
Thus, two new launches had proved possible at a time when new dailies were generally still unpractical.
Both were sister papers of established dailies, the Telegraph and Mail , which could be expected to provide a core of readers and whose presses had spare capacity.
The Sunday Telegraph (February 1961) cashed in on the rapidly expanding quality Sunday market, built up most effectively by the Sunday Times (whose colour magazine started in the same year).
The Mail on Sunday (summer 1982) had more difficulty, since it aimed chiefly to take readers from the less buoyant middle market long dominated by the now declining Sunday Express .
Unlike the dailies, the number of titles was not swelled by relaunches and changes of status: all other changes were closures.
First went the Sunday Chronicle , a failing product faced with stronger middle market competitors and pressure on each  side from the quality papers and the downmarket tabloids.
Its owner, Lord Kemsley, leased the presses instead to the Sunday Pictorial (renamed Sunday Mirror in 1963).
At the end of 1960, in the same period that the News Chronicle and London evening Star closed, the Sunday Graphic and the Empire News were closed by new owners, the Thomson organization.
Thomson, again, could make more money by leasing the presses to another newspaper — in this case the News of the World .
It was this subordination of the social and political value of a newspaper to commercial priorities that so exercised politicians and helped get the second and third Royal Commissions on the Press set up in 1961 and 1974.
In June 1961 the Sunday Dispatch , another middle-ground paper squeezed into unprofitability by competition for sales and advertising revenue, was sold by Lord Rothermere and amalgamated with the Sunday Express .
The previous 12 months had therefore seen unprecedented contraction of plague-like proportions.
Five important papers had died (three Sundays, one daily and one London evening), with a total circulation of six million.
Most of the readers, of course, moved to other papers.
One other Sunday paper died in the 1960s, after struggling on with subsidies from the Cooperative movement.
This was the Sunday Citizen , relict of one of the popular Victorian papers,Reynolds' News , relaunched with a new name in a tabloid format in 1962.
The Sunday innovations of the late 1980s have already been mentioned.
Sunday Today started alongside Today but made no mark.
Sunday Sport thrived on its advertising but was a cheaply produced magazine more than a newspaper.
News on Sunday was an earnest attempt in 1987 to establish a popular radical paper, backed by trade unions and Labour controlled local authorities.
Its planning and management were reportedly rent with the schisms for which the left is sometimes ridiculed.
Its circulation never approached the 800,000 target and was about 112,000 when, after little more than six months, the estate agent and local radio entrepreneur, Owen Oyston, who sought to rescue it, closed it down.
‘Qualities’ and ‘populars'
Trends in each paper's circulation are clear in Tables 3.2 and 3.3.
Changes were the result of many factors.
Some were general, like the good economic conditions (for the press) in the late 1940s and 1950s and the bad ones in the 1960s.
Others concerned specific papers — their comparative attractive-ness to advertisers; the age, wealth and education of their readers; their special style and contents.
Many of the last were intangible.
Discovering how to reverse a declining circulation was famously difficult and, as the figures show, was not often achieved.
Great success, such as that of the Daily Express at its peak (around 1960), might contain the seeds of decline.
Both the Express and the Mail went into the 1970s with an ageing readership, for they failed to replace their old readers with young new ones in the same numbers.
Yet if they changed their style, they risked making things worse by alienating the old readers and still failing to attract new ones.
The great circulation successes were the Daily Mirror and Daily Express into the 1960s; the Sun from 1970  onwards , when it bit hard into the Mirror's market;The Daily Telegraph until the 1980s and the Guardian , in a quiet way, after it had settled in London.
The Express and Mirror successes were repeated by their Sunday companions.
Nearly all the Sundays fell back more or less steeply later in the period, however.
Of all Sunday papers the most distinctive success was The Sunday Times , which soared ahead from the late 1950s on a formula of serialized war memoirs and increasingly diversified and seg-mented review and magazine sections.
Rather than trace individual papers in detail, it is more useful to look at the development of particular classes of paper.
One of Northcliffe's many effects upon the press was to sharpen the division, comparatively minor in the late nineteenth century, between the mass circulation ‘popular’ papers and the low circulation ‘qualities’.
Northcliffe founded the Daily Mail in 1896 and pushed its circulation to one million in 1900.
This was unprecedented for a daily paper: most were selling in the range 90 — 250,000.
In the 1930s, circulation wars pushed the  figures far higher, aided by a big increase in daily paper purchases among the working class.
The popular press needed the sales revenue from large circulations to cover their costs.
Advertising revenue would certainly help, or would boost profits, but much of it went simply on the paper and production costs of printing the advertisements.
The quality papers ran on different lines.
The sales revenue from their smaller circulations covered a much lower proportion of costs; but the greater purchasing power of their readers, some of whom spent ‘corporate’ money, not just their own personal incomes, enabled the qualities to charge far higher advertising rates and break even at circulation levels completely unrealistic for the populars.
The quality — popular distinction was sharply drawn by 1945.
Thereafter it was complicated by the immense success of the Daily Mirror , which had been turned into Britain's first mass market tabloid in 1935.
Both dailies and Sundays can thus be sorted into ‘quality’, ‘middle market’ or ‘popular broadsheet’, and ‘mass market’, or ‘popular tabloid’groups.
The differences roughly corresponded both to the nature of the contents and design (including length of articles and size of headlines) and to the social class distribution of their readers.
Table 3.2 shows how the groups changed.
The advance of the qualities was dramatic — sales in 1988 were two and a half times those of 1945, with five quality dailies instead of two.
The number of populars (excluding the Daily Worker/Morning Star , which fitted easily into neither category) was six in each year, but total circulation was down by nearly 10 per cent.
The absolute figures are less impressive.
Despite the great increases in formal education since 1945, fewer than one person in five was interested in the kind of reading matter offered by the qualities.
For the mass of the population, indeed, the shift of interest arguably went in the other direction.
In 1945 most people read a broadsheet paper — four populars and the two qualities, compared with two tabloids.
The broadsheet populars comprised a middle market — middle class and middle brow — which became steadily less distinguishable over the following decade.
In 1945 the Mail, Express, News Chronicle and Herald dominated the number of titles and the sales of the qualities and tabloids either side of them.
Forty years on, the Mail and Express remained, with the new Today , but found themselves squeezed between sectors that had doubled in size.
In the Sunday market the quality — popular division became even sharper than among the dailies when the qualities turned themselves into large scale Sunday magazines.
The popular broadsheet category eventually almost disappeared, however, as one by one the popular broadsheets changed their format to tabloid (see Table 3.4).
Only the Sunday Express , among all the middle market populars, was still a broadsheet in 1990.
Ownership
What kind of people owned the national press?
Many seemed larger than life.
The image of the ‘press baron’ partly reflects literal reality: politicians continually courted publishers with peerages to secure or reward their support in case the intangible  ‘power of the press’turned out to be real.
But the image also suggests character.
The ‘barons’ were often supreme egotists: flamboyant, assertive, idiosyncratic, ostentatious, ruthless — yet inspiring great loyalty and affection.
A newspaper suits such behaviour.
It involves the daily expression of opinion and its smallest details can be changed by the direct intervention of the proprietor.
By comparison, other mass production barons of the mid-twentieth century — motor manufacturers such as Lord Nuffield, for instance— could not so quickly, easily and frequently shape their products.
The newspaper is a natural tool for the autocrat.
Barons could most readily huff and stomp when they did indeed own their papers, rather than being chairmen, liable to be sacked by their directors.
Cecil King behaved liked a baron at the Daily Mirror in the 1960s, scolding the Wilson government and toying with the idea of political office.
Readers may have thought his front page squibs came from the pen of a dominant shareholder.
Not at all: King went too far and was out on his ear in an overnight boardroom coup in 1968.
Northcliffe, Beaverbrook, Kemsley or Thomson, on the other hand, could not easily be jettisoned: their press empires were more substantially theirs .
All, in fact, were self-made men — which no doubt is a clue to their style and motives.
There is more than a touch of rags to riches in the story of the outsize barons.
Despite great wealth, too, the barons were not generally profit-maximizers.
If they had just wanted to make money, there were far better ways.
By the late 1960s, indeed, half of Fleet Street was running at a loss (Economist Intelligence Unit, 1966), and the situation (though cyclical) got no better in the 1970s.
Titles were often kept going on the profits of provincial partners or other businesses.
With his own property, it was perhaps easier too for a baron to take risks or sail close to the wind.
Tiny Rowland (latterly owning the Observer ) was dubbed the unacceptable face of capitalism by Prime Minister Heath in the early 1970s.
Robert Maxwell was once declared unfit to be in charge of a major public company by an official inquiry.
It needed considerable force of character, whatever the merits of the issue, for the  Thomson family to shut down The Times and The Sunday Times for a year and for Murdoch to move the papers to ‘fortress Wapping’ later, in his struggles with the unions.
Some owners, of course, inherited papers — and their fathers' flair or good fortune.
Rupert Murdoch's father built an empire in Australia: his son did so on a world scale.
Lord Hartwell inherited The Daily Telegraph , saw it flourish and launched its Sunday partner.
Vere Harmsworth proved a shrewd strategist at Associated Newspapers in the 1980s.
Other heirs had less flair, luck or stomach.
Beaverbrook's Express group did not prosper under his son Max Aitken, who sold out some ten years after Beaverbrook's death.
Nor did Colonel John Astor's Times under his son Gavin.
Inheritors needed a motive for getting out.
The motives of those getting in could be as varied as the role of a  newspaper .
Some saw the press as an industry and had no other object than to sell a product, provide employment and make a fair profit.
Lord Thomson was the best example in the post-war period.
He was all the more striking because the boast that he ran his papers just to make money contrasted strongly with the more complex motives, combining profit with politics, that were still typical of the proprietors of the early 1960s.
The boast went bluntly against the claim by Thomson's fellow Canadian, Beaverbrook, that his own objective was purely propaganda.
Forerunners to the Thomson view included nineteenth-century printers, such as the early owners of The Daily Telegraph , who took over papers in settlement of unpaid printing bills.
Lord Southwood of Odhams Press acquired his 51 per cent shareholding in the Daily Herald between the wars on much the same basis.
Southwood was not much interested in the tactics of the Labour movement.
He happily entered an agreement, which lasted until 1961, 1 5 years after his death, to leave political policy to the 49 per cent shareholders, the TUC.
The Thomsons and Southwoods were exceptions.
Another, in the 1980s, was Eddie Shah, founder of Today .
Most barons saw their papers as means to an end.
This was usually the advance of a political cause or party, and, less often than before 1945, the pursuit of their own public or political career.
The Beaverbrook and Astor empires were both founded, before and after 1900, by rich men from overseas (Canada and the USA) who wished to buy their way into British public life.
With international multimedia empires and conglomerates, motives were more complicated.
To ask Rupert Murdoch what were his ‘goals’ would have been to pose probably rather a difficult question (if the answer were serious).
On the other hand, for Tiny Rowland of the conglomerate Lonrho, and for the Atlantic Richfield Oil Company of California, his pre-decessor as owners of The Observer , the control of a national paper might be no more than a useful form of corporate public relations and personal prestige.
Who, then, owned the national press in 1945?
Typically, papers were controlled by a dominant family, relatives of a pre-war, first generation empire-builder, politically partisan but demure.
No company had more than one daily, although there was a family connection between Lord Kemsley's Daily Sketch and his brother Lord Camrose's Daily Telegraph .
Similarly, four of the eleven Sundays (including the Empire News ) belonged to Lord Kemsley.
The others were separately owned, but several were in partnership with a daily.
The only fully independents were The Observer , belonging to a different branch of the Astor family from The Times , the Co-operative movement's Reynolds' News , and the huge News of the World , to become larger still, run by the Carr family.
Kemsley was less flamboyant than other barons of the earlier generation, like Northcliffe and Beaverbrook.
Quietly Conservative, he did not seek major political office, as they had.
Nor did his brother Lord Camrose.
The second Lord Rothermere, now in control of the Daily Mail , was similarly reticent.
Beaverbrook, though a wartime minister and intimate of Churchill, lived until 1965 but was a spent political force.
The dominant families of the other papers had what now would be called a low profile too.
Colonel Astor had bought The Times in 1922 specifically to keep it out of the clutches of Lloyd George, who was seeking a personal political base and had money to spend from his earlier sale of honours when Prime Minister.
Astor was a classic non-interventionist  proprietor, rumoured to own The Times but not actually to read it.
The Cadbury family, newspaper publishers since the Victorian heyday of the Liberal ‘chocolate press’, still ran the News Chronicle in a party interest.
The Guardian was controlled by a family trust, dominated by relations of the formidable owner-editor (and sometime MP) C P Scott, one of the great Liberal voices of British journalism for half a century into the 1920s.
The Financial Times , still fairly small and specialized, was controlled by the Crosthwaite-Eyres.
Very few papers indeed, therefore, had a wide spread of shareholders.
The unusual structure of the Daily Herald certainly prevented it being dominated by a small group, apart from the elected brothers of the TUC council.
The Daily Worker was run as a co-operative.
The Daily Mirror and Sunday Pictorial were in interlocking ownership; but the first Lord Rothermere, one of the founders (in 1903, when the Mirror was to be for women, edited by women — the women failed, and sacking them, the Harmsworths' henchman said, was like drowning kittens) had dispersed his shares on the Stock Exchange in 1931.
The 1961 Press Commission was told that there were 40,000 shareholders.
Taking a strict definition of a national paper (that is to say, excluding the Guardian and Financial Times ), twelve companies m- 1945 controlled between them nine dailies and eleven Sundays.
This pattern continued relatively undisturbed until 1959, when a short period of major upheaval began.
More changes came in 1969 — 71 and again in the 1980s, which was a decade dominated by battles over new technology and the establishment of new titles.
All these phases involved closures or the threat of closures.
When proprietors sold, at any stage, whether antici-pating amalgamation (like the News Chronicle and Daily Mail ) or a continuing future, they did so because of flagging interest or energy, or because they had not the resources to turn round a weak paper in an increasingly competitive market.
Not counting sales associated with closure, there were some 16 major changes of ownership of national dailies and 17 of Sundays between 1945 and 1988.
Most involved both dailies and Sundays.
Nearly half took place in the 1980s.
Table 3.5  shows the distribution of papers and dates.
The Guardian and Daily Mail alone stayed in the same ownership throughout the period.
Most papers changed once or twice.
The first changes were minor — Kemsley's sale of the Daily Sketch to Lord Rothermere in 1952 and the Pearson/West-minster Press purchase of The Financial Times in 1957.
Then in 1959 Lord Kemsley, apparently worried by falling income and the prospect of heavy death duties, decided to sell up completely.
This was a major destabilizing move, at the provincial level too (see below).
The main purchaser was Mr (not yet Lord) Roy Thomson, who got a national foothold through The Sunday Times .
In March 1961 the Mirror Group bought Odhams, which gave them the People and 51 per cent of the Daily Herald .
Also in 1961 the Guardian became London based and fully ‘national’ and The Sunday Telegraph was launched.
Taking account too of the closure of the News Chronicle , the Sunday Dispatch and several other Sundays following the Kemsley sale, five out of twelve dailies and six out of eleven Sundays — half the entire national press — saw their ownership, existence or status (as a ‘national’) affected during less than two years between August 1959 and June 1961.
In 1964 the TUC sold its 40 per cent of the Herald to the Mirror Group, which relaunched it as the Sun .
Then Thomson bought The Times late in 1966 and poured resources into it in an attempt to make it profitable.
More significant were the changes at the end of the 1960s, with the irruption of Rupert Murdoch.
After a tough battle with Robert Maxwell he bought the News of the World early in January 1969, and at the end of the year he bought the still failing Sun .
The Mirror Group's decision to sell it to him was perhaps the greatest miscalculation in post-war press history.
Murdoch immediately relaunched it as a tabloid and turned it against the flagship of its previous owners.
Linked to the disposal of the Sun was a takeover of the Mirror Group by the papermaking conglomerate Reed International, which already had a large shareholding in the Mirror .
In 1971 the Sketch and Mail merged.
In the three-year period 1969 — 71, then, three out of ten dailies and three out of seven Sundays changed ownership or status.
Failing energy and resources accounted for two sales in the mid-1970s.
The Observer , lagging behind The Sunday Times and without a daily partner as a cushion, was sold in 1976 by David Astor to Atlantic Richfield — a quite unexpected knight galloping out of the mists.
The following year the Beaverbrook papers were sold to the Trafalgar House conglomerate.
Unlike, say, Rothermere's Associated Newspapers, Beaverbrook had never seriously diversified, not even into the provincial press, and although the Sunday Express remained profitable, the Daily Express and London Evening Standard were in trouble.
Victor Matthews, Trafalgar's vice-chairman, was in the familiar self-made baron mould and duly acquired his barony from Mrs Thatcher.
Changes in the 1980s came more frequently.
Half the dailies existing in 1981 changed hands by 1988.
Two new dailies started and survived, one of which changed hands twice.
A third new daily quickly failed.
Three Sundays started, of which one survived.
The Independent and the Sunday Correspondent both emphasized the fact that they were not dominated by a ‘baron’.
Much of their money came from City institutions and insurance companies.
All the existing Sundays except the News of the World (six out of seven) changed hands between 1981 and 1985.
Some of these sales were to existing publishers.
When Roy Thomson's son decided to pull out of national papers, having spent millions on The Times in pursuit of production economies, Murdoch was the purchaser.
When ARCO tired of losses at The Observer , Tiny Rowland's Lonrho, already owner of a Glasgow daily, bought it.
In 1986 Rowland rescued Today , when its founder Eddie Shah ran out of cash after the paper's shaky launch.
Rowland sold it on to Murdoch.
There were three notable newcomers, however.
First was Robert Maxwell, who in 1984 achieved his long ambition to play the press baron role and won the Mirror papers from Reed at an acceptable price.
Next came the latest Canadian, Conrad Black, a businessman of conservative views, who bought the Telegraph papers from the last of the Berry family in the newspaper business, Camrose's younger son Michael, Lord Hartwell.
The Telegraph , too, had never diversified, and it lacked the resources to modernize.
Finally the expanding provincial group, United Newspapers, bought the Express group in 1985 from Trafalgar House.
Such a sketch oversimplifies the pattern of ownership and the complexities of the underlying economics.
It conceals elements of cross-ownership, for instance, such as Murdoch's 15 per cent ownership of shares in The Financial Times' parent company.
For many years too, various papers printed each other under contract (for example,The Times printed The Observer , and the Guardian printed The Sunday Times ).
To concentrate on the barons is to stare at the public face.
These other connections give point to the issue of concentration.
Table 3.6 shows each major ownership group's share of titles and circulation at 10 year intervals.
The pattern was not a simple and consistent move towards concentration, either of titles or of circulation.
The enormous Sunday circulations of the post-war years meant that even without owning more than one paper, the News of the World had the equal largest market share in 1947.
In contrast, Kemsley had five papers but ranked only fifth.
The circulation share of the three largest groups grew greatly between 1947 and 1967.
But they were not all the same groups within the different daily and Sunday categories each year: for instance, Beaverbrook was a top daily but not a top Sunday group in 1947.
Nor were they the same top three from one decade to the next: groups such as Kemsley disappeared, and the market share of a survivor such as Associated Newspapers fluctuated quite widely.
Nor were the largest shares by an individual group to be found at the end of the period: they were the Mirror Group's (more than 40 per cent in each category) in 1967.
If the figures were shown year on year, other variations would appear too.
The large concentration of circulation in the late 1960s was due to the Mirror Group's purchase of the Daily Herald and the People at a time when Murdoch had not yet arrived to challenge the dominance of the Daily Mirror over the tabloid market.
Once he had, the pattern changed.
His own success, with its accumulation of titles, meant that by 1987 the circulation share of the top three groups had slipped back — but the number of titles within them was greater than ever.
Overall, it is important to note that while Fleet Street was dominated by large groups, only one, Associated, survived the whole period from 1945 to 1990.
It was the combination of large circulation share and a large number of titles that gave concentration its distinctive character in 1990.
The provincial press
The main features of the provincial press were set well before 1939.
The period 1945 — 90 saw the number of morning papers decline, with total sales fluctuating; gains and losses among the evening titles, with a long term decline in sales; and more losses than gains among the weeklies, whose market changed sharply towards the end with the arrival of free sheets.
Chain ownership, built up between the wars by the manoeuvres of the press barons (mainly seeking economies of scale), remained a crucial factor.
The number of provincial mornings dropped by one-third from 29 to 18 (Table 3.7).
They fell one by one, like apples off a tree, but with the largest loss between 1955 and 1964.
Circulations differed greatly, and there was no consistent trend.
Some great names of the past survived at a much reduced level (Yorkshire Post, Newcastle Journal ).
Some had much the same sales after forty years as before.
Others had more than doubled.
Circulation size was no clue to survival.
Provincial newspaper economics were a complex matter, including the size of the market, proximity to competing markets, the range of other media and membership or otherwise of a chain.
The particular towns on the list thus had no obvious logic.
Glasgow, Edinburgh and Cardiff were to be expected.
But why on earth Leamington?
If Nottingham, why not Leicester?
If Plymouth, why not Exeter or Southampton?
The historical explanations lie mainly in the middle and late nineteenth century, when newspapers were founded often in a political cause, or  in connection with news about trade and commerce.
All of the other towns just mentioned, moreover, also had evening papers.
The eighteen morning survivors in 1989 were the remnants of an army that had numbered over fifty in 1900.
Birmingham, Manchester and Nottingham had competing morning papers in 1945, but only Glasgow and Belfast did in 1989 (the Glasgow Herald really competed more with the Edinburgh Scotsman than with the Daily Record , and the two Belfast papers reflected different sectarian viewpoints).
Manchester lost its morning papers altogether when the Guardian left.
Bradford, Brighton and Nottingham also lost their papers.
No town got a new morning paper.
Staff of the Scottish Daily Express tried to fill the gap when local publication of their paper was ended in 1974.
With Labour government backing they founded the Scottish Daily News but failed to capture a market.
Copies of the Express continued to be available, shipped up from England.
Few large towns lacked an evening paper.
The 1947 Press Commission listed nine with a population of over 100,000 but no paper, and 41 from 50,000 — 100,000.
Only 10 of these were far distant from an existing paper.
The precise number of evening papers has not always been easy to fix, since some of those with distinct names (such as the Evening Mail of Sandwell and Dudley in the late 1970s) were in fact local versions of a ‘series’ title (in this case, the Birmingham Mail ).
The number varied between 70 and 80.
Unlike the mornings, the number of titles remained much the same, but total circulation fell.
Evening papers still reached 90 per cent of their local households in the early 1960s: by 1980, they were down to 60 per cent.
(Clark, 1981, p. 6).
The first wave of closures did not come until between 15 and 20 years after the Second World War.
These were all in towns that still had evening paper competition: Birmingham, Bristol, Leeds, Leicester, Liverpool, Manchester, Nottingham, Edinburgh.
In each case the lower circulation title went under.
The fate of the Manchester Evening Chronicle (1963) was typical.
In the two years before its death, advertising volume dropped by a quarter and circulation by about 10 per cent(Clark, 1981, p. 12).
Its competitor, the Manchester Evening News , outsold it by a ratio of 2:1.
Where a paper closed in these circumstances, the survivor picked up on average rather more than half its circulation.
This shake-out left only Glasgow with two evening papers.
Glasgow, uniquely, had had three at the end of the war.
The weakest, the Evening News , closed in 1955.
The two others continued till 1973, when the closure of the Evening Citizen meant that no town outside London was supporting more than one evening paper — and London went the same way in 1980.
In contrast to the morning papers, which suffered most heavily from the competition of the nationals, the evenings also had scope for growth in towns where an evening was not already established.
At exactly the same time that the ‘shake-out’ was happening — the early 1960s — the largest expansion of evening titles since the 1890s was under way.
Twelve new papers were launched between 1959 and 1970, either in locations on the edge of the circulation area of a ‘parent’ paper (such as in Hereford, Peterborough, Bromley, Doncaster and Telford) or in outer-London towns like Reading, Luton, Slough and Watford.
A few of these papers became firmly established (and the latter helped kill the London evenings), but more, including some founded later in the 1970s (such as the Chelmsford Evening Herald and the Guildford Daily Advertiser ), did not survive long into the 1980s.
Altogether (including ‘series’ papers) about 20 evening papers were launched in the 30 years before 1985.
The post-war trend in evening papers, then, was a clear-cut elimination of towns with more than one locally based paper; the establishment of papers in perhaps 20 towns that did not have them in 1945; and the survival of all the existing papers that faced no home town competition as early as 1945.
As with the morning papers, circulation size was no clue to profitability.
In 1945, papers in Bath, Carlisle, Darlington, Scarborough and North Shields all published not more than 15,000 copies a day (the Scarborough Evening News published 8,000).
Papers in Glasgow, Manchester and Liverpool published over a quarter of a million.
By 1985 the average had dropped  but the spread was narrower, with a few exceptions at the extremes (the Manchester Evening News with 300,000 and the Darlington Evening Echo with 12,000).
A full list of titles is given in the appendix while Table 3.8 consolidates some of the information.
Trends in the number and location of morning and evening titles can also be set side by side.
At the end of the war, Glasgow had three morning and three evening papers; Belfast four and one.
Birmingham, Manchester and Nottingham had two mornings and two evenings each.
Bristol, Edinburgh, Leeds and Liverpool had one morning and two evenings; eleven towns had one of each, and Leicester had no morning but two evenings.
By 1985, Glasgow and Belfast had two mornings and an evening each, and 17 towns had one morning and one evening.
Put another way, 21 towns outside London had a morning or evening choice in 1945; 16 did by 1989 (but a more limited choice in nearly half of them).
The reality of such choice depended on whether a reader cared who owned the papers.
In 14 of the 21, morning and evening papers were in the same ownership, and some of these were themselves in national or regional chains.
This situation continued.
At the end of the war, provincial newspaper ownership took three forms.
Some papers were still in local companies, with or without a morning/evening partner, and controlled by one or two families or a scatter of shareholders.
This was, so to speak, the ‘historic form’.
Others were part of a provincial newspaper group.
The remainder were in chains, some of which belonged to the national press undertakings.
Table 3.9 shows the size of these categories and, with Table 3.8 and the appendix, the decline of independence over the years.
In 1947 over half the mornings and one-third of the evenings were owned by companies with few or no other newspaper interests elsewhere.
Eight of these companies owned both a morning and an evening paper (the Scotsman and the Edinburgh Evening Dispatch , for example, and the Nottingham Guardian and Evening Post ).
Eight owned only a morning Paper (such as the Liverpool Daily Post ) and a ninth, Outram's, owned   two in the same town (Glasgow).
Nineteen owned only evening papers.
Some of the family firms went back generations.
Tillot-sons, who controlled the Bolton Evening News until 1970, when it joined a chain, had done so for 104 years.
Graham of Wolverhampton, Grimes of Blackpool, Hawkins of Bristol and Jeans of Liverpool, were all in the saddle in the 1940s.
Most were unhorsed in the 1970s.
The provincial groups with papers in two or three towns were little different from the other independents.
The Iliffe  family had papers in Birmingham and Coventry, the Colmans in Ipswich and Norwich, the Storeys in Portsmouth, Sunderland and Hartlepool.
The fourth group, Southern Newspapers, was represented in Southampton and Bournemouth.
The growth of chains between the wars had been dramatic.
In 1923 they controlled only 10 per cent of evening titles.
By 1947 they controlled 11 of the 29 mornings and 33 of the 76 evenings (with minority interest in six more).
Lord Kemsley's group was largest, with six mornings, nine evenings and three Sundays (including the Empire News ).
The Westminster Press, controlled by the Pearson family (Lord Cowdray), had four mornings, nine evenings and the Birmingham Sunday Mercury .
The Harmsworth family interests, chiefly derived from the brothers Alfred and Harold, Lords Northcliffe and Rothermere, and trading as Associated Newspapers, had seven evenings and a major interest in four others (as well as managing, but not owning, a twelfth).
A separate Harmsworth chain owned a morning and three evenings, and United Newspapers controlled or had a major interest in six.
The trend of ownership across the post-war years had four interlinked parts: independent ownerships declined; the provincial groups carried on; there were manoeuvrings among the major chains; and — the greatest upheaval — Kemsley left the market altogether and was replaced by a new player, the international Thomson organization.
The decline of the independent mornings was produced as much by amalgamations and closures as by sales.
Only a few papers, notably the Scotsman and the Yorkshire Post , were sold to chains (Thomson and United).
Provincial groups like Iliffe (Birmingham Post ) and the Colmans (Norwich and Ipswich mornings) generally stayed with their papers.
The activities of the chains, however, meant that only a third of the mornings still published in 1988 were in the same ownership as in 1945.
The independent evenings survived less well.
Fewer than 10 of the 27 ‘single town’ companies of 1947 remained in control by 1988, and most of these ran smallish papers in towns like Halifax, Oldham and Scarborough.
The others sold out in the late 1960s and 1970s, often to the chains.
Kemsley's disposal of his provincial papers in 1959, of course, was part of the larger sale of his national newspaper interests.
Thomson had bought The Scotsman in 1953, as an entry to the British market.
The purchase of 11 provincial dailies and one Sunday was followed by various manoeuvres.
In 1963 the Manchester Evening Chronicle was closed, and the two Sheffield papers were swapped with United's Edinburgh Evening News .
Thomson then closed the weaker Edinburgh Evening Dispatch , which he had bought with The Scotsman .
The following year he tried to buy Outram's Glasgow papers but was beaten off by nationalist feeling (Thomson being Canadian) and the resources of the Scottish financier Lord Fraser.
The papers eventually passed with the rest of Lord Fraser's holdings to the multi-national conglomerate Lonrho.
Meanwhile, Westminster Press and Associated slightly enlarged their chains, partly, as with Thomson, by new launches.
Thomson, in particular, brought to the industry a dynamic concern with techniques of selling and marketing.
The Iliffe interests expanded too, through launches and the purchase of the Birmingham Sunday Mercury from the Westminster Press.
They became, like United, relatively much more important than in 1947.
By 1977, when the third Press Commission reported, five organisations stood out because of their provincial interests: Thomson, Westminster, Associated, United and Iliffe.
United and Iliffe alone had no national press interests.
But by 1988 Thomson had sold theirs and United had acquired some.
It is difficult to build details about the weekly press into this account, not least because of problems of definition.
The 1974 Press Commission found that nearly a third of weekly papers shared editorial content with other weeklies, and half shared advertising.
Many, in other words, were in series of associated titles.
This development had certainly been increasing steadily since the war.
The 1947 Press Commission had already pointed it out — but the proportion sharing at that time was only one-fifth.
Moreover, the total number of titles was very much larger.
The decline shown in Table 3.9 was continuous, although  the net figure conceals a considerable number of births.
About 200 new titles were launched between 1961 and 1974, for example, but 300 probably died.
In the same period, 40 per cent of the new titles were actually new editions of existing papers.
Most people launching weeklies were already weekly publishers, many of whom were also contract printers.
As weekly ownership declined, it also became more concentrated.
The number of towns with a choice of weekly papers was down from 226 in 1961 to about 150 in 1974.
As Table 3.9 shows, while the largest category of owners was still the independents, the number of weeklies taken into the provincial and national chains increased enormously.
The later pattern of weeklies was further complicated by the growth of free sheets.
These began to flourish in the early 1970s, and by 1975 there were 185.
They increased steadily and in the late 1980s outnumbered the paid-for weeklies.
Because they were delivered door-to-door, their ‘guaranteed’ circulation far exceeded the others' — 37 million compared with 7.6.
The response of the existing publishers was traditional: they founded their own free weeklies or bought up the newcomers.
By 1987, two-thirds of the titles and circulation were concentrated among two-dozen established publishers, with Pearson, Thomson, Associated and other familiar names controlling 20 — 40 each.
Half a dozen groups of some size produced free weeklies only.
Largest was the Yellow Advertiser Group, second only in circulation (two million) to Thomson.
In Birmingham, uniquely, a free daily paper was launched in 1984, to compete with the old morning and evening papers.
The implications of concentration of provincial press ownership are greater when its geographical variation is taken into account.
The chains generally concentrated in particular regions, although not to the extent of local monopoly.
(In 1961, for instance, the ‘leading publisher’ had more than 50 per cent of evening sales in seven regions.
By 1974 this number had dropped to four.)
Associated Newspapers, for example, was strongest in the south-west, with five evenings and two mornings in Cornwall, Devon, Somerset and Gloucestershire, and 60 per cent of Cornwall's circulation of weeklies in 1974.
Iliffe, similarly, concentrated in the west midlands, especially Birmingham and Coventry.
With nine weeklies acquired from 1961 — 74, their morning and evening interests accounted for most of the sales in the major part of the Birmingham conur-bation.
United Newspapers expanded strongly into Lancashire.
Westminster Press had three dailies and nineteen weeklies in the north and a spread of publications across the south.
In turn, ‘a striking development’, as the 1974 Press Commission researchers called it, was ‘the concentration of the ownership of newspapers in contiguous towns into a few hands’(Hartley et al., 1977, p. 73).
Three economic factors explain much of that concentration.
First, firms economized through the joint production of evenings and weeklies : one sign of this was the closure of 79 printing centres by dailies and chains between 1961 and 1975, leaving 126 in production.
Second, ‘series publications’ gave scope for editorial economies of scale .
Third, a compact market made for more efficient advertising sales .
Similar considerations helped to explain the survival of the provincial dailies in the face of competition from the nationals.
Provincial mornings could keep down their overheads and editorial costs if they had an evening partner.
Even so, the 1974 Press Commission estimated that perhaps eight out of fifteen mornings they examined were being subsidized by an evening paper.
Provincials also benefited from local display advertising (linked directly to retail sales activity) and from classified ads (dependent on households and population size).
In principle, the effect of concentration upon competition was, of course, to reduce it.
For the provincial press, any calculation is complicated by questions of market boundaries and different types of publication.
Thus provincial mornings, we have seen, competed chiefly with national mornings.
Monopoly evening papers often competed with a morning paper from elsewhere (such as the Bradford Telegraph and Argus with the Yorkshire Post from Leeds), for morning papers circulated far more widely than the evenings.
Evening and weekly papers faced the stiffest competition at the fringes of their circulation areas.
In the mid-1970s, evening papers in about 30 towns  faced competition from a rural-owned weekly.
The effect of all such variations was to make it in the interests of publishers not to specialize in one type of paper but, as they did increasingly over the post-war decades, to spread their interests across morning, evening and weekly papers — and, in a few cases, Sundays.
In addition, there was obviously competition from non-print media for advertising revenue and from other goods and services for the money in the newspaper reader's pocket.
Finally, the links between the provincial and the national press are summarized in Table 3.10.
The baron with a finger in every pie was in fact less common than might be supposed.
Most groups had most kinds of paper; only a few had all.
The most ‘complete’ baron, in this sense, was Kemsley in 1947, with a large share both of titles and circulation.
No group was directly comparable in 1961; but by 1976 the Thomson group was strong in all sectors.
So was United, in 1987, having acquired national papers by purchasing the Beaverbrook/ Trafalgar titles.
In general the pattern reflects the changes previously discussed in the national press.
Owners such as Kemsley, Beaverbrook and Odhams dropped out.
Newcomers such as Reed and Thomson entered but then partially withdrew.
Other newcomers such as Murdoch and Maxwell stayed.
Many of the Kemsley provincial papers were still in the same group in 1987 as in 1947, but now under a different owner.
The greatest continuity of ownership was in the Rothermere Associated Newspapers combine and the smaller and narrower Pearson/Westminster group.
But for a ‘weakness’ in the Sunday sector during most of the period, Associated would have been a consistently comprehensive group.
The addition of the provincial press, therefore, does not much affect the earlier conclusion about concentration among the nationals.
Neither of the two major national groups in 1990, Murdoch and Maxwell, was strong in the provincial sector.
Nor were the strongest provincials, United and Associated, dominant in either the quality or the popular national market.
The large issues about press concentration concerned the national sector and the incorporation of the press with other media and financial interests.
MEDIA 1945 — 1990: RADIO AND TELEVISION
Public service broadcasting
Regular radio broadcasting started in 1922 and the BBC was founded in 1926.
From its early days, broadcasting was therefore seen to be a legitimate field of public policy and its development was shaped by periodic government inquiries.
In contrast with the press, whose three Royal Commissions stemmed from the fear or fact of concentration and contraction, these concerned the management of expansion.
Pre-war were the Sykes (1923) and Crawford (1926) Committees, which set the pattern of ‘public service broadcasting’ run by the BBC, and the Ullswater Committee (1936), which confirmed it.
Post-war came Beveridge (1951), Pilkington (1962), Annan (1977) and Peacock (1986).
The Beveridge report ensured that TV would expand on the same lines as radio.
Pilkington determined the allocation of the third TV channel to the BBC not ITV.
Annan set the scene for the introduction of Channel 4.
Peacock, strictly about finance, cut open the large can of worms about the organization of broadcasting in the era of satellites, cable and new information technology.
In addition there were oc-casional narrower, often technical, reports.
These inquiries necessarily formulated explicit principles of broadcasting organization and practice.
Too expedient and un-systematic to be called a philosophy, they comprise even so a kind of official doctrine, rather as though a series of government  inquiries on the press had set down an official theory of ‘the Fourth Estate’.
They have been continuously unpicked or embroidered in the process of open criticism and riposte which the idea of public accountability imposes, part legally part morally, upon the broadcasters.
Memoirs, prestige lectures and academic treatises have all added to the argument.
Thus the BBC's proposals for Broadcasting in the Seventies , for example, published in July 1969 as a kind of White Paper, provoked what the BBC called ‘vehement debate’ and the Annan Committee ‘a public row of splendid proportions’(Annan, 1977, p. 12), including debates in both houses of Parliament.
Throughout the period 1945 — 90, then, the system governed by these principles can be characterized as ‘public service broadcasting’.
The phrase itself was not perhaps in common currency until it came under challenge in the 1980s.
Previously people were as likely to talk of a ‘public broadcasting system’;, but this became confusing when the distinctive US Tv network with that name was established, often using British programmes.
The principles referred both to the goals of broadcasting and to a particular form of organization through which (alone?) they could be achieved.
As with other principles, there could be arguments about whether they were in fact implemented in particular practices (finance by advertising, for example, or the quality of news coverage).
They had to be flexible, too, adjusting to the new post-war broadcast medium of television; then to a new scale and range of programmes, increasingly controversial, and to changes in the society they served; and above all to the introduction of what at first was known as ‘commercial television’ in 1955.
The first principle was that radio should be run as a monopoly.
Since the airwaves were limited, they were ‘a valuable form of public property’, as the Sykes Committee put it.
Secondly, the monopoly was controlled by the government.
Partly this was because the division of the radio spectrum was fixed internationally, and the government was guarantor of British conformity to the agreement.
There were other users in addition to broadcasters, too,(wireless telegraphy, for example) whose interests needed protection.
As radio caught on, politicians became increasingly aware also of the latent, intangible influence of the medium and its possible danger if unchecked.
This danger might be greatest in the government's hands.
A third principle, firmly established by the Crawford Committee, was that the public monopoly should be run at arm's length from the government.
The private monopoly of radio set manufacturers, set up in 1922 from the applicants for government broadcasting licences, was turned into a public monopoly: the British Broadcasting Corporation.
The point about a public corporation was its midway status between the politicians and their civil servants on the one hand — and the people running the broadcast services day to day on the other.
It was a quintessential institution of British government: its success depended upon informal, tacit habits and understandings, rooted in the shared values and experiences of an educated class, more than on legal forms and niceties.
In this it resembled the British constitution itself, which, as apo-logists delight in explaining to foreigners, is nowhere embodied in a single document having the force of law.
For the BBC, the government, in the person of the responsible Minister,(the Postmaster-General in 1945, as in 1926) appointed the seven Governors, set the licence fee and retained certain general powers.
In theory its powers went no further.
In practice, however, the BBC's position was epi-tonrized in the government's power to require or ban the broadcast of any specific matter.
This was used in 1955 to enforce the ‘Fourteen-Days rule’, which the BBC wanted to abandon, about broadcasting matters due for debate in Par-liament; and it was the authority for the general ban on BBC ‘editorializing’ and on party political broadcasts outside the annual series agreed with the BBC.
If it had been used more often, politicians and broadcasters alike would have regarded that as evidence not of the system's success but of its failure.
Programmes likely to produce such action ought, rather, to be spotted within the BBC in advance and either adjusted suitably or else supported by the Governors in such a way that the politicians would be quietly told, in effect, that if they wished  to object they risked on this occasion a larger row than they might want.
As intermediaries, the members of the public corporation — the Governors, who legally were the BBC — thus faced both ways.
They shielded the broadcasters from outside pressure — from all directions, not just from the politicians — and they reviewed the broadcasters' work, explaining, justifying and sometimes excusing it to government and the public.
This did not mean sitting on the fence but, in theory, jumping to and fro.
In practice, it meant protecting the broadcasters from politicians and pressure groups more than the other way round.
Pressure generally came at moments of crisis, such as Suez in 1956 or the Irish conflict in the 1970s and 1980s, and tended to focus on particular programmes.
This meant that details of the Governors' procedures, which might seem unimportant to outsiders — such as whether they watched a contested programme in advance of its first transmission — sometimes had great symbolic importance for the broadcasters.
The BBC was not the first public corporation and by no means the last.
As a device for separating ‘general matters of policy’ from ‘day to day administration’it seemed a comfortable way of combining public accountability with business efficiency in a parliamentary system of government: Ministers dealt with the former and the corporation's employees with the latter.
Public utilities such as electricity supply and London Transport were put under public corporations between the wars, and they were the standard form of nationalization in the Attlee government for railways, air and freight transport, coal and steel.
Few of these, from the vantage point of 1990, flourished as corporations so successfully as the BBC, which gained a reputation as one of the great creations of social and cultural policy in the twentieth century.
A public corporation managing a monopoly might do so in a sectional interest.
A fourth ‘public service’ principle was that the BBC should be, in the Crawford Committee's words, ‘trustee for the national interest’.
Radio must serve the interests of everyone, not of particular religions, regions or social and economic groups, and it could best do this if not subject to the  direct control of a ministry.
The Governors were to represent a broad cross-section of the public.
Consistent with the ‘national interest’ idea was a fifth principle, about the key matter of finance.
Rather than concentrate the raising of revenue at the production end of the broadcasting process, by selling airtime to advertisers, the Sykes Committee recommended raising it by charging a flat rate annual licence fee to the consumer.
This was considered fairer because the amount of advertising time would be small and expensive, which could favour the wealthiest clients.
The size of the fee was set and reviewed periodically by the government, for whom it was a useful source of leverage in the informal manoeuvrings typical of government — broadcaster relations.
For the broadcasters, the licence fee had the advantage too of being an assured and predictable form of income.
A sixth principle, more easily taken for granted by audiences, perhaps, than the others, was geographical ‘universality of service’.
Wherever people lived, they had an equal right to receive programmes, just as the BBC's parent department, the Post Office, delivered the mail to the remotest communities.
This would have meant little if the charge to the receiver reflected the true cost of delivery, so the flat rate licence fee was an important element in ‘universality’.
These principles chiefly concerned broadcasting organization, and the organization, of course, was designed to achieve complementary public service goals.
In these, one is dealing with programme content and specifically with a certain kind of programme quality.
The word ‘service’ here needs emphasizing, too, for while it is simple to establish that the law requires the appointment of twelve Governors and that twelve have been appointed, a broadcasting service is organic, extensive, continuous — and difficult to evaluate.
Applied to broadcast programmes, then, the public service principles were in the nature of flexible guidelines.
Their practice felt the stamp of personalities, starting with the formidable John Reith.
Reith's domination of the BBC as first Director-General (i.e. chief executive) until 1937 is well described as ‘massive, totalitarian and idiosyncratic, and for many decades  the traditions of the BBC seemed to flow directly from his personality’(Curran and Seaton, 1988, p. 118).
Reith's notion of public service was rooted in a strict sense of selfless moral rectitude, derived from Scottish presbyterian values.
Sir William Haley, Director-General from 1944 to 1952, was a self-made man whose career started as a telephonist on The Times , and he had much of Reith's commitment to the enlightening and educative value of broadcasting.
But he failed to appreciate the potential of television.
Another Director-General whose vision of broadcasting had a major influence in a period of important change in social attitudes was Hugh Greene, who oversaw a more liberal interpretation of ‘public service’ in the 1960s.
Obviously the stamp of personality was felt at all levels of the BBC.
Official committees of enquiry tended to duck the task of too detailed an account of the stuff of public service, falling back on the Pilkington Committee's observation that ‘good broadcasting is a practice not a prescription’(Pilkington, 1962, p. 12).
The principles were encapsulated in the requirement that public service broadcasting should ‘inform, educate and entertain'.
Those words, and in that order of priority, were included in the BBC charter (and were passed on to ITV in much the same form in 1955).
The particular order of priority avoided, firstly, the risk of simply ‘giving the audience what it wants’ and settling at a lowest common denominator of taste.
The stress on ‘information’ justified, in due course, strong news services, documentaries and international coverage.
Education meant infinitely more than good schools programmes; a whole approach, rather, to broadcasting as a means of widening horizons, opening doors, increasing awareness — all the well meant speech — day cliches of the educationist, working with the privilege of experience and knowledge and with a sense of responsibility for the improvement of those they serve.
Information does not properly inform unless it is accurate.
Principle, as well as expediency, therefore ensured that public service broadcasting was to be impartial.
This meant both that the BBC itself was not to ‘editorialize’ about the news (or ‘matters of public policy’, as the Postmaster-General put it in  1927) and that it kept strict control over access to the airwaves.
As the Annan Committee pointed out, the public service principles, and the BBC's position as ‘trustee for the national interest’, did not mean ‘that anyone with a claim to broadcast had a right to broadcast.
They do not give the press or the universities or the churches the right to broadcast respectively the programmes on the news, education or religion, or to determine how they should be broadcast’(Annan, 1977, p. 9).
The same principle meant that in theory, too, there was no subject about which the broadcasters might not make a programme, if they judged it right.
These kinds of argument could be almost infinitely refined.
In practice, they were inevitably contestable.
How did you recognize and measure impartiality?
Who should be excluded from the air?
Was it ‘against the national interest’ to have very many foreign programmes?
What was the right balance between creativity and innovation on the one hand and familiarity and repetition on the other?
The refinements also had to cover the new forms of broadcasting.
Once ITV started, rules about advertisements were needed, concerning length, frequency, position in schedules, content and so on.
What about the question of foreign ownership of ITV companies, too?
(Not permitted, was the answer.)
Later chapters indicate how some such questions were answered.
The answers naturally varied.
But the essence of ‘public service’ practice was the broadcasters' day to day independence.
However much encumbered by advisory councils, complaints commissions and the shifting apparatus of consult-ation and audience research, the broadcasters' own judgement about programme standards and quality — what it meant to inform, educate and entertain — prevailed.
The greatest challenge to the continuing applicability of public service principles to broadcasting structure and content was not the arrival of TV itself, which slid comfortably into the BBC system in 1946, where it had started 10 years earlier, but the Churchill government's decision to introduce a second TV network in 1955.
It was to be financed by advertising revenue, but was it best described as ‘commercial’ or as ‘independent’, as complementary to the BBC or as competitor?
The direct competition with the BBC was for the audience.
This did indeed run counter to the original principle of a benign public monopoly.
If the BBC really was being run in the ‘national interest’, what benefit could competition bring?
The idea that competition for audience share would be virtuous was thus an innovation.
On the other hand, it did not necessarily contradict the public service principles, especially as the new Act of Parliament obliged ITV to ‘inform, educate and entertain' according to the same standards.
Along with them went the baggage of impartiality, high quality, good taste and decency.
In news programmes, quality and range were sought by setting up a distinct company, ITN, which was jointly owned by the other companies and supplied news for the whole channel, and later for Channel 4.
Competition for finance did not in theory exist, since the BBC's licence fee was untouched by the new system.
In practice, however, the BBC knew that as its audience share fell, the case for a compulsory fee would become weaker and that getting the fee raised at the regular three-yearly review would be trickier (no government was going to win votes by raising the licence fee, even during the years of monopoly).
The popularity of programmes therefore did become a factor in BBC calculations in a qualitatively different way from previously.
But what of the very idea of advertising in a public service system?
The Beveridge Committee, which reported shortly before the Churchill government took office in 195 1, saw no conflict.
It drew a parallel between broadcast advertising and the advertising columns of the press, which did not (or need not) affect editorial independence.
‘Slots’— spot advertisements — were the form chosen for ITV.
Although the ITV companies sold them and collected the revenue, their frequency, duration and content were regulated by the supervising body, the Independent Television Authority.
In this way the influence of revenue source over programme content was minimized.
At the top, ITV organization followed public service principles  closely.
The ITA was a public corporation like the BBC, with a small group of Governors and comparable (though not identical) intermediary functions of oversight and control.
But where the BBC Governors appointed a Director-General to run the service, the ITA selected companies from competing applicants and awarded franchises to run the service in different geographical regions, subject to meeting the ITA's programme standards.
The franchises initially lasted seven years.
The ITA also owned the transmitters, for which the companies paid a rent.
The other supposedly distinctive feature of ITV, along with advertising revenue, was the principle of regionalism.
This fitted perfectly well into the public service world, but in practice it was considerably diluted for viewers by the networking arrangements of the four (later five) larger companies.
These were guaranteed a national, not just a regional, showing for their programmes for a number of peak hours each week.
The case against ITV had initially to be made against something that did not yet exist.
Much was therefore made of the horrors of American TV — again, by hearsay, since the BBC did not show the worst American TV programmes and none of the ads.
The pernicious influence of sponsorship on content may have been a fact in the States but was irrelevant to the proposed British system.
Arguments about the more intangible effects on ‘quality’ of the need to generate large audiences to provide enough advertising revenue, and of the intrusion of the profit motive in general, appealed to people's broader social and political prejudices.
But obviously they cut no ice with a Conservative government that was busy dismantling wartime controls and reviving the notion of ‘choice’ in people's everyday lives.
So ITV was ‘commercial’; but was it ‘independent’?
Hardly, except from the BBC; and perhaps the word might fairly be used to describe the divorce of advertisers from programme makers.
Was it complementary or competitive with the BBC?
ITV in fact was both.
Initially it seemed more competitive.
The BBC was the public service broadcaster: ITV was the commercial broadcaster.
The BBC Director-General Hugh Greene  was scathing in 1960 about an ITA claim to the public service label.
Only with the passage of time did the two channels come to be seen widely as part of a single public service system.
In particular the idea of competition for audiences but not for revenue seemed increasingly an expression of the British genius for making practical contraptions which then turn into beautiful machines.
Competition, feared at first for its degenerative effects on programme quality, was rationalized as consistent with public service principles, because it was not driven by competition for a single source of revenue, as in the USA, but ensured a proper sensitivity to audience needs.
Each system enjoyed what Reith in the beginning regarded as one of the public service essentials — assured finance.
The introduction of BBC2, Channel 4 and local radio posed no such challenges to the public service ideas.
But breakfast time TV provides a footnote.
The BBC started its own cut-price breakfast time service because of, and just before, ITV's TV-AM.
This was, in part at least, in pursuit of the idea that ‘if it's broadcasting, then the BBC does it’(even if someone else does too).
Similarly, the BBC felt that it should have a stake in the (abortive) satellite plans of the early 1980s.
These were echoes of the old days — of the BBC as a public service broadcasting system in itself.
By the time of the changes introduced for the 1990s, they had died away.
A careful distillation of the principles of public service broadcasting submitted by the Broadcasting Research Unit to the Peacock Committee in 1985 showed that the old values that were in place in 1945 could still be made to fit the diverse and vastly changed system forty years on.
In structure, the main difference was that advertising, once grudged, was now em-braced.
In programming, the shifts were of emphasis — towards the needs of minorities, for example— that reflected the different society and culture of 1980s Britain and that took a pluralist not a paternalist view of the meaning of ‘service’.
The benign monopoly had become a benign duopoly.
The BRU summed up the principles in eight points.
They claimed broadcast programmes should be available to everybody (‘geographic universality’), should cater for all interests and  tastes, and should make particular provision for minorities (especially the disadvantaged).
Broadcasters should ‘recognise their special relationship to the sense of national identity and community’, should be distanced from all vested interests, particularly the government, and should be ‘liberated rather than restricted’ by the public guidelines for broadcasting.
One main broadcasting organization should continue to be funded by ‘the corpus of users’(that is to say, the licence fee, or something like it), and broadcasting should be structured so as to encourage competition in good programming rather than for audience numbers (BRU, 1985).
Would these principles survive into the next period of change in the 1990s, or had they outlived their time?
The Thatcher government's policy, effected in the Broadcasting Act of 1990, provoked intense debate.
For the first time, there would in the future be direct competition for income, since a new, fifth TV channel would compete with the existing ITV channel for advertising revenue.
Franchises were to be allocated on both channels by auction, giving them to whoever would pay the government the highest fee, subject to an abstract ‘quality threshold’.
The IBA's successor, moreover, was to have fewer powers over programme content.
The fear of opponents was that the new system would push down production budgets; drive out minority programmes and ‘serious’ projects; subject ITV to the needs of advertisers more than before; force the BBC down market to maintain its audience share.
In short, it was feared the system would restrict, not liberate — viewers, as well as broadcasters — and put ratings and rubbish above quality (in every kind of programme) and range.
The government, of course, argued otherwise.
But those were controversies for a new decade.
Radio
Of all the major media, radio had the most varying fortunes between 1945 and 1990.
The BBC emerged from the war with immense prestige and popularity.
For the next 10 years it  basked in its monopoly, with radio still supreme, as TV came slowly out of the shadows.
The rude intrusion of ITV in 1955 changed all that.
Radio now was becalmed, for another 10 years.
Then it was noisily invaded by the pirates of Radio Caroline, illegally broadcasting pop music offshore in the North Sea.
The BBC reorganized its channels, took the pirate disk jockeys on board the new Radio 1 and entered the 1970s with little of the direct Reith influence remaining.
In the 1970s, local radio was greatly expanded, and a pattern was set.
Technical developments made possible both a greater variety and quality of signals and also more convenient ways of listening.
The transistor transformed the portable radio, cul-minating in the spectacle — bizarre if it had been witnessed 20 years earlier — of people going around with earphones and Walkmans.
Car radios also proliferated.
Obviously radio would never recover the prominence of the post-war years, but it successfully re-established itself as meeting a need complementary to TV, whether judged by audience figures or by advertising revenue.
A word such as‘moribund’, used by Annan to describe its position in the late 1950s, was no longer remotely appropriate.
Before the war the BBC ran two stations, one of which included regional programmes.
One of these became the General Forces Programme, which soon provided the light entertainment and relaxation which the Forces clearly wanted and which were easily justified by their importance to morale.
The ‘home front’ had similar needs, met by shows like Workers' Playtime .
This was geared to communal audiences, such as factory workers, who wanted background listening, and it was broadcast from the factory floor.
The second station, the Home Service, was more ‘serious’: for example it carried the main news bulletins that naturally attracted huge wartime audiences.
The war also saw the BBC staff more than double in size, from about 5,000 in 1938 to 11,000 in 1946.
The increase no doubt contributed to the Beveridge Committee's attitude five years later that the organization was bureaucratic, top heavy and over-centralized in London.
The BBC's pre-war conception of the audience had been  more like that of someone reading a book — a deliberate and solitary or individual habit, though it may be done in company — than of a collective social entity.
This fitted in with the idea of mixed programming, whereby music, talks, variety and drama appeared on each station, exposing the listener to a varied choice, rather than the stations being specialized.
This policy was broadly retained after the war, but with the populist elements intact.
Workers' Playtime continued for many years.
The Forces Programme was renamed the Light Programme in 1945, ‘designed to appeal not so much to a certain class of listener — but to all listeners when they are in certain moods’(BBC, 1946, p. 53).
The Home Service remained, with regional variations, and a new station was launched in 1946.
This was the Third Programme, brainchild of the Director-General, William Haley, though really pure Reith in character.
Haley cheerfully explained, as no successor could have dared after, say, 1965, that he saw society as a cultural pyramid, slowly aspiring upwards.
He himself had aspired with eminent success: the conception was a self-educator's dream.
The Third was a highbrow station, with a tiny proportion of the audience.
In these final years of radio prominence in the late 1940s and early 1950s, then, listeners had a choice of three BBC stations, including some regional variation.
A part-time chairman of governors was assisted by other part-timers (Table 4.1 lists the chairmen, the directors-general and the number of governors, and their counterparts at the IBA, for the years 1945 — 89).
Inflation was comparatively low and the licence fee, swelled by the increasing income from the separate TV licence, did not need to be raised often in order to provide an adequate income.
Revenue would be more of a problem in the future.
Table 4.2 shows the changes in the licence fee for the whole post-war period.
In the later decades it was raised more often.
The gradual eclipse of radio is shown by the growth in the number of TV licence holders, until the separate radio licence was abolished in February 1971.
Other ways in which the eclipse can be measured are the changing numbers of radio and TV staff (Table 4.3) and the changing ratio of expenditure (Table 4.4).
The Third Programme's elitist appeal (as it would now be called) to a minority ‘whose tastes, education and mental habits enable them to take pleasure in close and responsive listening to broadcasts of artistic and intellectual distinction’(Annan, 1977, p. 12) was so limited that in 1957 it was confined to weekday evenings and weekends from 2.30 onwards.
The rest of the time it was called Network 3, broadcasting specialist but less arcane programmes — on gardening, religion, music and so on.
In 1964 ‘serious’ music took over altogether and daytime Network 3 was renamed the Music Programme.
In 1964 too the first pirate, Radio Caroline, hove to in a ship just outside UK territorial waters off the Thames Estuary.
It was soon followed by others.
The pirate image was entirely fair.
They broadcast on wavelengths allocated by international agreement and national laws to other services (in other countries, not just Britain), including maritime communications.
They ‘stole’ the pop music that they broadcast by ignoring the law about royalties.
The audience was their treasure, and they delivered it to their backers, the advertisers.
There was even a buccaneering Robin Hood element, in that their programmes had a genuine popular appeal.
The Labour government was bound to take action: indeed there was a coordinated response through the Council of Europe.
In 1967 the appropriately schoolmarm-sounding Marine & Broadcasting (Offences) Act banned the placing of advertising with the pirates.
Equally, though, a Labour government could not ignore the public demand, and the BBC was authorized to provide a ‘continuous popular music programme’ on a medium wave frequency used by the Light Programme.
So in September 1967 came ‘wonderful’ Radio One, with its patter and jingles that sounded like ads but were not ads.
The other services were named Radios 2, 3 and 4.
Radio 1 was the most complete form of specialization on a radio station and the last before the BBC accepted that the Reith/Haley commitment to ‘mixed’ programming on each station simply did not correspond to listening preferences.
In 1970, after the famous public row, Radio 1 stayed as an all-pop network, Radio 2 became exclusively ‘light’ music, Radio 3  (limited to VHF) provided ‘serious’music by day and high culture by night.
Radio 4 was for talk — news, current affairs, drama and general entertainment.
This system was described by the ungainly name ‘generic broadcasting’, and it survived, with changes of wavelength and broadcast hours, throughout the 1970s and 1980s.
It was also accompanied by a large expansion of programme output, which nearly doubled between 1962 and 1975.
While putting these changes in place, the BBC had also been developing local radio.
The Pilkington Committee recommended a BBC monopoly, and in 1966 the government authorized an experiment on VHF with eight stations.
Starting with Leicester, these were all on air by mid-1968 and 12 more were added before 1970.
These reached a potential 70 per cent of the English population and were dotted in such obvious  places as Birmingham, Bristol, Leeds, Manchester, Liverpool, Nottingham — and London.
Another 20 stations would have increased the range to 90 per cent.
Scottish, Welsh and Northern Irish radio already had a considerable local element.
The new Conservative government in 1970 had different ideas and not surprisingly favoured a competing set of commercial stations.
To make room on the dial, various BBC medium frequencies were released.
This meant the end, in 1972, of the old system of regional variations on the national radio network.
The BBC's local stations were kept at 20, and the IBA was authorized to licence up to 60, reaching much the same total percentage audience.
Capital Radio and LBC opened in London in October 1873 and 17 others quickly followed, chosen from more than 60 applicants.
A change of government produced a temporary halt, when Labour, who returned in February 1974, stopped further expansion until after the Annan inquiry, But under the Thatcher Government new franchises were again allocated and by 1988 46 ILR stations were covering about 85 per cent of the UK population.
The BBC's stations increased to 30 (Table 4.5).
BBC local radio was a shoestring operation.
As with any extra BBC service, it had to be financed out of existing revenue, for there was no separate licence fee or earmarked increase.
ILR, of course, depended on the sale of ‘spot’ advertising, controlled by the IBA (renamed from ITA when its role was extended to radio).
There was certainly a distinct local advertising market available to support it.
But the revenue was not just there for the taking, and a station had to get its programming right to win the necessary audience.
Even then, income was liable to fluctuate.
Several stations had financial problems in their early days.
Both Capital Radio and LBC in London, the former geared to pop music and the latter to talk, made near-disastrous starts and recovered under new Canadian ownership (a reflection of the north American style most appealing in local radio).
At least two stations went bust, and others, such as Invicta Radio in Kent, had to relaunch before getting firmly established.
With ILR the question of ownership arises once more.
The idea of local radio fitted snugly with local ownership, like the provincial press.
But comparison with the press cannot go very far.
An individual might build a local paper from nothing and retain the ownership intact.
The costs of ILR were different.
They did not expand with the audience to the same extent as with a newspaper.
Nor were newspapers controlled by a public authority and subject to competitive franchising.
From the start, local radio companies had a fair spread of local investors.
As they became established, shares in many of them became quoted on the Stock Exchange.
This in principle dispersed ownership, though working against a local character.
ILR thus did not develop ownership chains like the local press.
Broadcasting law influenced the pattern, too.
No ITV company was allowed a controlling interest in an ILR station in the same area, and vice versa(though there could be joint directors).
The IBA could regulate the extent of foreign ownership, and foreign control was completely forbidden.
For the rescue operations of Capital and LBC, for example, Canadian interests were preferred over US alternatives, which were reckoned incompatible with public service values.
The law gave local newspapers a privileged position, virtually prescribing an element of radio/press concentration.
Papers with substantial circulation in ILR areas were guaranteed a shareholding if they wanted it and if the IBA felt their advertising revenue might be hit.
The Annan Committee disliked this  arrangement, for even the local newspaper publishers' association itself did not think the amount of advertising likely to go to ILR was great enough to be a threat.
Annan wanted press interests limited to 25 per cent in any station, with 10 per cent for any one paper.
But this was ignored, and by 1988 several of the 46 stations were 20 — 30 per cent owned by the press.
Table 4.6 gives the details.
Only one out of nineteen in 1976 had no press involvement at all, and four out of forty-five in 1987.
The same names and groups that have already featured in the discussion of the provincial press therefore appear again as owners of local radio.
This is true both of the small and narrower groups, such as the Eastern Counties group in East Anglia, or Portsmouth and Sunderland newspapers, and the national groups with major provincial holdings, such as the Westminster Press and Associated Newspapers.
(Radio holdings by the main press groups are indicated alongside their TV holdings in Table 4.11.)
Ownership links between ITV and radio were often indirect and came through a third party, including newspaper groups.
Table 4.7 shows direct links in 1988.
One striking development was the two clusters of ILR stations accumulated by Crown Communications and Capital Radio (themselves part owned by other organizations).
These two companies each had holdings in 1988 — 9 in 18 stations (Table 4.8).
While these links involved the provision of some common services, they did not constitute chains in exactly the traditional newspaper sense, since the holdings were not in every case large enough to be a controlling interest.
Obvious exceptions were Crown's 100 per cent ownership of LBC and Capital's of Devon Air.
Crown's other interests were in TV production, computer graphics and business communications.
In 1989 it was the first British company to take a significant stake in the French commercial radio network.
Capital, a longer established business, was part owned by the BET conglomerate.
The full picture of ILR ownership over a period of nearly twenty years is difficult to trace.
But clearly from the beginning the stations were included within media conglomerates, partly by government and IBA design and partly by the natural interest of media investors.
Television
The BBC had run a TV service from 1936 until 1 September 1939, two days before war broke out.
By then, 23,000 people within range of Alexandra Palace in London had been able to watch Shakespeare, variety, the Derby and the return of the King and Queen from a visit to Canada.
There was never much doubt that TV would be regarded as an extension of radio.
‘One thing cannot be stated too often,’ wrote Sir William Haley, Director-General of the BBC in 1951, ‘…
Television is an integral part of Broadcasting.
The essence of Broadcasting is that it is a means of communication capable of conveying intelligence into every home simultaneously’(BBC, 1952, p. 9).
A government committee under Lord Selsdon in 1935 had already affirmed this, when inves-tigating the form TV development should take.
An analogy with the film industry, or treatment as an entirely distinct medium requiring its own organization, was inappropriate.
TV began, therefore, as part of the public service radio monopoly.
‘The responsibilities are identical,’ wrote Haley.
‘The purpose should be the same,’
The broadcasters recognized, even so, that there were important differences, particularly in the costs of TV and in the way people might use it.
In 1939 the estimated cost of producing an hour of TV was twelve times that of the most expensive radio programme.
On the production scale of 1962 it was still seven times as much, and in 1980, perhaps ten times (Tunstall, 1983, p. 34).
This meant that within the BBC itself sources of finance beyond the licence fee were not ruled out altogether; nor by the Beveridge Committee in 1951.
As for audiences, ‘viewing television is a very different activity from listening to sound broadcasts,’ explained Maurice Gorham, the new head of BBC TV, in 1946 (BBC, 1946, p. 26).
‘The radio set can remain on for hours at a time; you can enjoy it as background to reading, writing, homework, housework….
The television set demands your attention; you cannot enjoy television from the next room.
You must sit facing the set, with the lights  down or shaded, and if you are a normal viewer you will find yourself very reluctant to be disturbed during a programme that you enjoy.’
At first some 15,000 households seized the opportunity to sit in darkened rooms when the post-war service started in 1946.
The government had started to take expert advice on how TV might be extended as early as 1943; so the BBC had the signal to go ahead almost as soon as the war ended.
The Alexandra Palace transmitter gave a range of about forty miles, or 12 million people.
New transmitters in Sutton Coldfield (1949), Holme Moss, near Huddersfield (1951), Kirk O'Shotts (1952) and Wenvoe soon extended the service to a potential 36 million, and by 1956 almost the whole population was included.
The actual audience, as Table 4.2 showed, grew rapidly from its tiny base, partly in line with the new transmitters and partly with the sort of fillip provided by the Coronation.
Initially, as Gorham's account suggests (with no exaggeration: the weak signal and eight-inch screen required the darkened room), watching TV was a fairly unsociable activity.
Alternatively something of a ritual might be made of inviting friends round to watch a particular programme.
The Coronation helped to make TV respectable, in addition to simply showing people its potential.
For nearly 10 years, then, BBC TV gradually established itself, with more programmes, more viewers and (rather slowly) more resources.
In 1957 — 8 licence revenue from TV exceeded sound for the first time, and the following year TV expenditure overtook radio.
In the early days, of course, radio listeners had heavily subsidized the generally more affluent TV watchers; while the richer parts of the country, following public service values, paid for the provision of the service to the remote and poorer parts.
Considering the engineering effort and investment, the necessary large-scale manufacture of TV sets, the lack of priority for TV inside the BBC, and the shift in social habits involved, the growth of TV in a decade still pinched by post-war austerity was remarkably quick.
The origin of ITV can be explained in many ways: as a  classic case (perhaps the first, post-war) of high pressure political lobbying; as Churchill's revenge on the BBC for its disdainful treatment of him during the 1926 General Strike and in his wilderness years in the 1930s, when he was largely kept off the air; or as part of the Conservative move to ‘set the people free’ from the bureaucracy and greyness allegedly intrinsic to Labour planning and the construction of the welfare state (sweets, be it remembered, did not finally come off ration until 1953).
The growth of TV at the BBC was stately compared with the hasty start of ITV.
The ITA was simultaneously having to work out the details of its own role; formulate rules that met the legislation's requirements for quality, balance and so on, some of which — about imported American programmes, say — would affect the companies' finances; and ensure both that there was proper competition for the franchises, yet that the operation did not collapse through mismanagement or financial miscalculation.
The Television Act was passed in 1954 after great controversy, including a powerful attack by Lord Reith in the House of Lords.
The first four contracts were awarded on 26 October.
The London service went on air on 22 September 1955, with the Midlands in the following February and the Northern Region in May.
This haste carried risks.
For example, Lord Kemsley, who had taken a 30 per cent interest in one of the successful bidders (and been a major factor in its success) decided sub-sequently to withdraw.
The company collapsed, the ITA had to re-advertise the contract in July 1955, and the ABPC film company, one-third owned by the American Warner Brothers, was persuaded firmly to accept it the very day before ITV started in London.
Such episodes were a portent.
In principle, the London Region included an estimated 13 million viewers, with 7.5 million in the Midlands and 12 million in the Northern.
In practice, viewers preferred to wait and see — or rather wait for other people to see — before converting their TV sets to receive the new signal.
ITV began with only some 3 per cent of households equipped to receive it.
Yet to win the big audiences  that would attract advertising, the companies had to spend large sums on attractive programmes.
The result was a near disastrous first year.
The smaller, regional companies, that filled the gaps in the system between 1957 and 1962, escaped this traumatic experience and were able to enjoy what Roy Thomson, owner of Scottish Television, unwisely described as a ‘licence to print money’.
The Television Act intended competition between ITV companies, not just between ITV and the BBC — which was what effectively developed.
Fraser assumed, indeed, that the government would by degrees allocate frequencies such that more than one ITV station would be able to broadcast in a given area.
Not until the 1990s would this in fact happen.
What Fraser and his colleagues decided to do, therefore, was try and introduce an element of competition first by dividing the three available stations — London, Midlands, Northern —‘vertically’, and secondly to move programmes from station to station ‘horizontally’.
‘Vertical’ competition meant giving weekday contracts to one company and weekend contracts to another.
‘Horizontal’ competition, the network system, might in an ideal world have meant companies vying to buy and sell the best programmes from each other.
In practice it led to the ‘carve-up’(described in more detail in chapter 6), whereby the four big companies (five, from 1968) were guaranteed national access for agreed amounts of their programmes, with the ITA/IBA controlling certain ‘quality’ aspects of content and the proportions of programme types (news, drama, and so on).
By 1968 the franchise terms obliged the big five to produce network programmes.
The successful applicants accepted these offers of split contracts, though without massive enthusiasm.
The financial interests thus gelled into four organizations that soon became instantly recognized household names and logos.
Associated-Rediffusion, Associated Television (ATV), ABC Television and Granada.
To provide a national and worldwide news service, the ITA set up Independent Television News, under the companies' joint ownership.
Table 4.9 lists the original franchise  holders and their successors, from 1955 to 1988, including the smaller companies that started slightly later.
Who provided the money and driving force?
The combination of competition, regionalism, previous relevant experience and piety about public service values determined the pattern.
It meant also that ITV companies were from the start a kind of conglomerate — by definition.
The money had to come from somewhere, and while old newspapers might spawn new newspapers there was not, of course, any ‘old’ ITV.
One natural source of finance and experience was the world of show business — live theatre and cinema.
This included ‘talent’ organizations like those of Lew Grade (ATV) and Jack Hylton (TWW), and theatre and cinema chains (the latter much larger enterprises in the 1950s, obviously, than later, when so many became bingo halls instead).
These included Howard and Wyndham (Scottish TV), Moss Empires and J Arthur Rank (Southern TV).
Rank were also involved in film production: and a few other, much smaller film makers, such as Launder and Gilliat, took an interest too (TWW).
Another obvious source was firms that had become wealthy through the hire of radio and TV sets — chief among them Rediffusion (Associated -Rediffusion).
Regional finance was strongly encouraged by the ITA, especially in the smaller companies.
In the early days it was not always easily secured.
TWW, for instance, with a base in Bristol, was part owned by the local Imperial Tobacco Company.
TWW, in fact, was a good example of a consortium put together from interests reflecting the shape of the franchise area, which was partly dictated by the fact that the signal for Wales would also be picked up in the West Country.
‘Regionalism’ also meant the presence of local notables on the companies' boards, sometimes bringing finance with them, as in the case of Lord Derby, chairman of TV, and sometimes prestige, contacts and local influence.
Regionalism also overlapped with the very important question of newspaper finance.
From the start this was bound to be contentious, for it tied in so obviously with concern about newspaper chains, the power of large circulations and the alleged dangers of a too one-sided  party press.
With Labour in opposition, and perhaps ready to dismantle ITV when back in office, the issue featured prominently during the passage of the Television Act in 1954.
Moreover it was a complex issue, rather than simply splitting opinion on party lines.
The provincial press was a strong expression of regionalism.
It competed with Fleet Street (with difficulty, as has been seen).
To exclude it from ITV, its competitor for advertising revenue, might weaken it further.
Yet the links between the provincial and the national press meant that it would be complicated, if not illogical, to allow investment by the former but not by the latter.
Involvement by the national press was thus the trickier issue for the ITA.
They handled it initially by seeking political balance, hoping, for instance, that the Manchester Guardian would join a consortium to balance the Kemsley bid and the 50 per cent holding of the Conservative Associated Newspapers (Daily Maid group in Associated-Rediffusion.
When Kemsley dropped out, the prospect of News of the World or Beaverbrook investment, also Conservative, was most unwelcome, and the Authority looked unsuccessfully for Odhams (Daily Herald), News Chronicle or Daily Mirror interest.
Cecil King,Daily Mirror chairman, preferred ‘to wait until after the second bankruptcy’.
The bankruptcies did not happen, but he bought the Daily Mirror into ATV when bankruptcy looked possible, after the traumatic first year.
ATV had run out of cash, as a result of large start-up costs, a delayed opening of its Midlands service and general under-capitalization.
At about the same time (July 1956) Lord Rothermere decided to sell most of his 50 per cent Daily Mail stake in Associated-Rediffusion; and he sold the remainder when he took a third of the shares in the new South/South-East franchise holder, Southern TV, in 1958.
The Amalgamated Press, controlled by Lord Camrose, also had a third share in Southern.
But almost immediately, Amalgamated was sold to the Mirror Group, which now had holdings in two companies — to which the ITA objected.
King, therefore, sold the Southern shares to D C Thomson of Dundee — about as far removed from a ‘regional’ interest as  could be imagined.
Meanwhile the Central Scotland franchise (and 80 per cent of its voting shares, and all the non-voting) had gone to Roy Thomson, Canadian owner of The Scotsman .
The press element in ITV finance was thus significant in several ways.
It was ‘natural’ and defensible, on the ground that one medium might reasonably seek to protect itself by investing in a competitor.
It was contentious, because of the political implications and the potential for concentration.
It fluctuated, through the manoeuvres of the press groups, and it tended to attract publicity.
It was the subject of legislation in 1963 and of particular scrutiny whenever official inquiries into the press or broadcasting were set up.
As time went on, the ITA/IBA tried to reduce press holdings.
The 1990 Broadcasting Act limited newspapers to a 20 per cent stake in TV companies.
Table 4.10 summarizes the holdings at various dates across the period.
Table 4.11 identifies them by newspaper group, and includes ILR.
The position is slightly complicated by the question what constitutes a ‘press’ company.
British Electric Traction (BET), for example, was regarded as such by the Press Council and the 1974 Press Commission, but not initially by the ITA.
BET had a major holding in Associated-Rediffusion.
Apart from that, Table 4.10 shows clearly how the number of network companies part-owned by the press increased, while the size of holding diminished.
All the regional companies had press holdings — most of them large — from the beginning.
They amounted to 28 per cent of the whole, when the Annan Committee investigated.
By 1987 most had been reduced or sold.
The holdings of particular newspaper groups fell into no tidy pattern.
Certainly Fleet Street as a whole never plumped for ITV.
Nor was there great continuity.
The Pearson,Guardian , D C Thomson and BET interests were the most sustained, but only the Guardian and Pearson's Financial Times represented Fleet Street.
Ignoring its own changes of proprietorship, the Mirror Group's papers were the largest group continuously associated with ITA.
In 1990, the Murdoch papers' association with Sky TV was the subject of most controversy, but that story does not belong in this post-war period.
Apart from the press and the other sources mentioned, ITV finance came from institutions such as banks and pension funds and, in due course, investors on the stock market (usually limited to shares without voting rights).
Table 4.12 lists them by rather general categories, partly adopted from the Pilkington Committee.
Categories such as‘theatre and entertainment’ or ‘cinema and film’did not include quite the same things in 1987 as in 1961, or not in the same proportions.
It is difficult to discern a strong trend or pattern in the types of finance.
One other noteworthy source of support to franchise bidders, bringing resources less of money than talent (though they often acquired shareholdings later) were the experienced broadcasters, many of whom came from the BBC (inevitably, in 1955).
They added an essential element of credibility to the high-sounding rhetoric required of franchise bids by the ‘public service, conditions set by the ITA.
Even though there was contact between the ITA and bidders before the formal application date, the grand interview between Governors and applicants in 1954 was by no means ritualistic.
Nor was it in 1967, when decisions to disenfranchise as well as to enfranchise were a possibility.
Considering the scale of the consequences, it is remarkable that the interviews carried so much weight.
The ‘creative, people were not necessarily most important in the interviews: but with their reputations as programme controllers, producers, editors, lay an applicant's chief prospects of attracting further talent and, ultimately, the best ratings.
The initial allocation of franchises in 1954, then, was absolutely not a matter of the ITA folding its arms and waiting for consortia to spring fully formed before it.
Franchises were re-allocated by competition in 1964, 1967 and 1981, and although there was each time a public invitation and a grand interview, the procedure involved a good deal of preliminary contact and discussion, not least about such important but apparently secondary factors as studio locations and offices.
Those re-allocation dates should not be underemphasized.
For TWW (1967), Southern (1981) and Westward (1981) they were execution dates; and major surgery dates for ABC and A-R (1967) and ATV (1981).
They were the moments, too, when new franchise areas were set up, such as Yorkshire in 1967, and new services such as Breakfast TV (1981) and Channel 4 (1981).
but changes in the ownership and control of  companies also took place between these dates, sometimes on virtually the same scale and certainly with the same consequences for programme contents.
Too much focus on the re-allocation competition risks understating the extent to which ownership and control changed by an irregular but continuing process of adjustment and negotiation with the ITA/IBA about the buying and selling of interests, either on the Authority's or a franchise-holder's initiative.
The award of a franchise to an entirely new company, from scratch, was thus the extreme case.
It was done for Harlech and LWT (1967) and for TVS and TSW (1981) in pre-evisting regions, and for Yorkshire TV (1967) and TV-AM (1981) with new franchises.
Even then there were elements of adjustment.
For instance, TWW, supplanted by Harlech, was given the opportunity by the ITA of buying 40 per cent of the shares in the new company.
Lord Derby, furious at losing his franchise, declined.
New but unsuccessful bidders were sometimes invited by the Authority to join a winner.
For instance the Yorkshire Post and three other local press groups joined their former competitor as junior partners in Yorkshire TV in 1967.
The Daily Telegraph, Observer and Economist , unsuccessful in groups bidding variously for the Yorkshire and Central Scotland franchises, were given holdings in LWT.
Another variation was the forced marriage.
Thames, awarded the London weekday contract in 1967, was formed by an ITA-initiated merger between A-R, the previous holder, and ABC, the previous holder of Midlands and Northern weekday and weekend contracts.
To rub salt into A-R's wounds, ABC was given a majority of voting shares and on the board.
In 1981, Central TV was formed rather similarly out of the previous contractor (ATV and some new shareholders.
In the latter case, as in 1967, one factor in the Authority's calculations was a decision to alter the shape of the franchise region.
Changes not brought about directly by the Authority happened in two ways.
The more dramatic was the salvage operation.
ATV provided the first example in 1955 — 6, as we have seen, with Mirror Group capital injected at a key psychological moment.
In 1964 the tiny Wales (West and North) company  effectively went bust, and merged, with its region, into TWW.
Then LWT, whose galaxy of creative talent in 1967 just ‘had to have its chance, whatever the repercussions,’ as the ITA chairman, Lord Hill, put it (Sendall, 1983, p. 364), failed disastrously at company management.
In 1971 it was rescued by Rupert Murdoch, who alone was prepared to risk the capital to keep it afloat.
LWT was bulging with production talent, headed by Michael Peacock, one of the BBC's golden boys; performance talent, with David Frost a star (and an important shareholder); and a string of business tycoons on the board.
But the former knew little of business and the latter little of TV.
Against a BBC policy of scheduling popular entertainment opposite LWT's ‘serious’ programmes, the company made little headway.
Peacock was sacked after a year, and other staff followed.
While other network companies mooted various ideas with the ITA for absorbing LWT or making London a single franchise — ideas that were anathema — Murdoch won reluctant ITA approval to buy the General Electric Company's 7.5 per cent of the voting shares (and a larger block of non-voting shares, which did not require approval).
With this foothold, and after further controversial sackings, he took control, eventually bringing in John Freeman, the eminently respectable journalist and ex-Ambassador to the USA, as chairman.
So far was the company now from its original shape that the ITA, in a face-saving operation, submitted the new team to a full-scale franchise-style interview, after which it declared itself satisfied.
TV-AM, equally star-studded, failed equally flamboyantly in 1982.
Again, Australian money and management (from Kerry Packer) turned it round.
In each case, grand programme ideals were abandoned, with the Authority's connivance, to keep the franchise going.
Less dramatic were changes in company ownership following changes in a parent company.
Sometimes these resulted in contravention of an Authority rule about foreign ownership or conflict of interest, and further sales followed.
The formation of the original four network companies has already been described.
The remainder of those first franchises  divided into second and third tiers according to the economic base provided by the populations they served.
The third tier was chiefly at the physical and cultural extremities of the nation — the Channel Islands, Ulster, North-East Scotland, South-West England and (the exception) the Anglo-Scottish borders.
All started later than the network companies and missed the dreadful first year.
Scottish TV came first, launched on the enthusiasm of Roy Thomson, who had difficulty con-vincing Scottish backers that ITV had a bright future.
He thus began with 80 per cent of the voting shares and all the non-voting shares.
Lord Derby's consortium for TWW has been mentioned.
The Southern region, so close to London, attracted nine applicants, among whom the Rank/Associated News-papers/Amalgamated Press group, which became Southern TV, was clearly the strongest.
The ITA decided that in this region it did not matter if the finance was not ‘local’.
Not long after the last regional ITV company went on air, the focus of interest shifted back to the BBC.
For the BBC, the Pilkington inquiry had been a vindication and a triumph, confirming the superiority of its own service over the commercial values of ITV, which was moving rapidly into surplus.
It was therefore no surprise when the Macmillan government allocated the third TV channel to the BBC in 1963, with a 1964 opening date.
It was becoming the rule not the exception that launches did not go right first time, but BBC2 settled down quite quickly as a recognized minority channel.
It could be little else.
The government wanted it broadcast on the new UHF/625 lines frequency (the rest of TV was on VHF/405 lines).
This meant it was available for the first two years only in London and the South-East and to people who bothered to fit a new aerial.
Moreover, it broadcast only for about four hours each evening; and ten years later it was still on air only 60 per cent as much as BBC1.
There was no increase in the licence fee to pay for a 50 per cent jump in programme hours.
Expenditure on TV in the year after BBC2 started increased from £27.6 million to £35.8 million (BBC, 1966, p. 194).
The BBC and ITA joined in a major construction programme  in the late 1960s to build 50 high powered UHF stations and more than 400 low powered, so that UHF was available to 95 per cent of the population by 1974.
Even so, BBC2 remained, as the BBC told the Annan Committee (p. 90), ‘the channel for initiation, for large scale departures as well as for tryouts and experiments’.
Colour, for example, was introduced in 1967 on BBC2 (not until 1969 was it available on BBC1).
BBC2 settled down with about 10 per cent of the total TV audience and heavily subsidized by BBC1, which had four times the viewers at only twice the cost.
Until the coming of Channel 4 in 1982, a very rough and varying 40 and 10 per cent audience share for BBC and 50 per cent for ITV was an implicit part of the equilibrium of the duopoly.
While BBC2 was gearing up, the ITA was concerned in 1963 — 4 with its first round of re-franchising, very low-key compared with what was to come.
Contracts were to be awarded for only three years, as the ITA hoped that by 1967 a fourth channel would be available and require more radical reorganization.
All the companies had their contracts renewed.
Three of the smaller regionals (Border, Grampian and Ulster) were not even opposed.
The London weekday franchise attracted five applicants.
There were 22 altogether, contrasted with 36 in 1967 — 8 and 42 in 1981 — 2.
The ITA took the 1964 competition very seriously, none-theless.
It came in the aftermath of the Pilkington Report, which had roundly condemned ITV, and at a time when profits were fat, as a result of which the government was introducing a tax, in the form of a levy on advertising revenue.
The Authority set out new principles governing ownership.
Existing companies infringed some of them and Rediffusion, for example, had to adjust its shareholdings.
By 1966 it was clear that a fourth channel was some way off.
The ITA decided to split the Northern region into separate Lancashire and Yorkshire franchises, each of which would be large enough to support a network company, increasing the number of these to five.
The ‘vertical’ division of London was adjusted so that the weekend franchise would run from 7.00 pm on Friday, not from Saturday morning.
This proved a  miscalculation, which added to the financial crisis of the new contractor, LWT, a few years later.
Seventeen new groups entered the competition in 1967 (out of‘two to three hundred’ who requested particulars)(Sendall, 1983, p. 337).
This time six of the smaller regions were un-opposed.
On the other hand, there were ten bidders alone for the new Yorkshire contract.
Several groups bid in more than one region.
Much of the trumpeted ‘new talent’ came from the BBC.
How were the ITA to proceed?
They were not in an easy position.
Allocating the new Yorkshire franchise was straightforward: the ITA played matchmaker between two strong, locally based groups.
But how should the existing franchise holders be treated?
If all were re-appointed, in a replay of 1964, the claim that franchises were ‘competitive’ would begin to look hollow, and would simply confirm the Pilkington Committee's judgement that to all intents ‘the appointment of a programme contractor is virtually irrevocable’(Pilkington, 1962, p. 165).
As Lord Hill replied to an outraged Lord Derby, whose TWW had ‘stood on its record’ and been brusquely dismissed, newcomers such as Harlech could offer only promises, ‘but if promise is never to be preferred to performance, then every television company will go on for ever’(Sendall, 1983, p. 359).
On the other hand, the realities of the situation made dis-enfranchisement both drastic and risky.
The ITA could not regard itself as starting with a blank sheet.
Disenfranchisement would mean upheavals for staff, start-up costs and teething troubles for the new contractor, and a danger that the service would indeed turn out to be demonstrably less popular than the old contractor's or different from what was promised.
Lord Derby complained that he had been given no warnings.
ITA powers over programming would make it more difficult, even, to argue that poor performance was wholly a contractor's fault.
The sacrifice of TWW and the merger of ABC and Rediffusion into Thames were acts of some courage and panache, in which the ebullient personality of ITA chairman, Lord Hill, a former broadcasting star as the Radio Doctor in the 1940s and  a cabinet minister under Harold Macmillan, were an important factor.
Beyond that, the ITA was influenced by the existing configuration of franchise holders, by new applicants' promises and broadcasting talent, by their performance at interview and the extent to which they met the conditions of regionalism and financial soundness.
Thus TWW had to compete not only with the mundane but necessary business skills of the Harlech consortium but with the presence of famous Welsh names from the arts — Richard Burton, Stanley Baker, Geraint Evans — and the authority of Lord Harlech himself, a former minister and Ambassador to the Kennedy White House.
Lord Harlech's concluding statement at interview, the official ITV history oddly comments, almost as though the process were a debating competition, Was the finest piece of spoken prose heard at any of the thirty-six ITA interviews' (Sendall, 1983, p. 358).
Where performance (at interview and in prospect) was decisive for Harlech, the forced marriage of ABC and Rediffusion showed the influence of the existing pattern of weekday/weekend franchises split between the four network companies.
With the creation of a new Yorkshire region came a decision to end this split except in London.
The Midlands, Lancashire and Yorkshire would now be seven-day contracts.
With a new applicant taking Yorkshire, with Granada strongly entrenched in Lancashire, and with ATV well placed to concentrate on the Midlands and give up its London weekend franchise, Rediffusion could reasonably assume that it would keep the London weekday contract and that ABC would move into the weekend slot vacated by ATV.
The dazzling LWT application put an end to that idea.
If LWT ‘had to have their chance’ then ABC was out in the cold.
A merger with Rediffusion for the weekday contract was a consolation prize for them both.
Rediffusion in particular was bitter about this decision.
The company had stuck with the infant system at a time when it could easily have collapsed, and the ITA's credibility with it.
It had pioneered children's programming for ITV and the use of videotape.
In line with ITA recommendations, its board contained a high proportion  of professional TV executives.
Why should it suffer simply because the ITA wanted to restructure the North and Midlands parts of the system?
The 1967/68 procedure was essentially repeated in 1980/ 81, with the addition of regional public meetings by the Authority.
These were held in belated recognition that the entirely private exercise last time had given the public not even a token opportunity to comment on the various applicants.
The competition was postponed from 1976, to allow for the Annan Committee, set up on 1974, to make its report on the future of broadcasting.
The results were fairly similar to 1967: two summary executions and one piece of major surgery.
After 20 years or more, Southern TV and Westward had both become vulnerable, but for different reasons.
Southern's absentee landlordism (the 25 per cent holding of D C Thomson of Dundee) was a continuing embarrassment to the regional principle, and the company's programme policy lacked freshness and a clear regional emphasis.
S even or eight serious and strong competitors came forward, and the group headed by former broadcaster and Labour MP, Lord Boston, was successful.
Westward had recently been the scene of a public boardroom row that could have come out of a TV series.
Again, it was not well placed to withstand the competition.
The major surgery was done to ATV in the Midlands.
The IBA decided to make this a ‘dual region’, with a new centre in Nottingham to balance Birmingham.
This involved closing ATV's London base.
The IBA hoped to raise half the capital for a new company from Midlands money, with ATV providing the rest.
This plan failed on two counts.
First, Lord Grade sold ATV to the Australian financier Robert Holmes à Court; second, the 49 per cent of ‘Midlands’ shares were bought by D C Thomson (who thus made up for losing Southern), the betting company Ladbrokes and the printing and publishing interests of Robert Maxwell.
Holmes à Court was obliged by the law against foreign control of ITV to sell his shares, which passed to Sears, a conglomerate including footwear and the William Hill betting shops.
An extra novelty in the 1980 — 1 franchise competition was the new breakfast time contract.
Again events followed a familiar path.
Eight groups applied.
The IBA was deeply impressed by the star-studded consortium with highfalutin public service plans.
Peter Jay, former Treasury civil servant,Times economics editor, broadcaster and Ambassador to the USA, provided intellectual thrust; Robert Kee, current affairs experience in depth; David Frost, showbiz contacts; and former ITN news reader Anna Ford, glamour.
The company made a disastrous start in February 1983 and found profitability only when it went down market under new management and ownership (partly Australian).
Much more exciting was the launch of Channel 4 in November 1982.
Its origins were a combination of expediency and of arguments derived from the public service rhetorical tradition.
ITV had assumed ever since the third channel was given to the BBC after Pilkington (as BBC2), that the fourth channel would come to ITV, on the principle of ‘fair-dos’ and to preserve the balance of the duopoly.
Conservative governments were predisposed in that direction.
Labour governments leant more sympathetically towards ideas (of which there could be endless variations) for some kind of ‘Open Broadcasting Authority’ to use the Annan Committee's phrase.
The point of this would be to escape the duopoly and some of the rigidity of the franchise system.
In practical terms, programme makers increasingly fretted that, in a system now producing many hours of television, it was virtually impossible to work independently of the BBC or an ITV company.
On the public service plane, there was a persuasive case that the duopoly was struc-turally and financially biased towards the common denominators of society and culture, even if not the lowest denominators.
Where ITV met the needs of regions viewed as ‘minorities, within the nation, the fourth channel should be a national service, but serving social and cultural minorities: blacks, feminists, philosophers, gays, American football fanatics, and
The outcome was determined eventually by the accident of which party was in power.
It happened to be the Conservatives, with an accomplished fixer, William Whitelaw, as responsible Minister.
Channel 4 emerged as a company wholly owned by the IBA, with directors serving a limited term.
Its function was to commission and buy programmes from independents and the franchise companies, not to make them itself.
News was supplied by ITN.
Finance was provided by the ITV companies as a ‘subscription’, and the companies raised it by setting the advertising time on Channel 4 in their own regions.
The channel thus had financial security without either public subsidy or the need to bow to the ratings.
In Wales, a separate fourth channel authority operated on similar lines, producing the channel S4C.
A deliberately experimental service, designed to seek small, specialized and neglected audiences, was a recipe guaranteed to make mistakes.
Channel 4 did so, with early programmes attracting audiences too low to register on the ratings.
With the help of a few sure-fire successes brought over from ITV, it gradually established itself, though still subsidized by the sub-scriptions.
By 1990 it had gone through the familiar process: what started as a compromising fudge had been rationalized as yet another creative act of policy, fitting in with its unique character to a harmonious pattern of public service broadcasting.
The changes in ownership by salvage operation between franchise rounds have already been mentioned.
There might have been more of these.
ITV was unavoidably vulnerable to the impact of economic recessions upon advertising revenue (for instance, revenue fell by 12 per cent in real terms in 1969 — 70).
Its ability to respond was limited by the IBA's programme requirements.
One of the sharpest recessions came a few years after the Conservative government, sensitive to the enormous profits made in earlier years, had imposed (in 1963) a variable levy rising to 45 per cent on the companies' advertising revenue (as distinct from their profits).
The position of one second tier company, Tyne-Tees, was so weak that to save costs it ‘affiliated’ with the network company Yorkshire TV within a joint holding company, Trident.
The ITA gave consent, only reluctantly, in view of the statutory rule forbidding ownership of more than one franchise company.
A major factor in  the decision was that one of the new UHF transmitters introduced in the switch from VHF overlapped both companies' areas.
Tyne-Tees, as the smaller enterprise, feared it would lose out.
Both companies transferred their capital to Trident and received interest in proportion to their original holdings.
The IBA insisted that each company continue with their separate programme responsibilities.
In 1980 the Authority brought the arrangement to an end.
In a rather different example from the same period, Scottish TV was so short of cash by February 1970 that it could not pay its ITA rental, nor the levy, nor its bills, nor get further credit from the bank.
The ITA saved it by postponement of sums due.
HTV, too, blamed the levy for its problems, though expenditure also played a part.
The Labour government eased the position by reducing the levy.
Governments could vary the levy at will, and it remained a permanent part of the system of ITV finance.
In 1974, it was changed to a levy on profits (later net of Channel 4 costs).
The history of TV until 1990, then, was one of growth and diversification, if not always in the ways intended either by regulators or companies and channels.
It took place entirely within the strict limits of ‘terrestrial’ transmission.
One of the ways — perhaps the chief one — in which 1945 — 90 did indeed make a distinct period was that in 1990 those limits were about to be stretched by the provision of satellite services.
Rupert Murdoch's Sky channel started first.
The BSB consortium followed some months later, in April 1990.
Even though their losses forced them to merge before the end of the year, the assumptions on which TV had been organized could never be quite the same again.
CONCENTRATION, CONGLOMERATION, INTERNATIONALIZATION
Concentration, conglomeration and internationalization — cumbersome words for complex processes — attracted increasing attention in the 1980s.
Media of all kinds seemed more and more to be under the control of a few large international corporations, headed by brusque individualists and outsize personalities such as Robert Maxwell and Rupert Murdoch, who were natural heirs, perhaps, to the Beaverbrooks and Kemsleys.
This development was undoubtedly happening; but it is important to be clear exactly which features were different from the immediate post-war years and which continued as before.
These distinctions are especially important since the development is easier to illustrate in broad terms than to measure precisely.
Media concentration, conglomeration, and internationalization long preceded 1945.
Concentration is normally measured by number of newspaper titles (or radio stations, and so on) or market share.
Northcliffe had a bigger share of Fleet Street morning circulation in 1910 (39 per cent) than Murdoch in 1989 (35 per cent ) and the same number of titles (three)(Negrine, 1989, p. 72).
Foreign ownership goes back just as far, in the sense that individuals such as Waldorf Astor and Max Aitken (Lord Beaverbrook) used foreign capital to buy into the English press.
Some inter-war newspaper firms were already conglomerates, too, through diversification into allied  businesses such as newsprint production.
Associated Newspapers (Daily Maid controlled the Anglo-Newfoundland Development Company, which owned land, railways, shipping and mines, as well as paper mills.
Odhams (Daily Herald and magazines) was primarily a printing business.
The Cadbury (News Chronicle ) fortunes were based in cocoa.
Like so many other newspaper owners, the Cadburys had been businessmen first and press magnates later — through involvement with party politics.
In the cinema, another growth medium inter-war, Hollywood money so dominated British film production that the government introduced protectionist policies.
The distinctive features of concentration, conglomeration and internationalization as they developed into the 1980s can perhaps be described as their scope, scale, management, balance and volatility .
The expansion of new media (and new forms of old media) was obviously a major cause.
The growth of ITV, transistor radios and Walkmans, LPs, CDs, audio tapes and VCRs, even free sheets, tended to follow familiar economic patterns.
Unless, like ITV, they were regulated, competition and economies of scale gradually reduced the number of sup-pliers and increased market share.
More media, equally, meant more scope for conglomeration — horizontally, at local, regional or national level, and vertically between all three.
A ‘media conglomerate’ in 1945 was largely print-based, perhaps with unrealized property assets and some ‘trade investments’in subsidiary businesses, such as paper.
The arrival of ITV in 1955 transformed the situation, acting as a focal point for previously unconnected interests.
By 1990 the conglomerates thus had a much wider range.
The post-war economic recovery and continued growth, added to the new media, meant that the scale of media enterprises grew both absolutely and as a proportion of the whole economy.
By the late 1980s, the largest organizations were likely to operate most efficiently if they did so at an international level, raising capital internationally and supplying international markets.
Overseas tycoons, too, such as the Australians Robert Holmes à Court and Alan Bond, saw British firms as a good base in which to expand outside their own domestic market.
Those trends saw the eclipse of the old style media baron.
The typical baron in 1945 still owned the majority of shares in his company, perhaps in common with his family.
But bigger enterprises and conglomerates increasingly overstretched them.
Murdoch and, especially, Maxwell looked and sounded like Northcliffe and Beaverbrook, but the looks deceived.
Two events in the 1960s symbolize the shift.
One was the peremptory sacking of Cecil King in 1968 by the Mirror Group board, of which he was chairman.
He had behaved like his authoritarian uncle Northcliffe but, as we have seen, without actually owning the paper he managed.
Northcliffe could not be sacked; King could.
The second was a modest change of name by the Fleet Street trade association, the NPA, at about the same time.
Formerly the Newspaper Proprietors Association, it now became the Newspaper Publishers Association, marking a shift from member groups dominated by a single proprietor to corporations managed on more orthodox commercial lines and with a wide range of finance.
Maxwell and Murdoch were no doubt entrenched in their organizations by the complexities of cross-holdings and foreign-registered companies, but their personal holdings were proportionately small, particularly in comparison with their predecessors.
The funds they manipulated were substantially other people's.
As we saw, Murdoch was able to control LWT in 1971 with initially just 7.5 per cent of the voting shares.
One other change of balance should be noted.
This is the rough distinction between non-media conglomerates with a media side-interest and, in contrast, media conglomerates that diversified outwards.
This distinction reflects the mixture of accident and design by which they grew.
The old newspaper conglomerates of national and provincial daily, Sunday, weekly and periodical publications had an obvious logic, which extended to the acquisition of printing plant and paper mills.
Cinema chains and film production made an equally obvious pair.
So, in one way or another, did the various combinations participating in the original ITV finances.
Even after they had ceased to be largely print-based, most conglomerates up until the 1970s remained primarily media  organizations.
ITV companies were bound to diversify because they were banned from holding more than one franchise.
Newspapers had to bear in mind restrictions the Monopolies Commission could impose (though this proved a feeble weapon, as Murdoch's accumulation of titles showed).
Their ITV holdings were progressively restricted by IBA policy.
So they diversified abroad, or into specialized publishing and books, recorded music, radio and leisure activities.
From the 1970s, the balance shifted.
Media conglomerates diversified further away, and non-media conglomerates moved into media.
Either way, the non-media element of organizations controlling media increased.
As the Press Commission put it in 1977 (p. 149), ‘Rather than saying that the press has other business interests, it would be truer to argue that the press has become a subsidiary of other interests’.
The Thomson organization was an early example of movement outwards.
Indeed, it illustrates very clearly all three features of concentration, conglomeration and internationalization.
Roy Thomson assembled from nothing a chain of small-town papers and radio stations in Canada.
The Scotsman , when he bought it in 1954, was the first significant British daily (Fleet Street included) to go into international ownership.
His purchase of the Kemsley newspaper chain was a step in the overall process of press concentration and gave him a Fleet Street prize,The Sunday Times .
His business methods, including the boosting of small ads and telephone sales, reflected North American management styles.
His successful enthusiasm for Scottish TV made the business a media conglomerate, as did the acquisition of book publishers, magazines and the contract for Yellow Pages (another American invention).
Purchase of The Times itself in 1966 was a culmination, and a further move towards concentration.
The success of the TV and press interests (including papers now far from the North American base, in West Africa for instance) led him to diversify, taking an important stake in North Sea oil.
(Associated Newspapers did the same, and both groups thereby had a useful cushion when the oil price rises and economic crises of the early 1970s saw newsprint prices quadruple.)
He diversified too into the booming package  holiday and travel business and by 1989 was the UK's biggest tour operator.
Increasingly, his business became a non-media conglomerate.
The later Thomson story illustrates also the volatility of the conglomerate in the 1980s.
Companies chopped and changed their holdings, for reasons that might have little to do with the specific nature of the businesses involved.
Thomson's son poured so much money into The Times in the vain effort to modernize it in the late 1970s that no one could blame him for wanting to sell it.
But when he did so (with The Sunday Times ) to Murdoch in 1981, the reason in fact was the wider international strategy of the organization.
The North American interests were paramount (with headquarters in Toronto), con-centrating on newspapers, books, data and information systems, travel and oil.
The regional UK press interests, and the travel and oil, still made sense, but The Times did not.
The Scottish TV holdings, too, were a thing of the past.
A similar if less conspicuous story might be told of the Reed conglomerate.
Until the 1960s, this was a paper-making company in which the Mirror Group (IPC) held 44 per cent of the shares as a somnolent investment.
Under the expansionist management of Don Ryder (a former financial journalist whose later success took him, inevitably it might seem, to the House of Lords) the company diversified — into wallpaper products for example, By 1971, Reed had outgrown its parent company, which it proceeded to take over.
The Mirror thus passed form owning to being owned by a non-newspaper interest.
In the 1970s and 1980s Reed changed a lot.
Early on, it sold its 21 per cent holding in ATV.
In 1984, it sold the Mirror titles themselves, giving Robert Maxwell his long sought Fleet Street base; and it entered the 1990s essentially as an international paper, packaging and publishing conglomerate — the fifth or sixth largest publishing empire in the world.
It was especially strong in business and consumer magazines, with well known titles such as Woman's Own, Country Life and New Scientist , book-publishing mini-conglomerates such as Octopus, and business publications in Europe and North America.
The movement of non-media conglomerates into media has  a more random appearance — a different kind of logic — than the diversification by Thomson and Reed (and Reed's movement back again).
Earliest into the national newspaper market after 1945 was the Pearson group, previously interested only in a regional newspaper chain (Westminster Press).
This had developed from a side-interest of the original Weetman Pearson (Lord Cowdray), a civil engineer and Liberal activist before and after the First World War.
The main Pearson interests remained in international banking, property and business.
When they bought The Financial Times in 1957, the Pearsons started to expand further into media.
They bought a half-share of The Economist , Penguin Books, the Longman publishing group and other familiar book imprints (including Michael Joseph, Hamish Hamilton, Sphere, Ladybird and Pitman).
They expanded their financial and business magazines.
They took a stake in the BSB satellite company.
Their non-media businesses included startling acquisitions such as the prestige Chateau Latour vineyard and the Royal Doulton china business.
Behind all this lay the American, British and continental European bank interests, such as Lazard's.
A good later example of a non-media conglomerate moving into the press for non-media reasons is the Trafalgar House purchase of Beaverbrook Newspapers in 1978.
Trafalgar was chiefly a property group, with hotel and travel interests and civil engineers such as Trollope and Colls.
Its first links with Beaverbrook came through refurbishing the Express building in Fleet Street.
The Beaverbrook papers were in financial trouble, and Trafalgar beat the competition to buy them, with its main interest being the asset value of the group's properties.
The vice-chairman, a self-made businessman, Victor Matthews, gave every appearance of enjoying the role of press tycoon and duly entered the House of Lords after the return of a Conservative government.
Trafalgar moved out of the press again when they sold their titles to United Newspapers in 1985.
This was unusual but not unique.
The Observer , for instance, spent six years in the ownership of the Atlantic Richfield oil company of California.
This was the result of a chance encounter in 1975, When the  Astor ownership was frantically trying to fight control passing to Murdoch or the Daily Mail .
Similarly Sir James Goldsmith, whose fortunes were in the food industry, started a weekly news magazine,Now , in 1979, after failing to purchase a suitable established title.
The magazine folded two years later and Goldsmith's attention turned elsewhere.
Another important non-media group with media interests at the end of the 1980s was ‘Tiny’ Rowland's conglomerate Lonrho.
Its name (from ‘London’ and ‘Rhodesia’) reflected its origins as a Central African trading company.
Rowland, as has previously been indicated, was the kind of entrepreneur to attract adjectives like ‘maverick’.
His interest in media started as a by-product of buying the House of Fraser, initially a large department stores group built up by a nationalistic Scot, Lord Fraser of Annandale.
Fraser had bought control of Scottish press and publishing interests, such as the Glasgow Herald and Evening Times publishers George Outram, specifically in order to prevent them being bought by the Canadian Roy Thomson.
Lonrho's media interests grew, most prominently with its purchase of The Observer from ARCO in 1981 and its rescue operation for Eddie Shah's Today , which it quickly sold on.
Rowland used The Observer to fight non-media battles, notably over control of the Harrods store, which at one time had been part of the House of Fraser group.
With the Scottish interests had come a stake in Border TV, which Lonrho kept.
Overall, its media business was a small part of the whole enterprise.
British Electric Traction was another conglomerate which, as its name implies, moved into media from outside.
Its regional press and magazine holdings went back some time but were not large enough to qualify it as a media company.
By the late 1980s, however, its 28 per cent share of Thames TV and 13 per cent share of the Capital Radio ILR combine certainly qualified it.
In the late 1980s, too, the Australians Alan Bond and Robert Holmes à Court (neither Australian-born) started to expand into British media.
So did the Canadian financier Conrad Black.
In 1982 Holmes à Court captured Lew Grade's ACC organization, which owned half of ATV and a variety of film, cinema, theatre and music interests.
Grade had overstretched himself and lost money heavily on box office flops such as Raise the Titanic and biblical epics.
Bond came later, from a base initially in real estate and classic Australian beer and mining companies.
But as the 1980s ended, his empire was dis-integrating — partly as a result of the 1987 stock market crash — and the future of his 15 per cent holding in the BSB satellite channel looked doubtful.
Black, in contrast, had a solid base in Toronto, both in media and other enterprises, and seemed likely to expand his UK interests beyond the Telegraph titles.
Neither Maxwell nor Murdoch, so prominent in the last twenty years of the period, fits the simple pattern of a non-media organization moving in or a media one moving out.
Instead they illustrate better the shifting balance within conglomerates between one media interest and another and secondly, the trend toward internationalization.
At first Murdoch followed the Thomson path: no-nonsense colonial boy muscles into sleepy British business and starts raising the dust.
After a tough takeover battle for the News of the World in 1968, financed by the profits of his Australian papers, Murdoch invigorated and streamlined the management, sold off various marginal activities (including Walton Heath Golf Course, allegedly purchased by the paper's one-time proprietor so that he could get to play golf there with Lloyd George, a member) and quickly bought the Sun .
The move into LWT followed; then The Times Newspapers saga and late refinements like the boosting of Today .
Murdoch's international side was symbolized by his vanishing sense of nationality.
In person and style, he remained the down-to-earth Australian, caustic about the class-ridden antique snobberies of the ‘poms’.
Periodically he returned to his Australian roots, but for long periods he worked in the UK.
Suddenly, however, he turned into an American citizen, a necessary formality if his expanding US empire was to remain legally his.
From the 1970s on, he expanded first into US newspapers (the New York Post , for example) and then into film  and TV, buying control of Metromedia and Twentieth Century Fox (whose massive film archive could feed his TV channels).
He entered the 1990s gambling on the long term success of his satellite TV channel, Sky, and his plans to build a fourth US national TV network.
In 1989, too, he took control of the publishing conglomerate Collins in a bitter takeover battle, thereby acquiring a string of familiar imprints such as Fontana and Granada Books.
He was also an important shareholder in the international news agency turned information business, Reuters.
Murdoch retained some non-media interests, such as a share of the TNT trucking business.
This was a key element in the reorganization of newspaper distribution, associated with the transfer to Wapping and the battle against the ‘old technology’.
But his was largely a media conglomerate: the prime example of those distinctive features listed earlier: large in scope and scale, with modern management and a shifting and volatile balance of interests.
The volatility was exemplified in 1989 by his 20 per cent holding in the Pearson Group, which might have been the basis of a takeover bid.
It was shown in a different way by sales forced on Murdoch by US and Australian cross-ownership laws.
In 1987 new Australian laws forced him to sell his Australian TV stations.
In the USA, the Fox purchase, which included seven TV stations, obliged him to sell his New York and Chicago papers that circulated in those franchise areas.
The balance of Maxwell's group was rather different, with origins in printing and in magazine and trade publishing.
Maxwell came quite late to newspapers, though not for want of trying: in 1968, for instance, he was a loser in the battle for the News of the World .
The Mirror titles made him a Fleet Street figure to match his other interests.
These included 20 per cent of Central TV and 15 per cent of Border; a cable station; and 25 per cent of a satellite music station, MTV.
Overseas, he controlled the US publishing firm Macmillan, 10 per cent of a French TV channel; and non-media interests world wide.
Maxwell's own nationality symbolized, again, the international  quality of his outlook.
Despite an English-sounding name, he was born in central Europe and fought with distinction for the British in the Second World War.
In the media jungle, Murdoch and Maxwell grew to be elephants.
Over the period since 1945 as a whole, other beasts proved mammoths — of elephantine size but doomed to extinction.
The Kemsley press empire was sold up.
So, in turn, were groups such as Beaverbrook, with the Telegraph being the last.
Companies at the core of TV groups, such as Rediffusion, lost their franchises.
Film and cinema groups declined or were broken up.
Newcomers picked over the bones.
In addition to the conglomerates already discussed, several press groups grew substantially.
United Newspapers developed from a modest regional grouping to Fleet Street prominence, latterly under the leadership of Lord Stevens.
United bought the Express papers when Trafalgar tired of them.
By 1990 they controlled eight regional daily papers, nearly one hundred weeklies, and two large magazine and directory publishers — Benn Brothers and Morgan Grampian.
They also owned Punch and the financial information agency Exchange Telegraph (Extel), formerly a traditional news agency.
EMAP (East Midlands and Allied Press) grew in a similar manner but without any national titles.
So did Iliffe, from its Birmingham Post base.
Outside the press, groups developed in the 1970s and 1980s from several directions.
W.H. Smith, originally a nineteenth-century distributor, wholesaler and retailer, moved into TV (25 per cent of Yorkshire TV) and satellite TV services.
Its book publishing activities expanded too.
Thorn, formerly a manufacturer of electrical equipment, radio and TV sets, acquired the much larger EMI, long established as a major international recorded music, film and TV industry.
Equally, names that no one had heard of emerged as important groupings.
Richard Branson's Virgin Records, for instance, grew and diversified, including a successful foray into cheap transatlantic flights.
Crown Communications, owner of LBC, became one of the two large ILR conglomerates.
It had interests also in computer graphics, TV and business film production and  services.
In 1989 it was the first British company to take a significant stake in French commercial radio.
Carlton Communications came from a broadly similar direction but with even more spectacular growth.
Pre-tax profits more than quadrupled from £5 million to over £20 million from 1984 — 5 to 1987 — 8.
Michael Green, its creator, built it up from a small photo-processing company.
After 15 years, this took off when, in 1982, Green moved into video production and copying, hire of TV studios and facilities, and technical electronic services such as digital effects.
He was a major beneficiary of the video boom and used his profits to diversify and expand abroad.
His attempt to buy into ITV by taking over their share of Thames TV from BET and Thorn EMI was vetoed in 1985 by the IBA, which wanted a broader rather than narrower range of owners.
Green had to settle, temporarily perhaps, for 20 per cent of Central TV, which he bought from the betting group Ladbroke in 1987.
An account of the growth of international media conglomeration risks piling example on extravagant example, while the question, ‘so what?’ gets ignored.
That question goes straight to the issues of media accountability raised in the introduction.
At this stage, the point to emphasize is the relevance of conglomeration to the very notion itself of ‘media’.
The conglomerates were commercial organizations.
A few had a technical coherence: they were entirely press, or entirely electronic.
Most did not.
Where was their economic and func-tional coherence, beyond the simple claim that they served a market?
Mostly, they were a product of the energy and inclination of their individual barons and of the sequence of expansionist opportunities those men had made or seized.
With concentration, conglomeration and internationalization the issues of power and accountability became substantially more difficult, in both principle and practice.
CONTENT AND AUDIENCES
Continuities
ITV researchers asked people in 1978 which of nine topics they thought should get more coverage, or less, in TV news and documentaries.
Industrial news, Northern Ireland, immigrants' affairs?
Yes, those were very important.
So would they personally like to watch more about them?
Well, as a matter of fact, no.
The poll found a clear difference between what people thought should be available and what they personally wanted to watch.
That example shows as well as any the complicated relation between what is available in media, which bits people use, how much, what for, and with what satisfaction.
The complexity is natural, given the prominence of media in daily life.
Analysts, particularly in the advertising world, ceaselessly try to unravel it, to help clients sell their products in the best markets.
The issues are even more complicated if, as in this book, one is exploring developments through time and comparing different media.
There is also the great puzzle, which is central to arguments over media power and accountability, about the direction of influence.
How far have media contents followed audience taste and how far created it?
The larger a programme's audience or a paper's readership, the more likely it seems that the content must in general be enjoyed, else why the large audience?
Equally, though, taste in many subjects, such as fashion (clothes, design, music) also follows media.
This chapter can be no more than a combination of large generalizations and small examples, maybe unrepresentative.
To start with, we may note certain obvious and important continuities of content and audience between 1945 and 1990.
Advertising , first, was crucial in various ways.
For instance, it kept down the direct cost of media to the consumer.
National daily papers got nearly half their revenue from advertising in 1970 and two-fifths in 1990.
Provincial dailies got 60 per cent or more, and weekly papers 80 per cent, at both dates.
For free sheets, of course, the direct cost to the reader was nil; and for ITV programmes, the viewer paid directly for the cost only of a TV set and electricity.
Advertising made media cheap.
On the other hand, one of the consequences of advertising finance was its strong impact on media contents.
From the start, ITV programme scheduling was almost entirely determined, apart from the IBA's requirements, by the need to get advertising revenue (in its early years, one-quarter of ITV's money came simply from the great washing-powder war).
The time, length, casting and sequence of programmes were all liable to be affected.
The shape of programme, audience and advertiser all had to coincide.
One simple factor played a major part in the calculations: time of day.
Audience size (on radio too) was primarily determined by when a programme was broadcast.
Peak-time, between roughly 6.00 pm and 10.00 pm, was the key to scheduling.
The BBC never had to fit audiences to advertisers, but from 1955 it was in competition for its audiences with ITV.
So a twice-weekly soap opera such as EastEnders , which started in February 1985, was as carefully researched as any commercial programme.
It was the first BBC soap since Z Cars and Compact in the 1960s.
Soaps, audience research had long shown, were not the kind of programme the public associated with the BBC.
The idea for this one was proposed in 1981, specifically to boost the early evening weekday audience and help to build it for the rest of the evening.
From telephone surveys and detailed representative group discussions, the planners developed the programme's shape — the neighbourhood, story line, characters — and launched it successfully four years later.
After its first year it had the widest appeal of any soap opera.
Many viewers were ‘structuring their lives round it’ and spoke of the characters as if they knew them well (BBC, 1986).
The early evening audience gap between BBC1 and ITV fell from 20 per cent to less than 10 per cent.
In the launch of EastEnders , did content follow audience taste, or audience follow content?
Clearly, there was a bit of both.
The example gives a glimpse too of the intricacies of scheduling and of the competition for audiences even when revenue was not directly a factor.
For the press, the importance of advertising can hardly be overstated, though it was often indirect.
It helped to start whole categories of publication, such as free sheets, Sunday paper colour magazines, and successive speciality magazines (yachting, autos, DIY, computing).
Lack of advertising finished others, such as the illustrated weeklies Picture Post, Everybody's and Illustrated .
Advertising revenue helped shape national dailies — literally, by justifying the switch to a smaller tabloid format in which a ‘full page’ consumed less paper without a proportional decrease in revenue earned.
It forced the closure of particular titles — the News Chronicle, Daily Herald and many other national and provincial papers with millions of satisfied readers.
Once paper rationing ended in 1956, the size of papers swelled and slumped as fluctuations in advertising revenue paid for more or fewer pages.
Within a paper, it influenced the space for different subjects.
The big financial sections in the dailies owed more to the growth of appropriate advertising in the 1960s than to a surge of reader interest.
What was very difficult to prove — but was much suspected, especially in the late 1940s, at the time of the first Press Commission — was that advertisers used their leverage to get favourable coverage and dampen criticism.
Crude threats to withdraw advertising might at any time have been counter-productive.
The Observer and Guardian were popularly believed to have lost revenue because of their opposition to the Eden government's Suez policy at the end of 1956, but other such cases are difficult to find.
The Distillers' Company, makers of  the deforming drug thalidomide, withdrew their advertising from The Sunday Times , in which they were currently the largest advertiser, when The Sunday Times began its campaign in 1972 for better compensation for the drug's victims.
This was presumably more in protest than in expectation that the campaign would be stopped (Evans, 1983, p. 93).
Easier game for advertisers were feature subjects such as motoring, travel and holidays, where the latest models and resorts were hyped throughout the 1960s and 1970s.
In those years, too, ‘special supplements’ became common among national dailies, in which articles about the special subject sat side by side with advertising matter.
In the provincial press, and especially the local weeklies, it is more difficult to believe that direct influence was rare.
Would a local weekly, for example, launch an attack on the estate agency business or the standards of the second-hand car trade?
The local press tended to be bland, and ‘stirring things up’, even in the angry years of the late 1960s, was the preserve of ‘alternative’ community newspapers.
The fear of direct influence by advertisers on programme content was one of the main planks in the opposition to ITV.
Blood pressures rose at reports that US TV film of the Coronation in 1953 had been punctuated by ads featuring a chim-panzee, J Fred Muggs.
The ITA was given tight control over the number, duration, placing and content of TV ads, which for most of the period were limited to an average of six minutes an hour.
Sponsorship was excluded.
Political parties, religious organizations, charities and various commercial products were banned altogether.
So, from 1965, by a government directive, were cigarettes.
Most of that was straightforward.
Since ITV had the TV monopoly of advertising and ‘editorializing’ was not allowed, few anxieties surfaced about advertisers' influence on programmes.
The Pilkington Committee was more concerned, for example, with the fifteen-minute programmes known as ‘admags’.
In these, well known actors and comedians plugged a variety of goods in the familiar setting of a shop or pub.
They had a deliberate soap opera quality.
One,Jim's Inn , became so  popular that its cast produced an LP.
Pilkington disliked the impression conveyed that these friendly personalities just happened to be recommending products as though they were disinterested parties.
The programmes were banned by the government in 1963.
The difficult problems came, both for the IBA and for the BBC, from the growth of indirect sponsorship.
From the 1970s onward equestrians leaped improbable heights at Wembley on mounts more likely called Sanyo Music Centre or Everest Double Glazing than Foxhunter or Dobbin.
Cricket boundaries were ringed with advertising boards.
Grand prix motor cars were painted up like buses to advertise cigarettes and even contraceptives.
Sports sponsorship was the indirect way in to TV advertising.
A final point about advertising revenue — and of major importance — was that media to some extent competed for it between as well as among themselves.
As a proportion of national consumer expenditure, advertising more than doubled between 1945 and 1990, so they competed for a growing purse.
But not all TV's advertising was ‘new’ expenditure.
As Table 6.1 shows, the national press kept a remarkably steady share, in the region of 16 — 19 per cent.
It was the magazine and provincial press sectors that suffered most, as TV's share wobbled upwards from 1 per cent in 1955 to 33 per cent in 1986.
Other ‘continuities’ from 1945 to 1990 are more briefly stated.
The division of the national press into ‘quality’ and ‘popular’papers was one of content as well as circulation, and it was itself largely a result of the higher advertising rates chargeable by the papers with readers who had more money to spend (not necessarily their own).
In content, the difference was in range and detail, as well as in the proportions of the various subjects.
Thus the ‘qualities’ covered a wider range of sports but gave them proportionately much less space overall than the populars.
With foreign news the populars did less well on both counts.
Such differences became even sharper with the contraction of the popular broadsheet papers after the death of the Daily Herald and News Chronicle .
The quality — popular distinction reflected also the character-istically English divisions of social class in newspaper readership.
Throughout the period, each paper was read by two or more people in addition to its purchaser, depending on the definition of ‘read’.
This contributed also to persistent readership duplication , with the average middle-class reader in the 1960s still reading about 1.25 national dailies.
There was also much overlap between the nationals and the provincial mornings and evenings.
Divisions of social class were less sharp than the size and format differences of the quality and popular papers.
Until the decline of the ‘middle market’ broadsheets (Daily Express, Daily Mail , and so on), readership and social class matched quite tidily.
In 1966, for instance, the class distribution of Daily Express and Daily Mail readers, the two dominant middle market papers, with nearly two-fifths of the total readership, reflected very closely the class distribution of the population as a whole (see Table 6.2).
The quality broadsheets were heavily skewed towards the wealthier social classes with more formal education, and the tabloids were skewed in the other direction.
Readership duplication and the extremes of circulation size add a surprising twist to these class divisions.
Far more AB (upper middle class) people read the Daily Mirror than The Times or Guardian even though they were a tiny proportion of the total Mirror readership.
Similar comments could be made about the national Sunday press.
Further differences between individual papers and periods can be seen in Table 6.3.
In general, there is no doubt that through the entire post-war period the readership of the national press reflected divisions of social class and education more distinctly than anything else — age, gender, religion, political attitude and so on .
In discussions about ‘choice’, for instance, it would thus have been unrealistic to think of the number of alternative daily papers as growing from nine in 1945 to twelve in 1990.
The well educated and well to do AB readers, 12 — 17 per cent of the population, were most likely to choose among some half a dozen papers.
The much larger group of semi- or unskilled working class DE readers, 33 per cent of the population, plumped overwhelming for three or four.
Class differences also affected TV-watching.
From 1955  onwards, working class people tended to watch more ITV programmes and middle class people more BBC.
Similarly working class audiences were the heaviest listeners to BBC Radio 1 and 2 and ILR stations, and middle class listeners made up two-thirds of the audience for BBC Radio 3 and 4.
A different kind of continuity was in the nature of news .
There is no reason to suppose people were interested by different kinds of things in 1945 than in 1990 — or 1890, for that matter.
Sex, crime and sport were staples of the nineteenth century.
Academic studies have confirmed the obvious: events make news if they are clear, unusual, unexpected or unpredict-able; if they fit a medium's cycle (a daily paper, for example, or an hourly news bulletin); if they involve well known people or groups, places or countries; if they are close to home (literally or figuratively); if they are negative (accidents) or reach a certain volume (in terms of numbers hurt, for example , or goals scored).
In competing for readers, papers supplied not contrasting contents but remarkably similar ones.
As in other kinds of market, the trick in increasing market share was to supply a product slightly different from the one with which a customer was satisfied.
Thus although news executives continued to  value ‘scoops’, Tunstall found in the 1970s that among journalists themselves, it was more important not to come last with the news than to be first with it (Tunstall, 1971).
Similarly, Murdoch's Sun in 1970 was a close copy of the Daily Mirror , whose readers he sought to poach.
Matthews' new Star was in turn a close copy of the Sun in 1978.
Overall, as the 1974 Press Commission observed, newspapers stuck to the same basic ‘components’, such as editorials, letters, sports and ‘personalities’(McQuail, 1977, p. 3 1).
Radio and TV did not change those news values.
Early worries that picture availability would make a story newsworthy in itself on TV did not persist.
What changed, obviously, were the people and events that met the criteria as the years passed.
Moreover, TV and radio were not primarily news media, judged simply by the proportions of their output.
They were increasingly good at breaking news fast, but their coverage was only a fraction of the newspapers', even measuring just the peak hours.
The weight of TV output in practice was more comparable to the features content of the press.
Another way of looking at contents is by subject.
Here, too, the types of subject did not change dramatically , considered in broad categories.
The 1974 Press Commission noted a relative decline in the proportion of news in the national dailies between 1947 and 1975, but they attributed it to newsprint scarcity squeezing out features while rationing lasted.
With certain exceptions, such as an increase in sport and a decline in foreign coverage, the more specific categories did not vary greatly either.
In TV, the changes were greater (see below).
Difficulties of finding comparable data prevent detailed comparison of press contents from year to year.
Tables 6.4, 6.5 and 6.6, therefore, present a patchy and summary picture.
The pagination Table (6.4) gives a rough indication of national dailies' increase in size (new type faces and better ink eventually meant more words per page).
The heavier news emphasis in the quality papers and the picture content of the tabloids are clear in Table 6.5.
The news categories used by the 1947 Press Commission, which were followed for the 1975 analysis, were too general to show up many differences of detail, but are   recorded in Table 6.6.
The 1974 Press Commission studied samples of provincial papers too.
These generally had a larger proportion of advertising, and the higher the circulation, the greater was the amount of classified rather than display ads, which was the opposite of the nationals.
The amount of local news varied from one-third in metropolitan papers (Birmingham Post, Yorkshire Post ) to 60 per cent or more in East Anglia and the West Country.
At least one-quarter of the local news was sport, with crime and police stories the next largest.
Foreign news was 5 — 10 per cent.
The evening papers relied even more heavily on local news — from 60 to 75 per cent.
Tables can give some measure of quality — popular, broadsheet — tabloid and subject differences, but they are no help in other ways.
In the 1980s, for instance, colour became common  in the national press.
Earlier, the colour magazine supplement to The Sunday Times (1961) was a landmark in Sunday journalism.
(The Observer did not produce one until 1964.)
Large Sunday papers, boosted by Thomson's classified ads drive at The Sunday Times , led to sectionalization, on American lines.
It was adopted for some of the dailies too.
Changing contents
The changing character of journalism — a paper's distinctive ‘voice’— is more difficult both to discuss and convey.
Much has sometimes been made, for example, of the Daily Mirror's rapport with its working class readers in the post-war years — the press equivalent of a cloth cap image (the cartoon character ‘Andy Capp’, ironically, was introduced when the period was ending).
Under the instinctive guidance of Hugh Cudlipp and others, with well established features and columnists, the paper was an articulate tribune for a class interest: ‘Forward with the People!’ said the mast-head.
In the 1960s, long before its circulation dipped, that rapport had lessened, as the higher living standards and consumerist values of the ‘affluent society’ confused old certainties.
‘The people had gone forward,’ wrote Cudlipp.
‘The question was, how to keep them there’(Cudlipp, 1962, p. 122).
The Daily Express , in contrast, had been the authentic voice of middle class England in the same period.
In Arthur Christiansen it too had an inspirational editor and expert newspaper technician.
His office bulletins became a fount of Fleet Street lore (‘Always, always, tell the news through people,’ for example).
Editorially, the paper followed Lord Beaverbrook's idiosyncratic conservatism, but its columnists, cartoonists, sports commentators, share tipsters and foreign correspondents, all caught a mood of 1950s optimism.
It is not altogether fanciful to match moods to newspapers.
To some extent, one is simply following circulation bends.
While the Mirror and Express flourished, the Herald and its offspring Sun (pre-Murdoch) struggled, and the Mail lived in  the shadow of the Express .
On Sundays, the 1960s belonged to The Sunday Times .
With circulation built on war memoir serializ-ations, resources went into ‘investigative journalism’.
The other Sundays bounced in the wake.
On weekdays, the Guardian thrived in a decade of Labour government reformism, while The Times struggled to modernize.
In the 1970s, the Sun was the full-breasted leader.
Later, the tabloids vied for market share with the kind of sensationalism and cheque book journalism that were the despair of quality journalists.
The 1980s ended with the tabloids' confidence waning, and with the Sun's nudes moving to page five, perhaps to slip away for good.
Two further trends are worth including among such thumb-nail sketches.
In the quality press, first, the 1960s saw a great growth of specialization within public affairs journalism.
Political, diplomatic and industrial specialists already existed.
Not only did they multiply, with space now for reflection and analysis in addition to hard news, they were joined by education, economic, home affairs and social services correspondents, among others.
Specific ‘women's pages’ were started: in the Mail , it was a ‘Femail’section.
The trend also belatedly reflected the increased scope of government intervention in the economy.
The movement was not all one way.
Foreign correspondents, for instance, dropped sharply.
Papers relied increasingly on locally based stringers and news agencies.
The very large costs of keeping their own staffers in foreign capitals were no longer justifiable, when British interests were a relic of their former importance.
The decline of anonymity, outside the leader columns, is also worth noting.
Anonymity lasted until 1967 in The Times and for nearly as long in parts of the other quality papers.
With a byline, an article becomes personal.
How far the personality then intrudes and colours style and substance, is a matter of degree.
In a world of TV, anonymous journalism probably could not have survived: when we see a face, we want a name (besides, print journalists were needed as guests on TV current affairs shows).
At The Times , the change was signalled by the appointment as columnist of Bernard Levin, a writer whose highly distinctive voice, originally anonymous in the Spectator , could not ‘unnamed’ have stood regular exposure in a daily  paper.
Anonymity, like the uniforms of nurses, the police or soldiers, highlights the role, not the person performing it.
In journalism, it therefore bolstered the idea of objectivity in reporting the news.
Its disappearance fitted an era in which electronic media were taking over the ‘hot’ news role and papers were selling the personal expertise of their staff at interpretation, comment, analysis, more than for traditional hard news.
Other aspects of press content are best discussed in common with TV and radio.
First, TV itself needs attention.
Tables 6.7 and 6.8 summarize BBC and ITV programming at ten-yearly intervals.
(Differences of definition and compilation make comparisons highly unreliable).
The enormous increase in broadcast hours is easy enough to observe.
The BBC started in 1946 with an average of 28.5 hours a week, generally from 3.00 — 4.00/4.30 pm and 8.30 — 10.00 pm.
When ITV started, both channels were limited to 50 hours a week and not more than 8 on any one day.
There were ‘closed periods’ from 6.00 — 7.00 pm on weekdays, Sunday mornings, and from 6.15 — 7.30 pm on Sunday evenings.
These are a nice reminder of the anti-social intrusiveness attributed to the new medium (rather like Sunday lawn-mowing).
For the BBC, increased news did not mean more income.
The cost of filling BBC2's hours, one must remember, had to be met from increased licence fees (controlled by the government), marginal economies and earnings from co-productions and sales abroad, and increasingly from the larger fee charged for a colour licence.
Colour was introduced in 1967, on BBC2.
More hours did generally mean more advertising revenue for ITV, and the companies frequently pressed the government for expansion.
In 1972 restrictions were lifted.
ITV and BBC1 were both soon broadcasting some 13 hours a day (the main change being an extension of afternoon hours)— double the amount 20 years earlier.
Breakfast time TV and Channel 4 doubled them again, so that by the late 1980s each network was putting out 200 hours a week.
Viewers thus went from a choice of less than 30 hours a week in 1946 to more than 400 in the late 1980s.
By 1990 you could watch TV round the clock.
The programme categories in Tables 6.7 and 6.8 reflect the broadcasters' need to demonstrate that they were ‘informing, educating and entertaining’.
The tables give an idea also of the kind of programming that was practical in the early days.
‘Talks’ and ‘demonstrations’suggest the camera eavesdropping, as though in a lecture hall.
‘Newsreels’ copied the magazine style of the old cinema newsreels; they were not yet bulletins of latest news.
‘Outside broadcasts’ are reminders that for years TV was a cumbersome medium, happiest in the studio or on set piece occasions such as the Cup Final, which could be planned well in advance.
There were very few feature films, because of competition with the cinema.
Ten years on, more of the familiar categories were in place.
ITV's early schedules were dominated by ‘entertainment’.
‘Quiz shows with glittering prizes, fast-moving adventure series, drama series and soap operas and spectacular live variety, gave a new look to British TV,’ recalled one IBA executive (David Glencross, 1985).
The names resonate, even when their shelf life has finished:Take Your Pick, Double Your Money, Emergency Ward Ten, The Avengers, Coronation Street (still running in 1990),Sunday Night at the London Palladium .
The differences in BBC and IBA programme categories do not conceal the contrast in those years between the ‘serious’(equals ‘less popular’) scheduling of BBC TV and the ‘entertainment’(equals ‘popular’) bias of ITV.
In retrospect, ITV justified its programmes, blatantly at odds with the intention of the policy makers, as the price necessarily paid to get the new system running.
Certainly, as we have seen, it was no easy task, especially with a controlling body, the ITA, that was an Authority without as yet possessing authority.
The regional bias of the system, too, worked against coordination in the early days.
Nevertheless, these were years in which ITV helped TV as a whole to acquire the stigma of an ‘idiot box’.
In 1962 the Pilkington Committee slammed ITV.
Its criti-cisms could easily be dubbed ‘elitist’(not in fact a vogue word at that time), but they boiled down to the traditional media dilemma about how far people know what they ‘want’ until they have been shown choices beyond their existing experience.
From the persuasive pen of Committee member Richard Hoggart, himself a working class man who had seized the opportunities of formal education, the critique flowed power-filly.
The government not only gave the second TV channel to the BBC but slapped the excess profits levy onto ITV.
The levy reduced the profit-maximizing incentive (thereby encouraging companies such as Granada to diversify out of TV) and indirectly helped the ITA to enforce the Television Act's requirements of programme quality and balance.
The Authority's grip grew progressively firmer.
The result was a gradual convergence of programming between ITV and BBC.
From the 1970s, ITV executives would note with a mixture of exasperation and glee that highly popular — but also esteemed and award-winning — ITV series were frequently mistaken for BBC products.
Upstairs Downstairs, World at War, Edward VII (in the 1970s);Brideshead Revisited, Jewel in the Crown (1980s)— all were ITV programmes that set the elitists purring.
They went out, of course, alongside the likes of Op-portunity knocks, The Golden Shot, Crossroads and Emmerdale Farm .
By the 1980s the BBC too had Blankety-Blank and EastEnders .
But, even so, viewers in 1987 still perceived ITV as better at quiz and game shows, entertainment and variety, adventure and police series, comedy and feature films; while BBC was the network for talk and chat shows, plays, science and nature, drama, documentaries and sport.
Even allowing for some massaging of programmes into ‘serious’ categories, ITV's progressive seriousness saw a halving of its ‘entertainment’schedules.
‘Informative’ content was much boosted by the intrinsically serious nature of Channel 4.
Much earlier than that, however, an important part was played by the rise of news and current affairs.
BBC was traditionally strong in these areas (classic ‘public service broadcasting’ territory), but with the introduction of ITN's News at Ten on 3 July 1967, ITV broke new ground.
This was TV's first half-hour news bulletin, and something of which Pilkington could have been proud, since research had shown in 1966 that 83 per cent of viewers were perfectly content with the traditional fifteen minutes at 8.55 pm.
News at Ten quickly became so popular that the companies built their evening scheduling round it.
For TV news it was a symbolic moment.
The BBC extended its own 9.00 pm bulletin.
News was no longer an illustrated supplement to radio and newspapers.
Newscasters worked as journalists and interviewers, not just announcers.
Satellite transmission soon added im-mediacy and a much extended range of sources and material.
‘The news’ became less of a bulletin and more an integrated programme of ‘reporter packages’, capable of delivering large audiences in peaktime.
In due course, colour, electronic news-gathering (an ITV innovation) and computer graphics would also add to the service.
The growth of broadcasting hours made opportunities for lunchtime news in 1972 and an extended early evening news in 1976, with similar BBC expansion and a distinctive approach from Channel 4.
More and more people came to see TV as their prime source of news.
A second factor drawing BBC and ITV together was the advance of programme people — producers and editors — into senior management posts at ITV, superseding the ‘merchant venturer swashbucklers’ of the first phase.
The franchise changes of 1967/8 and 1980 confirmed this.
Some of the talent were home grown, but others, including Michael Peacock of LWT fame and Jeremy Isaacs of Thames and Channel 4, came across from the BBC, where programmes such as Tonight (founded in 1957) had been famous nurseries of talent.
ITV increasingly could pay better salaries too; but the movement, of course, went in both directions, and the 1980s ended with a Deputy Director-General of the BBC, John Birt recruited from LWT.
One of the main differences between BBC and ITV programming envisaged in 1955 was an ITV regional bias.
This was largely nullified by the almost immediate institution of the network system.
This, again, was justified by necessity.
The ITA was persuaded in 1956 that unless the four major companies had guaranteed access to a national market for so many hours a week, the whole system might fail.
In essence, each of the four agreed to contribute a quarter of the programmes and to show the three-quarters contributed by the  other three in its own region.
The smaller companies took (and paid for) the network programmes, and contributed a modest share, but they had no say in programming decisions.
The only ‘regional’ element in the arrangement was that three of the network companies (Granada, Central and Yorkshire) out of the five (since Yorkshire joined in 1968) had a base outside London; so that Granada's Coronation Street , say, had ‘authentic regional accents’(quite an innovation in their time) and escaped a metropolitan bias.
By 1985 the five network companies were producing 45.5 per cent of the ITV programmes, amounting to more than 40 peak or near-peak hours a week.
The 10 smaller companies produced 9.25 per cent for the network and 7.75 per cent for showing in their own regions, where the IBA required up to 7 hours a week of ‘local interest’.
These companies' contribution lent itself to comparatively inexpensive, specialized programmes, such as science and religion.
From the start Anglia specialized in drama and Southern in children's education (ahead of the BBC).
The network system evolved into a complex and allegedly acrimonious business of bargaining in weekly meetings of the five major companies and the IBA, under the umbrella organization of the Independent Television Companies Association.
The IBA's increasing concern for programme standards and balance, plus pressure from the smaller companies that rightly felt they had more and more production potential to offer, added to the complications.
Channel 4 eased the pressure for space, but also led to more programmes competing for it.
At length, in 1987, the small companies were given greater access to the network and the number of network hours was reduced by about a quarter.
Many other features of TV programming, obviously, could be pointed out.
Many of them would be as much a record of the times as of TV's part in them.
TV missed the end of Empire, except for little bits like the Argyll Highlanders' steamy evacuation from Aden in 1967, but it caught the Vietnam War, the Nigerian Civil War, and so much as it was permitted in the Falklands.
Colour TV transformed the fortunes of games  such as snooker and transfixed the viewers of Wimbledon.
The growth of controversy and public affairs programming is discussed below.
TV drama started with the BBC pointing a large camera at a small stage.
Technical and financial improvement saw the virtual elimination of live performances (regretted by some people); immeasurable increases in the quality of settings, costumes and production generally; the commissioning of plays written specifically for TV (much encouraged by Sidney Newman's ITV ‘Armchair Theatre’ in the 1960s and BBC series such as‘Play for Today’and ‘The Wednesday Play’); and the discovery, with the Forsyte Saga , that audiences would happily get hooked on serialization of literary classics (and not-so-classics).
With film, similarly, TV at first was starved, then it did the deals bringing more feature films more quickly to the screen.
Lastly, ‘made for TV’ movies developed.
All such developments, along with the increasing amount of airtime, put pressure on the capacity — and the justification — for limiting programme production to the BBC/ITV duopoly.
By 1990 this was ending.
The longstanding quota of 14 per cent on foreign imports was still in place, but Channel 4 was buying a quarter of its programmes from independent companies, and the BBC was moving in the same direction.
As TV poured over the surface of everyday life its programmes made fewer and fewer concessions to pre-existing forms, institutions, media, manners.
TV made plays, told the news, taught school, increasingly on its own terms, not as a parasite, imitator or tolerated intruder concealed as a hat-stand.
As was pointed out earlier, it responded to popular taste, observing new taboos about racism and sexism, just as it helped demolish old ones of sexual modesty and obscene language.
But common to all programming, on any channel, was an eventual confidence in the distinctive value of the TV medium.
By 1990, TV did not need to make excuses for itself.
One unavoidable consequence was the impact of TV on the contents of other media.
Some of the earliest TV ‘panellists’, who would later have been chat show hosts but were regulars on games like What's My Line ? in the restricted TV hours of  the 1950s, were well known columnists in the popular dailies.
Gilbert Harding and Nancy Spain were two early examples.
At first TV drew on established reputations in the press; later, the press wooed contributors from TV.
The mingling of media personnel paralleled contents about different media.
Soap opera characters, often blurred with the actors who played them, were a staple of the tabloid press.
Programmes such as What the Papers Say dissected Fleet Street.
TV rows with politicians, a growing practice, made newspaper headlines.
TV criticism, initially a job for the plain man, became an important part of quality paper arts pages and attracted star journalists such as Clive James.
Evening and weekend papers gave lots of space to programme schedules.
Sporting stars pounded track, tennis balls or each other one minute and appeared on screen the next — or in celebrity quiz and talk shows later on.
News stories overlapped: morning paper headlines took account of the previous evening's radio and TV stories, and the electronic media picked up items from the daily press (all these developments, indeed, applied to radio as well as to TV).
By the early 1970s mixed-media tie-ins and marketing of records, TV series and books were well developed and would increase.
They had a major international dimension, as TV programmes were made for overseas markets, books were packaged for mass readership, feature articles were syndicated worldwide.
They ranged from the modest puffing of his travel book by a visiting American author on Radio 4 to the screening of pre-launch films about the making of big budget movies such as Gandhi .
Little in these practices was new, but they became endemic.
Audiences
Content analyses show only what was available.
But how and why did people use the media?
What difference did TV make?
The short answer is that people's motives for using media do not seem to have changed much from 1945 to 1990 — whether  to combat loneliness, find out what was going on or just relax.
But people did not persistently use the same media in the same way.
How much time people spent watching TV depends on the definition of ‘watch’.
Until the Annan Committee knocked BBC and ITV heads together and made them run a joint system of audience measurement, ITV relied mainly on counting the number of sets switched on and the BBC used sample surveys and audience ‘diaries’.
Audience measurement was part of the duopoly's competition.
The ITV figures were aimed at advertisers, the BBC's at programme planners and, ultimately, protecting the licence fee.
By any measure, obviously, TV-watching was the key development of the period, growing from nil to about 26 hours per head of the population per week (Tables 6.9 and 6.10).
It grew in two ways: initially, as more people got TV sets, and then as programme hours increased.
The growth was rapid, then gradual, and in the 1970s and 1980s it fluctuated.
In 1970, 75 per cent of the population saw TV at some point during the day and in 1986 the figure had not risen much further to 78 per cent.
This was fewer than the number of people looking at a daily newspaper.
If viewing was considered by the week, however, TV was virtually universal: barely one person in twenty did not see something in an average week in 1986 (BBC, 1986).
Viewing increased more with new broadcasting hours, such as afternoon TV in the early 1970s and breakfast time in the early 1980s, than with more channels and programme choice or technical improvements such as colour (colour licences overtook black and white in 1976).
The idea of ‘saturation’ was implicit also in the fact that although multiple set households increased steadily through the 1980s (Table 6.11), only one set at a time was generally switched on.
Typically, a second (or third!) set was in a bedroom or kitchen.
They were a substitute for lugging the TV around, and they also reflected the growth of video games and home computers.
TV rapidly became the most time-consuming medium.
This fact alone implies that it was not an exhausting activity but was used for relaxation and entertainment.
In 1961 it was already overwhelmingly the nation's ‘main activity’ in the evening, and the BBC study establishing that fact produced much the same figures when repeated in 1975 (BBC, 1976).
An ITV study in 1966 found TV easily the most popular leisure activity, followed   by ‘entertaining friends’ and ‘reading newspapers and magazines’.
Pubs, clubs and sport were right down the fist.
Watching televised sport was by far the most popular activity on Saturday afternoons (51 per cent of men, 34 per cent of women) PBA, 1967).
The government's annual Social Trends figures show sport the only serious rival to TV among the young, and gardening and DIY among the middle-aged (especially men).
TV stole its time from radio.
Radio's peak hour audience (6.00 pm to 11.00 pm) dived from 35 per cent of the population in early 1947 to about 4 per cent in the early 1960s.
The crossover year was 1955, when radio and TV each had half the audience, both with 15 per cent.
Radio fluctuated thereafter more than any other medium.
Within a generally low level, there were short-run increases in listening hours, from 7.5 per week in 1966 to 9.2 in 1972, for instance, and the amount stayed at about that level.
But radio's ‘reach’ continued to decline.
In 1970 52 per cent of the population listened at some point during the day, but only 43 per cent in 1986.
Those who did listen tended to listen more.
There were more radio sets than people in Britain in the 1980s (like sheep in New Zealand).
Radio, in general, became par excellence the medium used while doing something else, mainly housework, preparing and eating meals and getting up or ready for bed.
Fewer than a quarter described themselves as ‘just listening’ in a 1971 survey.
TV's effect on newspaper reading was less obvious.
‘Reading’ a paper is a varying and imprecise activity anyway.
(Does doing the crossword count?
What if you are watching TV at the same time?)
Early studies suggested TV did reduce the time spent reading a paper.
But researchers continued to show people spending large amounts of time at it.
The average man read his  paper for 69 minutes a day, according to an IPC survey in 1972 — 3, and the average woman for 47 minutes.
Similarly, 4 per cent of Sun readers spent a heroic two hours or more reading the Sun every day, according to a 1975 study for the Press Commission.
The same study found that people who read a daily paper were more likely to watch the news on TV than people who did not.
The newspaper readership tables produced for the advertising industry (Tables 6.2 and 6.3, for example) used rather generous definitions of ‘read’, along the lines ‘Did you see a copy of this paper yesterday?’
On that basis, TV was unlikely to damage the press.
If radio had depended on advertising revenue to operate on its 1940s scale, TV would have killed it.
TV arguably did help kill the News Chronicle in that way, and perhaps the London evening press.
But TV's main effect was to change the way in which people used their papers, more than to reduce their use.
It was clear by the late 1950s that TV, like radio before it, would provide the ‘main facts’ and the latest news, and that people wanted to follow up the details in a newspaper.
TV scored better than the national dailies for nearly all the categories of news listed in a survey for the 1974 Press Commission (Table 6.12).
Its dominance over other media built up steadily through the 1980s (Table 6.13).
Newspaper interest shifted, too, towards entertainment, and, as has been demonstrated, TV itself became an important item in the press.
The single most important reason quoted to the Press Commission for reading a provincial paper was in order to find out what was on TV that night.
As the press had found with radio between the wars, moreover, people liked to compare a newspaper account of, say, a televised play or football match with their own impression.
Did TV kill the cinema?
It is natural to assume so.
The weekly audience slumped from 25 million in 1955 to 2 million in 1976 (see Table 6.14 for annual figures).
The problem is to know how far to link the rise and fall of the two media not to each other but to some independent factor.
Docherty and others, for instance, argue that mass cinema-going fitted an era of large working-class urban populations with increasing leisure   and a little spare cash.
Late 1950s ‘affluence’— cars, holidays, pop records, coffee bars, more comfortable and family-centred homes — turned cinema into just one more leisure pursuit   among a range of alternatives.
TV, on this analysis, was a beneficiary of those social trends and cinema a victim (Docherty, Morrison and Tracey, 1987).
The result, again, was a changed medium.
Comedies continued to pull in the biggest audiences, followed by thrillers and adventure films.
Profits were made by a small number of heavily promoted productions.
Most people continued to go to the cinema occasionally, and about two-fifths of C2 and DE audiences in 1986 claimed feature films were their favourite TV programmes.
It was cinema-going, not films, that changed.
By 1970 the regular cinema audience had become disproportion-ately young, middle class and male.
In general, then, as TV percolated through social life, people accommodated their use of other media to it.
This is not to say that TV was always dominant.
The pattern of its use, like that of other media, was variable.
TV-watching always dropped in summer, with differences of up to 20 per cent between winter and summer averages.
People normally read fewer newspapers in summer too.
Getting readers to renew the subscription can-celled on holiday in August had long been a challenge to circulation managers.
Radio listening, on the other hand, was less variable.
Media use also varied during the week, being heaviest at the  weekend.
Sections of the quality Sunday papers, especially the colour magazines, were still being read well into the following week.
Usage also varied, in ways one would expect, during each day.
Peak time for radio, once it had reached its post-TV level, was in the early morning, when people were getting up, having breakfast and driving to work.
Women continued to listen in quite large numbers through the morning.
The afternoon audience steadily declined, built up for an hour or so in the late afternoon and then surrendered to TV, except for another late-night blip.
For TV, subject to the pattern of broadcast programme hours, the peak was at the other end of the day.
Newspaper reading, again, was fitted in round the working day, mostly in the morning and evening, with a mid-day blip.
Media use varied significantly too with events.
The Olympic Games, World Cup football, wars, royal weddings, natural disasters and accidents, could all distort a month's figures.
All those patterns and differences can be qualified by taking account of age, gender and social class.
These changed least in the most stable medium of the period (in terms of usage), the press.
Tables 6.2 and 6.3 have already illustrated the class skew of different papers, and the smaller age and gender skew.
By comparison, radio and TV audiences were homogenous for most of the period, not least because there was only a limited choice for 10 years after 1945.
The war had seen some very large audiences.
The nine o'clock news regularly held the attention of 50 per cent of the population, and comedy and variety 40 per cent.
Four people out of five heard the D-Day Normandy invasion in June 1944 announced on the radio news.
Tommy Handley's comedy classic,ITMA with its cast of characters and catch-phrases (entirely lost on later generations), convulsed half the nation every week.
Peace immediately sent the news ratings down by one-third, but the pulling power of radio in its heyday is shown in the fact that 45 per cent of the people listened to the half-hour general election speeches in the 1945 campaign — feats of concentration (however imperfect) inconceivable in 1990.
Successor to ITMA was Wilfred Pickles' comedy quiz and chat show,Have A Go !
This was attracting an average weekly audience of 54 per cent by 1948, a record for any regular light entertainment show on radio or TV ever since.
The gradual increase and specialization of radio channels  disintegrated the audience.
As with the peak-hours curve, it tended to go in the opposite direction to TV.
In contrast to viewing, radio listening generally decreased with age, was highest among the higher social grades and had no female bias.
The figures for 1986 (Table 6.15) show clearly the distinct appeal of each channel.
Table 6.16 shows comparable figures for TV and Table 6.17 gives channel profiles.
Channel shares had varied somewhat over the years, quite apart from the changes caused by the introduction of BBC2 and Channel 4 (Table 6.18).
Regardless of fluctuations, BBC1 reflected closely the class composition of the population as a whole; ITV had a working-class skew right from the start; all channels (especially ITV had a female skew; and all had an age profile considerably older than the population as a whole (in the 1970s, on the other hand 5 — 14 year olds had watched the most).
Compared with the press and radio, however, the TV audience remained very mixed: most viewers watched most channels for some of the time.
TV-watching had become a relatively passive activity by the 1980s.
In the early days it was like cinema in the home, watched with rapt attention.
Now it was more of a cross between cinema and radio, sometimes watched intently, but sometimes left on in the background.
Remote control and more channels meant people ‘zapped’ from one to another, often watching ‘television’rather than television programmes.
As Barwise and Ehrenberg (1988) argue, people came to have little involvement in their TV.
Audience sizes were fairly steady from day to day; people tended to avoid demanding programmes; they did not worry about missing episodes of a serial or series; they often showed rather moderate levels of attention and appreciation.
Viewers were therefore happy with a mixed diet, rather as though, in a public library, they sometimes picked up The Times , sometimes the Daily Mail , sometimes the Sun .
People typically watched a bit of many things instead of sticking rigidly  to films or sport or news.
This did not, of course, mean that all programmes were watched equally.
Audiences varied from the minuscule for further education, to 20 — 25 million for ‘major events’ like the Cup Final and Christmas Day programmes.
Because of the decisive influence of the time a programme was scheduled, audience size was not a reliable indicator of actual popularity, and both networks researched audience preferences, eventually evolving a joint Audience Appreciation Index.
In general, women, older people and the lower socio-economic groups were the most enthusiastic about what they watched.
The popularity of programme types did not change much, although there was always great variation within them and  overlap between them.
In their 1958 diet (which did not yet include so many top feature films or so much news), men gave their highest preferences to sport, plays, news, travel, variety, documentaries, westerns and current affairs, and their lowest to serious music, religion and science.
Women put plays, news and quizzes top, with sport roughly where men put religion, and science and serious music bottom (BBC, quoted in Tunstall, 1983, p. 112).
Young people were more interested in films, crime and quizzes than their elders.
The different programme categories of the 1980s prevent exact comparison.
In 1986 drama, series and serials, sport and documentaries all scored high on the Appreciation Index.
Feature films, quiz shows, panel games, variety and the news were less popular.
In sheer audience numbers, however, the programme rankings were less varied.
Light entertainment, sport, feature films, soap operas and crime series got the highest regular audiences, followed by sport, drama and general interest series, chat shows, the news, documentaries, one-off plays and current affairs.
Newspaper readers' preferences are an equally complex business but cannot be dealt with here at length.
One may argue indefinitely how far contents followed taste and how far they created it, but there is no doubt that the broad ‘entertainment’ appeal of the press increased at the expense of hard news and information.
News itself became more entertaining, and technologies enabling better graphics and presentation made features more attractive.
The sheer quantity of matter meant that people did not read all their newspaper.
Like the effect of programme scheduling on TV audience sizes, a story put on the front page was much more likely to be read than something buried inside, and ‘page traffic’ figures show slightly higher noting of items on right-hand than left-hand pages.
Reader's interest coincide generally with the news values listed at the start of the chapter.
Home news was preferred over foreign, new a about things familiar to the reader over the unfamiliar.
Particular items like cartoons and horoscopes often had high readerships; leading articles did not.
News about the  government attracted attention; politics and parties were less popular.
Sport attracted more men than women; fashions and women's features, obviously, more women than men.
Readers of quality papers wanted more ‘serious, matter.
Research for the 1974 Press Commission confirmed both that they enjoyed their paper less than readers of the populars and that they would miss it worse if deprived of it.
This was interesting general confirmation that the element of ‘serious, content that had been an important part of the deceased Daily Herald and News Chronicle was no longer something the non-quality reader was prepared to pay for in a daily paper.
For the non-Conservative parties, too, it was melancholy news — blazoned every day in the tabloid approach of the Sun .
The findings also supported this author's conclusion in a review of data in the early 1960s, that the further along the socio-economic scale one went, the more were entertainment and relaxation the motives for newspaper-reading (Seymour-Ure, 1968).
The entertainment role of the press was confirmed too by the Press Commission finding that most people felt their paper gave them as much news as they wanted.
Among tabloid readers there was also a strong awareness of their paper's sensationalism, tendency to invade private grief and to print too many silly or trivial stories.
The corresponding regular complaints against TV were about bad language, violence and sex (in that order).
ITV viewers were most likely to be offended and BBC2 the least.
‘Entertainment’, of course, is an extremely general term.
Over the years, many studies analysed people's motivations for media use in great detail, and many of the specific findings would count as ‘entertainment’.
Quiz programmes, for instance, appealed to people as a means of excitement and escape from worries, an opportunity to rate oneself in comparison with other people and possibly to learn something.
Soap operas, naturally, provided endless scope for companionship, both with the fictional characters and as a conversation topic with friends and at work.
Such studies resound with heartfelt quotations: ‘I like to hear the sound of voices in the house’; ‘The programme  reminds me that I could be worse off than I am’; ‘It sometimes helps me to understand my own life’(McQuail, 1972).
Such motivations cut across different media and remind us again of the extent to which media permeate our lives.
As with patterns of ownership, the impression of contents and media usage over the years is of an increasingly interlocking system, the user's version of conglomeration.
Although it does not show up in the analyses, content surely also became more international, in source of origin, if not always in substance.
Within the system, finally, there were varying combinations of medium, content and audience interest.
The world of rock and pop music — non-existent, virtually, in 1945 — linked radio, records, tapes, video and magazines, with a relatively small and specialized TV element.
Sport was integral to the national and local press, TV and to a diminishing extent (except for cricket) to radio.
Politics was the preserve of press, radio, TV and a few specialized periodicals.
Fashion, ‘life styles’ and women's interests (an increasingly anomalous category) thrived in magazines and the press.
Drama was strong in film, TV and radio; news, in TV, radio and press.
Sex was featured most freely on film and, within the medium's limits, in magazines, with TV and newspapers inhibited by mass taste and public policy.
These links all had several levels: financial, organizational, promotional, international, advertising, audience.
The different patterns overlapped, linking, in a wide sense, to form the intricate media system as a whole.