

THE LOST GENERATION, 1914–1932
The First World War and its impact on British society was to have a profound significance for the emergence of British fascism.
Yet this relationship was deeply problematic, which helps to explain the diversity of opinion and the contradictions within the phenomenon.
The influence of the war was to affect social classes, groups and individuals in Britain in a variety of ways and many came to support fascism for disparate political, economic and social reasons.
Some saw fascism as a means to restore an alleged utopian past of harmonious political, economic and social relationships which had been swept away by the war and replaced by the degenerative effects of the extension of the franchise in 1918 and the emergence of political democracy.
Other fascists interpreted it as a locomotive of history: an opportunity to create a new society where the major political consequence of the war, the greater direction and control of economic activity by the government, could be harnessed for social reform in peacetime.
This too would necessitate a new political system where traditional party politics would need to be subordinate to a national will for reform and the consequent reduction of democratic rights.
The attraction of fascism after the first World War
It must, however, be stressed from the outset that even among the most alienated fascism was far from being the only political response to the continued decline of Britain and the mounting economic problems after the first World War.
for some who, given European experience, seemed to be the most prone to the appeal of fascism in the lower middle classes, it proved to have only marginal importance in the 1930s in Britain.
Indeed, apart from a few regionally isolated areas like the north-west of England before 1934 and the East End of London after 1935, fascism was not of major political significance.
Among the small minority of combatants who found it difficult to adjust to civilian life after the war, who were anti-semitic, militantly anti-communist and concerned about the continued decline of Britain, individuals were almost as likely to be anti-fascist as supporters of fascism.
Douglas Reed, for example, who resigned as Central European Correspondent of The Times in 1938 over his newspaper's support for appeasement politics, and whose background and life history read like the classic facsimile of the alleged fascist, proved in practice to be a crusading anti-fascist.
The fact that Britain was a victorious power in the first World War also helps to explain fascism's limited impact on the country.
for after the war, national resentment could neither fester on an unrequited national grievance as in Italy, nor on a stab-in-the-back myth to explain defeat as in Germany.
Several consequences of the war ultimately did lead some in British society towards fascism, however.
In the immediate post-war period the problems created by the Russian Revolution, the emergence of a socialist Labour party as the major opposition party in Britain, and the extension of the franchise in 1918 to reward the working class and women for their role in the war, frightened some elements among the middle classes.
In the longer term the failure of the National Coalition, and the Conservative and Labour governments in the 1920s, to create the ‘home fit for heroes’, turned some towards  more radical solutions for Britain's problems than the return to normalcy and safety-first politics of what Mosley was to call the old gangs of British politics.
In consequence, fascism was to emerge in Britain in the 1920s as a supposed imitation of Mussolini's example in Italy, although in reality it was little more than ‘Conservatism with knobs on’, in Arnold Leese's graphic definition of the British fascists.
Its immediate origins have to be seen mainly as an ultra-conservative response to the social consequences of the first World War.
In general it was almost exclusively extreme right-wing elements who were first involved, but they tended to be of two distinct types.
The first were supporters of the Die-hard Conservatives, an unofficial parliamentary group who admired their aristocratic pre-war namesakes, opposed the continued survival of Lloyd George's coalition after the Coupon Election of 1918, and wished for the restoration of what they termed ‘true conservatism’.
The Die-hards were opposed to the rise of a socialist Labour party and militant trade unionism, which they saw as a revolutionary threat to property and the stability of British society.
In particular, they saw the function of the British fascists as providing stewards for Conservative party meetings to help maintain free speech and law and order.
An unarmed paramilitary group, their role in practice proved to be a cross between an adult boy scout movement and a slightly more sinister defence force and strike-breaking organization.
Rather more ideologically committed to a new form of politics were those for whom anti-semitism was seen as the reason for the changes in British and European society engendered by the first World War.
Of particular importance here was the formation of the Britons Society in 1918 which was to be the immediate precursor of British racial fascism.
This reactivated the pre-war nativist tradition in more virulent form and combined it with the dissemination of the emergent bible of European anti-semitism, the Protocols of the Elders of Zion .
This more sophisticated and rationally expressed conspiracy theory of anti-semitism was combined with gutter racist anti-semitic abuse in its publications.
The miniscule middle-class membership was insignificant as a group, but the survival of the publishing arm of the organization and the influence of the society on Arnold Leese were to be of crucial significance to the development of racial fascism in Britain.
Other groups with links to the pre-war Die-hards also used their influence to help advertise the Protocols of the Elders of Zion through newspaper publications.
The Duke of Northumberland purchased the Morning Post and established a new weekly, the Patriot, to popularize the idea of a conspiracy.
Even The Times for a while in the aftermath of the Russian Revolution suggested that there was more than a grain of truth in the concept of a Jewish world plot.
The immediate roots of British fascism thus grew from those who tried to ignore the real consequences of the first World War.
The mixture of reactionary conservatism and political anti-semitism in the main represented a response of those who asked for a stable hierarchical society based on paternalistic deference.
What small political influence it possessed was confined to the immediate post-war years of social tension, inflation and unemployment.
Its survival after the early 1920s was a part of the more eccentric sections of the political underground.
Of far greater significance for the inter-war period were those who saw fascism mainly as a positive force which would create a new society deriving directly from the war experience.
The anaesthetizing shock of the trenches was to bring about a delayed-action reflex for many who had fought in them.
The failure of the politicians to create a society which adequately compensated for the horror and trauma of the war produced a mood of frustrated anger which tinted the utopian cravings of many attracted to fascism.
British fascism in the 1930s was to represent the mood of the trenches bitterly coloured by the disillusion of fifteen years' hindsight.
Clearly, of course, it was far from being the only political response to the war.
As in france, communism, pacifism or religion were just as likely to mark the outlook of those who had experienced the camaraderie, fear and gore of trench warfare.
Yet in the 1930s, British fascism was to represent a distinctive consequence of the same phenomenon.
It was the  peculiar mixture of alienation and reformism which created the most enduring legacy of British fascism, the tradition of political violence and anti-democratic values co-existing uneasily and with some contradiction with a pragmatic modernizing economic programme.
After 1934 this was to be combined with the anti-semitic obsession of both ultra-conservative reactionary fascism and racial nationalist traditions in the BUF, despite the fact that it was expressed in slightly less virulent form and appeared to have more social roots.
Mosley and post-war radicalism
Of those connected with the BUF the experience of three individuals stands out in connection with the impact of the first World War.
The founder and leader of the BUF, Sir Oswald Mosley, was a self-conscious political spokesman for the ‘lost generation’ and the survivors of the first World War.
A.K. Chesterton, an important member of the leadership of the BUF and later first chairman of the Directorate of the National Front, was another for whom the war had profound significance.
Chesterton's experience was more exacting than Mosley's, which helps to explain his more irrational and emotional form of fascism.
The third individual was the writer and novelist Henry Williamson, author of Tarka the Otter and other nature books.
He was a non-active member of the movement, but an analysis of his heavily autobiographical books and novels, in which the first World War is of crucial significance, throws considerable light on the origins of fascism.
Indeed it is his support for Mosley, expressed on many occasions, which goes some way to account for the continuing neglect of his work by much of the literary establishment.
Even the most perceptive of critics of the literature of the first World War, Paul Fussell, has totally ignored Williamson's most important work on this theme.
This is indeed unfortunate, for Williamson, perhaps more than any other writer, accurately described the experience of the common man in the trenches and the lingering and traumatic effects it had on the survivors of the experience.
Although character and aesthetic  ideals differentiated Williamson from post-war society more radically than the large majority of the participants in the conflict, an analysis of his work helps to explain why other idealists and embittered individuals at all levels of the movement should turn to fascism as a solution to the problems of British society in the inter-war years.
The principle significance of the first World War will be examined here through an analysis of these three individuals.
Other examples of the influence of ‘war socialism’ on the emergence of British fascism, such as its impact on John Beckett, could have been chosen.
Wider sociological studies of the BUF have also emphasized the importance of direct and indirect consequences of the war, most particularly the impact of mass unemployment.
The examples developed here are heavily biased towards the leadership and intellectual rationalization for the movement.
It has been estimated that 60 per cent of the fascist elite had been members of the armed forces and over 40 per cent saw active service in the first World War.
However, it should not be forgotten that the unofficial populist ideas of the rank and file, particularly with regard to anti-semitism, unemployment and political violence, were often significantly different from the formulations of the leadership.
Many at all levels of the movement, who were too young to have had experience of the First World War, were nevertheless affected by its indirect effects.
They saw the military discipline, anti-socialist politics, the threat of confrontation with left-wing elements, and anti-semitic baiting of immigrants and British citizens of Jewish religion, as a source of excitement which gave meaning to a dull existence.
Even quarrelsome members of the leadership, like William Joyce, appear to have been attracted to the movement by such motives.
In the East End of London, some joined the BUF because it appeared to offer a kind of explanation for economic and social problems which had their roots in the  interaction  between a native working class and a stable Jewish minority.
Fascism appealed both to the classically prejudiced and to those who thought objective social factors a justification for projecting antipathy towards an outgroup.
However, it should be emphasized that even in the East End a large majority of the native host population were anti-fascist.
Perhaps of greater importance than those who were attracted to fascism for irrational or emotive reasons were those who were ideologically committed to the form of radicalism which BUF doctrine and propaganda promulgated.
Many such individuals, from Alexander Raven Thomson in the leadership to fascist rank-and-file like Jeffrey Hamm and Robert Row, were deeply committed entrants into the movement who were to stand by Mosley through all his trials and tribulations.
Such individuals were often attracted to the BUF because they felt that Mosley had a practical solution to the problem of unemployment and would create a more just society.
At the other extreme, many short-term members in the 1930s saw the BUF as little more than a social organization in which political activity was very much a secondary phenomenon.
Numerous purges in the regions were designed to root out less than committed fascists, which helps to account for the high turnover of membership in the 1930s; A.K. Chesterton in particular was notorious for the war he waged against literal social fascists, being responsible for expelling over 300 members in Stoke in 1935 who used the local headquarters as a drinking club.
Others joined for even more dubious reasons.
Several cases of serious criminal activity, including burglary and fraudu-lent use of BUF funds, have been commented upon both by academic studies and by more sympathetic observers like Henry Williamson.
Nevertheless, despite the wide variety of motives which led individuals to become fascists, it remains true that the hierarchical and authoritarian structure of the movement gave additional weight to the official ideology and explanation of events.
As the  movement and the significance of British fascism owed so much to Sir Oswald Mosley, and as he increasingly came to see himself as the political spokesman for the lost generation and the survivors of the First World War, it is the impact of that event I want to examine first.
Mosley's own experience of the First World War was less traumatic than either Chesterton's or Williamson's.
Although he performed valiantly as a navigator in that most dangerous of all the branches of the armed forces, the Royal Flying Corps, in 1915, and during his service sustained a serious leg injury, there is little evidence that he experienced the full horrors of trench warfare.
Nevertheless the legacy of the war did determine his career choices.
His limited experience of the nature of modern warfare convinced him that those who sacrificed themselves for their country should not die in vain.
The war turned an immature, irresponsible aristocrat into a man who combined the frivolity of his youthful lifestyle with the dedicated, passionate, highly articu-late and rational exponential qualities of the reforming politician.
Mosley came increasingly to see himself as the spokesman of the war generation, who refused to compromise his idealistic principles with the political realities of the post-war world.
For Mosley the lesson of the First World War was simply the necessity to keep faith with those who had paid the ultimate price.
He devoted his life to politics for a twofold purpose: to ensure that the useless slaughter of the First World War was not repeated, and that the survivors of that horrific experience should live in a better world.
These were far from ignoble aims.
Some considered it to Mosley's credit that a man who had the ability to attain the highest office in government should have ignored the rules of the political game because of his devotion to principle.
Others interpreted it as Mosley's attempt to change the conventions of British politics by iconoclastic disregard of the traditional forms of political discourse.
Utopian reformism was to replace the art of the possible in Mosley's new political game.
Mosley's political odyssey in the inter-war period ultimately led him and some who admired him to fascism, the most radical  rejection of the cosy nature of the high politics of British tradition.
Fascism resulted from the frustration with, and alienation from, a system in which politicians were obsessed with the conventions of party politics to the detriment of the need for radical change (highlighted by the First World War); and radical change was vital if Britain's accelerated economic and political decline was to be reversed.
Mosley, the rebel with a cause, first tried to reform the system from within during the 1920s.
Failure led him to mass manipulation and an attempt to revolutionize British politics from outside the system.
The failure of this attempt, first in the New Party in 1931, and then in the BUF between 1932 and 1934, led to the degeneration of Mosley's rationalistic pleas for reform to the gutter politics of the later 1930s.
The collapse of Mosley's challenge as a reforming force, and the close connection this had with political violence, was to represent an ironic commentary on the nature of British politics.
Mosley revolted over the wrong crisis, for he failed to see that considerable social and economic reform would result from a Second World War, a conflagration which he bitterly opposed and which led to his internment in 1940.
The fact that Mosley was turned into a reforming politician by the First World War highlighted his dilemma.
He became the youngest beneficiary in the coupon election of 1918, fighting on a programme of ‘socialistic imperialism’ in his Harrow constituency.
From the outset he was at odds with the Conservatives, nominally his own party, who increasingly saw the return to normalcy, along with the need to return to the governmental conventions of party politics of the pre-war era, as the top priority.
The Coalition government under Lloyd George became more and more constrained by the demands of Conservative retrenchment.
Mosley himself admired Lloyd George's qualities of leadership and had been impressed by his energy and administrative skills at the Ministry of Munitions from 1915 to 1916.
He liked his personal style of government, and his establishment of a Cabinet Secretariat and his own personal advisers or brains trust in the ‘garden suburbs’.
In particular Mosley was influenced by Lloyd George's ability to bypass bureaucratic red tape and through dynamic activism attempt to tackle head-on the mounting  problems of British society.
Mosley's later fascist ideas on government owed much to Lloyd George's wartime reforms of the administrative structure, even if they had been devised in a democratic framework.
His point was that a war in peacetime would have to be fought against unemployment, as it persistently remained above one million in the 1920s, and rose towards three million during the severe cyclical depression between 1929 and 1932.
Lloyd George's later ideas in the green and yellow books of the Liberal party in the 1920s were to play crucial roles in BUF policies on agriculture and unemployment in the 1930s.
Yet if Mosley came to see Lloyd George as a fellow economic radical, objections to the management of Irish policy divided them in the early 1920s.
Mosley was opposed to the reprisals of the Black and Tans in Ireland and began to identify himself more and more with Lord Robert Cecil's League of Nations Union.
By 1923 he had fallen out with Lloyd George, the Conservatives and Lord Robert Cecil over Ireland, economic policy and Mussolini's invasion of Corfu respectively.
Increasingly, Mosley came to see unemployment and economic policy were the key issues in British politics.
In 1923 he began to study economic theory and became convinced that government objectives, far from ensuring a return to prosperity, were actively discouraging it through deflationary policies and obsession with the return to the gold standard at pre-war parity.
Mosley consciously educated himself through the writings of Keynes, Hobson and other Independent Labour Party (ILP) theorists to become the most perceptive of all government critics actively opposing the consensus of economic policy-making in the 1920s.
His mistake was to assume that the Labour party would provide a more receptive political vehicle for his ideas than the Conservatives.
The fundamental divide in British politics in the inter-war period proved to be not the differences between the rapidly growing and supposedly socialist Labour party and the long tradition of high politics, encapsulated in the party divisions between the Conservatives and the steadily decaying Liberal party, but between the economic conservatives and economic radicals across the political spectrum.
In the inter-war period the radicals made little headway.
In  government both the Conservatives and the Labour party followed vigorously orthodox economic policies.
The radicals, such as Harold Macmillan in the Conservative party, the Independent Labour Party group and maverick individuals like Mosley and Ernest Bevin in the Labour movement, were effectively isolated and had little impact on policy.
Only in the rapidly declining Liberal party did the radicals have any significant influence on policy.
Lloyd George spent large sums of his private fortune (acquired in rather dubious circumstances as a treasure chest for the Coalition Liberals between 1917 and 1922), in research activity which recommended radical policies for the Liberals in areas such as land reform and unemployment policy in the 1920s.
Yet even Lloyd George's influence was reduced to a family group of four followers in the 1930s, as the rest of the divided Liberals, although in two distinct factions, supported the coalition government.
The goat, as he was jocularly known, was to end his political life in the wilderness.
The parallel experience in the inter-war period of this fellow economic radical Lloyd George is also instructive in another sense.
His period of power from 1917 — 22 as prime minister of the coalition Liberal and Conservative government showed that the limits of economic and social radicalism were constrained by the realities of contemporary politics.
Whilst the extension of the franchise and Christopher Addison's hopes for building the ‘homes fit for heroes’ showed a genuine desire for the radical elements in government to reform British society, the fact that Britain needed to export nearly one-third of her output to pay for essential imports necessitated the re-establishment of settled trading patterns and the development of new markets.
However, the growth of economic nationalism on a world-wide scale during the war, the re-drawing of the political map of Europe, the effect of the Versailles Treaty, and the large debt due to the Americans to help pay for the war, all ensured that the freedom of action to expand welfare was strictly limited.
Domestic economic factors further complicated this gloomy picture.
The rapid inflation which resulted directly from the cost of financing the war raised the cost of British industry significantly, and made much more difficult the attempt to restore financial  stability.
Similarly, the fact that over 60 per cent of Britain's exports were dependent on the declining and low-productivity industries in coal, steel, shipbuilding and cotton, caused severe structural problems and rapidly increasing unemployment, when the new pattern of domestic and foreign demand became relatively stabilized in the 1920s.
Thus even for governments with radical good intentions, which for the most part the Lloyd George government was, there were formidable obstacles to piecemeal reform.
When increasing financial problems necessitated retrenchment, Addison's schemes for housing reform and other increased social benefits had to be jettisoned as a result of the harsh cuts of the Geddes Committee.
Radicals in the inter-war period became divided among themselves as to the degree to which social and economic reforms should be subordinated to financial constraints.
The party  divisions between leading reformers such as Lloyd George, Mosley and Macmillan also hindered co-operation, as did personal hostility within political parties (on all occasions between Mosley and Ernest Bevin in the Labour movement and intermittently between Lloyd George and Keynes in the Liberals).
Outside the charmed circle of high politics, radicalism on the far left developed utopian socialist blueprints which neglected pragmatic considerations of how they were to be achieved.
Financial reformers were divided between the monetarists and distributionists, and both were relegated to the economic underworld in terms of their influence on the political establishment.
On the political right the fourth estate busied itself in a revived version of the old Chamberlain protectionist pipedream of Empire Unity, as now expounded by the press lords Rothermere and Beaverbrook.
The fact that radicals both inside and outside parliament were often divided among themselves and had no uniform political views or remedies was emphasized by their ineffectiveness in the Economic Advisory Committee in the 1930s.
The essential disunity between the radicals made it easy for the inter-war period to be dominated by the conventional wisdom of  economic orthodoxy and sound finance.
This was personified by the ascendancy in the political sphere of Stanley Baldwin and the rise in the economic sphere of Montagu Norman, the Governor of the Bank of England.
Baldwin's rise to power as the Conservative leader and prime minister in 1923 and 1924 — 9 was ruled by two considerations: first, the need to tame the Labour party and to force it to accept the conventions of parliamentary politics; and second, to ensure that Lloyd George be kept out of office at all costs.
Safety First, the uninspiring motto of his 1929 election campaign, represented his policy in political and economic matters.
The aim was to restore as far as was practically possible the conditions of the pre-First World War era.
This was symbolized by the doomed attempt to restore the gold standard at pre-war parity as the basis of economic policy, which necessitated vigorous deflation to ensure financial rectitude in the altered conditions of the post-war world.
It also meant the obligation to meet international debts, and for Baldwin to negotiate the 3½ per cent interest repayment on the American war loan in 1922.
The policy of Norman and the Cunliffe Committee succeeded in placing economic and financial policy in a straitjacket between 1918 and 1931, severely limiting all subsequent British governments in the 1920s.
Paradoxically, then, despite the election defeats of 1923 and 1929, the success of Baldwin's political strategy was almost total.
The Labour party in its two minority governments in 1924 and 1929 — 31, despite some minor foreign policy successes, failed to pass any much-needed radical social legislation and Ramsay Macdonald behaved in a constitutionally impeccable manner.
What was more to the point was that socialism in power meant economic conservatism in practice.
Philip Snowden, Chancellor of the Exchequer from 1929 to 1931, was as much obsessed with financial rectitude as any Conservative and proved to be Mosley's doughtiest opponent in the Labour party.
The failure of the General Strike in 1926 marked the end of any possibility that extra-parliamentary forms of left-wing mass politics could alter effectively the economic policy of the government.
Meanwhile Lloyd George's radical plans, although ensuring a partial revival of the Liberal corpse in the 1929 election, were effectively  sidelined, and the accident of illness was to ensure that he played no part in the formation of the coalition government of 1931 either.
Mosley's political career in the 1920s has to be viewed in the context of the triumph of economic conservatism.
He joined the Labour party in 1924 on the mistaken assumption that socialism in power would achieve economic and social reform.
In practice, as his experience as Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster between 1929 and 1930 proved, it lacked the will to implement any radical reform.
The Labour party possessed a utopian ethic of socialism but it failed to develop the pragmatic programme either to alter the capitalist state which it inherited or to reform it from within.
Mosley did find kindred spirits in the Labour movement, some of whom followed him into the New Party and a smaller proportion into fascism, but although the party conference and the Labour movement in general were sympathetic to his practical suggestions, the Labour government rejected his proposals.
Mosley's new success in the Labour party was to challenge effectively Chamberlain's political control of Birmingham and to turn the ILP into one of the most significant sources of radical ideas in the 1920s.
However, neither of these achievements were to prove to Mosley's advantage in the 1930s.
His undoubted personal success in the 1920s in Birmingham was not to be repeated in the 1930s, as fascism made less impact there than in the East End of London or the north-west.
The ILP rapidly declined into a fundamentalist socialist sect which was soon expelled from the Labour party.
Mosley resigned from the Labour government in 1930 as a result of the Cabinet turning down his reflationary programme contained in the Mosley Memorandum.
In political terms this represented, in Mosley's view, a viable synthesis of available radical ideas, which together would provide an effective attack on the immediate problem of mass unemployment and a longer-term beginning to the larger aim of reversing the decline of the British economy.
After his narrow failure to convince the Labour party conference in 1930, he and six other MPs left the Labour party to form the New Party, which actively campaigned on the Mosley Manifesto, a rewritten version of the memorandum.
Unfortunately for Mosley, although the economic crisis worsened in 1931, bringing about the fall of the deeply divided Labour government, it was replaced by a National Coalition made up of  Conservatives, the majority of the Liberals and a few Labour MPs under Macdonald, Snowdon and Thomas.
This was virtually the Conservatives in disguise with Baldwin, rather than the prime minister, Macdonald, its chief architect.
In the general election of 1931 the National government won a veritable landslide with a majority of 410 seats.
The New Party was obliterated, losing all its members of parliament.
The failure was to end Mosley's effective attempt to change the policies of British government from within the parliamentary party spectrum.
He now had nowhere to go, despite overtures from all three political parties.
After a long, bitter process Mosley had discovered that the rules of the political game and the increasing conservatism of British government militated against effective action from within the political structure.
Convinced of the rightness of his policies and fearful of the consequences of economic decline, Mosley became attracted to the forms of activist mass politics in an attempt to rejuvenate society.
British fascism was born of the failure of economic conservatism to check the rapid decline of Britain in the inter-war years.
In spite of its obvious imitation of continental movements it was to be a profoundly British variant, with social and political roots in domestic problems.
Chesterton, Williamson and the appeal of post-war fascism
If Mosley came to fascism as a result of the failure of the process of British parliamentary politics to create the new society, the same could not be said of others, like Chesterton and Williamson, who had little or no contact with high politics.
Indeed, an important element in the BUF was provided by those who came to fascism from outside the traditional party spectrum and who had little or no previous political experience.
Other values from different spheres of activity were transposed to the political sphere to justify the move.
In the cases of both Chesterton and Williamson it was the combination of the lingering after-effects of the war and the transposition of supposed aesthetic values to the political sphere, together with personal traumas of varying intensity, which  accounted for the turn to fascism.
An interesting difference between the two was that Chesterton was never able to escape the effects of this potent brew after he became a fascist, whereas Williamson managed to do so to a considerable degree, despite his continued personal support for Mosley until his death.
For both Chesterton and Williamson the first World War was a searing experience which provided lasting images of heroism, horror, comradeship, leadership and fear.
It marked them off from other men and made it difficult for them to settle down to the dull conformity of civilian existence after the war.
The war on the Western Front in 1917 — 18 had turned Chesterton into an alcoholic, a condition which he finally controlled in the later 1930s, thanks to the generosity of Mosley who financed his cure at a special clinic in Germany.
His most enduring memory, which haunted his imagination for much of the inter-war period, was of his time as a nineteen-year-old officer in 1918 when he led an action to capture enemy trenches at Epehy.
His great courage at the time eventually earned him the Military Cross, but the harrowing experience was for a long while foremost in his mind and symbolized by the walk back to his commanding officer over a mass of dead German and British soldiers in which his feet scarcely touched the ground.
Small wonder therefore that as a drama critic he grasped the significance of R. C. Sherriff's famous play,Journey's End , in 1929.
Its hero, Stanhope, a young officer who survived three years on the Western Front imbibing increasing quantities of whisky, saw death, the escape into nothingness, as the only answer to the squalor of the trenches and the daily horror of seeing brave men victims of the slaughter and wastage.
Chesterton, a Stanhope who survived, found in fascism a positive political creed with which he could identify.
He could now move from cultural idealism and aesthetic values to political commitment.
Yet this was not to represent journey's end for Chesterton's political development.
His growing disillusion with Mosley in the later 1930s led to his resignation from the movement and the collapse of his revolutionary faith.
He became an alienated reactionary for  whom the trauma of the First World War was reinforced by the memory of the fascist God that failed, and his thought became increasingly dominated by the negative obsession of the conspiracy theory of history.
Williamson's experiences of the war were just as deeply ingrained.
He had been a survivor of many of the major actions of the war, firstly as a volunteer soldier and later as a commissioned officer.
Two events in particular were graphically imprinted on his mind.
The first was the Christmas truce of 1914, when after the horrendous fighting of the first Battle of Ypres, German and British troops fraternized and played football together on Christmas Day.
This for him came to symbolize the futility of the war, which seemed to be fought for no discernible purpose, between opponents whose essential common humanity was denied by the mass slaughter.
Patriotism had been distorted by lying propaganda and the massacre of European civilization resulted from the dominance of corrupt political and industrial interests, which were the only ones to benefit from the war.
For Williamson, only soldiers who had fought in the war, and who understood the horrors of modern conflict, could save Europe from further disaster.
Hence his attempt to enlist T. E. Lawrence in a campaign to prevent war with Germany in the 1930s, which ended in Lawrence's tragic death, and his naive belief that since Adolf Hitler had been a member of the German regiment with whom he had fraternized in 1914 he was basically a man like Williamson who wished to maintain peace at all costs, unless forced into war by the manipulation of others.
Williamson felt he had a special bond with Hitler, and even at times imagined aloud that he had spoken to him on that fateful Christmas day.
The image of hope which had thus arisen in Williamson's mind was soured by the reality of his second obsession: the sheer horror of his experience on 1 July 1916, when 60,000 British soldiers were killed or wounded on the first day of the Battle of the Somme.
This for him highlighted both the frightfulness of war and the  ineptitude of the governing classes.
The essential effect of such knowledge was to alienate  Chesterton and Williamson from the contemporary world.
Both of them found it difficult to express their feelings on the war, except in the third person, so strong were their views.
This was particularly the case with Williamson who used the vehicle of his vast epic The Chronicle of Ancient Sunlight to develop his most mature insights into the nature of the war.
Chesterton also tended to express his own feelings in the mouths of alleged fictional characters.
Both men's views in the inter-war period were highly subjective and embittered; both lacked the necessary detachment and sense of objective hindsight to bring the experience into proper perspective.
Indeed, fascism was to appeal to many who, on whatever grounds (most of them rational), suffered from an inability to see problems of contemporary society except in an intensely alienated form.
Chesterton's views were to become increasingly obsessional from the 1930s onwards; Williamson, as The Chronicle of Ancient Sunlight was to prove, particularly in its early volumes, regained a considerable measure of detachment and objectivity in his professional vocation as a novelist after the Second World War.
Yet in the inter-war period for both Chesterton and Williamson the myth of the trenches bred a contempt for civilian society and those without direct contact with the nature of modern warfare.
It was almost as though such an experience gave the initiated a glimpse of a deeper level of reality than the allegedly shallow analysis of contemporary society by those who had not faced at first hand the traumas of modern warfare.
Such views predicated the existence of higher forms and judgements than the empirical mode of reasoning and pragmatic values of British society.
Both Chesterton and Williamson, and to an increasing extent Mosley, were to utilize such ideas to justify the fascist revolt.
British fascism was to come close to being rationalized as the political revolt of the romantic imagination in the twentieth century.
Paul Fussell has developed the interesting point that the first world war was a peculiarly literary war.
It occurred at a moment in time when reading represented the chief leisure activity, apart from sex and drinking, for the British population.
for the upper class the belief in the educative values of classical English literature was still strong.
The desire for popular education and self-improvement for the masses was at its peak.
In the context of  British fascism Chesterton was to use the aristocratic upper-class literary conventions to justify the impact of the war on his espousal of fascism.
Williamson, through his mainly autobiographical work, was to provide a panorama of views on the impact of the war on ordinary working people and the lower middle classes, and through the hero of The Chronicle of Ancient Sunlight , Phillip Maddison, was to show how the experience could lead to support for fascism; Mosley was to appear as Sir Hereward Birkin and the BUF as the Imperial Socialist party in the later volumes of the epic.
The move to nationalism
It was not, however, merely through political and artistic influences that the impact of the First World War was to provide such an important background influence for British fascism.
The impact of the war and the dislocation of the British economy and society that it caused greatly expanded the variety and impact of ideas on the sources of fascism.
Williamson was also attracted to Mosley because of his positive views on British agriculture.
For those who were dismayed by the threatened collapse of the ruling class in central and eastern Europe and the rise of the Labour party and extension of the franchise in Britain, anti-semitic conspiracy theories of history, particularly as outlined in the Protocols of the Elders of Zion , were to gain a momentary influence in polite society before returning to the political underworld.
More important, perhaps, was the confluence of stimuli which activated the revolt of Sir Oswald Mosley against the political establishment.
Far more than any other fascist leader, Mosley's view of the post-war world was based on a rationally expressed intellectual critique.
This contained two main elements: a reasoned attack on conventional economic policy in the 1920s, and a growing questioning of the philosophical basis of government and society.
Together they were to form the essential background to the most important British variant of fascism.
At the outset it should be stressed that Mosley's mode of reasoning owed far more  to continental than to British tradition, to a synthesis of ideas rather than empiricism.
This was then applied to the native influences on his economic thought.
The development of Mosley's economic ideas in the 1920s showed a gradual transition from a socialist to a nationalist Perspective.
Mosley's socialist ideas, mainly worked out under the influence of the Birmingham Labour Party and the ILP, were basically a synthesis of Keynesian monetary theories and socialist concepts of planning, J.A.
Hobson's under-consumptionism, C.H. Douglas's ideas of social credit and the war-time experience of government direction of industry.
These ideas were published in the pamphlet Revolution by Reason in 1925.
In this document, Mosley had argued for a managed currency rather than the return to the gold standard at pre-war parity as the basis of economic policy, for nationalization of the banks, the establishment of consumer credits to supplement working-class purchasing power, the development of an Economic Council to plan production, and the setting up of a mechanism to check that money supply was equated to production potential.
The general aim was to ensure that the purchasing power of the population was equal to the vast expansion of industrial capacity in the war.
Only if effective consumer demand was increased could the new productive powers of industry be used at their full potential and unemployment avoided.
Although this synthesis of ideas has been rightly praised by subsequent historians and political commentators, Mosley came too realize during the later 1920s that such ideas could only partially solve Britain's economic problems.
In particular he came to appreciate that Britain's reliance on decaying staple industries, whose production costs were making them increasingly uncom-petitive in the post-war world, could only be saved by the abandonment of free trade and the adoption of more protectionist policies.
His earlier work had convinced him of the importance of the home market in maintaining effective demand, so a new policy which emphasized its expansion was called for.
Also the rapid growth of unemployment in the later 1920s convinced him that more vigorous short-term measures were appropriate.
Schemes of  public works financed directly by central government owed much of their inspiration to Lloyd George's yellow book,We Can Conquer Unemployment , and his own work as Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster.
Gradually the concept of a new integrated market based on the planned development of resources in the British Empire as a whole took place, as Mosley borrowed and integrated Joseph Chamberlain's imperial ideas and Rothermere and Beaverbrook's British Empire development schemes into his plan.
Other ideas such as the problem posed by third world economic development and Douglas's fears of new technology destroying rather than creating employment were used to justify such policies.
In a remarkable series of speeches in the House of Commons and in the Memorandum and Manifesto in 1930 and 1931 Mosley developed his ideas.
The growing nationalism of his schemes needed only the more autarchic economic plan and the authoritarian nature of political control to turn it into fully-fledged fascism.
Since he was elected in 1918 on a platform of socialistic imperialism, complete rejection by the political establishment of his more sensible ideas turned the potential into a certainty.
But if Mosley's practical search for radical economic policies was to provide a meaningful response to solve the problems of inter-war Britain, both Chesterton and Williamson survived by developing the higher metaphysical values derived from aesthetic appreciation of literature.
By adopting such beliefs and applying them to contemporary society both found sustenance in elitist moral and ethical beliefs which were far removed from contemporary reality.
As a result both were prone to a disastrous application of metaphysical cultural values to political analysis — in the case of Chesterton and his role as a drama critic and provincial journalist in the 1920s, to a vision of cultural despair based on a parallel theory of criticism to that of his friend the Shakespearian scholar, G. Wilson Knight.
Williamson's romanticism and nature worship, on a rather lower level of theoretical conceptualisation, was to owe much to the books of Richard Jefferies, in particular the sunlight imagery of much of his work.
Both failed to see that there was an epistemological gap  between metaphysical values as applied to culture and society.
By arguing that such beliefs represented a higher appreciation of reality untroubled by empirical criteria both became prone to naive interpretations of political society, most notably Chesterton's virulent cultural anti-semitism and Williamson's curious views on Hitler.
Such beliefs that society needed to be reconstructed with new cultural values implied the revolutionary transformation of individuals.
The fascist concept of the new man fitted in well with such ideas.
Mosley too became increasingly prone to blur the distinction between art, philosophy and life.
Although he was far more concerned with the didactic message of Shaw, Goethe and Wagner than with their artistic values, he transposed his interpretation of their meaning to the political sphere.
This was particularly pronounced in his interpretation of Nietzsche, where the latter's ethical concerns were translated by Mosley into political equivalents.
It was not only in the area of economic ideas and cultural criticism that the First World War was to be important to the roots of British fascist thought.
The devastation and restructuring of European society gave credence to a whole variety of forebodings about the collapse of European civilization.
The genre of apocalyptic historical prophecy reached its apotheosis in the writings of Oswald Spengler, whose The Decline of the West had been published coincidentally at the time of Germany's military defeat.
The influence of Spengler's thought on the BUF was to be seminal, as Mosley and W.E.D.
Allen were to signify.
In their view, Spengler diagnosed the main historical trends of human society and accurately predicted the fate of decaying bourgeois society.
For fascists, however, Spengler's prophecies were too gloomy.
Fascism would revive the corpse of Europe and prevent the final decline into barbarism.
In The Decline of the West Spengler argued that world history exhibited a cyclical pattern based on the organic growth and decay of separate cultures through time.
He argued against the linear view and stated that the study of history could only be understood through an intuitive understanding of spiritual destiny, rather than the material cause and effect relationship of modern science.
Metaphysical values should be used to interpret history correctly.
The main cultures which Spengler analysed were the Apollinian (Classical), Magian (Eastern) and Faustian (Western).
Following the organic method Spengler delineated what he considered to be the significant ideas and symbols of the spring, summer, autumn and winter phases of each culture.
As each culture neared the end of its organic life cycle the creative stage was finished and the atrophying civilization stage began.
For Spengler, this historical progression was a deterministic feature of all cultures, although heroic actions of individuals and peoples could delay the inevitable sequence of the next phase of development.
Caesar figures could delay the collapse of civilization and the return to barbarism.
It was the discussion of the contemporary civilization phase of Faustian Culture and his prophecies for the immediate future which gave Spengler his notoriety.
For him the civilization stage of European culture had been ushered in by the French Revolution.
The key symbol of European life, the nation, had been transformed from a dynastic culture-creating unit to a liberal democratic rationalist state.
The nineteenth century was seen as the age of liberalism and democracy and of the victory of money values.
For Spengler, democracy was a sham and parliament a front for external forces who ruled by other means.
this form of alleged manipulative government could only be transformed by the values of the new caesars, the ‘fact men’ of history, who relied on blood, instinct and realpolitik and not on rationalistic ideology to influence masses and govern nations.
Without them society would be swamped by new barbarians, both from inside and outside the civilization.
Spengler was particularly worried by the threat of a Russian invasion of Europe.
Mosley, arguing that Spengler's understanding of caesarism was profound but that he had failed to see the potential in modern science to rejuvenate society, saw fascism as a ‘mutiny against destiny’.
It was caesarism and science, fascism as a revolutionary corporate system of organization based on modern technology and a unified national purpose, which would renew the youth of European culture for Mosley.
Yet apart from this acknowledged  intellectual debt and critical reaction to Spengler Mosley developed other ideas from his work.
Spengler's concept of the alleged unity of European culture and its primary faustian symbols was to be the basis of his ‘Europe a Nation’ campaign after the Second World War.
Similarly, his idea that contact between different cultures merely led to decay and that Magian Jews and Faustian Europeans were bound to live in friction with each other, was to be an important intellectual influence on Mosley's cultural anti-semitism and to re-inforce his later views on apartheid.
Thus the First World War was clearly of particular importance to the origins of British fascism for both its political and cultural roots.
This was to be demonstrated by the significance given to Remembrance Day parades from the British Fascists through the BUF to the National front and its splinter groups.
The emergence of fascism symbolized a reaction to the continuing decline of Britain and the developing economic and social problems which had been accelerated by the war.
British fascism was to contain extremes from both political right and left as well as to incorporate large numbers with no previous political background.
It was to be influenced by both native British sources and events on the continent, but the most distinctive features, like all continental fascisms, was to be its intensely nationalist roots.
THE BRITISH FASCISTS AND CONSERVATIVE FASCISM, 1981–1934
British fascism originated in several distinct and contradictory reaction to the long-term decline of Britain and the dislocation caused by the First World War.
In the 1920s fascism represented mainly an extremist form of the Die-hard revolt which developed away from the concept of high politics.
However, looked at from the perspective of the 1980s, it is not at all clear that groups which styled themselves upon Mussolini's movement in the 1920s were of greater significance than certain more obscure British nationalist organizations of the period, since these provided crucial financial and ideological legacies for later gener-ations of British fascists, most notably anti-semitism.
This chapter looks at the development of a conservative fascist tradition and the following one assesses racial nationalism.
Both traditions were very marginal in their impact in the inter-war period; their practitioners were regarded as highly eccentric by the small minority who knew of their activities, and as a nuisance by the police.
Dissemination through publication
Indeed, the origins of both traditions lay more in publishing activity than in organizing mass political movements.
The funding of a Die-hard journalistic empire centred on the Morning Post , the Patriot and the Boswell Publishing Company, by Alan Percy, the eight Duke of Northumberland, and Dame Lucy Houston, was non-fascist in inspiration, although the Patriot supported the  British Fascists (BF).
Similarly, the Britons Society and Publishing Company appeared to be nothing more than a minuscule middle-class organization with a bee in its bonnet about Jews.
The BF on the other hand was named after the new Italian experiment in 1923, even though it had little direct knowledge of the aims and ideas of Mussolini.
Its history was of minor significance in itself, although its activities did lead to a degree of confrontation which acted as a precursor to the political violence later to become associated with the BUF in the 1930s.
Its importance as a fore-runner was due less to its political ideas than to its military discipline and its administrative personnel, who were later to help organize the day-to-day running of the BUF.
These groups had deep historical roots in the opening months of the First World War, which had seen the renewal of the sources of criticism of the radical right against the Liberal government.
The continuing military stalemate, even after the advent of the coalition governments of 1915 and 1916, saw the emergence of both populist and radical right resentment, searching for an explanation of the impasse on the western front.
This became increasingly focused on the anti-Liberal, anti-Prussian and anti-semitic elements in the Die-hard tradition, which was elaborated in a simplistic conspiracy theory.
Journals such as Cecil Chesterton's The New Witness and Leo Maxse's National Review , and right-wing political authors like Arnold White, argued that there was an alleged hidden hand in British government working against the national interest to secure the victory of Germany.
This campaign was directed principally at naturalized Englishmen of German and Jewish extraction who were thought to have conflicting loyalties.
The rise of Lloyd George to become prime minister in December 1916, and the close proximity of Rufus Isaacs, Edwin Montague and Sir Alfred Mond as his advisers, gave a spurious plausibility to such claims.
Since the beginning of the war demands had been made for the internment of naturalized aliens, and a spy mania developed.
Lord Haldane was forced to resign from government as a result of coalition, and eminent businessmen such as Sir Ernest Cassel and Sir Edgar Speyer withdrew from public life for the duration of the war.
Even the  royal family changed its name to Windsor and Prince Louis of Battenberg resigned from the Admiralty as a result of this climate of thought.
Yet the radical right was forced into an awkward position during the war.
On the one hand its ultra-patriotism and Ger-manophobia made it an important driving force behind the campaign for no compromise and total victory; but against this was the undoubted fact that the most dynamic political leadership and organizing ability to ensure this outcome was provided by Lloyd George, the radical right's bête noire .
When Lloyd George became prime minister in December 1916 he was backed by the Unionists in a coalition government.
With the continuing stalemate in 1917 and early 1918 it was not surprising that the radical right became restive and began to campaign both inside and outside the Unionist party for the removal of Lloyd George.
An unofficial Die-hard faction of the Unionists tried to undermine the coalition from within, supporting the army in its battle with Lloyd George over military control on the western front during the Maurice debate.
Two Conservatives, Henry Page Croft and Sir Richard Cooper, stalwarts from the pre-war Chamberlain tariff reform campaign, founded the National Party in 1917 as a protest against the Coalition government.
Its programme included the raising of the conscription age to fifty, the closing of German-owned businesses, the internment of enemy aliens, conscription for Ireland, a guaran-teed price for home-grown cereals, protection for British industry and counter air raids against German towns.
The party put up twenty-three candidates at the Coupon Election in 1918, but only Croft and Cooper were elected.
The party rejoined the coalition in 1921 in order to work against it from the inside.
Both Croft and Cooper assaulted the honours system and Lloyd George's use of patronage, but by 1922 they had joined forces with a wider Die-hard campaign of which the Duke of Northumberland was the figurehead and Maxse and Gwynne its main publicists.
The radical right's anxieties had been further strengthened by the effects of the Bolshevik revolution of 1917.
Not only had it removed Russia from the war, but its call for international  revolution and the threatened collapse of the ruling class in much of central and eastern Europe in 1918, combined with an increase in working-class militancy at home, frightened many in the middle classes even outside the radical right.
A plethora of pressure groups and popular movements grew up to give vent to such feelings, including the British Empire Union and the National Citizens Union.
This fear found its most extreme expression in the activities of Alan Percy and his supporters, who can be seen as a connecting link between the pre-war Die-hards and a conservative fascist tradition.
Although his death allegedly prevented the Duke of Northumberland from founding an anti-alien party, there were distinct links between the more extreme fringes of the Die-hard revolt and the emergence of British fascism.
The chief connections proved to be anti-semitism, anti-socialism and a patriotic espousal of the cause of the British Empire.
This was expressed in a more rational and less extreme form than in the Britons Society, although individuals like Baron Sydenham of Coombe appeared to be connected with both.
Die-hard conservatism represented a continuation of the fears and anxieties that had surfaced in those most respectable publications,The Times and the Morning Post , with their debates over the Protocols of the Elders of Zion and the Cause of World Unrest , at the end of the war.
Indeed, the Duke of Northumberland was to purchase the Morning Post as a mouthpiece for Die-hard conservatism in 1924.
The general tone was to follow the case put forward by Maxse and the Chestertons.
The basic argument was that traditional conservatism should re-establish itself by an uncompromising opposition to liberalism and socialism and by combating the supposed international Jewish conspiracy whose sole purpose was the undermining of the British Empire.
To these ends the Duke of Northumberland financed a publishing house, the Boswell Publishing Company, in 1921 and established a weekly newspaper,The Patriot , in 1922.
With further injections of capital of £2,500 from Lady Houston and an anonymous bequest of £6,750, the cause of aristocratic Die-hard conservatism was to survive, at least in journalistic form, until  1950.
The family connection linked the enterprise to the pre-war Die-hard revolt, and Nesta Webster — the principal author of the Boswell Publishing Company — linked it to both the National Citizens Union and the BF.
Even with the addition of the Morning Post to the publishing empire in 1924, Die-hard journalism was fighting a losing battle.
Aristocratic paternalism and Die-hardism had little place in Baldwin's Conservative party.
Its evocation of an idealized pre-war era and its commitment to anti-semitism prevented it from joining forces with other maverick Conservative press barons like Rothermere and Beaverbrook.
The dominance of orthodox economic policies, cautious pragmatism and consensus politics reflected the mood of the British electorate in the 1920s rather more than did the utopian assumptions of the Die-hard remnant.
Indeed, in political terms Die-hard conservatism proved to be even less relevant than its pre-war namesake.
The Duke of Northumberland's political concerns had little or no significance for contemporary society, a fact acknowledged by Nesta Webster in her conspiracy theory novel,The Secret of the Zodiac .
Here Parbury (Baldwin), the prime minister, was portrayed as supporting the League of Nations, recognizing Soviet Russia and encouraging self-government in India.
His benign indifference to the grave problems of the contemporary world was seen as one of the main causes of the threatened collapse of British civilization and of the total isolation of the Die-hards.
Baldwin was to undermine the radical right as effectively as he disarmed the left in the inter-war period.
The radical right mainly drifted back towards the Conservative party and only a small minority associated with the emerging fascist movement.
The rump of Die-hard support around the Boswell publishing concerns was to survive as part of an underground tradition.
In 1950 the company was wound up and its copyright taken over by the Britons Society, in a merger of racial nationalist and Die-hard conservative traditions — an ideological alliance of two of the major strands of political thought which later heavily influenced the ideas of the National Front.
Rotha Lintorn Orman and the British Fascisti
Rather less ideological in its programme was the British Fascisti formed in 1923 by Rotha Lintorn Orman.
Although there were links to other organizations, such as through Arnold Leese to the Britons and Nesta Webster to the extremist Die-hards, the organization's political roots had greater connections to the mainly middle-class pressure groups which evolved at the end of the war to protect property against the alleged socialist menace, the most important of which were the British Empire Union, the Middle Classes Union and the National Citizens Union.
These in turn were similar in political structure and function to pre-war pressure groups which had reflected popular anxiety against German competition.
There was some evidence, however, that for fascism to evolve in Britain, it needed to recruit new members from the lower middle and working classes, who had few, if any, previous political connections.
Certainly many of the ordinary rank and file, like William Joyce in the early years, were of this nature; and it seems significant that J. Havelock Wilson of the Seaman's Union, a stalwart of working-class anti-socialist movements, spoke at an anti-Bolshevik meeting stewarded by 600 fascists at the Royal Albert Hall in 1926 ii
Rotha Lintorn Orman was a spirited young middle-class woman who was concerned about the growing industrial unrest and threat to property posed by the emergence of a socialist Labour party and an alleged communist menace.
She was born in 1895 to an army major and his wife and was granddaughter to a field marshal.
Her independence and organizing ability had been displayed early when she joined the Girl Scouts in 1909 and formed the first Bournemouth troop of guides.
During the First World War she volunteered for the Women's Reserve Ambulance and twice won the Croix de Charité for gallantry for heroic rescues in Salonica.
Invalided home with malaria in 1917, her war experiences no doubt contributed to her indifferent health and drink problem, which were to be factors in the weakness of the BF  before her death in 1935.
Her main concerns in the internal politics of the BF were to encourage independence and self-reliance in women, to combat socialist Sunday schools and the Kibbo Kift, to establish BF children's clubs, and to discourage takeovers by more militant authoritarian or anti-semitic rivals.
Rotha Lintorn Orman admired Mussolini as a man who had dealt firmly with the socialist menace.
Apart from that fact she knew little of the nature or content of his fascist experiment.
She borrowed the name and very little else from Italy.
There was some connection between the British Fascisti and Italy, however, but no evidence of foreign funding.
Several of the closed files on the BF seem to refer to their activity in Italy through their links with the International Centre of Fascist Studies, and the Foreign Office was aware that a British resident called Captain Strina was attempting to form a legion of the organization amongst expatriates in that country.
However, apart from that connection the British Fascisti reflected Rotha Lintorn Orman's own experience of the Girl Guides, public service and a military background rather than any emulation of continental examples or ideologies.
As a result the BF was organized as a cross between a glorified boy scout movement and a paramilitary group.
The organization was run by an executive council who were responsible to a grand council, and was administered locally at the county level.
Districts were created that were responsible for the basic unit structure of seven members.
The movement was divided between the infantry (the small unit of seven men), the cavalry and motorized transport, the propaganda and publicity section and the intelligence department.
the membership was further split between the active flying squads and the reserves.
Active members paid six shillings a month whilst inactive ones paid one shilling.
Meeting platforms were festooned with a plethora of union jacks and members wore badges and gave the Italian fascist salute.
In 1927 the blue shirt was adopted as the official uniform and in the 1930s a beret and dark trousers or skirt were added.
Vastly inflated claims were made about the membership, which reached its peak in 1925 — 6 with several thousand active members.
Accounts published during the bankruptcy proceedings in 1935  suggested that the subscription income had been £6,848 in 1925, £604 in 1928 and afterwards less than £400 a year.
The position of Rotha Lintorn Orman in the organization was explained in large part by her financial resources.
Her mother had handed over most of her fortune of £50,000 to Rotha and this was used to fund the organization.
She also received a monthly allowance from her mother.
The grand council of the movement was dominated by retired military officers of the Colonel Blimp type, Die-hard conservatives, landed gentry and emancipated middle-class women.
The first president was Lord Garvagh, who was succeeded by Brigadier-General Blakeney from 1924 — 6.
Blakeney, who had been general manager of the Egyptian State Railway from 1919 to 1923, was responsible for organizing the tight-knit military discipline of the organization and for turning the BF into a limited company, the anglicized British Fascists Ltd, in 1924.
He was also later to be connected with both the Imperial Fascist League (IFL) and the BUF.
Other notable members who entered fascism through the BF, included Arnold Leese, later of the IFL, and William Joyce, Neil Francis Hawkins, E.G. Mandeville Roe and H.J. Donovan of the BUF.
Arnold Leese was one of two fascist councillors elected at Stamford in Lincolnshire in 1924.
William Joyce's fanatical commitment to fascism was strengthened after receiving a razor slash on his cheek while helping steward a Conservative party meeting at Lambeth Baths in October 1924.
Neither found the BF a suitable vehicle for their increasingly anti-semitic views as the organization did not become hostile to Jews before 1932.
Leese considered the initials of the organization to be unfortunate, and argued quite logically that it was misnamed, as its platform had little to do with fascism.
Nesta Webster, however, who was a member of the grand council for three months in 1926 and 1927, thought that the BF had done more for British patriotism than all the other middle-class organizations put together, and soon after  leaving established a Patriots Enquiry Centre, a kind of Die-hard library where the ultra-right could study the socialist menace.
The fact that such later fascist luminaries became rapidly dissatisfied with the BF was due mainly to its failure to become either an accepted ally of the state preparations against political extremism or a credible independent political movement in the 1920s.
In spite of its activism, its military discipline, the stewarding of right-wing Conservative speakers, the attempted abduction of Harry Pollitt, and strikebreaking activities, the BF made little impact.
The increasing eccentricity of its founder alienated many as well.
Although there was no leadership cult, Rotha Linton Orman developed an increasing knack of instigating factional disagreement in the movement at periodic intervals, and as a result of the lack of initiative, leadership and purpose, there was a high turnover of membership.
The first serious split occurred in 1925 with the formation of the National Fascists, a group of about 100 which broke away from the parent organization on the grounds that the BF were neither sufficiently anti-semitic nor fascist.
For a time it proved to be more militant than the BF.
A meeting in Hyde Park in 1926 was attended by 1,000 people and ended with a fight with communist demon-strators.
Other stunts included the breaking up of Labour party meetings and vandalizing a Daily Herald van by driving it into the railings of a London church.
The movement survived as the National Fascists for three years, with a black shirt uniform.
However, it too suffered from factional splits and lack of finance.
In the winter of 1926–7 a power struggle brought it to the attention of the police.
Its leader, a Colonel Seymour, was charged with committing common assault on Charles Eyres, the leader of the Croydon branch of the organization, after a dispute in which Eyres claimed that Seymour had misappropriated funds and altered the constitution to turn himself into a virtual dictator; this led to Seymour drawing a sword and pointing an unlicensed gun at Eyres.
In terms of ideology, the National Fascists were more extreme than the BF.
According to an article in the paper's journal, the Fascist Gazette , communists were ‘wild beasts’ whose ‘hell's spawn’should be pushed into the sea.
Socialists and  communists would be drastically punished, and the present franchise system would be restricted in the National Fascist state.
An equally serious split occurred in 1926 over the issue of the General Strike.
This posed the problem of the relationship between the BF, the government and the Conservative party.
During the strike Rotha Lintorn Orman organized a fleet of cars from her mother's London address to transport strike-breakers to work.
She offered the services of 200,000 members — a grossly inflated claim — to join with the National Citizens Union in the Organization for the Maintenance of Supplies.
Sir William Joyn-son Hicks, the Home Secretary and vice-president of the National Citizens Union, threatened to resign from that organization if the proposal was accepted.
He objected to the aims of the BF and its vague idea to introduce a corporate state.
The proposal of help could only be accepted if the BF altered their constitution to make explicit their belief in parliamentary government.
While Blakeney and five other members of the fascist grand council accepted these terms, Rotha Lintorn Orman dug her heels in and with other members narrowly defeated the proposals, which would have abolished the independent status of the BF.
Blakeney and several others then resigned.
These two internal rows greatly weakened the movement.
After the General Strike it rapidly declined and Rotha Lintorn Orman's tenuous grasp of reality disintegrated still further.
Several attempts to gain permission to publish a photograph of King George V in the BF journal,The Lion , were refused.
Her request to hold a Remembrance Day parade two months early in 1927, when 15,000 BF members would salute the king at Buckingham Palace during a march to the Cenotaph, was turned down.
The police became irritated too with the need to check her unsubstantiated claim that there were communist arms dumps and Russian involvement in plans for revolutionary uprisings.
Such activities as there were led to sporadic violence with communists and communist front organizations, such as the disruption of the International Class War Prisoners Aid meeting at Trafalgar Square in January 1927.
As the BF increasingly lacked purpose and credibility other emerging movements became interested in its assets.
Rotha Lintorn Orman, who appeared to become steadily more dependent on alcohol, became increasingly intransigent.
She split the organization again in 1931 when Francis Hawkins and Mandeville Roe accepted Mosley's merger terms with the New Party, whilst the women on the committee turned them down.
However, in the 1930s, with her deteriorating health and the takeover of its most committed members by the BUF, the BF became practically moribund.
There were plans to revive it and turn it into an Ulster Loyalist pressure group when a leading member, Archibald Whitmore, an ex-member of the Ulster Volunteer Force, announced to influential people at the Bath Club that he planned to develop the BF in Ireland along the same lines as the movement in 1914.
However, this plan and one for merger with the IFL failed to materialize.
Negotiations with another pocket Mussolini, It.
Colonel Graham Seaton Hutchinson, and his National Worker Party, also fizzled out; his proposal to merge the two groups into the British Empire Fascist Party probably collapsed when the BF realized that the National Worker Party was aptly named.
In spite of Hutchinson's claims that he had 20,000 members in the Mansfield district, and large numbers of followers in Lancashire and other industrial areas, and that he had printed hundreds of thousands of copies of the National Worker , there was no evidence that he had any members in his organization.
Increasing financial difficulties became another problem when Rotha Lintorn Orman's mother cut her allowance, believing that the BF had been taken over by disreputable elements, who lived off her daughter's money and manipulated her by making her increasingly dependent on alcohol and drugs.
 Drunken orgies and undesirable practices were alleged to have taken place at her London home.
Whatever the truth behind this accusation, it was noticeable that the BF became increasingly anti-semitic in its death throes.
In 1933 its total membership was believed to be about 300, but the cost of a fund-raising appeal for £25,000 proved to be more than the sum collected and the movement went £800 into debt.
When in 1934 a further loan of £500 from a Colonel Wilson  was not repaid, he forced the movement into bankruptcy after Rotha Lintorn Orman once more vetoed a merger with the BUF.
She never recovered from the demise of Britain's first fascist organization and died a year later.
The decline of the BF, which ended in such inglorious circumstances in the bankruptcy court, was due to several factors.
The organization lacked coherent leadership and purpose and was little more than a patriotic group with a foreign-sounding name.
Although developed as a mass movement, it had no leadership cult, and despite William Joyce's scar, confrontation with socialists was small beer compared with the castor oil politics of Italy in the 1920s.
Its importance for the development of fascism in Britain has to be seen in terms of the administration and discipline which the group who left to join Mosley in 1931 supplied to the BUF.
Nesta Webster and the conspiracy theory
The impact of the ideological inheritance of these conservative elements by later forms of British fascism was to be delayed.
The BUF had little time for the reactionary tone of Die-hard conservatism, and its anti-semitism was derived from social and economic grievances rather than from an ideological tradition.
Its significance was to be more for the racial nationalist tradition and the development of non-Mosley fascism after the Second World War.
The contribution of the reactionary aristocratic conservative case and its pseudo-academic presentation was to provide an underground tradition which possessed a dual function, an appeal to patriotic nationalists and an ideal cover for died-in-the-wool fascists and nazis to re-emerge in more acceptable guise.
The contribution of the Duke of Northumberland's publishing ventures to the eventual emergence of conservative and racial fascism in Britain was to supply a seemingly rational conspiracy theory on which opposition to the British political system could be based.
The Protocols of the Elders of Zion were proved to be a forgery by The Times in 1921 and this went some way to defuse the growth of anti-semitic tendencies within the wider political culture.
For those who wished to retain belief in the conspiracy  explanation of modern political events, an alternative version was supplied by the Morning Post , the Patriot and the publications of the Boswell Publishing Company.
All these sources supported Die-hard conservatism and their conspiracy views were resurrected later by British fascist groups.
Although the main contributors to this tradition, such as the Duke of Northumberland, Baron Sydenham of Combe, Catherine Stoddart and Nesta Webster, were implicit believers of the Protocols , a more historical explanation was offered.
This was based on the research of Nesta Webster, the grand dame of British conspiracy theory, who saw Jews in alliance with other subversive forces, as being behind all the ills of the modern world, from the threats to the British Empire through to the nudity movement.
The alternative to the Protocols as a base to the conspiracy theory was the revival of the French counter-revolutionary tradition, which had been developed in the first articles in the ‘Cause of World Unrest’ disclosures in the Morning Post in July 1920, and was handed down to posterity in more permanent form in Nesta Webster's version of world history.
The basic argument of this tradition was that revolution was caused by the machinations of secret societies, who used their knowledge of occult forces to undermine authority and the stability of governments.
Freemasons were seen to be the power behind the French Revolution, whose role in contemporary disturbances such as the Russian Revolution had been taken over by the Jews.
Nesta Webster had been deeply influenced by the occult revival of the late nineteenth century, although she was hostile to its basic humanist and evolutionary precepts.
Somewhat ironically, given the role bankers were to play in the conspiracy theory, she was the daughter of a director of Barclay's Bank.
Her ideas can fairly be described as the intersection of personal and group fantasies.
Her personal delusion is described quite clearly in her autobiography.
Whilst researching the material for her second book, the Chevalier de Boufflers , a romantic story about two French aristocrats on the eve of the French Revolution, she underwent a mystical experience.
She became convinced that she had read the letters of the Chevalier de Boufflers to the Comtesse  de Sabran in another life, and that she might be a reincarnation.
This belief so dominated her thoughts that she began to form a coherent political ideology based on what she imagined the ancien régime to have been like, and became convinced of the perfection of the aristocratic society of eighteenth-century France.
For Nesta Webster the French Revolution came to represent the cause of all the problems of the modern world.
Although the Chevalier de Boufflers was highly successful, with fifteen editions published, her attempt to place it in context in The French Revolution was harshly treated by some historians.
Her contention that this event was a result of a twofold plot of the Duc d'Orléans and the Illuminati, organized from Germany, was heavily criticized by several reviewers.
In retrospect it is clear that the rejection of her work merely deepened her anxiety and revealed the beginnings of a persecution complex.
Her literary concern about the doleful consequences of the French Revolution was turned into a political neurosis by the contemporary situation in 1918.
Nesta Webster's fears had been reinforced by the collapse of the traditional social order in Europe in 1918.
This led her to search for a continuous tradition which had been activated by occult means and linked the French and Russian Revolutions.
With the transition from a basically personal hatred of the French Revolution to the more general threat to society posed by the Russian Revolution, continental freemasonry became insufficient as a causal explanation.
The Jewish cabbala was introduced as the force which originally inspired the freemasons.
The Jews became the link which undermined both the English national state and the structure of society.
It had been the Jews, together with Prussian militarism, that had been behind the Russian Revolution.
To this ethnocentric anti-semitism Webster added a belief in the sentiments, if not the authenticity, of the Protocols of the Elders of Zion .
This, she argued, was very similar to the code of Weishaupt, the founder of the Illuminati, which in her view had caused the French Revolution.
This interpretation of the forces behind history in The French Revolution and World Revolution was taken to its logical conclusion in her most notorious work,Secret Societies and Subversive Movements .
With meticulous footnoting, she now argued that all plots and revolutions against the social order in human history had been caused by secret societies, through the use of black magic, mass hypnotism and telepathy.
With eight editions published by 1964, this was to be the main connection linking Nesta Webster to the development of the fascist conspiracy theory.
Although a member of the BF grand council in 1926, her political roots and beliefs emanated from Die-hard conservatism.
Of little significance in the inter-war period, her ideas developed a new lease of life, both in Britain and the USA, after the Second World War, because her rationally expressed anti-semitism and pseudo-academic version of world history proved influential in themselves, as well as providing a respectable cover for more extreme ideas.
Her work became an ideal basis for a revisionist fascist conspiracy theory.
Those who wished to appeal more directly to fascist or nazi ideas would criticize her Christian and anti-German ideas, while stating that she was on the right track.
Others argued that her theories lacked an understanding of financial power.
(The channel for the survival of Webster's ideas in Britain within the fascist tradition was to be provided by the publications of Arnold Leese and the Britons Society.)
Although her views are still regarded as highly eccentric outside reactionary conservative and fascist circles, it is interesting to note that some historians now argue that secret societies like the IRA and the Mafia have indeed played a significant role in world events, and that the Illuminati conspiracy in the 1780s was truly a model for future revolutionary organization.
The BF, despite its short connection with Webster, was to have little relevance for the development of a native fascist ideological tradition.
This was apparent in the BUF where the main administrative clique, who were recruited from the BF, were  derided as totally lacking in ideas by the more ideologically committed.
Nevertheless Mandeville Roe, an ex-BF member, did write a book on the Corporate State in Italy, and together with Alexander Raven Thomson provided the chief source of such ideas in the BUF.
Yet apart from this the BF policy was vague and generalized.
Its main components included the upholding of the monarchy, promotion of class friendship, the elimination of the slums, the encouragement of Empire trade, the drastic restriction of immigration and hostility to Bolshevism and socialism.
There was no overt anti-semitism before 1932, although calls for the purification of race and criticism of moneylending no doubt could be interpreted as such by those who saw the hidden hand of the Jews everywhere.
The significance of the BF therefore was to be in its administration and the fact that it was the first British organization to link itself specifically with Mussolini's new form of politics, in however diluted a form.
THE JEW WISE, 1918–1939
More ideologically militant than the British Fascists, although even fewer in numbers, were the groups who could be seen as closest to the nazis in their thought and inspiration.
These were the self-proclaimed ‘Jew wise’, i an odd mixture of reactionary conservatives and racial fascist enthusiasts whose obsession with political anti-semitism was to lead to an alternative tradition in British fascism to that provided by Mosley.
The most important exponents of these beliefs in the inter-war period came from three organizations: the Britons Society, the Imperial Fascist League and the Nordic League.
The common element in all such movements was a fanatical belief in the authenticity and argument of the notorious forgery, the Protocols of the Elders of Zion , an obsessional Jew hatred based on a gutter anti-semitism or an older Christian tradition, and a racial nationalist outlook.
Reliable intelligence reports from meetings of such groups refer to such audience comments as ‘Kill the Jews’, ‘Perish Judea’, ‘We hate them’ and ‘Bastards’.
The conspiracy mentality of members of these organizations represented a mirror image of the alleged Jewish plot to subvert the world, and partly explained the secrecy with which they hid most of their activities, and the fact that so very few knew of their existence.
Extreme anti-semitism and its significance
Although parts of this tradition have been examined in great detail, some of the most important aspects of it for this theme have received little attention.
The major historians of political anti-semitism in Britain in the inter-war period, Colin Holmes and Gisela Lebzelter, have produced fascinating accounts of the publication of the Protocols in England, the ideology of the belief system and the personalities of Arnold Leese and Henry Hamilton Beamish.
However, they have said very little about the membership or the nature of political argument within the Britons or the IFL, and almost nothing on the most important of the extreme anti-semitic organizations, the NL, and its guiding spirit, Archibald H. Maule Ramsay MP.
Indeed, only one unpublished study has referred to the activities of this group and the concern with which the Board of Deputies of British Jews viewed it.
Yet in many ways recently released Home Office papers on the IFL and the NL, particularly when it is related to the information in the Board of Deputies Archives, gives us much-needed new information on these matters.
This is as significant and interesting material as the recently released Mosley papers and helps to illuminate the divergent nature of British fascism and the very mixed and complex attitudes fascists and anti-semites had towards Hitler.
The relevance of these organizations certainly did not lie in the number of their supporters and activists.
Although each of them gave greatly inflated estimates of their membership, reliable intelligence reports suggest that they were shoestring operations with minimal popular impact.
The minute book of the Britons speaks of average attendance at meetings of between thirty and fifty members, and Special Branch officers discovered that the circulation of its newspaper The Hidden Hand was only 150 per month.
Even the most detailed study of Arnold Leese and the IFL  has overestimated the size of membership; intelligence reports have suggested that IFL numbers, despite inflated claims of several thousands, averaged only 150 during most of the 1930s.
Its activities were only kept going by fifty enthusiasts living in London and the obsessional fanaticism of Leese, its guiding spirit.
The print order for its main propaganda vehicle,The Fascist , published between 1929 and 1939, was certainly more impressive than for the journal of the Britons; but of the 3,000 produced, 1,000 were purchased by a Mr Pope of Porthcawl and many of the remainder were sent to South Africa.
The Security Service reported in the war that the IFL was mainly subsidised by Leese's private means and that the largest individual contribution, by a Colonel Macdonald of Brussels in the period for which cash books were found between September 1930 and August 1933 and from June 1937 to November 1938, was only £5 per month with a special donation from him of £50 in November 1938.
The more popular meetings of the NL were attended by between 200 and 400, although attendances fell rapidly in the summer of 1939.
The membership of such groups showed a marked bias towards individuals of petit bourgeois or middle-class background who had obsessions of varying intensity about the Jews.
Otherwise members seem to have exhibited a fairly normal range of personality and most seem to have been socially well-adjusted despite the extremism of their anti-semitic views.
There was also a small working-class and youth element attached to the IFL, some of whom acted as a kind of precursor of the skinhead and football hooligan types later attracted to the National Front and British Movement.
The true significance of these groups was fourfold.
Firstly, the Britons and the IFL, although unimportant in themselves, were to provide crucial financial, publishing and ideological links to the revival of British fascism after the Second World War.
Second, the activities of Maule Ramsay and the two secret societies he was  connected with, the Right Club and NL, and his links with Mosley in 1939 — 40, were to be responsible for the internment of many fascists without trial in the Second World War, and in part the mutual recriminations between Mosleyites and racial nationalists which fragmented the revival of the tradition after 1945.
Third, the important Rex v. 
Leese case in 1936 as explained later nevertheless established reluctance by the authorities to prosecute obvious cases of seditious libel against Jews and other minorities if public order was not threatened, because publicity might create more harm than good and because of the fear that jury acquittals might be misunderstood.
Fourth, the IFL was associated with secretive underground activities which implicated it as one of the originators of a tradition of direct action and racial violence against immigrants.
Whilst there were obvious similarities between this tradition and nazism, its inspiration and origins occur in a period before anybody in England had heard of Hitler.
Prior to the First World War unrelieved hostility towards the Jews, which expressed both obsession with their alleged power and ascribed to them filthy moral and personal habits, was rare.
Only Joseph Banister in his England under the Jews appeared to suggest a total pathological malice towards them.
He was a journalist who later edited the British Guardian in 1924.
Sir Richard Burton had also revived ill-informed prejudices in his accounts of alleged Jewish ritual murder, even if the Board of Deputies of British Jews forced drastic pruning of his original text.
Yet the same forces and influences on society which saw the emergence of the Die-hards as the main force of the radical right after the First World War also saw more extremist reactions from a small but significant group who thought like Banister, and who were prepared to use Burton's supposed evidence.
Beamish and the Britons
More plebeian than the Die-hards and entirely independent of Conservative control were the activities of populist  organizations who rose to challenge the Coalition government in by-elections at the end of the war.
Fired by the oratory of such as Horatio Bottomley and Pemberton Billing, groups such as the Silver Badge Party of ex-Servicemen showed the degree of dis-satisfaction with the management of the war.
Standing as an Independent, Henry Hamilton Beamish came within 1181 votes of winning such a by-election in Clapham in June 1918.
In December 1918 he came second in the same constituency in the Coupon election.
After a short association with Pemberton Billing's Silver Badge Party of ex-Servicemen, Beamish quarrelled with him and developed his own organization, which he called the Britons Society.
Of all the multiplicity of middle-class organizations which arose as a response to the dislocation of war and the perceived threat of socialism in Great Britain, the distinguishing feature of the Britons Society was its crude and obsessional anti-semitism.
Formed by Beamish in 1918 as a patriotic organization dedicated to the eradication of what it termed alien influences in British life, the Britons campaigned for the forced expulsion of Jews from England and for the revoking of the Act of Settlement of 1700, which would ensure that immigrants and their descendents would be ineligible to hold public office.
The Britons claimed to discern a ‘hidden hand’ in British government which had delayed the victory against Germany in the war, and argued that Jews had organized an international conspiracy designed to promote anarchy and disorder in the world.
With such beliefs the Society proved receptive to both the nativist anti-semitic tradition which had been focused on the anti-alien campaign in the East End of London between 1900 and 1905, to the Marconi scandal before the First World War, and to international influences such as the White Russian anti-semitic propaganda directed at the Bolsheviks after 1918.
This latter influence became more pronounced when the Britons took over the George Shanks version of the Protocols , entitled The Jewish Peril , in 1920, and published the Victor Marsden version,World Conquest through World Government , in 1921.
Later the Britons showed an interest in the activities of  the National Socialist Workers Party in Munich and Beamish spoke at a Hitler meeting.
The Britons remained a small lecturing and debating society, with a minuscule middle-class membership.
The organization concentrated its activities on publishing anti-semitic literature, most notably the Protocols and Beamish's own concoction The Jew's Who's Who (1920).
Beamish had formed the provocatively titled Judaic Publishing Company, which was renamed the Britons Publishing Company in August 1922.
Apart from the minutes of the two meetings in 1932 and 1948 there is little evidence that the Britons Society survived longer than that of its regular monthly publication from 1920 — 5.
This was the journal Jewry Ueber Alles which had just been published in February 1920, and had altered its name to The Hidden Hand in September 1920 and to the British Guardian in May 1924.
The Britons Publishing Society, however, had a much more lasting effect on British racist thought.
Dedicated to printing anti-semitic material and to disseminating the Protocols and other variants of the conspiracy theory of history, it was formally separated from the parent society in 1932, and continued as a publishing and distribution business for extreme right-wing groups until the 1970s, producing eighty-five editions of the Protocols as well as becoming the main outlet for circulating American conspiracy theory works and racist material.
As a small clandestine organization the Britons Publishing Society was to become the main ideological source of an underworld whose principal themes were later to influence the racial nationalist tradition from the IFL through to the National Front.
The founder and president of the organization from 1918 to 1948 was the above-mentioned Henry Hamilton Beamish.
Beamish was the son of an admiral who was aide de camp to Queen Victoria, and brother of the Conservative MP for Lewes.
He fought in both the Boer and First World Wars.
In South Africa he came to the conclusion that the Boer War had been fought for the benefit of Jewish gold and diamond financiers, who were  exploiting British imperialism for their own international purposes.
This, combined with the presence of Jewish revolu-tionaries in the Bolshevik uprising, and the alleged Jewish capitalist funding of the communists from Wall Street, convinced him that there was a plot to undermine civilization and the British Empire.
The British government was seen as completely dominated by Jewish interests since the Marconi scandal, with Isaacs, Montagu and Mond allegedly pulling the strings behind Lloyd George.
With the rise of Lloyd George to become prime minister in 1916 Britain was now ruled by the ‘Jewalition’.
The manifest disasters of the war could be quantified exactly in anti-semitic terms.
Jews were supposedly responsible for one-quarter of the casualties of the war.
Beamish decided to communicate such views to a wider public.
Together with H. McCleod Frazer of the Silver Badge Party for ex-Servicemen, Beamish displayed a notice at Charing Cross in 1919 which alleged that Sir Alfred Mond was a traitor and that he had allocated shares to Germans during the war.
In substance this merely repeated the libel levelled against Mond by the [New Witness in October 1918, where it was alleged that the Mond-Nickel Company had distributed shares to enemy subjects without government sanction.
This represented the end of a campaign where patriotic English Jews of German extraction were denounced as potential or actual traitors by the popular press and the New Witness, National Review or John Bull .
Whilst such German immigrants earnestly desired peace, there is no evidence of unpatriotic behaviour.
Beamish was sued by Mond and judgement was found in the plaintiff's favour to the cost of £5,000.
In order to escape payment Beamish fled the country and he only returned to Britain at irregular intervals from then on.
His later role as a kind of travelling salesman of international anti-semitism is only tangentially related to the scope of this study, although he was to be of considerable significance in his role as vice-president of the IFL and the legacy he bequeathed to Arnold  Leese was to help him revive racial nationalism after the Second World War.
In Beamish's absence the Britons survived under the direction of Dr J.H. Clarke until his death in 1931.
Although Clarke tried to maintain interest, the organization foundered after the British Guardian ceased publication in 1925.
J.D. Dell, a solicitor, became honorary secretary of the Britons Publishing Society until his retirement in 1949.
In the inter-war period, apart from publishing the Protocols , the Britons made little impact.
Indeed, the authorities made no move against the organization during the Second World War and it continued its activities unmolested.
This earned it black marks in the eyes of its founder, Beamish, who considered it a decrepit and defunct organization not worthy of his continuing support.
Arnold Leese, who was to become the undis-puted leader of the IFL in 1932, was highly critical of Dell's social credit views about Hitler as a supposed Jewish agent, but after Beamish's death in 1948 he used part of his inheritance to revive the Britons.
Membership of the Britons Society in the 1920s included more than ultra-conservative political reactionaries.
Given the nature of its virulent anti-semitic propaganda, it was surprising that some fairly well-connected and distinguished individuals were associated with the organization.
These included Dr J.H. Clarke, chairman from 1918 — 31, who was chief consulting physician to the Homeopathic Hospital in London, and was claimed to have some influence with the Conservative Die-hards in the 1920s; Walter Crick, the Northampton boot manufacturer, who was vice-president from 1925 — 36; and Arthur Kitson, the inventor, currency reformer and entrepreneur who provided another link with manufacturing industry.
Other members included Lord Sydenham of Combe, an ex-Governor of Bombay and Victoria, Australia, as well as a secretary of the Imperial Defence Committee; George Mudge, Professor of Zoology at the University of London; Victor Marsden, Russian correspondent of the Morning Post ; the Churchman Prebendary A.W.
Gough; the explorer Bessie Pullen Burry; Lady Moore; Capel Pownall, the archery expert; and a bevy of military men including It-Colonel A.H.
Lane, Brigadier-General Blakeney and Captain Howard.
There were some interesting connections between these individuals and others associated with the Britons, apart from the common commitment to the British Empire.
The experiences of  Beamish, Lane and Joseph Banister linked them not only with the anti-alien campaign prior to 1914, but also with the anti-semitic critique of Jewish capitalists in South Africa by Sir William Butler.
Kitson, Crick and Clarke were all talented individuals who disagreed strongly with the prevailing establishment views in their field.
The fact that their discoveries were either ignored or did not bring their just rewards was partially responsible for inducing a conspiracy mentality.
The presence of such energetic ladies as Bessie Pullen Burry in the Britons, of Nesta Webster and Catherine Stoddart in the Duke of Northumberland's publishing concerns, as well as Rotha Lintorn Orman's role in the British Fascists and Mary Allen's, Mary Richardson's and Mrs Dacre-Fox's membership of the BUF, suggested a peculiar side-effect of the suffragette movement; political commitment and involvement could develop in very different directions from the dedicated socialism of Sylvia Pankhurst or the militant conservatism of her mother and sister.
Indeed, the suffragette movement and its link to fascism represented one kind of genteel revolt by spirited upper-middle-class women against the stultifying effects of the Victorian ethic of limiting the role of respectable ladies to ornaments in the social round.
Arnold Leese and the IFL
There were close ties between the Britons and the IFL.
Beamish was a vice-president of this organization and spoke at several of its meetings on his infrequent visits from abroad in the 1930s.
Arnold Leese, its leader, was a member of the Britons and had gained a strong belief in the Protocols of the Elders of Zion as a result of contact with Arthur Kitson in Stamford, Lincolnshire, where Leese had lived in the 1920s.
Anthony Gittens, secretary of the Britons from 1949 to 1973 and a member since 1924, was a prominent member of the IFL in the 1930s and opened a branch at Kentish Town in London.
The IFL originated in November 1928 as a patriotic anti-socialist organization.
It acquired its fanatical anti-semitism only  after Arnold Leese became its guiding spirit in 1930.
The movement was originally formed by Brigadier-General D. Erskine Tulloch, and was controlled by a directorate of three persons, Major J. Baillie, L.H. Sherrard and Arnold Leese.
Baillie and Sherrard resigned in 1932 and Leese became the sole leader of the organization, assuming the title of director-general.
Leese was a veterinary surgeon who had retired from his practice in Stamford in Lincolnshire in 1928.
This had some claim to be the hotbed of British fascism in the 1920s owing to the fact that Leese and a colleague had successfully stood for the local council on a British fascist policy in 1924.
However, Leese quarrelled with the ‘BF's’, as he called them, because he thought they lacked dynamism and credibility.
Moving to Guildford, Leese's fanaticism and his willingness to devote all his time and resources to the new movement soon made him the fulcrum of racial nationalist activity in Britain.
His ability to provide finance for publishing a newspaper,The Fascist , and a constant stream of pamphlets devoted to fascism, anti-semitism and racial nationalism, and his own editorial drive, made him a natural source of inspiration.
However, although Leese's virulent anti-semitism and racial fascist beliefs made him the nearest equivalent in outlook to an English Hitler, his personality and attitude to leadership were very different.
Leese's lack of impact, of course, was also due to the very different cultural traditions and values of British society compared with those of Germany.
Leese had a pronounced anti-authoritarian streak in his behaviour and a quarrelsome personality.
His loneliness as a child had been reinforced by his years of solitary endeavour in the north-west frontier in India and Kenya, which made him the world's leading authority on the diseases of the camel.
He found it very difficult to work in collaboration with others.
Although not untalented as a journalist, despite his venomous and eccentric views of Jews, he lacked any personal charisma.
Racial nationalists and extreme anti-semites respected Leese's fanaticism and dedication to the cause, but were not prepared to obey his commands or views without question, nor were they able to get personally close to him.
For his part  Leese accepted discussion and political argument in the IFL provided that official policy was not contravened.
In practice this meant a marked toleration of a variety of extremist ideas provided that the individual had proved himself to be ‘Jew wise,.
Leese's view was that the chief function of the IFL was a training organization for an élite of anti-semitic propagandists, not as a political party in its own right.
The organization of the IFL was divided into three separate hierarchical structures.
The first was the Graduates Association, comprising the leading members who were designed to become the future governing aristocracy of the fascist corporate state.
Beneath them were to be the fascist Legions, the militant branch of the League who were divided into active and passive sections of members.
The Activist Confederations were to be associate members who were to disseminate the belief in corporatism throughout the community.
In practice there were two types of member: the fifty or so of middle-class or petit bourgeois origin who formed the backbone of the appreciative audience at Leese's regular Wednesday night diatribes against the Jews at his London headquarters represented the core of the IFL; there were also working-class members who engaged in street meetings at intermittent intervals and who were involved in direct conflict and physical violence with members of the Jewish community.
As well as central London headquarters, branches were known to exist at Hackney, Kentish Town, Bristol, Glasgow and Newcastle upon Tyne.
The only paid official in 1936 was P.J. Ridout, who was paid £2 a week, mainly out of Leese's own funds.
Amongst the coterie of fanatical enthusiasts around Leese, the most interesting were those who comprised the ‘literary board’ of The Fascist .
This was a fluctuating group of four or five individuals who were responsible for the literary output of the organization.
The Board of Deputies of British Jews managed to infiltrate a reliable agent into the IFL for a time in 1937 and his information provides a fascinating glimpse of its workings.
The chief implication of his findings was that although Leese was the dominant personality of the movement, the literary output usually ascribed to him was in part a joint enterprise of the literary board.
In particular, one of Leese's most notorious pamphlets, ‘My  Irrelevant Defence’, was co-written with Charles W. Gore.
This outlined the basis of Leese's claim that the Jews were guilty of ritual murder, which had led to his being charged with seditious libel in 1936.
Gore apparently did not want his name on the cover of the book and wished for it to be published by the Canadian fascist, Arcand, so that he could not be sued.
Although not formally a member Gore had a profound influence on Leese.
He thought that fascism was played out in England and that the IFL should merge into a new organization that he planned called the ‘National Union of British Workmen’.
His literary pretensions were further highlighted when he sent a copy of his unpublished manuscript ‘The Island of Madagascar as a National State for the Jewish people and Why’ to Lord Rothschild, who forwarded it to the Board of Deputies in 1938.
By this time Gore had split with Leese and offered information on the IFL to the Board of Deputies, which was declined.
Others prominent in the literary board were H.H. Lockwood, an insurance agent, who contributed regularly to The Fascist .
He was considered to be one of the most dangerous of all the fascists and was interned until the end of the Second World War.
S.H.E.
Fox also attracted the attention of the Security Service.
He was an editor in Shell Mex house and a frequent visitor to Germany, who entertained members of the nazi party when they visited this country in the 1930s.
However, the only person Leese was associated with in the 1930s who was later to become distinguished in his own field, was the popular medieval historian and expert on Gothic architecture, John Hooper Harvey.
The kind of material which members of the Graduate Association enjoyed at their weekly meetings was best exemplified by a Jewish intelligence report of a lecture given by the IFL vice-president H.H. Beamish in 1937, entitled ‘National Socialism (Racial Fascism) in Practice in Germany’, which appeared to have been fairly typical of his beliefs.
Members heard Beamish tell the audience that Germany was a great country today because Hitler had named the enemy and it was to be hoped that he would soon  call an international conference on the question.
According to Beamish, the IFL knew of three remedies to the Jewish question: to kill them, sterilize them or segregate them.
In answer to questions after the lecture Beamish said that the Russian Revolution had killed off the intelligentsia and that the country was now inhabited by ‘animal life people’.
With a chilling prophecy he then stated that it would be the task of a great leader, Hitler for preference, to march into Russia in the next five years and place one half of the population in the lethal chamber and the other half in the zoo.
After the applause had subsided Leese then spoke to the effect that national socialism had been vilified in this country, and that Germany was supposed to have nudist camps of unclean practices, which was untrue, but the IFL's photographers had penetrated into nudist camps in this country, which were perfectly foul and run by Jews.
The meeting was then closed with all present saluting with a ‘Heil Hitler’, much to the agent's embarrassment.
If the more intellectual middle-class members were titillated by such political discourse, the IFL had more mundane functions.
Clothed in full dress uniform, the members wore a black shirt (blouse pattern), khaki breeches, puttees, black boots and black beret.
Black or grey trousers were worn on duties other than full dress parades, and a brassard showing a Union Jack with a swastika superimposed was worn on the left arm in conjunction with the uniform.
This was usually worn when selling The Fascist and for other ceremonial duties.
Some working-class members of the Legions also held open air meetings in Hackney and other locations in the East End of London at irregular intervals.
After a letter to the Home Secretary in 1934 complaining that the IFL speakers had stated at these meetings that they would clear all Jews out of the country, and if this was not possible they would starve them and murder them, Special Branch reported that a Mr Pipkin and a Mr Smith of the IFL, both about twenty-one years of age, had made reckless and rash statements at such occasions.
Although the IFL's extremism, lack of resources, and failure to make any impact made it of marginal political significance, the Jewish community were worried about its potential.
The genocidal language of its speakers and propaganda undoubtedly increased  tension in areas of high Jewish concentration such as the East End of London.
Equally significant was the secrecy with which the IFL operated.
It appeared that within the organization was a secret group which was responsible for extra-legal anti-semitic ‘excitement’.
This appears to have been responsible for several stunts and was implicated in the general increase of physical violence against Jews in the East End in the middle 1930s.
On Empire Day 1934 an IFL flag showing a Union Jack, in the centre of which was a swastika, was attached to the flagmast at London's County Hall as a protest against the alleged Jewish preponderance on the LCC and in its employ.
In June 1935 an LCC plaque on the house where Karl Marx had lived was removed by the IFL and replaced by an anti-Jewish notice.
The Jewish agent reported in 1937 that a secret group known as the ‘tough squad’, under the direction of Gore and Ridout, operated with members of the BUF at night in the East End.
While the leadership of the IFL was evidently opposed to Mosley, they were prepared to co-operate with the rank and file of his organization.
Leese distinguished between the ‘Kosher Fascists’ and the ‘British Jewnion of Fascists’elements in the leadership of the BUF and possible allies within the membership of that organization who would be useful to his anti-semitic campaign.
With the increased growth of tension in the East End in 1936 the Security Service became interested in the activities of the IFL.
In view of the complaints of the Board of Deputies of British Jews and the virulence of Leese's propaganda, the government tried to silence him through recourse to the law.
As a result of the publication of the accusation that Jews practised ritual murder against Christians, Leese and his printer Whitehead were tried on charges of seditious libel and creating a public mischief on 18 — 21 September 1936.
Using the argument that the Jews, not being a definite community, were not His Majesty's subjects and therefore not under the protection of his laws, and quoting the Gospel of St John that the Jews were descended from the devil, Leese's defence was partially successful.
He was found not guilty of the serious charge of seditious libel but guilty of the lesser misdemeanour of creating a public mischief.
In spite of this partial acquittal Leese  still went to prison.
He was given six months' hard labour after he refused on principle to pay the fine.
Leese claimed that his ‘martyrdom’ had been achieved against the wishes of the Jury who had acquitted him on the serious charge.
Thus although the authorities had their wish and Leese was effectively silenced for six months, during which time the IFL became a virtually moribund organization, the Rex v. 
Leese case had opened a Pandora's box of possibilities for the racial nationalists.
The Attorney-General had been astonished at the verdict and came to the conclusion that the jury had viewed Leese as a stupid crank with honest convictions who should not be convicted of the serious charge of seditious libel.
After his release from jail Leese decided to challenge the validity of his imprisonment by publishing My Irrelevant Defence , a lengthy justification of his charge that the Jews ritually murdered Christian children for their blood at Passover.
In spite of the fact that Leese's charges were much more blatant than in the original offence the authorities decided not to prosecute in case an acquittal might be misunderstood by the general public.
Recently released Home Office papers in fact show that the authorities drew back from prosecuting even the most blatant cases of anti-semitic propaganda both before and during the Second World War despite the fact that it was ostensibly being fought to destroy Hitlerism.
The comments of both ministers and civil servants also showed a critical attitude towards British Jews within wide sections of the establishment.
The government's reluctance to act in such cases was shown in relation to a further blatant abuse of the Jews at a Nordic League meeting on 20 May 1939.
A.K. Chesterton, the ex-BUF propagandist, became so carried away by the effect of his anti-semitic diatribe that he ended his speech by advocating the use of lamp-posts to string up the Jews.
Unfortunately the two verbatim reports of what was said slightly disagreed with each other.
Whereas the report of an ex-police inspector highlighted the genocidal implications of Chesterton's speech, that of the Special Branch scribe merely stated that the whole of his discourse was  directed towards racial discrimination and hatred of the Jew.
The Home Secretary, Sir Samuel Hoare, noted that any influx of refugees from the continent might bring together the political extremes — the fascists who had been attacking the Jews for three years and the communists and other left-wing elements who might argue that Jewish refugees were taking away Gentile employment.
Hoare also agreed that he had been advised by the Director of Public Prosecutions that charges of seditious libel against individuals attacking Jews as a group would in all probability fail.
A senior civil servant later corrected the Home Secretary's interpretation by arguing that offensive speeches against the Jews as a whole might be liable to prosecution if they were likely to occasion a breach of the peace under the Public Order Act.
As Chesterton was preaching to the converted there was no chance of this, so he avoided prosecution.
During the Second World War a similar problem arose with regard to the publication of Alexander Ratcliffe's Truth about the Jews , brought out by the British Protestant League.
Here a different Home Secretary, Herbert Morrison of the Labour party, argued that legislation protecting a particular group of persons would set a most dangerous precedent, and that although Ratcliffe's pamphlet was deplorable, he could not prevent its publication.
In Morrison's view, a law for the protection of the Jewish community might have an effect contrary to that intended.
Before he became Home Secretary Morrison had argued that the best way for Jews to prevent anti-semitism was to ensure that they could not be blamed for social injustices in areas where they lived.
Whereas fascists and anti-semites were free to libel Jews as a group in the most foul language in their publications, the Jews were supposed to be more English than the English according to Morrison.
This kind of governmental double standard towards minorities survived until the passing of the Race Relations Act in 1965.
Maule Ramsay's secret societies
The IFL was not the only extreme anti-semitic organization in existence in the 1930s.
Another small group of racial nationalists called ‘The Nordics’ amalgamated with the IFL in 1934; other organizations such as the Militant Christian Patriots, the White Knights of Britain and the National Socialist League were among the most conspicuous examples.
Short-lived fascist organizations like the United Empire Fascist Party and the National Socialist Workers Movement appeared and disappeared in the 1930s.
After 1937, when the international situation worsened, increasing numbers of militant fascists and anti-semites, disillusioned with Mosley and Leese, and encouraged by nazi success in Europe, saw the need for an umbrella organization which would co-ordinate anti-semitic activity.
It appears that the Nordischer Gesellschaft in Germany sent representatives to this country in 1935 to encourage such a grouping and that their spokesman referred in 1937 to the NL as being the English branch of international nazism.
The NL had managed successfully to screen its activities from the attention of historians and political commentators to this day, but it was not so lucky with the relevant authorities.
Both MI5 and the Board of Deputies of British Jews were well aware of its significance.
Its importance was highlighted by the fact that Britain's most notorious extreme anti-semite, Archibald H. Maule Ramsay, MP appeared to be its guiding spirit, which explains why there is now significant intelligence information on this secret society; the fact that Jewish sources, MI5 and the Council for Civil Liberties broadly confirm each other, suggests that the reports were reliable.
Indeed, Ramsay's secret societies, the Nordic League and the Right Club, were so easily penetrated by intelligence agents, and the government has now released some of this material, that when this information is checked against independent sources it becomes possible to present a plausible account of what the British fascists were up to during 1939 and 1940.
While Special Branch sent along junior officers to transcribe proceedings at NL meetings in 1939, the most important information we have on its activities is that procured by an  intelligence agent working for the Board of Deputies of British Jews.
Disturbed by the evidence of an increase in organized hostility towards the Jews during 1938, Neville Laski used his contacts with Special Branch at Scotland Yard to employ a recently retired inspector to penetrate the NL for the Board of Deputies.
According to a letter in the files this man's name was Pavey.
His success in being accepted at the highest levels of the League enabled him to provide graphic accounts of their meetings and organization.
He was so successful in avoiding suspicion that he was sent to a nazi ‘summer school’ in Germany in August 1939 as a representative of the League.
A photographic memory enabled him to avoid the obvious suspicions which Special Branch officers noting the proceedings obviously fell under at such meetings.
His reports, which confirmed those of Special Branch, testified both to the reliability of his memory and to his obvious potential as an infiltrator.
There is evidence too that E.R.
Mandeville Roe, an ex-member of the British Fascists and the BUF, also submitted reports on the NL to the Board of Deputies in 1939.
Archibald Maule Ramsay was, with Mosley, the most significant figure on the fascist fringe of British politics.
Although he vehemently denied being a fascist, merely wishing to purge the Conservatives of all Jewish influence, his unparliamentary statements expressed to the NL and his connection with the Tyler Kent affair in 1940 left considerable room for doubt.
The Security Service thought that Ramsay was unbalanced and suffered from persecution mania so far as the Jews were concerned.
In 1931 he was elected as Conservative MP for Peebles, as a supporter of the National Government.
In 1938 he read The Protocols of the Elders of Zion and appeared to suffer the same ‘road to Damascus’ transformation of personality which afflicted Arnold Leese on reading that document.
Henceforth he interpreted all political phenomena in terms of an anti-semitic conspiracy theory.
While he was increasingly regarded as a wild eccentric on the fringes of the Conservative party in Parliament, his extra-parliamentary activities included becoming in 1938 — 9 the  dominant personality in two secret societies, the NL and the Right Club.
He was convenor of the fourteen-strong council of the NL and leader of the RC.
The NL, according to its constitution, was an association of race-conscious Britons.
Its aim was to provide a convivial meeting place where the enlightened could help formulate a programme to teach the uninitiated the nature of the enemy which was undermining the country.
It saw its role as co-ordinating the activities of extreme anti-semitic and racial nationalist bodies in fighting the so-called Jewish menace.
To that end it eschewed a leadership cult and had a formless organization, although a council decided its policy.
The Security Service and the Jewish agent noted its connections with practically all the fascist and anti-semitic bodies, such as the IFL, the National Socialist League, the White Knights of Britain, the Britons Society, the National Socialist Workers Party and the Militant Christian Patriots.
There were also connections with more respectable organizations such as the Liberty Restoration League and the United Ratepayers Association.
The only significant exception to Maule Ramsay's co-ordinated attempt to unify the fascist political fringe was Mosley s refusal to connect his organization to the movement.
However, after the NL was disbanded at the outbreak of war, ex-members of this organization were to join the move towards a closer collaboration of anti-semitic, pro-nazi and peace movements.
The NL appears to have originated as a development of the White Knights of Britain.
Like the NL this too was a secret society and had its headquarters at the same address in licensed premises in Lamb's Conduit Street, London.
According to the Memorandum , the NL was the power behind the Militant Christian Patriots as well as having close connections with the IFL.
In terms of individual connections, with the exception of Mosley and some of his personal lieutenants, the membership of the NL included a galaxy of anti-semitic and pro-nazi notables, a veritable who's who of the fascist political fringe.
Apart from Maule Ramsay these included Brigadier-General R.B.D. Blakeney, Serocold Skeels (a known nazi agent), Major-General J.F.C. Fuller, H.H. Beamish, Arnold Leese, P.J. Ridout and Jock Houston.
Membership of the League was through connections to accredited anti-semitic and pro-fascist organizations and showed a predominant middle-class bias with one-third of the audience being women.
The activities of the NL were primarily restricted to private meetings in 1938, although it was connected with the Militant Christian Patriots at the end of the Munich Crisis when it urged Chamberlain not to get Britain involved in Jewish designs for a world war.
During 1939 it surfaced and held several public meetings in London of a pro-nazi or pro-appeasement character.
It also had public viewings of nazi propaganda films of an anti-semitic nature, including one on the ritual slaughter of animals.
Its notoriety and extremism, which was a principal reason why Mosley refused to get involved before the Second World War, was mainly due to the wild verbal excesses at its meetings.
The toast at the bar was ‘P.J.’ or Perish Judah.
This was a nazi form of greeting that had been popularized by P.J. Ridout of the IFL in 1936, presumably as a conscious pun on his own initials.
In the aftermath of Kristallnacht the NL had to be treated by the authorities as more than an eccentric lunatic fringe organization.
The secrecy of the League was primarily due to its connection with the White Knights of Britain, or the Hooded Men as they were sometimes called.
This was a British 1930s version of the Ku Klux Klan which was active in 1936 — 7.
With an elaborate initiation ritual modelled on the conventions of freemasonry, its aim was to ‘rid the world of the merciless Jewish reign of terror’.
It was an occult body with secretive passwords and much mumbo jumbo.
The meetings of the order, like those of the NL, took place among festoons of swastikas, and members had to swear blood-curdling oaths to its patron saint King Edward I, who had expelled the Jews from England.
Death was the alleged penalty for those who divulged the secrets of the order.
Commander E.H.
Cole was the chancellor of the organization and T. Victor Rowe played the key role of the man on the door in the initiation ritual.
The order claimed over 7,000 members — but this was a wild exaggeration typical of this group.
At the beginning of the war the Security Service categorized the NL as a seditious body whose speakers did not hesitate to advocate methods of violence to achieve their ends, many referring to a coming revolution.
There was also a tendency towards the  advocacy of a genocidal solution to the so-called Jewish question and much anti-semitic abuse at their meetings.
Amongst the most extreme speakers were Maule Ramsay, Captain Elwin Wright, Commander Cole, Seracold Skeels, A.K. Chesterton and William Joyce.
Ramsay steered an erratic course between advocating the possible use of violence against Jews if other measures would not achieve their object, and milder comments.
If Jewish control could not be challenged constitutionally it would have to be done by acts of Steel; and he saw the time approaching when, like the mayor of Bethlehem, he would have to arm his son against the Jews.
On other occasions he drew back from the implications of this argument by not referring directly to the Jews and by arguing that the British army would always obey the orders of the cabinet even if there was a Jewish Minister for War such as Hore Belisha.
Other members did not mince their words with regard to the British government.
William Joyce attacked the ‘Slobbering, bastardised mendacious triumvirate’ of Churchill, Eden and Cooper and argued that conscription would bring into the army thousands of young fascists whose training should not be wasted.
Elwin Wright, who up until 1937 had been secretary of a respectable Anglo-German Fellowship, advocated the shooting of Jews, called Neville Chamberlain a liar and a traitor and stated that Parliament was a ‘blackmailing corrupt body of bastards.’
For Commander Cole, the palace of Westminster was full of dirty corrupt swine and the House of Commons was a ‘house of bastardised Jews’.
Cole's extreme anti-semitism had developed as a result of his exposure to the Protocols when he had been involved with allied help to the White Russians in the Civil War in the 1920s.
While the attitude of British fascists and anti-semites to the nazis must be left to a separate chapter, the logic of ‘Jew wise’ anti-semitism implied a similar outcome to Hitler's genocidal programme.
For NL members shooting the Jews was the favoured solution, although on one occasion Wright suggested they should  be destroyed painlessly and Chesterton wanted them strung up on lamp-posts.
Serocold Skeels inverted the logic of genocide: as the Jews ritually slaughtered cattle and the Talmud viewed gentiles as animals, growing Jewish power threatened the security of the goyim everywhere; the Jews would soon have the legal power to murder whom they chose.
Such arguments naturally alerted the authorities to the possible threat posed by such an organization.
However, although there were some well-connected members and the Security Service was conscious of the links with the German nazis, the very eccentricity and extremism of the NL made it totally alien to British political culture.
It completely failed to influence public opinion when it emerged from its secret society chrysalis in 1939, and in spite of its extremism and the uncertainties of the law with regard to seditious libel where public order was not threatened, the authorities decided that any move against the group would give it unwanted publicity and might achieve more harm than good.
Only on the outbreak of war were steps taken to discourage its members from any anti-war activity when two of its leading members, Oliver Gilbert and T. Victor-Rowe, were interned on 22 September 1939.
The organization had already terminated its activities at the outbreak of war, although members still met unofficially in Gilbert's house.
Most of its members then joined other anti-war organizations and many were interned in 1940.
Ramsay's other secret society, the Right Club, was also ostensibly closed down at the outbreak of war.
However, Ramsay and some of his closest associates still met and its activities were in fact to provide the government with the excuse to intern many fascists without trial in 1940.
It was formed in 1939 for the same purpose as the NL, to amalgamate and strengthen various extreme right-wing and pro-fascist movements.
The RC was ostensibly less nazi than the NL and was aimed at infiltrating and influencing the establishment to further Ramsay's campaign to lessen the alleged Jewish influence on the Conservative party.
It began life as a kind of January Club of the NL, but it rapidly became more significant.
The RC concentrated its activities on contacting potential sympathizers, particularly in the armed forces.
Ramsay signed up over 300 persons, whose membership was duly noted in the  so-called ‘red book’.
The authorities were more worried about this group than about the NL and only one document about it his so far been released, despite the fact that it was successfully infiltrated by several agents.
The story of the RC — which will be given in more detail in another chapter — has still not been fully told, mainly because the documentation on it has been treated like the Crown Jewels.
Racial nationalist ideology
Such generalized and unsystematic anti-semitic obsessions as were displayed by individuals in these groups would suggest that little could be learned from an attempt to study the belief systems of such movements.
The crude and splenetic expression and presentation of such views suggested irrational pathological prejudice rather than a coherent ideology.
No doubt personality problems played some part in the views of many of the individuals concerned, but perceived characteristics of Jews and their alleged behaviour provided a rationalization of such extremist views for most members of these organizations.
Arnold Leese's anti-semitism owed much to his hatred of Jewish methods of slaugh-tering animals and the cruelty that he believed resulted.
Arthur Kitson's views developed from a generalized critique of the banking system and the role Jews supposedly played in it.
Several of the other known members of such groups had Arab connections or were opposed to Zionist ambitions in Palestine.
Whatever the origin of these views, the groups produced literature which fed such beliefs and this material found a wider readership through the NL.
Much of the content of such literary activity was little more than political pornography.
The Britons' newspaper regaled its limited readership with many of the anti-semitic slanders of White Russian propaganda from the Civil War, including tales of how Jewish Bolsheviks boiled deacons in water and drunk the resultant soup.
Leese fell foul of the authorities by publishing allegations that Jews indulged in ritual murder of Christian children for religious purposes.
Both the Britons' and the IFL literature contained lurid tales of alleged Jewish  responsibility for crime, the white slave traffic, for casualties in the First World War, for corrupting public life and for financial malpractices and banking irregularity.
In much of this material there was little attempt to relate such antipathy and prejudice to a consistent and coherent theory of behaviour, but the assumption and arguments on which it was based can be seen as the origins of a racial nationalist ideology which was to be more rigorously formulated at a later date.
In short, the obsession with blaming all the supposed ills of the modern world on to the Jews which common to these groups was so great that coherence and intellectual consistency were often disregarded.
It was not until after the Second World War that a distinction between an exoteric display of prejudice and an esoteric anti-semitic ideology can be discerned in racial nationalist literature.
In the inter-war period the two were often mixed in a totally unco-ordinated manner.
As a result the negative obsession of anti-semitism played a much greater role than the positive outline of racial nationalism and the Nordic, Aryan or Anglo-Saxon theme of such ideas.
Yet an analysis of the ideology behind the antipathy and prejudice displayed in racial nationalism, despite the fact that so little of the expression of such ideas was coherent or systematic, is important for three reasons.
First, the basic assumptions of such ideas in altered form were later developed into the ideology of the National Front.
Second, the comparison with nazi ideas provides a guide to the influence of Hitler on British racial nationalism.
Third, the comparison with Mosley's fascism shows quite conclusively that as well as the competition between potential British Führers, and the personal and political gulf between British fascist movements, there was an ideological divide which hindered closer co-operation.
All these factors were to play an important role in the disaster of 1940.
Racial nationalism, which played a minor role in British fascism in the inter-war period, was to become much more significant in the revival of the tradition after the Second World War.
The ideology of racial nationalism was nowhere coherently formulated in fascist literature in the inter-war period.
Yet its inherent assumptions were implicit in most of the literary output of the Britons and the IFL and were disseminated through such  groups as the NL.
It was based on certain fundamental beliefs, which were expressed in extreme form, deriving ultimately from certain aspects of nineteenth-century scientific enquiry and social philosophy.
It represented a synthesis of certain ideas, expressing as uncritical positivism which amalgamated certain propositions from anthropology, biology, psychology and sociology, which was presented as an hierarchy of race.
This formulation mixed highly subjective behavioural views with the more objective criteria of nineteenth-century science to create a British variant of nazi ideology.
Although there was little trace of the blood mysticism or metaphysical argument which so characterized Houston Stewart Chamberlain's and volkish ideas in general in Germany, some elements derived from romanticism.
The assumptions which derived from scientific sources were more heavily accentuated in English racial nationalism than in nazism and ultimately stemmed from an Anglo-American tradition rather than from continental sources.
As has been pointed out, several important nazi ideas come directly from English sources, and it was the use of such indigenous ideas rather than the copying of a successful foreign movement which accounted for the ideology of English racial nationalism.
These ideas originated in the ethnocentrism of mainstream anthropological thought, which was strongly coloured by both the romantic movement and the Darwinian revolution in science.
Anthropological ideas of the Great Chain of Being had tradi-tionally placed those of European descent at the peak of that classification, and those of other origins at lower levels of development.
At the apex of achievement was the Aryan or Nordic group, most notable in those of Anglo-Saxon lineage.
According to anthropologists and linguists most heavily influenced by the romantic movement, they were the sole creators and carriers of culture even among European groups.
Early nineteenth-century science had indiscriminately merged physical criteria of classification with psychological characteristics to produce an  ideal type classification of human groups; aesthetic ideals of beauty and heroic personality attributes had been ascribed to the Aryan or Nordic group, and all other races or ethnic groups were accorded inferior appearance and character references.
Whilst the inconclusive debate between monogenists and polygenists in anthropology, and the influence of Christianity and political liberalism, somewhat tempered the ethnocentrism of scientific and official attitudes, the Darwinian revolution swept away many of the restraints which checked the development of racist views, at least for those who could see no difference between evolution in the natural world and human achievements.
Although the influence of the Darwinian revolution on social and political thought in general is a highly complex one, and had several ambiguous or contradictory features, its impact on those prone to extremist ethnocentric or racist views was profound.
In particular, the tendency to relate the supposed forces of natural selection and vigorous competition from the natural to the human world equated the different achievements of culture and technological development with variations in skin colour and other physical characteristics.
Social Darwinism, with its emphasis on the survival of the fittest and chance variation, denied the effects of will, conscious planning and human agency in evolution, and of altering the fixed characteristics of different groups or races.
By the end of the nineteenth century, the Darwinian revolution appeared to offer scientific proof of the processes of evolution.
Weismann's germ plasm theory, that inheritance of characteristics was genetically determined, Galton's stirp theory and work on hereditary genius, and the biometric work on population statistics, appeared to give empirical verification to the societal implications of Darwin's theories.
The rival Mendelian genetic discoveries were rather more problematic and complicated, although if certain assumptions were made then racial crossing inevitably led to the weakening of the inherited characteristics of the allegedly higher type.
For racial nationalists, all these influences led inexorably to one conclusion.
The hierarchy of race with Aryans or Anglo-Saxons at  its apex was under threat of contamination from the supposed lesser breeds.
Implementation of eugenic control of alleged inferior groups, whether they be the urban proletariat, the Jews or coloured peoples, was seen as of vital importance.
Racial nationalists saw the Jews in Manichean terms: they were the ultimate enemy, an anti-race derived from the mixing of incompatible elements and which had originated not in Palestine, but in the Khazar empire of southern Russia.
Of mongrel breed themselves, the Jews were purportedly engaged in a conspiracy to bastardize the races of mankind and to bring the natural nation states of the world under the control of a one-world Jewish superstate.
The logic of such views naturally contained a number of contradictions.
In terms of Darwinian theory, the most successful groups were those who had the highest reproduction rate.
The fittest in British society should therefore have been the lower class and the immigrant, both of whom had higher birth rates than the upper classes.
This fact obviously did not conform to the elitist views of ‘fitness to rule’ of most racial nationalists.
The image of the Jew posed problems too.
On the one hand he was supposedly an inferior being, with anti-social habits and disgusting personality traits; on the other hand he possessed a superior intelligence and sufficient group solidarity to leave him on the verge of world domination.
But for individuals like Arnold Leese intellectual consistency mattered much less than his hatred of the Jews.
At one NL meeting the self-confessed animal lover and Jew-hater suddenly adopted a full-blooded Lamarckian argument to explain the difference between Swedish and British cattle.
Apparently Swedish cows, secure in the knowledge that they were going to be stunned by true Aryans before they were slaughtered, were happy and friendly towards man; British cows, who might be bled to death for kosher meat, had no such guarantee and were morose and sullen as a result.
Leese's ludicrous argument appeared even more bizarre, given his inflexible belief that acquired characteristics could not be inherited and that genetic endowment and not environment, culture or education determined behaviour; when applied to mankind these ideas led him to criticize Spengler and other nationalists for seeing culture rather than race as determining human action.
For Leese, this  explained why Spengler was national socialism's worst enemy.
This also strongly differentiated Leese's fascism from Mosley's since the latter explained his fascist revolt with reference to neo-Lamarckian arguments and Spengler's historical and cultural vision.
In spite of such obvious inconsistencies the basis of racial nationalist beliefs were outlined in the literature of the Britons and the IFL.
G.P. Mudge, in a series of articles in The Hidden Hand entitled ‘Pride of Race’, translated the arguments derived from traditions in nineteenth-century anthropology and biology into language racial nationalists could understand.
Today Mudge's views read like a classic case study of most elements of nineteenth-century racism.
His mixture of Social Darwinism, categorization of national and racial types, the Manichean conflict between Aryan and Jew, reading of personality from physical attributes, primitive eugenics, the aesthetic ideal of beauty and the use of middle-class value judgements were all symptomatic of this.
So too was the assumed superiority of Nordic men and Anglo-Saxon nations.
Particularly significant was the fact that despite the Nordics' supposed love of liberty the more authoritarian qualities were emphasized, and there appeared to be a shift from traditional nineteenth-century assumptions of Anglo-Saxon authority over colonial peoples to an elitist anti-democratic control of ‘Nordics’ over ‘Mediterraneans’within British society.
The transition from nineteenth-century Anglo-Saxonism to racial fascism was completed by Arnold Leese.
The quality of the conceptualization of his thought was low, but the garrulous style of The Fascist and his pamphlets contained an implicit if dimly perceived racial philosophy which linked Leese to this tradition.
Leese believed that race was the factor which determined history and cultural achievement and that different types of men had fixed and immutable types of character and personality, exactly as with dogs.
He also possessed a Manichean view of society, in which the future of civilization depended upon the outcome of the struggle between Nordic and Jew.
For Leese, the Nordic or Aryan  was the sole creator of culture and civilization.
His noble and heroic qualities were diametrically opposed to the negative qualities of the Jew.
The chivalrous, virtuous and humanitarian values of the Aryan contrasted with the assumed sadistic blood lust, ritual murder and-hatred of the goyim allegedly typical of Jews.
Whereas for Leese there were no pure races, ‘race mixing’ could be of two kinds.
Where the parents were of radically different types this led to the degeneration of the qualities of the higher race, but if the racial outcrossing was between individuals whose characteristics were complementary or similar then it was beneficial.
In practice this meant that Leese denounced the influence of Arabs, Negroes, Somalis and Chinamen whom he considered were defiling the race, particularly in seaports, as well as the alleged Jewish menace.
To Leese immigration and race-mixing was a jewish plot to undermine the British Empire, and to ensure that the ‘poisoning of our Anglo-Saxon blood by this yellow negroid horde is proceeding a pace’.
Leese's idiosyncratic views on race derived from his own experiences rationalized in terms of a particular intellectual tradition.
Leese mentioned Hans Gunther,The Racial Elements of European History , L.A. Waddell,The Makers of Civilisation in Race and History , Madison Grant,The Passing of the Great Race , and Lothrop Stoddard's books,The Revolt against Civilisation, The Rising Tide of Colour against White World Supremacy and Racial Realities in Europe , as his main intellectual sources.
This represented a merging of nazi Nordic influences with an Anglo-American anthropological tradition.
It was also significant that J. Hooper Harvey's first book,The Heritage of Britain , was dedicated to Waddell.
This book, which was advertised by the IFL, stressed the ‘Gothic’ origins of British culture where Goths were described as pure Aryans of the ancient royal caste.
Waddell, a Professor of Tibetan at the University of London, believed that the Aryans were the bearers of culture and had originated all the main civilizations in history.
Racial nationalism also included a critique of Jewish banking policies.
Leese's own diatribes about the Jewish financial octopus  owed something to his links with Arthur Kitson, who had explained to him his belief in the quantity theory of money in Stamford.
Kitson was a prolific inventor whose own difficulties in financing and manufacturing his patents had led him to a radical critique of the banking system.
While in the United States in the 1890s he had been heavily influenced by the Populist and Democratic Parties' assault on the Gold Standard.
Much of the rest of his life was dedicated to opposing British financial policy and the monetary straitjacket in which it placed British industry.
For Kitson what was produced, and not the amount of gold bullion, defined the wealth of the nation, and financiers — particularly Jewish bankers — had hijacked the economy in a conscious conspiracy.
The state should plan the growth of the economy and not be constrained by artificial financial pressures.
Kitson's views were derided by the establishment but he had important influence in both radical and lunatic fringe circles.
Leese was not the only one in British fascism influenced by Kitson's arguments.
Much of the ILP's important critique of Gold Standard policies in the 1920s was heavily influenced by Kitson, who had given several lectures to the organization.
Mosley's Birmingham Proposals in 1925 were a direct outcome of such ideas.
Mosley's ideas and critique of the Gold Standard were better thought out than Kitson's and derived mainly from Keynes, but they nevertheless provide the one tangible link between the two main traditions of British fascism.
In most other respects, in terms of personality, ideology, political credibility and intellectual coherence, Mosley's and Leese's fascism were about as far apart from each other as it was possible to be.
THE BUF AND BRITISH SOCIETY, 1932–1939
The British Union of Fascists represented the mature form of the fascist phenomenon in British society, being the only organization with any pretension to significance in inter-war Britain.
Formed in October 1932 by Sir Oswald Mosley, it drew its inspiration from Mussolini's Italy and most of its initial impetus from the youth movement of the New Party (Nupa) and the membership files of the British Fascists.
Mosley had decided during the 1931 general election campaign to form a fascist movement, after the devastating defeat in which the New Party lost all its parliamentary seats and twenty-two of its twenty-four candidates forfeited their deposits, and his visit to Mussolini in Rome and to nazi leaders in Munich in January 1932 merely strengthened his resolve.
The early years
Mosley's turn to fascism was a response to the failure of the British parliamentary system of government to adopt radical reform to cure unemployment, and to prevent the continued economic and political decline of Britain.
This failure was symbolized by the crushing victory of the ‘old gangs’ as Mosley called them, in the general election of 1931.
Ironically, given the severe limitations of freedom of speech planned in the future fascist state, Mosley deemed it necessary to protect that liberty by providing more rigorous stewarding of public meetings to prevent them being broken up by left-wing activists.
Hence the somewhat incongruous background to the emergence of Britain's most important fascist  organization: the publication of a reasoned pragmatic plan of action to attack unemployment in Mosley's The Greater Britain , combined with the creation of a uniformed defence force to ensure that those who wished to hear of such ideas at public meetings would be able to do so.
Thus from the beginning the BUF exhibited a Janus-faced appearance; it was a movement which was intellectually the most coherent and rational of all the fascist parties in Europe in its early years, yet whose aggressive style and vigorous self-defence attracted political violence.
Paradoxically, the failure of the BUF was linked to both phenomena.
It failed to convince the nation that authoritarian methods were necessary to solve Britain's economic crisis and prevent further political decline, and it was blamed for fomenting the violence and public disorder which became associated with its activities in the 1930s.
Furthermore, the British economy staged a revival in that decade.
New industries and housebuilding in the south and east of the country led to a growth rate which rivalled that of the mid-Victorian era, and apart from a minor dip in the statistics in 1937 — 8 the sustained restructuring and recovery of the economy created many new jobs and reduced rates of unemployment in all but the most depressed areas dependent on the declining staple industries.
For a party whose purpose was to solve the unemployment problem the BUF was conspicuously unsuccessful in recruiting a mass following from its victims.
Apart from the cotton campaign in Lancashire in 1934 the BUF made no headway in the areas of high regional unemployment.
Apathy or the new loyalties to working-class politics, where both the Labour and Communist parties were militantly hostile to fascism, ensured that the BUF made no impact in such localities.
Neither increased living standards for the majority nor the despair of mass unemployment in the depressed areas proved conducive to the growth of fascism in Britain.
The crisis of British society which Mosley saw as essential for the success of his movement, and which he predicted as having arrived in 1932, stubbornly failed to materialize.
The political violence which became inextricably linked with the BUF proved to be the other great negative factor in its fortunes, despite some temporary gains amongst those who were frightened by working-class and Jewish militancy.
Yet two facts must be stressed at the outset with relation to this problem in inter-war Britain.
First, although it was a serious issue which eventually led to the introduction of the Public Order Act in 1936, such violence was only a pale reflection of the conflict which led to the growth of fascism in Italy and Germany in the inter-war period.
there was no British Horst Wessel, nor indeed any anti-fascist martyr, as a result of political disturbances in the 1930s, although claims were made that a Blackshirt died later from injuries inflicted at a meeting at Holbeck Moor in Leeds.
Second, political violence in England was not invented by the BUF, nor did it come about as a response to its activities.
Throughout the 1930s Mosley stressed the propaganda theme that Blackshirt methods were necessary to prevent ‘red terrorism’.
Although his accusations on that score were greatly exaggerated, the police had experienced problems with increased disorder at meetings as a result of the depression.
The deployment of police at the end of the National Unemployed Workers Movement hunger march in London in October 1932 saw the most intensive public order precautions since 1848.
In Bristol twenty-nine persons were arrested for assaulting the police, malicious damage and disorderly conduct with respect to the activities of the National Unemployed Workers Movement and the Communist party in 1931 and 1932.
Certainly Mosley's constant harping on the theme of left-wing intimidation was a fairly effective recruiting ploy throughout the 1930s.
The second MI5 report on the activities of the BUF argued that the Olympia meeting on 7 June 1934, which so alienated influential opinion, actually increased support amongst those who were concerned about political disruption by left-wing activists.
For two days a representative cross-section of working-class men, ex-officers, and public schoolboys queued from morning to night  at the Black House to join an organization which they saw as being dedicated to preserving freedom of speech.
The Security Service, on the other hand, argued that violent demonstrations which threatened public order could only benefit political extremism in general, as it provided incentive for recruitment for both fascists and communists.
Mosley justified the turn to fascism as the result of the increased disruptive tactics used by opponents of the New Party.
However, followers like Harold Nicolson noticed other fascist traits in 1931.
Mosley's adoption of a more authoritarian manner and the increasing importance he gave to developing the youth organization as a relatively disciplined defence force led to the departure of many of his more important political collaborators like John Strachey.
The immediate cause of the decision to adopt fascist methods was the attack on Mosley at a New Party meeting in Glasgow in September 1931 when he was hit on the head with a stone and attacked with a life preserver.
Mosley then decided to expand his personal bodyguard, the so-called ‘Biff Boys’, to create a more disciplined and trained group.
Nupa, the New Party youth movement, was rapidly enlarged to create a viable defence force which later became the basis of the elite I Squad, and Harold Nicolson suggested a uniform of grey flannel trousers and shirts.
Nupa emphasized physical fitness and organized discipline.
However, the original ‘Biff Boys’, the hearty undergraduate types who had been trained by the Jewish boxer Ted ‘Kid’ Lewis, were now joined by others with more controversial opinions and methods; in August 1932 a nineteen-year-old member of the New Party was convicted of sticking labels on shop windows in London's Oxford Street urging the expulsion of the Jews from Britain.
During 1932 Mosley approached the other fascist movements in Britain to see if co-operation was possible.
He attempted a takeover bid of the major fascist groups, demanding their subordination and acceptance of him as their new leader.
This determined the name of Mosley's fascist movement, the British Union of Fascists, when it was formed in October 1932.
However, Mosley only had limited success in this endeavour.
His deputy, Robert Forgan, had satisfactory talks with Neil Francis Hawkins about the amalgamation of the New Party with the British Fascists, but the grand council of the British Fascists voted against a merger by one vote in May 1932 after its founder Rotha Lintorn Orman, who was very suspicious of Mosley and regarded him as a near communist, vigorously opposed the change.
The men on the Committee, led by Francis Hawkins and E.G. Mandeville Roe, then resigned from the British Fascists and joined Mosley, bringing with them a copy of its membership list.
Francis Hawkins was to rise to effective second-in-command of the BUF after 1936 and the impact of the ex-British Fascist members was to be significant in the organization and administration of the movement.
Mosley contemptuously dismissed the remaining British Fascists as ‘three old ladies and a couple of office boys’, and after the split Mosley ignored the existence of the British Fascists.
During the Jewish protest demonstrations against the nazis in Hyde Park on 23 July 1933 a small lorry carrying British Fascists in a counter-demonstration shouted abuse at BUF headquarters.
In retaliation for this, and fearful that they might be blamed for any fascist hostility towards the Jews, between fifty and sixty BUF members wrecked the BF's headquarters.
Further negotiations with the remaining BF membership resumed in July 1934.
Colonel Henry Wilson negotiated with Mosley in an attempt to merge the two organizations.
He had lent £500 to the BFs to liquidate pressing debts, and in order to obtain repayment had either to bankrupt them or obtain financial backing from elsewhere.
However, between Wilson's meeting with Mosley and that of the British Fascist grand council, Rotha Lintorn Orman changed her mind and, allegedly under the influence of drink, strenuously opposed the proposal.
The merger plan was again abandoned, and Wilson began bankruptcy proceedings to wind up the BFs.
The proposal to merge the IFL with the BUF completely failed.
Mosley had chaired a meeting where Arnold Leese and Henry  Hamilton Beamish had addressed Nupa on ‘The blindness of British Politics under the Jew Power’ in April 1932, but from then on relations rapidly deteriorated.
Leese saw Mosley as an unprincipled opportunist and argued that his fascism was not based on racial nationalism.
He was also extremely suspicious of Mosley's first wife, Cynthia Curzon, accusing her of having Jewish blood in her veins.
To Leese, Mosley was a ‘kosher fascist’, a Jewish agent planted to discredit the whole concept of fascism in Britain; to Mosley, Leese was no more than an anti-semitic crank.
However, the existence of a potential rival, no matter how eccentric, meant that there was an alternative fascist allegiance open to disgruntled members of the BUF.
The effects of this personal hostility and rivalry led to unofficial direct actions being taken by members of the BUF in November 1933.
A fight involving 150 people led to BUF members breaking up an IFL meeting, tearing up its banner and beating up Arnold Leese and Brigadier-General Blakeney, the ex-president of the BFs.
Rubber truncheons, knuckledusters and chairs were used as weapons and there were many injuries.
After this, according to MI5, the IFL became moribund and no longer ranked as a serious competitor to the BUF.
After this assault Mosley reputedly was forced to discipline his own followers in order to maintain order in the BUF, and to discourage further acts of violence which invited retaliatory action by the authorities.
Mosley repeatedly argued that his Blackshirt organization was a self-defence force and that although he could have disrupted other political meetings he never chose to do so.
A policy of legality and the maintenance of public order was officially adopted by the BUF in its attempt to portray itself as a responsible organization.
Indeed, the altered conditions of 1939 led to some co-operation between fascist, anti-semitic and pro-German groups, although Leese was excluded from the informal alliance.
Before this, however, potential rivals had been either ignored or treated ruthlessly by the BUF.
Conditions for co-operation included total subservience to Mosley's leadership, and for those like Leese who objected, unofficial violence often resulted.
A group of Blackshirts vandalized the offices of the British United Fascists in Kensington  in 1933; in 1936 Blackshirts in Liverpool assaulted the Social Credit Greenshirts with knuckledusters at their headquarters; and William Joyce's Nationalist Socialist League was also subject to disruption by Blackshirts after he left the BUF in 1937.
The early history of the BUF saw a rapidly expanding movement becoming quickly embroiled in conflict with left-wing opponents.
At first many of the new recruits were from Mosley's New Party; some were old followers from the ILP.
Mosley tried to recruit from Conservatives and from those who were affiliated to no party.
To the left he stressed the revolutionary aims of the BUF whilst to the right he emphasized authority and ordered government.
While several important recruits, such as Robert Forgan, and in 1934 John Beckett, were to join the movement from the left, and W.E.D.
Allen was to play an important role in the story of the BUF, in general it was those who came to fascism from outside politics who were to prove the most important elements in the organization.
During 1933 Ian Hope Dundas, Alexander Raven Thomson, A.K. Chesterton and William Joyce all joined either as a result of Mosley's charismatic personality or convinced by the fascist creed.
Dundas, a martinet figure, was to be Mosley's chief of staff, Raven Thomson his leading intellectual, Chesterton his best polemicist and Joyce the leading speaker, who rivalled Mosley in the brilliance of his oratorial style, even if the content was often rabid nonsense.
It was the excitement and potential violence which the BUF seemed to offer which proved the biggest recruiting spur.
From the outset the establishment of a uniformed and disciplined fascist defence force, the Blackshirts, was Mosley's first priority.
Under the first commander, Eric Hamilton Piercy, and adjutant Neil Francis Hawkins, they were organized on paramilitary lines, particularly the elite I Squad at the Black House, Mosley's headquarters.
Blackshirts were driven to meetings in armour-plated vans.
Interrupters were warned that fascists did not tolerate hecklers, who if they continued where then ejected from the meeting.
Knuckledusters and leaded hosepipes were sometimes used at early BUF meetings, though Mosley rapidly banned their use by Blackshirts.
A graphic example of early Blackshirt  violence was provided by the principal of Ruskin College, Oxford, who took sworn affidavits from victims who had been roughly treated at Mosley's meeting in Oxford in November 1933.
These included allegations of having been thrown downstairs, of fascists banging the heads of interrupters on the stone floor, and of protestors having fascist stewards' fingers rammed up their nostrils.
However, it would be misleading to suggest that fascist violence was the sole cause of conflict.
As with Hitler's nazis, Blackshirts argued that in using weapons they were merely copying the tactics of their opponents.
The National Headquarters reputedly had a museum of offensive weapons used by anti-fascists which included knuckledusters, rubber piping, coshes of all sizes, razors set in potatoes and daggers.
Mosley, with his combative language and stormy oratory, proved later to be no sluggard at defending himself with the good old British fist.
At a Prestwich meeting in 1936 he lost his temper at persistent heckling, jumped into his audience and knocked three of the ringleaders senseless.
When one of his own officials insulted him at a Leeds meeting Mosley knocked him unconscious.
Mosley was himself quite seriously hurt by a brick at a meeting in Liverpool in 1937.
The violence associated with the BUF from the outset, and which continuing throughout its history, represented an interaction of mutually opposed and conflicting forces.
After a visit to see Mussolini's International Fascist exhibition in the spring, Mosley organized the first large BUF march in June 1933 when 1,000 Blackshirts marched through London.
The anti-fascists largely ignored this demonstration.
Soon afterwards, in the autumn of 1933, the BUF bought the lease of the Whitelands Teachers Training College, Chelsea, which was turned into fascist headquarters, the so-called Black House.
This became the organizational, intellectual and social centre of the BUF.
The movement's leading officials had offices there and between 50 and 200 Blackshirts were in residence at various times, living under military discipline.
Opponents argued that the cellars were used for punishment purposes, and Special Branch alleged that a man  had been seriously wounded by a knife in the stomach after horseplay between fascists at Black House.
The rapid growth of the BUF and the increased problems of public order associated with it led to the government showing an interest in BUF activities.
At a conference in the Home Office in November 1933 attended by the Commissioner of the Metropolitan Police, two officers of MI5 and a superintendent from Special Branch, it was decided that information should be systematically collected on fascism in the United Kingdom.
From the spring of 1934 onwards in a series of reports MI5 evaluated the significance of this intelligence.
Most of this material is now available for consultation and, interpreted with care, it illuminates many aspects of BUF activity, since the papers expand and complement other sources.
The drive for expansion received its greatest impetus from the support given to the movement by Lord Rothermere, who was persuaded by Mussolini to back Mosley.
For six months his newspapers gave prominence to BUF activities, which was a splendid opportunity to increase propaganda, and produced a sharp boost in membership figures.
During the same period Mosley tried to increase the quality of his followers too.
At the beginning of 1934 be attempted to gain more influential and financial support from establishment and entrepreneurial sources; hence the formation of the January Club, a dining group which although not specifically a front organization, nevertheless was designed to influence politicians, businessmen and members of the armed services towards the fascist case.
The leading spirits behind the club were Major Yeats Brown, the Bengal Lancer, Dr Robert Forgan, deputy leader of the BUF, Sir Donald Makgill and Captain Luttman Johnson, all of whom where either members of the BUF or had close connections with Mosley.
The function of the club was to allow leading fascists to discuss contemporary political issues with experts and some opponents in a convivial after-dinner atmosphere.
As many as 350 attended such functions and amongst members and guests were Lord Middleton, Brigadier-General Spears, Sir John Squire, the Earl of Iddesleigh, Lord Russell of Liverpool and Sir Charles Petrie.
MI5 was particularly interested in the contacts made with  the armed services, but the Security Service could find little sign of important influential support for Mosley in Parliament, even at the peak of the BUF growth in 1934.
Only three Conservative MPs had shown much interest in the movement, and the political establishment in general thought the best policy was to ignore Mosley.
A few radical spirits were interested but most sympathized with Baldwin's long-held view that Mosley was ‘a cad and a wrong ‘un’.
Other areas of the establishment were infiltrated by fascists, and groups were set up in the Civil Service and in several educational centres and public schools, including the Universities of London and Birmingham, Stowe School, and Winchester, Beaumont and Worksop Colleges.
Mosley's and Rothermere's interest in aviation led to the formation of a fascist flying club in Gloucester-shire in 1934.
As Mosley tried to make the presence of the BUF felt in 1934, so popular opposition to the growth of fascism increased.
This was particularly marked amongst the organized working class.
At the grass roots level this was shown when John Beckett, the ex-MP for Gateshead and recent Mosley recruit, returned to his old constituency as part of a speaking tour in May 1934.
Greeted with shouts of ‘traitor’, he had to run the gauntlet of 3,000 anti-fascists in Gateshead and 5,000 in Newcastle.
At Leicester a hostile crowd several thousands strong prevented A.K. Chesterton who was then the Midlands organizer, from attending a meeting.
It was, however, after Mosley's Olympia meeting on 7 June 1934 that public opinion in general began to harden significantly against the BUF.
Although the meeting led to an immediate increase in recruitment, the BUF lost the propaganda war concerning responsibility for the violence associated with the occasion, and in retrospect it marked the turning-point in the fortunes of the movement.
About 12,000 attended, including about 2,000 Blackshirts, half of whom acted as stewards.
The police were not in attendance, although 762 officers were in  reserve in case of trouble.
Special Branch had warned that political violence was a possibility as the communists were planning to disrupt the meeting; they allegedly had plans to locate the main power switch so that the lights could be cut off at a favourable moment.
Mosley's speech was interrupted continuously by heckler's who were unceremoniously removed by the stewards.
According to Mosley, the interruptions showed the necessity for the fascists to have a defence force and demonstrated that for many years past there had been no freedom of speech in the country.
According to Special Branch, very violent treatment was meted out in the foyer to the men removed by the Black-shirts; the police intervened just in time to prevent serious injury.
As it was, in the fighting at the meeting and afterwards many sustained injuries.
Five were detained in hospital, including two fascists, and one doctor saw between fifty and seventy victims.
He suggested that, given the nature of the wounds, it seemed that knuckledusters and razors had been used on members of the public.
With hindsight it is clear that left-wing opponents planned to disrupt the meeting, for over 1,000 anti-fascists were involved in a counter-demonstration and in the systematic attempts to wreck the occasion.
However, it is also plain that the fascists deliberately over-reacted and that the indelible impression left on most uncommitted observers was one of Blackshirt violence which frightened and dismayed many neutrals.
Also, given the political context, it was not surprising that the growth of fascism should meet with such hostility in Great Britain.
Organized labour pointed out the obvious possible parallels between fascism in Britain and its German and Italian counterparts.
The General Secretary of the Associated Society of Locomotive Engineers and Firemen wrote to the Home Secretary arguing that the growth of fascism created a threat to organized labour since it had led elsewhere to the suppression and murder of trade unionists.
The National Feder-ation of Professional Workers had already objected to the proposed constitutional reforms of the BUF and what they saw as plans for the suppression of Parliament, the imprisonment of  opponents, and the establishment of a private army.
The National Joint Council of the Labour party, the parliamentary Labour party and the Trades Union Congress, in a deputation to the Home Secretary, argued that unless the government took action against the BUF the Labour movement would be unable to control the justified anger of extremists who were already forming anti-fascist organizations such as the Greyshirts.
Such actions were understandable, given that fascist speakers like William Joyce were already bluntly stating at public meetings that freedom of speech could not be tolerated in a fascist state.
However, it was the loss of Lord Rothermere's support and the free publicity in the Daily Mail that contributed most to the decline of the BUF.
In an exchange of letters Rothermere said he could no longer support a movement which was becoming increasingly to believe in dictatorship, anti-semitism and the corporate state.
Mosley argued that the loss of Rothermere's support was due to the threat of Jewish advertisers like Joe Lyons withdrawing their business from his newspapers.
But Rothermere's action was mainly caused by the unfavourable publicity for the BUF which followed the Olympia meeting, and the link in the public mind between its political creed and the far more sinister and violent events of the Night of the Long Knives of 30 June 1934 in Germany.
Growing confrontation with political opponents rapidly became a method of obtaining much-needed publicity, once Rothermere's support had evaporated.
In the second half of 1934 and in 1935 the movement all but collapsed as a national force, and to revive its fortunes the fascist political programme was de-emphasized and instead more attention was paid to fomenting local and regional grievances in populist campaigns.
Thus the ‘tithe war’ was supported in agricultural areas, a cotton campaign in Lancashire, and shipping policies were emphasized in Liverpool.
Sectional groups like the Fascist Union of British Workers tried to organize strikes at the Firestone works in Brentford and on Birmingham buses.
The movement also represented individuals  before the Public Assistance Boards, and collected information on the structure of British industry for the future fascist state, but its efforts soon petered out.
The turn to anti-semitism
The use of political anti-semitism within the BUF has to be seen in the context of these efforts at revival.
Following Rothermere's defection, radical voices within the movement suggested the use of open anti-semitism to stimulate popular response.
Mosley, genu-inely puzzled by growing Jewish hostility to the BUF, asked A.K. Chesterton who was now on the Headquarters staff to examine the influence of Jews in British Society.
Whilst Chesterton's later justified reputation of being one of the most rabid anti-semites connected with British fascism would suggest that this was like asking a cat to drink a bowl of cream, there is little evidence to suggest that prior to his involvement in the BUF he viewed the world primarily through anti-semitic spectacles, despite being a second cousin to such notorious anti-semites as Cecil and G.K. Chesterton.
Although the report was not published, it convinced Mosley of Jewish dominance in British society and that over half the assaults committed on fascists had been by Jews.
The interpretation given by Mosley and Chesterton to such findings would suggest that there was already a pronounced anti-semitic influence within the BUF which from the autumn of 1934 onwards was officially condoned by the leadership.
Indeed, anti-semitic behaviour had been incipient within the ranks of the BUF from the outset and included elements first recruited from the New Party.
At the level of the official leadership anti-semitism was forbidden.
However, double standards were used ind attacks on the ‘alien menace’ in the fascist press used many anti-semitic stereotypes long before it was accepted as an official weapon; for instance in Blackshirt in October 1933 those Jews who attacked fascism were likened to a cancer in the body politic.
But responsibility for the developing conflict with the  Jewish community as with the hostility of the Labour movement, has to be seen as a matter of convergence.
There was plenty of evidence to suggest a pronounced development of anti-semitic tendencies in the BUF ranks during 1933 and 1934; but as the Metropolitan police records make clear, militant Jewish youth and communist elements were assaulting Blackshirts selling newspapers at this time.
The ending of Rothermere's support and the turn to political anti-semitism were crucial to the future history of the BUF.
Dropped by the one section of the establishment which supported it, and adopting policies that ensured that popular opinion would become increasingly hostile, Mosley destroyed whatever small likelihood the BUF had of becoming an effective force in British politics.
It became increasingly a political pariah, relegated to a marginal position in society, which could be safely ignored by influential opinion.
Thus a vicious circle of political impotence was set in motion by Mosley; in order to obtain much-needed publicity for the programme and political ideas of the BUF, which it was now denied in the national press, the techniques and methods of low politics leading to street conflict with political enemies were encouraged.
The increasing switch to populist methods, and the threats to public order and the political anti-semitism with which this became associated in the public mind, meant that Mosley's movement went increasingly beyond the pale.
His earlier refusal to play the party game had led the political establishment to ignore him, and their view was now reinforced by the problems for public order brought about by Mosley's street-corner politics.
The rapid mushrooming of activity in 1934 and its equally spectacular decline led the Security Service to re-evaluate the development of the BUF.
During 1935, as a result of intelligence information, they came to the conclusion that Mosley received most of his finance from Mussolini and that the national roots of the movement were weak and kept alive by artificial means.
Fascism in Britain was to be an irritant in society, not a serious threat to the establishment.
Mosley's turn to political anti-semitism was signalled by his Albert Hall meeting in October 1934 when he attacked both the ‘big’ Jews who were seen as a threat to the nation's economy and the ‘little’Jews who allegedly swamped the cultural identity of localities where they settled.
The official attitude to British Jewry taken by the BUF saw Jews in terms of a national rather than a religious or racial issue.
Jews were supposedly a nation within a nation who owed allegiance to an international community rather than to the British State.
Unlike the role it played in the IFL, political anti-semitism never became a total ideological explanation of all the imagined ills of British society for most of the official leadership of the BUF, though there were obvious exceptions like William Joyce and some of the speakers he trained for the East End campaign of 1935 — 7.
In general, however, the developments of BUF anti-semitism from a rather vague ideological formulation to a virulent political weapon has to be seen as part of the strategy of lining up fascist sentiments behind regional issues, which attracted popular attention in different localities.
The immediate trigger to the anti-semitic campaign was the reception of Jock Houston as a speaker in the East End of London in 1935.
Houston mixed earthy Cockney presentation with a crude political anti-semitism which drew a positive response from many in his growing audiences.
Apart from the area around Manchester, ill other regions were experiencing a steep decline in membership by 1935, and anti-semitism now showed itself to be a viable propaganda vehicle in a particular locality; from then on it was given special prominence.
Elsewhere it proved a negative variable, even in areas with a sizeable Jewish presence such as Leeds or Manchester.
In Birmingham there was a virtually total neglect of anti-semitism.
These tactics were necessary because the major national political issues of 1935 had proved in practice to be disastrous flops for the BUF.
In particular, the ‘Mind Britain's Business, campaign against the League of Nations policy to boycott fascist  Italy after her invasion of Abyssinia in 1935 cut little ice.
The fact that Mosley had lost his main propaganda outlet meant that the British public for the most part paid little or no attention to beliefs which appeared to derive from ideological sympathy with Italian fascism or more sinister reasons.
The other major issue of 1935 was also a non-event for the BUF.
The general election of that year was boycotted by Mosley, using the less than inspiring slogan of ‘Fascism next time’ as the rationale for his decision.
The fact of the matter was that the BUF had neither the organization nor the quality of personnel necessary for a national political campaign.
The comprehensive victory of the National government showed how little impact fascism in particular and political extremism in general had made on the British public by 1935.
From a national movement designed to revolutionize the political structure of the nation, the BUF had degenerated into an organization which became increasingly dependent on a localized campaign playing on anti-immigrant racial populist themes, which was to be the main pattern of British fascism from then onwards.
National campaigns, like the support for Edward VIII during the abdication crisis of 1936, and the portrayal of the BUF as a peace movement in the later 1930s, either fell on deaf ears or were only partially successful in changing the focus of fascist politics from the parish pump and the anti-immigrant concerns of the East End of London to wider issues.
The move from anti-Jewish sentiments to full-scale political anti-semitism went through several stages.
It took twelve months from the Albert Hall speech in October 1934 until anti-semitism was used as the main plank of a political campaign.
Even then Mosley appeared at first to have some regard to public opinion and the image the BUF projected of itself.
Thus when it was discovered that Jock Houston had a criminal record he was immediately moved from London to Manchester, and replaced in Shoreditch by Charles Wegg Prosser, a law student with an impeccable background.
However, this appointment was not approved by those who had been attracted to the movement by Houston's populist oratory and Prosser was assaulted by two members of Shoreditch branch.
With the rise of new men under  Francis Hawkins, like Captain Donovan and U.A. Hick to control the administration of the movement in London, so the emphasis switched to the recruitment of anti-semitic elements and the quality of the personnel deteriorated.
Political anti-semitism in the East End of London had deep social causes and utilized a historical tradition of anti-alien hostility which had emphasized anti-semitism from the turn of the century.
One-third of the Jewish population of Great Britain lived there and the influx of refugees escaping from persecution in eastern Europe between 1880 and the First World War had exacerbated many of the social problems of this decaying inner city area.
Some Jews had been conspicuously successful in adapting to British life and they undoubtedly brought a new vitality to an economically declining region.
They also came to be blamed for the ills of the locality, including the use of sweated labour by unscrupulous employers, rack-renting by slum land-lords, and the increased crime rate.
Both the Labour and Communist parties had already been highly critical of some Jewish employers before the fascists arrived in the area.
Both they and the Jewish establishment argued that the best way to fight fascism was to eliminate the festering sores allegedly caused by some Jewish elements, by exhorting the whole community to adopt behaviour patterns which would give no grounds for offence.
Some nativist elements in the host community were critical of what they saw as an assault on local culture by alien Jewish values and it was this ethnocentric attitude to change, when allied to the existence of genuine social grievances, which was to make some parts of the East End a fertile reception area for racial populist and anti-immigrant movements right through from the British Brothers League in 1900, the BUF from 1936 to 1940, the League of Ex-Servicemen and the Union Movement in the 1940s, to the National Front in the 1970s.
The increasing conflict in the East End in 1936 and the follow-up campaigns of the BUF developed as a result of the inter-action of fascist anti-semitism and Jewish counter-attack.
It arose out of genuine social issues, not because there was a disproportionate number of prejudiced personalities living in the locality.
The threat to the breakdown of law and order, which led to the passing of the Public Order Act in 1936, was more complex than the simplified picture of a battle between fascists and communists for control of the streets which both the BUF press and the Metropolitan Police records tend to convey.
On both sides it was the rank and file members of the fascists, and the communists and the Jewish community, who demanded more vigorous action.
Initially the fascists tried to present a respectable form of anti-semitism for the campaign in the East End.
However, the success of Houston and the failure of Wegg Prosser, coupled with the emergence of East End populist orators like E.G. ‘Mick’ Clarke, combined with increased hostility by militant working-class and Jewish elements to bring about a rapid reversal of policy.
Fascist resources became increasingly concentrated here and recruitment of anti-semitic elements and adolescents was actively encouraged.
The forces of government, the working-class organizations and the Jewish establishment wished initially to ignore Mosley and the fascists in the hope that this would deny him publicity and defuse a potentially explosive situation.
However, some members of the Communist party and the Jewish community were increasingly concerned about fascist expansionism in Europe, Hitler's anti-semitic legislation in Germany, his destruction of the German Labour movement and Mosley's own move to anti-semitism.
Since the Third International's change to a popular front policy in 1935, groups such as the Jewish People's Council against Fascism and Anti-Semitism, the International Labour Defence of Britain and the London Ex-Servicemen's Defence against Fascism were part-Communist party front organizations and part spontaneous working-class resentment against the incursion of the fascists into the East End of London.
The Council for Civil Liberty, which later became the National Council for Civil Liberty, fulfilled much the same function for mainly middle-class people interested in this subject, and worried by the threat made by fascism to cherished freedoms.
Indeed, the leadership of the Communist party were  more concerned with opposing fascism abroad, recruiting for the Spanish Civil War and developing trade union activity and housing associations than with fighting Mosley on the streets.
However, their membership thought differently and Joe Jacobs and other militants backed up by massive popular support, forced the Communist party to organize the opposition to Mosley at the ‘Battle of Cable Street’ on 4 October 1936.
What particularly enraged the East End labour movement and the Jewish community was the number of increased unprovoked attacks on Jews and communists by young hooligans in the Stepney, Bethnel Green and Shoreditch areas during 1936.
Together with these assaults, the breaking of shop windows, the desecration of Jewish cemeteries and synogogues and the massive spread of anti-semitic graffiti greatly heightened tension.
While the IFL were responsible for some of the outrage, BUF members were behind much of the increased conflict.
The growth of street corner meetings in 1936 where BUF speakers like ‘Mick’ Clarke and Raven Thomson made regular insulting remarks about the Jewish community inflamed passions still more.
Fascists justified such behaviour as legitimate self-defence: it was they who had been first assaulted by razor gangs of alien Jews.
The BUF argued that a West End bookmaker masquerading with a Scottish name had a fixed tariff of remuneration for the degree of severity of injuries his henchmen inflicted on Blackshirts.
Anti-fascists argued that whoever was to blame for the violence, the police and courts treated them more harshly, and the National Council for Civil Liberties certainly produced reliable testimony to back up those claims.
It is against this background that the Battle of Cable Street must be viewed.
Mosley wished to hold a march through areas in the East End of London where there was both a large Jewish community and elements who would be receptive to a fascist demonstration.
The Labour movement and many in the Jewish  community thought that the government, police and Jewish leaders were far too passive in their policy of ignoring Mosley.
As a result a spontaneous movement whose leadership was seized by Jewish communist activists emerged.
A petition organized by the Jewish people's Council against Fascism and Anti-Semitism collected 77,000 signatures in two days; it was felt that if there had been more time over a quarter of a million would have signed against Mosley's proposed demonstration.
When Mosley led his men towards the East End on 4 October he discovered that more than 100,000 opponents blocked his path.
At Cable Street the counter-demonstrators broke into a builder's yard and a lorry loaded with bricks was overturned and used as a barricade.
The police banned Mosley from proceeding with his march and 1,900 fascists marched westwards instead.
Consequently it was the huge anti-fascist demonstration that created the major problem of public order.
The Bethnal Green police reported that truncheons were drawn and mounted police used against militant anti-fascists.
The Hackney police stated that of the 85 arrests made by them, 79 were of anti-fascists.
At least 73 police and 43 private individuals needed medical attention afterwards.
Civil liberties and the Public Order Act of 1936
The Battle of Cable Street has entered left-wing mythology as a great triumph of militant anti-fascism.
Certainly the fascists did not pass and the numbers involved showed the depth of popular hostility against fascism and anti-semitism.
Yet the police reports suggest a different interpretation.
It was the end of the first stage of a conflict which was to rumble on up to the Second World War.
The first results of the demonstration and violence were much the same as after the Olympia meeting in 1934; there was an immediate stimulus to recruitment for both fascists and communists and Special Branch estimated the significant, if transient, boost to fascist membership in East London to be around 2,000.
The authorities became worried about the threat to public order  and decided at last to act against both fascist paramilitary provocation and anti-fascist counter-violence, a decision influenced by deputations to the Home Secretary from the London Labour party and the Manchester watch committee.
Whilst their more extreme suggestions were disregarded, the degree of concern was duly communicated to the government.
Herbert Morrison was extremely unhappy about the degree of ethnic strife and fascist propaganda to be found even in the schools of the East End of London, and he suggested there should be non-partisan agreement between all other political parties in the area that fascist political activities should be banned.
The Battle of Cable Street had led to further hostilities between fascists and militant communists, Jewish and working-class elements in the East End.
A week afterwards fascist youths instigated the so-called ‘Mile End Road Pogrom’, when despite the presence of 2,000 special constables at a nearby communist victory rally, a gang of hooligans smashed windows of Jewish shops and houses and assaulted all those designated as Jews that they could lay their hands on.
As a result of the serious increase in the level of political violence the government rushed through the Public Order Act, which became law on 1 January 1937, in an attempt to contain the situation.
The Public Order Act represented the culmination of a long debate within the government about how increased civil disorder should be controlled.
It was seen as necessary to increase police powers to ban and control demonstrations and marches and to remove ambiguities in the existing law.
The Act was passed in response to the situation of conflict which had developed between fascists and anti-fascists in the East End, but had a wider purpose — to exert greater social control through increased police powers and the threat to public order posed by political extremism in general.
In this sense it was aimed at the problems highlighted by the National Unemployed Workers Movement demonstration in 1932 as well as the fascist disturbances.
Existing case law in Beatty v. 
Gilbanks (1882) and Wise v. 
Dunning (1901) left it unclear whether fascist demonstrations could be construed as a genuine attempt to convert people to a point of view or to provoke by  insult.
The Public Order Act reflected the police concern about the use of uniformed paramilitary groups which might challenge their monopoly of law enforcement and maintenance of public order, together with more general worries about the necessity of maintaining social control and of preventing provocative behaviour against law-abiding citizens.
Recently de-classified Home Office papers do, however, show that there was a fluid situation within the agencies of state on this question.
In general the Home Office was more concerned with the issue of protecting civil liberty and public order, while the police wished to ban the fascist movement.
In 1934 Lord Trenchard, the Metropolitan Police Commissioner, had written to the Home Secretary complaining that the BUF had passed false information with regard to a communist plot to attack the Holloway branch and an alleged IFL plan to attack the Chelsea headquarters, and suggested that this mischievous nonsense would best be dealt with by outlawing the fascist movement.
The Home Office responded by stating that the same arguments which pertained ten years ago when General Horwood wished to ban the Communist party still stood today.
While such movements should be closely watched, there was no argument for banning them.
To do otherwise would be to break the long-established political tradition of allowing people to hold whatever views they liked, so long as they did not break the law or urge others to do so.
Only if public order appeared to be on the verge of breaking down would the government contemplate restricting political liberty.
Provided that people in this country believed they had an honest system of government which dispensed even-handed justice, then there was no need to tamper with the law unless public order was threatened.
To do otherwise was to risk driving underground legitimate political expression, which would create worse problems in the long run.
Nevertheless, despite this classic defence of the traditional liberal position of the Home Office, the Secretary of State was prepared to examine whether several aspects of the problem which  worried the police could be dealt with piecemeal.
Emphasis was given by the Home Office and Cabinet to the desirability of laws which banned the use of political uniforms and the establishment of paramilitary organizations, and research was concluded to see how other nations dealt with the problem.
In 1934 the Home Office twice re-drafted a bill banning political uniforms, but concluded that the difficulties involved in definition, and the need to protect the civil liberties of other groups who wore distinctive clothing, together with the expected nit-picking objections of MPs like A.P.
Herbert who were concerned to protect civil liberties, outweighed any advantages to be gained from such legislation.
The failure to gain the consent of opposition parties and the improvement in the situation led to the dropping of the second proposal in 1934 and the Cabinet then decided that the matter should be put on ice unless the position deteriorated and immediate legislation was thought necessary.
This situation occurred in 1936 after the Battle of Cable Street.
However, the new police Commissioner, Sir Philip Game, put forward fresh arguments when asked to comment.
He still stressed the desirability of banning the fascists but he now stated that anti-semitism had added a new dimension to the problem since 1934.
Sir Philip argued that anti-semitism appealed to a subconscious racial instinct which was almost universal, with the Colonel Blimps believing in the conspiracy theory, and that in East London it was envy of Jewish economic success which caused the problem; this development represented the only real danger of fascism.
Although communists were a nuisance it was fascist anti-semitism which caused the real headache; if this were outlawed then the problem would be removed.
Additions to the existing law which attacked the symptoms rather than the cause were useful: if the police were given the power to prohibit processions and meetings, to outlaw paramilitary defence corps and to ban political uniforms this would no doubt help, but suppression of fascist anti-semitism would be the best solution.
Sir Philip Game's important contribution to the debate showed that police attitudes towards fascism altered considerably during the 1930s.
Contrary to left-wing and anti-fascist claims, the police  at the highest levels were not biased in favour of fascism, even if there were problems of interpretation of the law in developing conflict situations at the street level amongst the junior ranks and local magistrates treated anti-fascists more harshly than fascists.
Sir Philip argued forcefully that there were much stronger reasons for banning fascists than communists and that political anti-semitism should be outlawed.
It was somewhat ironic that the Home Office moved from its traditional defence of political liberty into a law and order stance just as the main police spokesman was advocating more liberal and socially aware arguments.
The Public Order Act was to reflect the traditional police palliatives, despite Game's lukewarm espousal of them, and was to ignore his more radical solution.
The terms of the Act forbade the wearing of political uniforms except on ceremonial occasions.
The use of stewards was banned at open air meetings, and insulting words likely to cause a breach of the peace were declared unlawful in public speeches.
The police were given the power to ban marches or alter their routes if in the opinion of the authorities they were likely to cause a breach of the peace.
In addition this ban could be applied to all political parties in a locality for up to three months.
The Public Order Act was a necessary but highly controversial piece of legislation.
It severely limited the right of free speech, a fact denounced both by fascists and communists.
Yet it was not clear that the Act was successful in controlling the situation after 1937; in Germany the banning of political uniforms had little effect on the rise of the nazis.
There was also the problem of defining the use of insulting words and behaviour.
Although the police did successfully charge fascists for this crime after 1936 the punishment was often derisory, and police interpretation of the law was often inconsistent.
Raven Thomson was deemed not to be insulting when he said at Bethnal Green in March 1937 that he had the utmost contempt for the Jews and that they were ‘the most miserable type of humanity,’ but an Inspector Jones was overruled when he reported that Mick Clarke had used no inflammatory language at the same venue in June 1937, when other police shorthand notes stated that Clarke had called the Jews ‘greasy Scum’and ‘the lice of the earth’.
During the election  campaign of March 1937 there were numerous complaints that the police failed to take action against provocative statements and actions against Jews by the fascists.
Numerous assaults, cases of window smashing and the dissemination of graffiti continued unabated.
The nature of the fascist impact in the East End of London was demonstrated in the first local elections of 1937.
In the LCC elections of March 1937 the British Union, as it then called itself, attained 23 per cent of the vote in North East Bethnal Green, 19 per cent in Stepney (Limehouse) and 14 per cent in Shoreditch.
Six months later in the municipal elections it fought eight seats in five London boroughs.
In six seats it finished second, with a best performance of 22 per cent in Bethnal Green East.
Outside London the British Union performed disastrously, with its candidates in Leeds, Manchester, Sheffield and Southampton all finishing bottom of the poll.
Even in its stronghold of East London the BUF's impact was patchy.
It never came close to winning an election anywhere and, despite the fears of Harry Pollitt, the Communist leader, it made little impact in London dockland around Wapping.
Political anti-semitism attracted mass support for the BUF in a limited geographical area, but it engendered greater hostility within those same localities and had appalling consequences elsewhere.
Mosley's dream of a fascist nation was reduced to the reality of a minority anti-semitic political sub-culture in some areas of the East End of London.
If the use of political anti-semitism can be seen as a crucial stage in the decline of the BUF from a national movement to a localized racial populist organization, then its attempt to resurrect its political pretensions in the Peace Campaign of 1938 — 40 merely hastened its inevitable total destruction.
The campaign was at best only partially successful in recovering the fortunes of the BUF in 1938 — 9.
As with earlier national campaigns against unemployment and the League of Nations policy of sanctions against Fascist Italy, the role of the BUF in the political history of the decision-making process was non-existent.
However, in 1938 the ‘Britons fight for Britain only’ and ‘Mosley and Peace’campaigns, although based on assumptions different from the government's appeasement policies and having no influence upon them, nevertheless harmonized quite well with the general drift of public opinion with regard to European intervention and the threat of war.
From March 1939 the situation altered radically.
With  Hitler's tearing up of the Munich agreement, with the invasion of the rest of Czechoslovakia and the threat to Poland, British public opinion began to distrust Hitler's word and the nature of nazism changed markedly.
Mosley's opposition to this national change of mood meant that for the small minority who still wished to maintain the peace of Europe at any price, he was momentarily seen as an alternative leader who would keep Britain out of a war.
Such a policy led to a limited revival of the movement in 1939.
According to Mosley, his great peace rally at Earls Court on 16 July attracted over 20,000 (the Special Branch claimed a figure of 11,000).
Most of the audience were respectable middle-class citizens who sported fascist badges.
However, although new members flocked to the movement others resigned in protest against what was seen as the placing of fascist loyalties above patriotic considerations.
There had previously been problems in 1938 in Bethnal Green, Limehouse and East Ham when many members became anti-German.
Mosley now tried to collaborate with other anti-war forces, but to little avail although this activity was to prove disastrous for the BUF in 1940.
The impact of the BUF on British society in the 1930s was small; it was merely a minor irritant for the government.
Although some success had been achieved through its radical economic, social and political programme in the early period, suspicions of the links with more sinister movements in Europe and the development of anti-semitism and political violence turned public opinion against the fascist movement.
The BUF was contained by an unofficial publicity boycott in the media after 1934 and by the surveillance of the Security Service.
When public order was threatened in 1936 — 7 the government hastily stepped in to implement palliative legislation limiting freedom of political expression, but this seemed to keep the problem within bounds.
The pro-appeasement campaign of 1938 — 9 produced an accelerating recovery from a low base for the movement, but once war was declared this hastened its final destruction — although this is a complex story deserving separate consideration elsewhere.
The important point, however, is that even in the dark days of May 1940 the Home Office was very reluctant to destroy the fascist movement, and the  Security Service joined the campaign to intern Mosley and the most important members of the movement only after information had been acquired which suggested secretive behaviour and links with potentially treasonable behaviour.
The government in the 1930s saw the BUF as a nuisance which needed to be watched, but which was felt to have little impact on wider society and which suffered from grave internal weaknesses.
It was seen more as a patriotic form of national self-expression than as a pro-nazi organization and hence was not closed down in September 1939 when war was declared.