

The American and European context of reform
The United States of America
Deinstitutionalization in Europe and the United States of America is a process that is still very much unfolding.
No country has managed to do away entirely with reliance on state psychiatric hospitals.
Even in the USA, where a radical process of resettlement got underway at an early stage, most reported episodes of mental illness are still treated at these institutions.
Indeed the rate of admissions to state hospitals in the mid-1970s was double that of the 1950s.
However, the increased rate at which new patients are admitted has clearly been more than matched by the rate at which patients have been discharged.
The massive decline of the state hospital population in the USA, from a peak of half a million in 1955 to 191,000 twenty years later indicates that the scale of change is indeed highly significant, and that, in some form, a transfer of care has occurred.
Many observers suggest that this transfer has had mainly adverse effects on the population concerned.
On her own examination of the evidence, Bachrach has argued that community services have not generally assisted the chronic population and that communities differ in the degree to which they have been ‘ready’ to accept the retreat from institutions.
Kirk and Therrien, commenting on the reduction of the hospital population in Hawaii, identify a ‘myth of rehabilitation’.
The myth involves two elements of wishful thinking.
The first is that the removal of institutional conditions is in itself a therapeutic act.
The second is that staff who transfer from hospitals to the community change their attitudes toward their charges, taking on new enabling and nurturing rather than rule-enforcing and limit-setting care roles.
By the 1980s the phenomenon of transinstitutionalization had been uncovered by Lamb and Brown amongst others.
This involved a  straightforward transfer of patients from mental hospitals to board-with care houses or nursing homes.
These moves were condemned on the grounds that backward conditions in hospital were being exchanged for backward conditions in the community.
Such an intention had not been apparent in the earlier government policy of the 1960s.
An impressive result of the policy was the creation of 507 fully functioning community mental health centres (CMHCs) by mid-1975.
The centres were designed to provide ‘a coordinated program of at least five essential mental health services: in-patient services, emergency services, partial hospitalization (such as day care), out patients services, and consultation and education services’.
Charged with the task of treatment and prevention and after care, they seem to have failed to develop an effective community support system for discharged patients.
Administrative problems played their part in this story since the centres were not run by the same authorities as those managing the state hospitals.
‘Moreover in the rush to reduce their census the hospitals discharged patients long before most of the community centres had been established and before supporting programmes had been developed’.
Underlying the mental health movement in the USA was ‘widespread faith in the ability of mental health experts to effectively manipulate the social environment’.
Among professionals there was a belief that ‘perhaps two-thirds of the population were psychiatrically ill’, which meant that there was ‘a gigantic opportunity for human progress’.
But the centres which were the linchpin of the movement were criticized both for erring too much on the side of prevention — tackling such issues as racism, poverty and education in the communities served, and for doing too little prevention, this arising from the affiliation of most of them to general and mental hospitals.
The attempt to adopt a public health model, bringing a whole host of welfare agencies to primary intervention opened up ‘a power struggle from which the mental health field had yet to recover’, according to Gardner (writing in 1977).
Aside from those who were involved in intellectual and political movements it was an open question how far mental health experts would be received into the bosom of the target population.
Many potential customers might feel more comfortable where agencies were not aiming at supervision of their minds.
If the help available was to be a free good then, in the USA, there would be a considerable amount of stigma attached to recipients of it.
If it were to be successful the mental health movement would have to move away from any strong association with welfare.
The mental health centres, from which so much was expected for the future, were designed to become self-funding from fees and diverse agency support.
The federal pump-priming for their establishment, eventually extended to cover their first eight years, was not intended to support them for the long term.
This strategy neglected the fact that most users of such services in the USA  were poor by definition, since the more well-to-do would elect to go to private practitioners.
It was highly unlikely that the chronic population discharged from the mental hospitals would provide an affluent enough target population to support self-funding mental health centres.
This policy assumption seems to have been naive, and to have been built on the extravagantly high hopes of the public health model of intervention.
Italy
The initial impressions of the Italian reform of 1978 suggested a similarly disappointing outcome to that in the USA.
However, there is a dearth of systematic research into the changes effected.
Bollini and Mollica contend that early reports of catastrophic results were often based upon ‘short visits and superficial knowledge of the Italian mental health care system’.
More recent reviews suggest that the government prohibition of admissions to mental hospitals has, at least partially, succeeded in achieving the development of community services.
There are of course significant political differences between the USA and Italy, even though both come under the rubric of industrial capitalism.
Trade unions and the socialist movement have traditionally been weak in the USA, while Labour or Social Democratic parties have dominated some European governments, depending on a strong undercurrent of what has been called ‘Eurocommunism’.
In Italy local communist control of municipal affairs, particularly in the north, is well established.
As health services are run by elected authorities, there is much scope for ‘municipal socialism’ in the administration of mental health.
As Ramon comments,
Marxist views are not approached as merely theoretical formulations but also as guidelines for action.
For example, the emphasis in the organisational framework on power sharing among the different professional disciplines involved, on not making redundant any workers, and the focus on the lay community demonstrate the impact of Italian Marxist thinking on the reform group.
It is often suggested that in Italy the general public is more receptive to the idea of mental hospital residents returning to live in the community.
The belief in collective action for change was mentioned earlier.
In this context the development of co-operatives is a notable feature of the reform.
By means of the co-operatives patients who had previously been subject to institutional peonage — payment of token wages in exchange for hospital work — have been able to earn wages comparable with those in the wider economy.
An example is given in the review of the Italian reform edited by Perris and Kemali.
This initiative was taken in Trieste in 1973, when all patients who had undergone ‘ergotherapy’ in the hospital combined together as a co-operative to carry out cooking, ward work, cleaning and maintenance tasks.
‘At the end of a month-long dispute they succeeded in  obtaining the contract for these jobs from the hospital administration and were consequently entitled to the wage guaranteed by the National Cleaners Contract’.
The co-operative, made up of both former patients and ordinary workers, continued to hold the contract for cleaning all mental health centres and former hospital buildings after the closure of the hospital.
Much has also been made of the catharsis for the ‘community’ of the exodus.
Again in the case of Trieste, Dell'Aqua describes how patients, painters, doctors, nurses and students built a blue horse — the Marco Cavallo — which led a joyful procession of about 6,000 patients through the town, and on to a celebration of the emptying of the first ward, held at a local primary school.
The coming out of the horse, following long discussions and meetings between doctors, nurses, patients and artists, was also an opportunity to denounce the miserable conditions of the Mental Hospital, the backwardness of the law in force, the nurses' working conditions and, above all, the lack of real prospects for all those patients who were already capable of living outside the hospital.
Ramon considers that there were in fact similar political obstacles to the achievement of mental hospital closures in Italy as have been found in Britain.
The majority of the psychiatric profession's members were not in favour of the reform.
There was no evidence for the feasibility of such change.
The ruling coalition in Parliament in 1978 was opposed to the reform.
The law was passed ‘more by default than by intention’.
Much was owed to the small Radical party, which collected the necessary 500,000 signatures to obtain a referendum on the issue.
To avoid the possible political embarrassment of such a referendum, the government preferred to make the law itself.
Four ‘change-facilitating factors’ are picked out by Ramon; heavy and unchanging reliance on segregated institutions; the existence of a minority of psychiatrists prepared to act politically (while not having the desire to act in a party political framework); the autonomous nature of the regions leading to more enthusiastic reform beginning in socialist and communist areas; and perhaps most importantly for the concerns of this book,
The wide acceptance of the positive value of collective action, typical of Italy for a long time [which]meant a well-established tradition existed for mobilising community support.
This social environment for devolution contrasts strongly with that in the USA.
This is evident from an analysis of public opinion on welfare in the USA in comparison with opinion in other countries.
Shapiro and Young for example found that Americans are consistently less supportive of state intervention than are the people of other industrial countries, if not always markedly so.
They ascribe the difference to the fact that Americans value  equality of opportunity rather than equality of outcome.
While attitudes on education and medical care strongly support either direct state provision or state guidance and support for private provision, attitudes on income support and urban relief are much more mixed.
In contrast to all other social welfare policies, public assistance programmes for the poor are the most controversial.
These policies remind many Americans of deadbeats, fraud and entangled bureaucracies; and they appear to provide serious disincentives for employment.
As is well known, Americans are uneasy toward the terms ‘welfare’ or relief in contrast to ‘assistance for the poor’or similar phrases.
Thus Americans are found to prefer distribution of food stamps rather than broader policies for a guaranteed minimum income.
Their views on programmes for urban renewal tend to follow similar lines to their views on welfare, with large-scale intervention not seen as a public responsibility.
These differences between American and European views have ominous implications for deinstitutionalization since, as already pointed out, many chronic patients are poor.
There is also evidence that they drift into the urban areas which are the subject of decay
Marmor also comments that
America's ethos of limited, constrained government remains the accepted rhetoric.
The nation has a very large civil service but a mixture of disdain for and suspicion of its civil servants…our leading governmental institutions are without the benefits of great formal authority and respect.
American society fragments into the complicated pressure groups and local constituencies.
But the American polity remains rooted in a cast of mind appropriate to a commercial agrarian society, requiring the most minimalist of government performance.
This view fits with those of the political scientists, Lindblom and Benson.
They see the output of state policies in the USA as the result of interagency negotiation, rather than central or local direction.
Direction of social policy from the centre is rarely promised or achieved.
Policy tends to be incremental in outcome.
This suggests that the major transfer of care from state hospitals has taken place without any specific political driving force.
Fiscal crisis, however, has been as apparent in the USA as in Europe.
States were therefore keen to see the federally supported mental health centres as the new agencies which could play the leading role.
Though there has been a clear public responsibility for the long-term residents of mental hospitals, public responsibility for those discharged has not been so well established.
For many years Medicaid did not finance mental health care for adults, while Marmor comments that the amount of benefits for care outside hospital that was made available totalled a  ‘derisory’ 250 per year in 1987.
Though there might be public support for better insurance programmes, if somewhat thin, because of the stagflation-induced social policy crisis, there was no ‘mass attention, supportive sentiment, or a willingness of governmental actors to place mental health finance prominently on the agenda’.
A final element in the USA is the legal interest in mental health which focuses strongly on the individual and the right not to be committed except in extreme circumstances.
The corollary of such a concern with the individual is a lack of concern with the collectivity.
What had once been a largely invisible world of mental hospitals, private suffering, and professional services now appears in local communities as homelessness, strange persons in public, and bewilderment about who is responsible for whom.
In such a context no wonder that those preoccupied with the mentally ill feel so frustrated with the politics of fiscal restraint in all the industrial democracies.
In one sense this is comforting for the concerned public in Britain, since visions of an apocalypse for those discharged seem less credible given the differences in approaches to welfare.
But the American approach to community care does not necessarily diverge from that of Europe where the response of state agencies to public opinion is concerned.
Atherton argues that the mass of the American people remain committed to support for the ‘genuinely poor, sick, disabled and disadvantaged’, but not to a redistributive welfare programme.
The wider European context
Since the radical reform could happen in the uncollectivist and weakly welfarist USA as well as in the collectivist and welfarist Italy, the obvious question to ask is why it didn't happen elsewhere in Europe.
Many obstacles appear to stem from central-local relations and conflict between the public and private sector.
Municipal autonomy in the regions of Italy and state autonomy in the USA seems to go some way to account for the ease of transfer of care.
This appears to be confirmed by current trends in Spain, where the development of autonomous regions encompassing health and social care is leading to a strong administrative reform which has, as one of its central objectives, the establishment of primary care services for people suffering from mental illness.
By contrast, in Greece, which is divided up into nine health administration districts, little reform has taken place.
This is despite the passing of a law in 1981 providing for many of the Italian reform components: general hospital wards, community mental health centres and procedures for linking the various sectors.
The system of health district administration does not lend itself to local initiatives, since the districts do not relate to any natural geographic catchment areas.
By 1987 five inpatient units in general hospitals had been  created and thirteen mental health centres.
But there had been only a small decrease in mental hospital beds and little sign of a significant shift to different forms of care.
Portugal provides an interesting case study of administrative problems.
In 1981 co-operation with the Swedish government produced a programme for health care which provided a stimulus for reform of the asylums.
Planning proposals for a new system of mental health services for the areas of Lisbon and Oporto were developed.
According to Ribeiro, these proposals took their principles from the French system of psychiatric sectors linking hospitals and after care.
A community psychiatry system was adopted which had the mental health centre at the middle.
In a short and irreverent sketch which aims to explain subsequent inaction on implementing the reform in Portugal, Ribeiro calls on a concept in the Portuguese language known as desenrasca — multiform resistance to rational planning and change.
The resistance has eight aspects to it:
1
informal rejection or acceptance of the planning proposal, without expressing it at a formal level
2
kill it using silence
3
personalization of the planning proposal
4
cosmetic reformulation of mental health policies, objectives and action programmes and recommendations
5
internalization of planning proposals without reference to them
6
hidden criticisms that only appear in the interpersonal context: the classic ‘utopian plan’, ‘not feasible’, ‘without economic basis’
7
avoiding of confrontation
8
and last but not least the complete inability of presenting different alternatives.
Ribeiro's argument points to the significance of distinguishing the universal approbation accorded to community care policies from political initiatives for their implementation.
While most European countries have developed new forms of service, there appears to be a silent majority vote for the retention of the mental hospitals.
This scenario seems to apply to the position in The Netherlands, otherwise seen as being in the forefront of community care.
Although there was a reduction in mental hospital beds of 17 per cent between 1955 and 1975, this hardly bears comparison with the trend in the USA where for the corresponding period the reduction was 66 per cent.
Since 1985 there has been only a marginal reduction in mental hospital beds: ‘I think we lost some somewhere’, as Dr Peter Verbraak, Director of de Grote Bek Hospital in Groningen, recently commented.
Yet reform in The Netherlands began early, in the 1930s, with the avoidance of hospital admissions.
According to van der Grinten, this trend originally arose because of the effects of the trade recession of the period on the municipal authorities funding patient care in the large hospitals.
‘Extramural care’ was seen as a means of reducing this burden.
In Amsterdam, Querido introduced a twenty-four-hour domiciliary support system, linked with the care of general practitioners.
This system was also adopted in other large cities.
A number of different types of psychiatric crisis intervention services had become available by the 1980s.
These included
eight general crisis centres, with or without beds, alternative psycho-social centres based largely on religious principles, specialized services for youngsters, outreaching services as part of community mental health centres and emergency room services as part of the general hospitals.
With the ‘relatively dense network of outpatient and day patient services which exist in the country’, it is surprising that the radicalism of Italy has not been contagious.
In fact the Dutch face some of the same administrative problems in achieving change that beset other European countries, principally in the lack of a system for municipal co-ordination.
Many of the large hospitals are controlled by religious foundations, with the government role being largely limited to funding patient care through insurance schemes.
The services of the hospitals have only recently become more integrated with primary care services outside.
Previously the hospitals tended to be in competition for clients and resources with rehabilitation and primary care agencies.
The religious/municipal dichotomy, coupled with a lack of direct state  provision of health services, probably accounts for the lack of a widespread deinstitutionalizing or care transfer movement.
The insurers have also been reluctant to underwrite non-medical forms of care outside the hospital sector.
It is only recently that the municipal authorities and hospital boards have begun to discuss the possibility of changing the insurers' conditions of funding so that they are more permissive of non-medical intervention and support.
But there are signs too that the professional care providers seek to halt the slight trend in reduction which has taken place in the role of the mental hospital.
Thus Giel argues that
While the Dutch government is actively planning to reduce the number of hospital beds, particularly those for long-stay patients, it takes little notice of the reality of mental health care in The Netherlands, cherishing various misconceptions regarding institutionalism and community care.
[Drawing on a case register summary he continues]any further reduction of mental hospital beds will be to the detriment of the chronic mentally disturbed person.
Perhaps the least change of all has occurred in France and the former Federal Republic of Germany (FRG).
France is a country which led the therapeutic enterprise of building the asylums in the nineteeth century.
Its Lunacy Act of 1838, which required every department to develop a public  asylum, can be seen as a model for the legislation of other countries.
But despite being subject to the second wave of pan-European reform in psychiatry since the 1940s, France has not moved away from the asylums with any speed.
Mangen and Castel relate an appalling tale of how the circumstances in which the French asylums found themselves in the Second World War prompted experiment with alternatives.
Tens of thousands of mental hospital patients died from starvation in the hospitals.
To attempt to save as many residents of one hospital as possible, two psychiatrists, aided by a group of resistance workers, engaged in a desperate effort to resettle them with households in the surrounding area where they could be fed.
The patients ‘were quickly integrated into the life of the small community and it was found that many of them were surviving better outside than inside the hospital’.
One of the interesting facets of developments in France, which also applies to the situation in the former FRG, is that the legacy of mental hospitals is not seen as an intrinsically untenable one.
They are not considered to be non-viable either on the grounds of their isolation and remoteness from the communities they serve, or on the grounds that they are physically falling into a state of dilapidation.
In 1960 a new French programme for mental health services provided for hospitals to be converted on village plan lines.
The objective was one of ‘adaptation and humanisation, not mass closure’.
Nevertheless France possessed a technocratic system of sectorization across the whole country with departments and communes being mandated to provide local outpatient and prevention services.
While government and insurance funds are available toward the cost of these services the provincial municipalities still have to contribute local funding for their development.
Thus there has to be some degree of policy enthusiasm for prevention and outpatient services if the dominance of hospital inpatient beds over the care system is to change in any one administrative area.
Reliance on the nature of local commitment has been a considerable obstacle to lessening dependence on the mental hospitals.
Mangen and Castel suggest that
by the late Seventies it was generally acknowledged that a funding system partially dependent on the departments would be unlikely to assure speedy progress towards a comprehensive service in the sector and would do nothing to reduce the substantial regional inequalities in the distribution of extra hospital facilities.
As in The Netherlands, the insurers have also resisted subsidizing treatment which is primarily non-medical, though they do fund 30 per cent of the dispensaires prevention programmes administered primarily within the local government system.
In the mid-1980s the French government did act to try to redress these  trend, taking over responsibility for extra hospital services from the local departments.
Plans were also made to phase out unoccupied mental hospital beds and to transfer others to community services.
Nevertheless the key point about the lack of political interest in change is made tellingly by Mangen and Castel:
Whatever the feeling inside psychiatry, mental health is not a major political issue in the country as a whole.
The vote for the 1838 Act was preceded by impassioned debate in both parliamentary chambers and aroused widespread interest throughout France.
That level of public and political interest has never been rekindled.
Britain
The history of British policy has been discussed elsewhere in comprehensive terms.
Therefore it will not be dealt with in any detail here.
The main focus of the discussion which follows is on the relative importance of administrative, economic and therapeutic factors in the evolution of policy.
Britain has been subject to the same decline in long-stay beds and has responded in the same way as other European countries to this fall in the mental hospital population.
Plans were laid from the early 1960s for the development of non-asylum types of treatment.
General hospital units would provide the typical destigmatizing, cure-centred approach being followed around the psychiatric globe.
As these units were set up, they would replace the functions of the large hospitals, which would be required only for the care of the old long-stay patients, a cohort admitted before the outdoor mode of treatment was to become common and schizophrenia was thought uncontrollable in the community.
Since they had become used to hospitals it was believed both unfair to them and impracticable in resettlement terms to ship them out to the community.
As the cohort died out and were not replaced, the asylums could be shut down.
But demographic trends would determine the rundown rate.
As in other Western European countries north of Italy, there was to be no pre-emptive national closure policy.
Government has stressed at several points that it seeks the development of local district services first, with asylums to close only when the latter services can cope with the patient workload.
This suggests that closures have not stemmed primarily from an objective of economic rationalization.
Their rundown had more to do with their social function becoming anachronistic.
The country was not ringing to calls for their shutdown from either legislators or the judiciary.
There was no significant social movement for community medicine, or people's councils for health/social services or self-help.
This perhaps reflected the endemic nationalism (rather than localism) of health and social welfare in Britain.
The National Health Service (NHS) was always based on  administrative units and had a non-elected board of control.
Social services were provided by local councils but these councils were not especially noted for being bonded to local cultures.
Within these councils, social services were strictly regulated.
In the 1970s and 1980s their work was dominated by statutory duties toward the care of children.
While there, were many attempts to devolve welfare services to a neighbourhood level, the overall decline in local authority power relative to the centre vitiated much of the potential for popular decision-making.
At the same time community development failed as a 1970s movement to sustain the campaigning ability of local residents and their autonomy in civic affairs.
As an organization for the administration of medicine, the NHS tended to interpret community care to mean the devolution of hospital-centred services into a ‘primary care’ catchment area.
The transfer of services in the asylums to the community fell in with this approach.
The district general hospital (DGH) units carried through the first stage of devolution of services.
Instead of relying on admissions to an asylum serving several district areas, each district would, in the DGH, have its own core treatment rooms.
The second phase would be carried out by the dispersal of nurses and psychologists into general practice surgeries and day hospitals.
Alternatively, free-standing mental health centres could offer outdoor treatment and support.
So, above all, the picture is of an administrative reform taking place for new mental health services to be created.
Initially it was believed that the general devolution to smaller administrative entities would, in itself, create the conditions for asylums to be closed down.
The hospitals more remote from their catchment area were thus the natural early candidates for closure.
Closures had implications beyond the NHS, however.
The main problem was that if the new devolved NHS services were to replace the asylums' treatment, then a structure of long-term support would be needed for those who, albeit now being able to live in the community rather than vegetate as long-term inpatients, still mostly required structured day care or home visiting or occupation.
This requirement, not being a treatment need, was not primarily an NHS responsibility.
The asylums had of course long predated the bifurcation of health and welfare in the centralized system.
With their dissolution the health and welfare functions would have to be distributed between the newer health and social services administrative entities.
Local authorities, although not being party to the devolution of the NHS provision, would have to be asked to take upon themselves a serious long-term support role.
But there were, inevitably, in a period when municipal provision was subject to restraint, problems about the achievement of the social services support that would match the NHS devolution.
Through joint planning forums, there was a mechanism for co-ordinating health and social care across the boundaries of the statutory sectors from 1974.
The  administrative situation in Britain was thus favourable to change.
But much depended, as elsewhere in Europe, on the attitude of the municipal authorities towards committing resources for new services.
Local authorities had a duty to assess those judged to be ‘at risk’ or ‘vulnerable’and the state had to take responsibility for the supervision of care.
Beyond that, the White Paper Better Services for the Mentally III (1975) also set out rates of provision which health and local authorities ought to be aiming to achieve For ‘oughtness’ could be read council discretion about what priorities they had for the distribution of ‘new moneys’.
These were, naturally under much pressure.
If social services committees did exercise any clout over other committees within councils, the strong prior claim of children was already established.
In 1976 central government did take an initiative to try to influence local policy-making in favour of the long-stay dependent groups.
By means of explicit priorities the centre aimed to manoeuvre the localities into promoting long-term clients up the league table of social care.
Within an annual 2 per cent growth in the budget for personal social services, and a 1.8 per cent growth in NHS revenue, services for elderly, mentally handicapped and mentally ill people would receive a proportionally greater allocation than the mainstream services for short-term consultation.
But there were priorities within the priorities.
Whereas 2.8 per cent growth was projected in services for mentally handicapped people, only 1.8 per cent growth was to be devoted to those who were mentally ill, the average across the health and welfare sector.
The policy held out little prospect of significant change.
The Care in the Community initiative in 1981 attempted to force the pace.
Through it, government addressed for the first time the issue of the long-stay population in all the institutions for elderly, mentally handicapped and mentally ill people.
Subsequent guidance enabled regional health authorities (RHAs) to pay grants to local authorities for the support of people resettled in the community from the NHS hospitals.
Somewhat cautiously the government hinted at fairly large-scale programmes of reintegration:
Most people discharged from hospital psychiatric care have had only a short period as in patients and do not need long-term help after leaving.
Other people have spent many years in hospital and could no longer live outside it.
There may , however, be up to 5,000 people now in hospital who fall in between these two groups and may be capable of leading more independent lives….
There may also be scope for new approaches to the care of elderly severely mentally infirm people now in hospital.
On one level this statement was not staking out any new policy, merely raising theoretical possibilities.
On another level it signalled a new departure.
The White Paper of 1975 mentioned above had simply referred to the  virtual impracticability of asking social service departments to commit themselves to major investment in a programme for mentally ill people.
In addition the important statement was made that
In the last resort achievement will be dependent on the community's willingness to accept an increased responsibility for those of its members who are or have been mentally ill…time is needed to prepare the way and to accustom the community to these added responsibilities.
The very length of the timescale may help in this respect.
Against this pessimistic background, the Care in the Community optimism about the possibilities for long-stay patients to live more independently seemed to betoken a change of central thinking.
Was this driven by the need to ship out the occupants of the decaying and unviable institutions?
The answer is that it is difficult to see a conspiracy theory at work.
As early as 1968 the government recognized that the development of DGH treatment services was not leading to the replacement of asylums.
But on the other hand nothing was done about that beyond the statement of the obvious that there would be no votes for mental health within the welfare budget to fund alternative long-term community care to that given in institutions.
Such funding would have to be clawed back from the contraction of the institutions.
In 1977 in The Way Forward , it was stated that
It is clearly undesirable and often more expensive to admit or keep in district general hospitals or long stay hospitals old or mentally ill or mentally handicapped people who could be properly looked after in the community.
This will be avoided only if adequate progress can be made in developing community services including community hospitals…the release of really substantial resources for deployment in the development of local psychiatric services generally is likely to be achieved only with the closure of a whole hospital.
Regions ought to be looking to the future and planning the replacement of major mental illness hospitals.
It is possible to detect a slight warming-up of the issue between the late 1960s and the late 1970s, given these prompts for RHAs to think about taking some positive action.
But as has been seen, if changes were to be brought about, they were to be initiated by making changes internally to NHS services.
The question being asked was ‘Could the old long-stay patients be moved to smaller community hospitals/nursing homes to enable the closure of the asylums’ The answer was still being sought in 1983, when the Department of Health and Social Security (DHSS) launched a programme of pilot Care in the Community projects to follow its earlier guidance.
A central allocation of £19 million was made available to fund twenty-eight locally based resettlement projects distributed around  England.
These were to provide a variety of community placements for up to 900 people languishing as long-stay inpatients.
The community facilities would range from ordinary houses to group homes and hostels.
At the same time some attempt was made to try to isolate those large hospitals which were really too deteriorated and poorly situated to continue.
Government attempts to define such hospitals did of course give a new lease of life to those not under scrutiny.
Health authorities were thus urged to
Make arrangements satisfactory to patients and staff locally for the closure over the next ten years or so of those mental illness hospitals which are not well placed to provide a service reaching out into the community and are already near the end of their useful life.
Such closures should provide a source of staff, capital and revenue to support the development of the new pattern of health services, including community psychiatric nursing, for the mentally ill and perhaps help to support the development of services provided by local authorities .
(my emphasis)
By 1988 firm closure programmes had been devised for 43 out of 178 hospital units for mentally ill patients in England surveyed by the National Schizophrenia Fellowship (NSF).
However, at the time of writing there is some doubt about the robustness of these programmes while the implications of the internal marketing reform in the NHS are worked through.
Social policy and community care
In 1986 the government appointed Sir Roy Griffiths, the private sector consultant behind the earlier general management reforms in the NHS, to carry out an inquiry into community care.
The primary concerns were twofold.
First, spending on residential care in private sector homes for elderly people through the social security budget was rising at an exponential rate and was to all intents and purposes out of control, being demand led.
Reports on residential care indicated that its quality was extremely variable and that monitoring arrangements were far from satisfactory.
Second, the development of community care facilities was extremely patchy and there was a widespread belief that the policy, aside from the isolated initiatives such as the DHSS pilot projects, was simply not working
As the government itself was to admit in its response to the resultant Griffiths Report on Community Care, the ‘rapid growth of residential and nursing home care’ had been ‘unplanned and largely based on the availability of social security benefits’.
This indicated that transinstitutionalization might be taking place.
There were also fears that the same trends of homelessness among mentally ill people as had become apparent in the USA were being repeated in Britain.
The reforms proposed by Griffiths to remedy the situation are  discussed further in the conclusion.
The important factor for the mental hospitals was that the Minister for Health gave what he called the ‘amber light’ to authorities planning reprovision of services in the community.
The secretary of state meanwhile pledged himself to ensure that discharges of seriously mentally ill people from hospital would take place only when adequate medical and social care was available for them outside hospital.
The Griffiths inquiry stemmed also from broader concerns in the provision of welfare in the late twentieth century.
The ideal of privatized, familial, informal care, unsullied by the peremptory intervention of the municipality, has been pursued with some vigour.
Knapp draws out five significant themes in the development of care in the community initiatives.
These are de-hospitalization, joint working (between the NHS local authorities), cost-effectiveness, consumerism and ‘mixing the economy’.
He suggests that the search for cost-effectiveness was particularly prevalent in the 1980s, with the establishment of the Audit Commission and the development of performance indicators in the NHS.
Though a laudable objective, it came to be identified with health and local authorities seeking to make savings by passing costs of care to the social security budget maintained by central government.
Consumerism embraces new forms of individualized care planning such as case management through which the recipient of the service will be involved in decision-making.
The aim is to allow consumers to have greater influence over forms of care allotted to them.
The Disabled Persons Act 1986 enshrined the new principles, though without providing funds for the advocacy arrangements desired.
The mixing of the economy, the last of Knapp's five themes, is probably the most important in terms of future social policy.
A key response of governments in Europe to the perceived fiscal crisis of the mid-1970s was to adopt strategies which would restrain state expenditure, switch payment for utilities from taxation to consumer charging, and allow the private and voluntary sectors to play a larger role in the provision of transport, education and welfare services.
An interesting early example of the attempt to empower consumers and strengthen the role of the private sector was the 1975 initiative of Kent County Council to test the viability of a voucher scheme for school places.
The move came about under the stimulus of ‘national debate on educational standards, finance and accountability’.
The scheme was not adopted and the results of the feasibility study provide a good example of some of the difficulties that the state has faced in attempting to change the pattern of welfare.
First, it was estimated that the annual cost of the scheme to the Council would possibly be of the order of £1.25 million.
The only possible savings would be from reductions in the number of teachers in the maintained schools, which would come about if parents were to stick to the survey preferences that they indicated  for the independent sector.
These savings were thought to be of the order of £0.5 million at the most.
Second, parents did not choose to vary their choice of schools for their children in the hypothetical voucher system in any marked way from their choices of placements under the then existing system.
Only 12 per cent of parents interviewed chose a different school from the one currently attended; the majority opted to remain in the maintained sector.
The reason for highlighting this instance of attempted change can now be made clear.
Writers such as Hill and Bramley and Duncan and Goodwin have contested the idea that an economic crisis occurred in the 1970s.
Significant public spending restraint had in fact been introduced earlier in the 1960s under the Wilson government.
The search for alternative means of supplying services might derive its urgency from perceived rather than real crisis, and more particularly a disenchantment with state social planning as such.
This fed the general enthusiasm for liberating people from the too close supervision of the state, and in turn ushered in the rise of Hayek's system of philosophy in which the aim is to reduce government provision to the barest minimum, for civil security and basic social security only.
All other systems of social support should be for voluntary organizations of citizens to devise and subscribe to.
The OECD (Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development) has recently argued that governments are not likely to be successful in securing increased public sector efficiency unless there is a greater role for the price mechanism and market forces.
This is on the grounds that people who value services ‘will consume as much as they are willing to pay for’.
Charging for services, especially public transport, refuse collection and street cleaning, is therefore considered to offer considerable scope for increasing efficiency.
Particularly noted is the case of the former Federal Republic of Germany (FRG), where local governments raise a quarter of their income from charging, mostly through environment and public health levies.
Nevertheless the OECD cautions that principles of equity do impose a limit to the possibilities for charging.
Probably the most striking shift from the public to the private sector not only in Britain, but also in France and the USA has taken place in the provision of housing.
The growth of home ownership has enjoyed cross-party support in Parliament.
The desire to own a home was considered ‘deep and natural’ by the Conservatives, and ‘basic and natural’by the Labour party.
Housing was the first of the public sector programmes to be tied back in the 1960s.
This has had important consequences for the rehabilitation of mental hospital patients, which will be discussed in the context of the empirical study reported in Chapters 3, 4 and 5.
The search for alternatives to the failed British system of state provision led Segalman and Marsland to look for, and find, a welfare idyll in Switzerland.
The Swiss do not have a national health service and most of the population is covered by voluntary health insurance.
Segalman and  Marsland were struck by the fact that the Swiss appear to have ‘no concept of a right to state support’.
Rigorous means testing is ‘carried out without difficulty’ and public aid can be recovered if a person later becomes affluent.
The observers were also especially impressed by the collective concern for those who showed signs of being unable to support themselves at the local level:
If a child should begin to falter in [occupational training]for adult self-sufficiency, the whole community becomes concerned — not just the school's personnel, but the whole gamut of formal and informal social control mechanisms become actively involved.
The remedies which they prescribe for Britain involve the separation of social insurance for health, pensions and employment from social assistance to those in unpredictable need.
Financial responsibility for giving support would be delegated to a local level in order to rekindle civic responsibility.
But looking back to the principles of Beveridge's plan for welfare, one of the main conditions which the originators made, in order that a workable system might evolve, was that reasonably full employment be maintained.
Neither high levels of endemic unemployment, nor its corollary, mass dependence on benefits was envisaged.
Segalman and Marsland take little account of this issue.
Achieving regular employment has been one of the most difficult targets for people who have left institutions and there is a marked descent through the occupational and class structure so that, especially where they have suffered illnesses such as schizophrenia, the work they are able to get tends to be of an unskilled or semi-skilled kind.
At the same time, the opportunities available are often for casual work rather than permanent positions.
This raises issues about the conditions of employment within such work and to what extent they are associated with exploitation and vulnerability.
Within the European context Britain has always had a relatively large ‘marginal workforce’.
Part-time workers accounted for only 7 per cent of the employed population in France and between 10 and 12 per cent in the former FRG during the 1960s and early 1970s.
For the same period in Britain these workers made up 20 per cent of the workforce.
At the same time there was a ‘well-established tradition to use temporary labour’.
Lane argues that up to the middle of the 1970s the conditions of employment of part-time and temporary workers were reasonably protected by the state balancing the interests of capital and labour.
But at that point, ‘the general deterioration of economic development, the growing uncertainty and instability on world product markets and the introduction of new technology brought about new requirements in the utilisation of labour, as well as mass unemployment’.
An important part of the new model was what Lane calls the ‘restoration of worker competition for employment’.
In France the new model — which Lane calls ‘market capitalism’ to distinguish it from the welfare capitalism of the previous period — led to a number of legislative changes.
These lifted some of the restrictions attaching to contracts, such as those involving precarious employment outside the state sector or fixed-term and other like kinds of less secure employment.
In Britain there was a significant reduction in the number of employees eligible for employment protection, so that to be within the terms of the Employment Protection Act, they had to be working for two years instead of, as previously, six months.
The already high percentage of part-time workers increased to 23 per cent and ‘there occurred a small to moderate increase in the proportion of temporary workers’.
Thus on balance marginal and less protected forms of employment have not grown at any marked rate in the market capitalism phase that Lane distinguishes.
What is important is the change in conditions of those employments which clearly are of one kind in making the marginal workforce more vulnerable.
As Lane points out, surveys suggest that a majority of temporary workers actually opt for temporary status by choice, but nevertheless a large proportion are in fact disadvantaged since they lack the benefits which attach to permanent positions.
This employment context of increased competition between applicants for insecure part-time or fixed-term jobs with few protective conditions, suggests that the ideals of rehabilitation and normalization — that is the restoration of opportunities for participation in all areas of civil society will be extremely difficult to implement within the terms of hospital rundown.
This brings us back to the underlying issue in this chapter about welfare and dependency.
Normalization requires equality of outcome as a fundamental principle, and indeed therapeutic right.
For clients of the services for mentally ill people, protection of conditions of employment to work toward that outcome is important.
The withdrawal of state protection for the marginal workforce makes adherence to that principle problematic.
Summary
The search for alternatives to state welfare provision, and in particular for informal, privatized, familial and voluntary care to be substituted, forms a foundation for the move away from mental hospitals.
As this review of change in Europe and the USA has shown, there were a number of important experiments in the 1940s and 1950s which, coincident with the development of mood-stabilizing drugs, suggested that a significant number of long-term patients could be successfully boarded out in the community.
Yet local authorities seemed to exhibit a universal lack of interest in developing alternative services to the mental hospitals, even when given sizeable subsidies.
At the same time the insurers who supported much mental hospital care under the continental system were not willing to  finance non-medical social support.
Where action did occur, in the USA and Italy, in each case a central government initiative drove the process of local reform.
In the USA it was the federal programme for mental health centres fuelled by a faith in the capacity of psychiatrists to improve the health of the nation.
In Italy the campaign of the Radical party achieved legislation to stop admissions to the mental hospitals.
The availability of subsidies for care, whether through insurance companies or state schemes has acted both as an obstacle to change and as a change facilitator.
In France, the former FRG and The Netherlands, the guaranteed subsidy for medical treatment gave the hospitals a secure role provided they could attract sufficient customers.
In the USA and to a limited extent in Britain, the availability of subsidies for nursing home care has encouraged a transfer of patients away from the long-stay institutions, and thus the more advanced pace of rundown in those two countries.
The perceived fiscal crisis of the mid-1970s and ‘stagflation’ in the USA brought in their train attempts to limit state expenditure on welfare.
The difference in attitudes toward welfare between the USA and Europe has been highlighted to show that trends toward contraction of municipal housing and urban programmes, when coupled with the process of deinstitutionalization, make it more likely that hospital leavers will be marginalized in a competitive environment.
The themes Knapp picks out about community care, the mixing of the economy and the drive to cut municipal costs, viewed in the light of the OECD concern to develop customer charging for services, assume a market among those with long-term illnesses or needs for support.
This has been contested by many students of welfare systems.
The experience in housing and nursing home care in Britain suggests that the level of state subsidies required to enable poor individuals to participate in such a market does not lead to a reduction in the total cost to the state.
The picture is obscured by the different public and private agencies seeking to divest themselves of the burden by distributing costs between one another.
De-hospitalization can be seen as a natural consequence of the decline in numbers of old long-stay patients.
To this extent closures can be seen to stem from therapeutic advances achieved by professional care staff.
But then it is puzzling why so little reduction has occurred in Europe as a whole.
The professions in psychiatry are not convinced of the therapeutic advantages of the move to the community, hence the suggestion from within that fraternity that rehabilitation is something of a myth.
Clearly more weight attaches to the principal administrative and economic factors: the development of general hospital treatment and primary care which are intended to replace mental hospitals, and the search for more cost-effective alternatives to state hospital provision.
Since the new forms of treatment set up have not reduced the demand for state hospital admissions and the alternatives so far devised have not guaranteed more  cost-effective services, the move into the community can be seen to be reaching a critical stage of development.
Italy and the USA constitute rogue cases in the sense that in the former case there was political interest in change, while in the latter case there was an extraordinary mass interest in psychiatry.
In Britain the process was subject to much more diffidence and restraint.
But this is to anticipate the next chapter.
A theoretical framework
The overview of mental health policy in the USA and Europe presented in Chapter 1 suggests that in many aspects the British case is typical of the continental process of reform.
No political movement has emerged in Britain to press for rundown of the mental hospitals.
Psychiatrists have not been involved in the lobbying of Parliament to any significant degree.
As Cooper wryly observes:
It is often not appreciated, at least in the U.K. that the medical profession has had very little say in the major decisions about the design of the health services.
For instance nobody knows who provided the detailed advice upon which ‘Better Services for the Mentally III’[the blueprint for government policy published in 1975]was based.
He continues
Similarly, mental hospitals were not built at the suggestion of psychiatrists, and psychiatrists have not been responsible as a profession for their run-down and closure.
While the Royal College of Psychiatrists and the British Medical Association counselled caution on closures, the impressive period architecture of asylums has attracted the interest of architects in the possibilities of preserving them intact with a resident population.
No national directive on the hospitals has been issued to the effect that there should be no further patient admissions to any of them.
As the case of Italy indicates, even if there had been, researchers would have had to examine the activity of the local state very closely to establish what action had been taken upon the directive.
This raises the issue of centre-locality conflict.
For some time in social policy it has been appreciated that local administrations do not simply act as transmitters of national legislation and guidance.
Aside from issues of    interpretation and priorities between the directives, Barrett and Fudge have described local implementation as falling within a policy-action continuum.
The existence of the continuum means that policies made by the centre are changed by information and guidance coming back up from the locality.
Drawing on an analysis of American inter-organizational relations Lindblom argues that it is simply not possible for the central state to impose its wishes on the local state.
Marmor's discussion of the incipient federalism of the USA's fifty states, and popular distrust of national government, lends support to such a view.
Lindblom's main point is that where local policy-makers have not made the decisions they will be slow to take action to implement them, and the significant degree of local state autonomy on questions of social policy suggests that this would be a situation easy to envisage.
This process of policy-shaping is held to be legitimate because the local state has to react to popular pressures in devising its welfare systems.
The dominant American view is that interest groups will always be able to organize themselves where the need arises and to defend their social position before the state.
This is seen as a natural process of democracy.
The potential anarchy and irresponsible policy deviation of this situation — where the local bullies and barons of federal funding set the agenda is not so apparent as might seem however.
Government's most cherished social policies may be enforced against local opposition, whether through the courts, dismissal of authorities which fail to set budgets, or through the imposition of ‘direct rule’ over a recalcitrant agency.
In Britain rate and poll-tax capping are obvious examples of such action by the centre.
Palmer views these types of key policies for central government, which it is willing to enforce strongly, as ‘strategic highs’.
Where the implementation of such strategic highs is in question the centre will limit the action space around interpretability and local discretion.
Within the NHS the Government requirement for ancillary services to be offered to private as well as‘in house’ tenders can be considered one such strategic objective.
Ham's research indicates that government ministers played a more important role than local administrators in determining the course of implementation of this initiative.
The American theory of autonomic development of interest group pressures to ensure equitable state policy outcomes draws attention to the shape of popular pressures of health services.
Alford's work indicates that in the USA three principal interest groups are involved.
‘Professional monopolists’ attempt to retain a system in which the location, costs and type of service is determined by those who provide it, primarily doctors, ‘Corporate rationalizers’, the second interest group, are the planners and administrators of health organizations who attempt to achieve a rational spread of services to meet the socio-demographic distribution of need.
Alford distinguishes the lay popular interest in development of services as  the third and largely repressed force: it is not organized as a permanent lobby and is not party to the agenda setting between the monopolists and the rationalizers.
The system of interest group pressure ensuring state responsiveness to its publics thus appears to be flawed.
Bachrach and Baratz posit the existence of ‘institutional dominance’ in large corporations.
This dominance exhibits itself in the ability of corporations to choose effectively which topics of policy they will shepherd into the arena of public debate, and which they will keep within the confines of private discussions.
Public consultation about policies can therefore be something of a sham where major options and potential developments are either not shared with the public by the corporation or not conceptualized by the public.
Nevertheless the structure of the planning process within the district health authorities (DHAs) of the NHS has given wide scope for public interests to be admitted.
Institutional dominance is not a necessary condition of policy-making.
The process established in 1982 provides that ‘bodies with a close interest should be consulted informally throughout the development of plans and programmes’ and that ‘the body in question may be represented on the planning team’.
With regard to formal consultation it is stipulated that ‘professional advisory committees, academic authorities, bodies representing the interests of staff, CHCs [community health councils]and local authorities will be included,as well as any other relevant interests ’(my emphasis).
The Barclay and Cumberledge reports on social work and nursing respectively laid strong emphasis on patch-based working for the 1980s.
The parish or ward base — the patch, neighbourhood or most recently ‘locality’ has become the fashionable location for the receiving and giving of care.
While this is often assumed axiomatic to good services, which have been removed from a local base only because of the division of labour requirements of bureaux, it is not a self-evident welfare virtue.
It can remove choice and increase stigma.
It can make the relation between the carer and the person cared for too familiar.
For mentally ill people local care may be undesirable if they wish to be treated by anonymous carers rather than people who may live in their own locality.
Relatives who are carers may also find that the requirement for professional support to be given locally infringes on their own rights to privacy.
They may fear that the condition of the person they care for might become common knowledge in the neighbourhood, and prefer the anonymity afforded by distant, specialized, non-local treatment facilities.
In fact these difficulties are not restricted to the giving and receiving of care, but are also reflected more generally in phenomena of social contact and recognition between neighbours.
In the 1970s Abrams and colleagues carried out the ‘Street studies’ of neighbouring and subsequently reviewed neighbourhood care schemes.
Abrams believed neighbouring to hang on a dilemma which those who live near to each other have between the need for support in times of crisis and  the need for privacy.
While neighbours need to contribute to some notional ‘stock of common good’, so that they can draw on it should they become in need of help at some point in the future, they also wish not to be imposed upon by the needs of others.
As Marsden commented in the discussion of Abrams's original research proposals:
At the most general conceptual level of what we mean by good neighbouring, the ideas are tapping very thorny problems of the sources of social cohesion and solidarity.
For instance if you translate ‘neighbourly behaviour’ into ‘altruism’or ‘community’you are immediately into all the problems discussed from Tönnies and Durkheim onwards (i.e. how and why solidarity is built upon kinship, common place, occupation, religion and so on).
And if you look at studies of ‘community’ it seems to me that they haven't been resolved.
Corporatism and post-Fordism have led to the control of industry, employment and markets from international centres which supervise the socio-economic development of continental trading communities.
There is little scope for such matters to be controlled from within neighbourhoods by the people living within them.
With the increasing emphasis on provision of housing and transport outside the state, these goods too are increasingly distributed and rationed along such lines.
In the light of these trends the concepts of neighbourhood or patch have become less relevant to civic self-determination.
Locality on the other hand has come into the ascendancy because of the need to redefine forces for local autonomy around much larger clusters of population.
The localities described by Cooke and colleagues are essentially local market-places competing with others in the international network.
He defines locality as
the space within which the larger part of most citizens' daily working and consuming lives is lived.
It is the base for a large measure of individual and social mobilization to activate, extend or defend those rights, not simply in the political sphere but more generally in the areas of cultural, economic and social life.
This theme of giving back control over civic affairs to local people and moving away from the grip of town halls and utility or service administrations was one investigated in the community development projects of the 1970s.
Analysis of these projects suggested that if such control were to be achieved, local people would have to acquire the motivation and skills to be able to organize themselves into effective action groups able to negotiate with public authorities.
These skills are not common and are mostly cultivated by middle-class residents who do not live in the areas most in need of a collective uplift.
There seems little hope of local control of health issues in the inner city.
The unlikelihood of the urban parish continuing to exhibit the features  of a self-standing community has also been revealed by research showing the way in which kinship and friendship contacts are kept up over ever increasing geographical distances, largely because of mass car and telephone ownership.
Community care co-ordinated from Brussels and delivered into neighbourhoods by the corporate providers of the European Community would seem the final blow to the familial, private and intimately local ideal.
Higgins among others has called for the abandonment of the term ‘community care’ and for the identification of practical alternatives.
However, health authorities and family practitioner authorities are keen on the idea of generic teams delivering patch-based care.
Localism is seen as a good thing in itself.
With their populations of 100,000 to 300,000, health districts offer the possibility of considerable demographic subdivision, according to ethnic mix, the proportion of elderly people living alone, the proportion of young people in the population and so on.
But this idea of care in the locality is little different from one which follows the need for an effective division of labour to be adopted by health maintenance organizations.
What is confusing about locality is the romance attached to the concept which implies that remote governments have somehow been thrust off by street corner society.
Drawing together the threads of this discussion of community, neighbourhood and locality care, it is possible to construct a simple theoretical framework for study of the empirical question at hand, the closure of two large English mental hospitals.
The framework can be best seen in terms of a continuum of discretion.
At one end of the continuum, local actors within centre-controlled authorities have no discretion.
The policies for health and social services are dictated from central government, and health authorities and local government simply implement them.
The scope of their action is fixed by universally applicable criteria.
At the other end of the continuum, local actors have a large area of discretion within what can be termed ‘Athenian’ authorities.
In implementing and interpreting policies, they challenge the imposition of legal obligations where they feel it is locally valid to do so.
Representatives of Athenian local states purposively seek to nurture popular campaigns and public initiatives which can take up the welfare services ‘action space’.
The role of the authority itself is then one of free-ranging facilitating and monitoring.
Between these opposite ends of the continuum lie intermediary kinds of local state action which I have termed guided, autarchic and decentralized (see Figure 1).
Constructed as ideal types, they are in Weber's famous phrase ‘one-sided accentuations of reality’.
In the ‘real process’ of policy implementation, local authorities may follow a pattern of action drawing on several of the types sketched here.
But by distinguishing clearly between them in this methodological fashion it is possible to explore how far local state action tends to fall into one type rather than another when action on any one policy is considered.
The controlled authority
The characteristics of the controlled authority are in some ways those of the classic bureaucracy, in which rules provide for all cases of need.
They are impartially applied in order to ensure that the goals of welfare are not subverted to the partial concerns of those implementing policy.
While appropriate for armies, this model of organization is widely believed to be too inflexible, remote, impersonal, ineffective and inefficient for welfare provision.
However, unelected, time limited, hierarchical agencies have played an important role in central government initiatives to solve social problems.
This is illustrated in the history of the Urban Development Corporations in Britain.
Such corporations tend to usurp the functions of local elected authorities which are simultaneously subjected to greater central control.
The action research of the Brunel school can be used to draw out the key advantages of the controlled authority.
The main theme is that the duties and responsibilities of each person in the organization are unambiguously defined.
To this end the work carried out is divided into levels.
At the grass-roots, the deliverer of the service has to make no judgements about when or where the delivery should take place.
This is already prescribed for him or her.
At the next level up, that of ‘situational response’, professionals need to take decisions about the appropriateness of particular forms of follow-up.
The third ‘developmental’ level involves choices about the organization of workload which follows these professional decisions about action.
At the fourth level analysis of fields of need is carried out at the top of the organization.
The need to be served is in turn prescribed, in this instance, by the centre.
In one sense this definition of fields of needs was attempted rather graphically by Griffiths and is a feature of the NHS and Community Care Bill.
Local authorities are to take charge of responding to social care needs, health authorities to health care needs, with a fairly firmly defined boundary between the two.
The guided authority
The concept of the guided authority rests on the traditions of independent local government, voluntary action, and the use of expert opinion in decision making about welfare.
Many policies are not based on rule books and central government allows considerable discretion to the local state.
Though the 1988–1991 welfare reforms, particularly those in Education and the NHS, have tended to remove some of that discretion, nevertheless central government pays somewhat selective attention to the issues which it sees as the most politically pressing.
The others are left to the localities.
In many respects the purchasing and contracting arrangements have strengthened the power of the locality to decide, mainly because of the reliance placed on the technical judgements of the caring professions.
Implementation in the guided authority is thus a messier affair than in the controlled authority.
The political aims of the centre are not written on tablets of stone and handed down from the Mount.
Some areas of policy may be the subject only of unspecific recommendations, perhaps setting out a range of loosely worded options.
In turn these open up the field to considerable latitude of local interpretation.
The guidance may in any case often be dated.
Within its terms local actors are able to develop independent initiatives, such as, for example , those involving health care for women.
The theory of guided authorities draws its strength from Glennerster's work on social planning for elderly and mentally handicapped people.
The Centre for Corporate Strategy and Change also tends to implicitly adopt this model.
It recognizes that professional decision-makers often form themselves into factions for the purposes of bargaining.
They also seek to become owners of policy initiatives rather than to act as transmitters for central political goals.
The pursuit of localism as a phenomenon within state organizational cultures reinforces these tendencies.
The competition between professional and management groups is seen as essentially productive, and indeed is the stuff of life for those inhabiting the organizational levels.
It is particularly important for innovations and community care.
As Stocking has shown, an innovation may be shown to be effective but not adopted widely, whereas another innovation may not have been demonstrated to be effective yet can become widely accepted in practice.
The differences seem to be to do with the fact that local ‘product champions’ are often required to stimulate the infusion of new practices.
These champions need to enjoy both a senior position and the respect of colleagues outside their own profession.
Glennerster suggests that the centre should give incentives to the localities to encourage the healthy competitiveness for innovations.
For example the centre could facilitate research in the areas where it felt that development, change and adoption of new techniques was required.
Discretionary policy-making at a number of levels in the organization is thus the key to this system, perhaps corresponding in its internal fluidity to some of the features of Burns and Stalker's organic model of organization.
The autarchic authority
The autarchic authority is one which brings to mind Marmor's image of the agrarian, government distrusting USA.
Local states are not accorded a leading role in decisions about welfare.
Expertise is diffuse rather than held within the guided hand of the state authority.
As a mixed economy of welfare emerges in Britain, clearly the model of the autarchic authority will assume greater significance.
While the negotiation of outcomes between central government and local government is important, proposals  are not generated directly from factions or product champions internal to the authorities concerned.
Rather they are formed within an external market of inter-agency competition and adjustment.
In order to determine its policy, each local state authority is constantly adjusting its position to take account of the intentions of others.
At the same time it also has to adjust to market leaders in the private and voluntary sectors and to public interest groups.
Here prescription from the centre is most unwelcome.
On one level the policy of local agencies evolves in a way that is ‘disjointed’ and ‘incremental’and could be seen as the antithesis of responsible party policy-making.
On another level policies are not irrational and their disjointed character is not seen as a bad thing by the apologists of incrementalism.
They regard the conflicts between the centre and the locality as inevitable.
Compromises would not attract the support of the key interest groups in either and would be impossible to implement.
Ideally the conflicts are thus best resolved by non-negotiated partisan action taken by one agency in anticipation of, or in response to, the actions of another.
Management of welfare thus follows the course of a large chess game.
Where two agencies put forward conflicting options, the search is inevitably on for a third option, which may involve negotiation.
These processes are justified by the fact that the audience wields some power over the moves of the managers.
Organized interest groups play a significant part in the decisions.
Critics point to the disservice to the public of allowing the self-interest of organizations to determine welfare outcomes.
Benson for instance argues that agencies are primarily concerned with achieving what he calls an ‘uncluttered domain' for their services.
The problems posed by the resultant institutional dominance are not addressed.
The public support which any of the agencies enjoys for its services will depend on the social rank and size of social groups which can be mobilized to defend it.
The strength of agencies will thus not necessarily reflect the popularity of their policies.
Autarchic manoeuvrings at the inter-organizational level thus leave open the issue of ‘localism’.
This is for a more radical type of authority to pursue.
The decentralized authority
A strategy of decentralization would appear to answer the critics of monolithic bureaux and self-serving power and resources maximizers.
Authorities following this strategy are less vulnerable to the control of professional groups or corporate interests and correspondingly more open to popular pressure.
The means of power and decision-making in the decentralized authority are made freely available to non-state agencies and other organized interest groups.
Opportunities for influence and participation are thus not dependent on the social rank or size of such groups.
A number of authorities in Britain have attempted to devise means of sharing  decision-making with neighbourhood groups, Islington and Walsall Councils being among the first to do so.
In the interpretation of national guidance and development of local responses, the members of a decentralizing authority
take seriously the possibility of institutional dominance posed by the existence of their own and other welfare organisations…they would be concerned to consider options for change which challenge the vested interest, or the market position of their organisation itself — for instance by acting as subordinate partner to other agencies in a cooperative venture.
The decentralized authority has a somewhat dated ring to it, in that it retains a faith in the ability of the local state to decide and provide.
However, decentralization raises an important theme for the empirical processes to be outlined in the next three chapters.
This centres on Bachrach and Baratz's suggestion that public bodies resort to appeals to ‘symbolic normative values’ to foist off challenges to their own values.
A lot of work is put into making organizational procedures resistant to public manipulation of the decision-making.
For decentralization to work, state policies should reflect the desires of outside interest groups at the sub authority level.
The local state has to resist its tendencies to manipulate.
As in the case of autarchic policy making, effective outside influence would require that public interest in specific social issues had already been articulated rather than being reflected in some generalized public unease.
In the decentralizing authority the exercise of that influence is made much easier by the offer of participant status in the administration and development of local policy.
The Athenian authority
At one remove from decentralization is the Athenian model of action which lies at the least controlled end of the continuum.
For Athenian authorities, sharing of power and admission of non-state interests is not sufficient because it allows influence only to the articulate and to civic agitators — the minority who can turn municipal decision-making to their own advantage.
Social groups which lack the civic skills to represent their own interests are particularly vulnerable to neglect by decentralizing agencies.
This is an important point where chronic mentally ill people are concerned, since many lack the confidence and social skills to make a telling case for their needs to be met.
So, an athenian democracy where all have a voice is required.
This may take two principal forms.
In the first, the state facilitates the democratic organization of clients.
Ideally the pressure groups formed are not to be organized functionally around ‘clienthood’ or ‘patienthood’but around identification of interests which consumers in general feel to be appropriate.
Thus they might involve users and ex-users  of a variety of health and social services, together with their friends and supporters.
As in decentralization, some degree of latitude in interpretation of centre policy would be necessary for its implementation to adapt to local influences which can only be an unknown factor at the beginning of the facilitating process.
By definition, levels of prescribed output and organization of workload cannot be fixed in a local state structured to follow this course.
Professionals have a choice between imposing ‘appropriate’ needs on their clients or attempting to break down the latters' 'dein-dividualisation' (e.g. as an unemployed person, as a schizophrenic etc.) and assisting ‘real’needs to be collectively voiced.
In the second form of Athenian democracy a more populist welfare framework is intended.
All the people are to have a voice, which is to be operationalized through their individual consumption or purchasing decisions.
This is a direction in which the 1991 NHS and Community Care reform is leading.
In its first phase, it allows intermediaries, such as DHAs and general practitioners to make the purchases.
These intermediaries are immediately faced with questions about how to distinguish consumer preferences from professional carers' judgements of need and of which, among them, to give most weight to.
But as was stated above, it must always be borne in mind that these models are ideal types.
For on the one hand the Athenian type of behaviour might seem to be quite incompatible with local state obligations in law and electorally to majority, articulated, social interests.
But on the other hand it is already operated by, for example, those professionals who have co-founded with users voluntary pressure groups, doffing their professional garb by night.
In this sense professionals have already attempted to break down the norms of public discourse to bring on the clients of welfare who have suffered in silence.
Operationalizing this framework allows study of key questions about the closures of British mental hospitals.
Would one find controlled authorities rationally closing the hospitals which they had been told were least fit to serve for the future — for instance on the grounds of extreme remoteness to districts served or lack of viability in terms of the relative decline of the resident population — and thus cases of rule book judgements?
Would one encounter clinical opinion leaders in guided authorities designing innovations that would permit resettlement of the asylums residents and bidding for funds to support their development?
As a third possibility, might closures be facilitated through mutual lobbying and adjustment of autarchic DHAs and correspondent agencies within the local organizational network — with a part incremental, part negotiated evolution of new services displacing the mental hospitals?
Might DHA power sharing with voluntary organizations, consortia and other relevant interest groups, within decentralized bodies, be the key facilitator of plans for the replacement of the  asylums?
As a fifth more radical possibility, might consumers be empowered by the professional care givers of an athenian local state and seek to opt out of the traditional services — persuading providers or purchasers to contract for alternatives?
The government's 1983 de-hospitalization pilot programme, followed by Griffiths investigation into community care, could be seen as the beginning of central direction of mental health services.
However, though Griffiths recommended the appointment of a Minister for Community Care, no such Minister was to be appointed.
A central government directed devolution of large psychiatric hospital services to their catchment area communities was therefore an unlikely outcome.
Whether community health councils, and pressure groups such as MIND would be able to persuade individual health authorities to embark on reform programmes would of course depend on local circumstances.
Certainly, in at least one of the case study districts, Islington, which will be discussed in Chapter 5, decentralization of local authority services under a socialist regime made for some civic similarity with the regions of Italy which received mental health reform most warmly.
Moreover, once health authorities had been granted powers to ‘buy in’ services, then the  question of the accountability to local publics of their purchasing decisions was raised.
Adoption of an athenian model of action for closure initiatives was thus not out of the question.
Britain 1986–9: the first big hospitals close
Powick
It was statistical analysis of trends in admissions to and discharges from mental hospitals that had led central government to plan for the redundancy of the hospitals.
But the proposition that the trend of decline in the 1950s could be used as a baseline for planning in future years was much disputed.
As Jones comments, ‘possible variables such as the rate of development of community services, the aging of the population, economic uncertainty, and the limits of public tolerance, were mentioned, but were not weighted into the predictions’.
In fact the anticipated pace of rundown was not kept up and progress at replacing asylum care with general hospital treatment, as elsewhere in Europe, was slow.
In 1968 the secretary of state drew attention to the fact that mental hospital services were ‘lagging behind’ the modern approach of DGH psychiatric departments and local authority community services.
The Department of Health decided to set up a development project to show how co-operative planning between hospital and local authorities could provide a comprehensive modern system of care.
This was to focus especially on the apparent difficulties of resettling the mostly elderly long-stay population of the asylums.
The area of Worcester was chosen for the development of a demonstration community service to replace the local mental hospital, Powick.
This was a centre initiative taken through a controlled authority.
The fact that the long-stay population was not declining as rapidly as had been thought meant an expensive ‘double running’ situation.
The new range of services would be supported alongside the old.
The problem was therefore to find means of resettling a resident population apparently becoming more difficult to discharge.
Local professionals had not been responsible for developing a closure programme and there is evidence that rehabilitation was inadequately co-ordinated prior to renewed efforts in the latter  part of the demonstration programme.
There does not appear to have been any significant pressure from voluntary organizations or the public.
There was a cynical view that Powick was chosen as a government test centre after it was featured in a World in Action television report on overcrowding in psychiatric hospitals.
Powick was built as the City and County Pauper Lunatic Asylum for Worcester in the mid-nineteenth century.
In many ways attitudes and policies at the hospital appear to have followed a fairly typical course, with model behavioural regimes giving way to mass custody.
In the first annual report of the medical superintendent it was reported that it had not been necessary to use the padded cell on any occasion, despite the fact that many patients had been admitted handcuffed, leg iron locked or bound with cords and chains.
However, Wing suggests that Powick was noted in the early days chiefly for the cheapness of its care: ‘The beauty of the setting and the amenities of the farm (510 acres) contrasted with the restrictive and pinchpenny regime.’
He points out that according to the recollections of Dr Sandison, Deputy Superintendent from 1954 to 1964, it had been difficult to fill the beds at Powick with patients admitted from the county and that admissions from such places as Birmingham, outside the catchment area, often of severely disabled people, were accepted.
‘Powick still had its reputation for cheapness and it made a profit.’
Such warehousing was evidently mitigated by freedom from restraint.
Gillard even considers that the hospital was in the vanguard of therapeutic optimism in the 1950s, ‘being one of the first in the country to pull down the perimeter wall and unlock the wards, encouraging patients to mix freely’.
The national plan for district general hospitals projected that Powick beds would be considerably reduced — from 1,089 in 1962 to 260 in 1975.
But this in itself did not lead to Worcester being an obvious target for government to focus attention on, since such a reduction was in line with predictions for other hospitals.
Probably the fact that it was, and is, an area of geographical averageness, made up of market and light industry towns dotted around a ‘Middle England’ farming countryside, played some part (though the area was well below average in relation to poverty, disease and social isolation).
It was also thought that there was a very static population in the area which would be helpful to research into the efficacy of the new services.
Results would be more reliable where there was only a small drift into or out of the area.
Interestingly the commercial value of the site did not play a part in the calculation.
Despite long negotiations with the local authority planning department, the site did not figure in their 1982 County Plan for residential development and alternative health service uses were therefore being canvassed.
By 1975 the Worcester project was ‘well under way’, and by 1979 all the beds and hospital places, which were provided up to the prescribed  national levels proportional to the catchment population, had been opened.
The main service sites were at Kidderminster General Hospital and the Worcester County Infirmary, providing a combined total of 210 beds.
A short-stay hostel was located at Kidderminster, with a long-stay hostel being provided at Worcester.
Peripheral day hospitals and day centres were set up in Malvern and Evesham.
The administrative problems of phasing out Powick fell into three main areas.
First, there was the state of the fabric of the hospital, and the cost of maintaining a satisfactory standard of accommodation in deteriorating buildings.
Second, there was the difficulty of staffing the hospital to an adequate level, given that new entrants to the service were difficult to attract to an institution which was closing.
The third group of problems related to the task of trying to rehabilitate the large number of elderly long-stay patients with intractable illnesses.
This last problem was clearly of greatest concern to government.
As in many asylums, rehabilitation had tended to revolve around the acute admission wards from which patients were more likely to make a full recovery.
This was reflected in the organization of the service within the hospital.
As part of the effort to resettle the long-stay population the occupational and industrial therapy departments were integrated to offer 180 places specifically for this group.
Further input was secured from consultant psychiatrists working in the new community units.
They were to retain a commitment to sessional work at Powick, with the elderly population, under the reformed system.
Finally, ‘special attention was paid to staff training’ in order to ‘keep staff up to date, maintain interest and motivation’.
It is evident from a Health Advisory Service (HAS) visit in 1985 that a fundamental flaw had been discovered in the planning of the Powick strategy.
It had been assumed that increased rehabilitation input would achieve the ‘big move’ out of hospital and the restoration of substantial numbers of patients to some moderate state of well-being.
It assumed that models of rehabilitation valuing people through work, which had been established at such hospitals at Netherne, could be applied for an indefinite period with all patients being potential benefactors.
These assumptions were to prove over-optimistic.
Despite the increased input, remaining long-stay patients in Powick proved fairly intractable.
It took much longer than expected for the population to be reduced by deaths, occasional discharges and transfers to new units.
By the end of 1978 when the new Powick replacement units were opened in the Worcester and Kidderminster areas, 343 patients remained in Powick.
It proved difficult to discharge many of these patients.
Thirty-one had been discharged by 1983 but with six of these patients having been transferred to a general hospital for physical illness and having subsequently died.
‘With hindsight’, the HAS commented, ‘it can be seen that the exercise of moving to community care should have begun with the provision of substitute facilities for longer term dependent patients’.
Despite the lack of recovery through rehabilitation the hospital population had been reduced to 189 patients in 1982.
This was mostly accounted for by a ‘natural’ death-rate of 9 per cent per annum.
But the picture was further complicated in 1983 when the Worcester DHA proposed to close another psychiatric hospital, with a similarly small and diminishing resident population, St Wulstan's, for which it had assumed responsibility.
To achieve the closure the authority planned to transfer the remaining patients to Powick.
Another problem which was uncovered during the planning process relates back to one of the variables which Jones suggested that government predictions had not taken fully into account.
It had apparently been hoped that the numbers of long-term patients suffering from dementia would diminish with the rundown of the asylums.
However, a contrary trend of rapid increase in the number of ‘elderly severely mentally ill patients requiring hospital care’ was discovered.
In response, the Co-ordinating Committee for Powick, chaired by an academic from Birmingham University and involving six public authorities, decided to dedicate two further units specifically for this group, one being provided by the conversion of a general practitioner (GP) maternity unit.
What were the results of the Worcester Development Project?
Although Powick did not close until 1989, admissions had stopped a decade earlier.
Lawrence, Cumella and Robertson analysed admissions to Kidderminster DGH during the first six years without the ‘back-up’ facility of admission to Powick.
They found that ‘there was little or no accumulation of long-stay patients’ during the period.
Here then was apparent proof that the asylums were not necessary once the general hospital network was comprehensively developed.
However, Lawrence and his colleagues caution that the lack of appearance of ‘new long-stay’ patients in the hospitals may have been due to geographical drift of such patients to other hospitals.
In addition, a small number of people described as ‘young organic patients’ did become long stay but were transferred into the dementia unit at Kidderminster.
Between 1983 and 1986 Medical Research Council workers interviewed a large sample of clients at day centres and day hospitals in the Worcester catchment area.
The sample was made up of people whom they judged would probably have been long-stay residents of Powick if that option had continued to be available.
The researchers identified 167 people who had been attending for a year or more.
They were able to interview 139 of these service recipients, and in nearly all cases also interviewed their carers.
Close relatives were questioned in approximately half of the cases.
An interim report of the team suggests a reasonable degree of satisfaction with the new services with the majority of clients and carers viewing them as helpful.
The social contact provided by the existence of the centres seem to be particularly valued.
This had helped some to become more confident and others to feel less lonely.
Nevertheless a number of unmet needs were uncovered which are still the subject of analysis.
Disappointingly there was little evidence of any change in the condition of attenders over the course of two years from the interviewing of the original sample.
One could argue on this evidence that the government demonstration had succeeded, subject to caveats about the need for caution in extrapolating from this study area possible effects on the rest of the country.
Yet the problems of rehabilitating the largely elderly resident hospital populations remained unsolved.
By the beginning of 1986, when alternative facilities were being planned for the combined residual population of both St Wulstan's and Powick, it had been recognized that
As the vast majority of patients are elderly and have spent long periods in hospital, it is unrealistic to expect them to live independently or improve dramatically on discharge.
It is essential that alternative accommodation should be very varied in type and support to give the greatest degree of independence to patients commensurate with their disabilities and to enable adjustments to be made in small steps.
The evidence nationally regarding ‘new long-stay’ patients was equivocal, with the need for residential provision to be made for such patients being strongly contended outside Worcester.
Moreover, the results of Lawrence's evaluation of admissions to the new service had not become available until 1987.
In its objective of finding ways of rehabilitating the residual long-term inpatient population, the Development Project had a singular lack of success.
The transfer of patients from St Wulstan's to Powick, in order to bring about the closure of the former hospital, which housed a preponderance of younger long-stay patients, was planned almost in spite of the Development Project.
Central government was thus not able to give clear guidance drawn from the Worcester case for hospital managing authorities in the rest of the country.
Those authorities continued to be faced with the same issues of escalating costs and deteriorating quality of service within the institutions.
By the 1980s many asylums had contracted to a size which was dwarf-life when compared with the vast acreages and Palladian pretensions of their heyday.
The story of St Wulstan's Hospital forms a fascinating footnote to the narrative of events at Powick, which illustrates that Worcester Health Authority was as much locally impelled to rationalize mental health services, as pushed to do so by the centre.
In fact there was ample opportunity to achieve this objective.
In 1982 Worcester district management team (DMT) considered that
two mental hospitals [St Wulstan's and Powick]each catering for about 200 patients situated some nine miles apart in the same district can no longer be justified in the present economic climate.
Lying to the south-west of Worcester city, St Wulstan's had not historically been used for mental health services.
In 1961 it was reopened as a hospital dedicated to specialist services for the rehabilitation of mentally ill patients, to serve the whole of the West Midlands region.
The aim of the ‘new’ hospital was in part to lessen overcrowding in the other twenty mental hospitals of the region, from which referrals would be taken, and in part to develop specialist methods of treatment for those who did not get better under ordinary therapeutic regimes.
St Wulstan's began with more than 300 beds, though it was never entirely filled.
After a review of its operation in 1977 it became clear that only a minority of patients referred from the other hospitals were being successfully rehabilitated and that St Wulstan's had become another long-stay hospital.
Moreover, its existence was completely at odds with the national trend for community care, since patients who were referred were brought to a location quite remote from the area in which they had lived.
It is surprising that the work and evolution of the hospital was not in any way linked up with the Powick project: first, because of the knowledge evidently acquired about the prospects and techniques for resettling the long-stay population, with which the Department of Health was concerned, and second, because of the enhanced rehabilitation resources which it offered.
At the time of its merger with Powick, in the closing stages of the rundown of the latter hospital, the fusing of specialisms was seen to offer many advantages, but by this time it had already been decided to resettle residents in permanent community hostels.
Banstead
Banstead Hospital, situated in the Surrey commuter belt, was the first large hospital in Britain to close in August 1986.
The closure was doubly important because the catchment area covered the inner London districts of Westminster, Paddington and Hammersmith.
The situation was radically different from that obtaining at Powick.
Whereas Lawrence and his colleagues had suggested that patients suffering from chronic schizophrenia might have drifted away from Worcester and Kidderminster, one of the major concerns about community services in London was that such patients tended to relocate in the inner city areas of the capital.
These were precisely the areas covered by Banstead.
The population of this hospital was double that of Powick, running to nearly 800 patients in 1979.
The very size would seem to militate against action on closure, with the point of non-viability being some way off.
While the area health authority (AHA) had commissioned work to consider the future of its long-stay hospitals, the looming 1982 reorganization of the NHS by which the area tier of authorities was to be abolished, did not augur well for any initiative to be taken forward from such work.
The easiest option for both district and area administrators would have been to    do nothing until after the reorganization had taken place.
The tradition of incrementalism was strongly established within the NHS and the tendency to avoid conflict was inherent to its administrative culture.
Why, then, was the Banstead strategy conceived so early?
Paradoxically the threat to their survival posed by reorganization appears to have gingered up the interested members of the dying Kensington, Chelsea and Westminster area authority.
‘Members knew about Jenkin's proposals and the removal of a tier in the NHS and sought a monument to their existence.
Within the AHA ranks was an influential caucus of members which functioned in some ways like the group of the political party in power within a local authority.
They met separately from the authority and shared a common ‘soft Left’ platform of views on the future of the NHS.
Observers suggest that this group was very much one of its time: it played a role in the breakdown of the supposed post-war welfare consensus and in polarization of attitudes around more overtly political positions on state social policy.
One member of the caucus was particularly prominent in its activity and was well known as an innovator in the NHS.
It was this group of AHA members which was responsible for the establishment of an Area working party on mental health services.
The death of the AHA was not the last word of its members, since the caucus moved across to a position within the new Victoria District Authority, which took over responsibility for the management of the AHA's asylums.
The caucus thus gave continuity at the top throughout the development of the closure plan.
Pressure from this group was applied to prompt officers to take action when the momentum flagged.
Such pressure was important, since it was apparent that some of the officers within Area Working Party were satisfied with the production of ‘sliced bread statements’: manifestos of intent which did not necessarily carry any promise of implementation.
The precipitating factors for the closure of Banstead were not different from those which applied elsewhere in the country.
General hospital units were being developed within the catchment area of the hospital and its function as an admissions unit would eventually be superseded.
In addition it was very remote from the catchment area, located fifteen miles from central London, representing a considerable journey given the density of the urban areas to be crossed and the paucity of public transport systems in Surrey.
But the story of closure cannot be told beyond this point without analysis of the other psychiatric hospital managed by the AHA with which its fate was so closely bound.
Horton Hospital, located in Epsom, and together with Banstead one of a ring of mental hospitals in the vicinity known as the ‘Epsom cluster’, was subject to the same process of decline and was also in an impossible location to offer community care.
Surprisingly given that it was chosen for closure, Banstead proved the more viable of the two hospitals in terms of admissions from the catchment area.
It was Horton that was fast losing its supply of ‘new entrants’ with the opening of St  Charles Psychiatric Unit in Kensington, planned for 1984, being seen as a critical point.
For Horton staff, particularly the medical staff, the loss of ‘acute’(short stay) admissions would make the hospital a far less attractive place to work in.
For clinicians who wanted to practise their skills and for nurses who needed the job satisfaction of returning patients to the community, there would be an uphill task with an entirely chronic and elderly population.
Nurse education and training at Horton would be likely to become unsustainable without a sufficient variety of placements for students.
The district management team ‘feared that Horton would become very uncompetitive’.
From the point of view of cost-effectiveness and efficiency, it would have been surprising had the new Victoria Authority not taken an initiative.
It had responsibility for two institutions within five miles of each other, both established for the same function and both less than half full.
But the decision for closure had in any case already been made by the predecessor AHA.
The AHA working party had concluded in 1979 that there was ‘no long term need for both these psychiatric hospitals to be retained to meet the service requirements of the area’.
The choice was between two options.
The first was to run down both hospitals in parallel until a point of non-viability at either one of them was reached and a closure plan could be executed.
The second was to close one hospital and transfer as many of its patients as possible into community facilities, resettling those who could not be so placed into the other, retained and upgraded hospital.
It was this option which was chosen, and it was suggested that closure should probably take place when the combined population of the two hospitals dipped below the 1,000 mark.
The management team of the North East District, said to be ‘general management oriented before general management’, was given the task of considering the details of closure and the strategy for transfer of patients.
To a historian of the health services this decision to rationalize the two hospitals on to one site could be seen as rather disappointing.
For all the initiative, corporateness, political enthusiasm and managerial opportunism of planning for closure, it did not appear to bring in any noteworthy innovation.
Indeed it could be argued that the AHA, and the North East District within it, was simply an efficient administration carrying out orders from the top.
Banstead and Horton were both quite clearly remote from their catchment areas, and ill-fitted to serve in any future organization of local mental health services north of the Thames.
It was therefore incumbent upon the AHA to plan alternative services.
This duty was helped by the fact that the general hospital units being built up in the London catchment area were already taking over the functions of the asylums.
Yet the role of the caucus members and the DGM clearly lent a continuity to the lengthy process of planning closure which might otherwise  easily have been lost.
For his part, the DGM began by spending a day a week at Banstead from April 1980 and subsequently took six weeks off from running the affairs of district administration, handing over to his deputy in order to work full time on the strategy for closure.
He became involved at a much more personal level, playing cricket at Horton.
The only danger was, as he recalls, that he would have become institutionalized.
Yet the DGM regarded the crucial administrative and managerial input to have been the appointment of a new Unit Administrator for Horton and Banstead in 1982.
From that point on he only went down to the hospitals ‘as and when required’.
The soft Left orientation of the caucus was also obviously important.
The mental health charity MIND had already canvassed the idea of taking the opportunity presented by the decline in the population of the hospitals to argue for sale of parcels of land in order to fund community services.
The problems for Kensington, Chelsea and Westminster to develop such services were manyfold.
First, the authority was losing revenue resources to the outer London districts under the RAWP formula.
Under the terms of this formula resources in the NHS were distributed in such a way as to favour areas of the country traditionally under-provided with services, such as the Trent region in the Midlands.
Its application meant that London received a proportionally smaller increase in funding, year on year, than many of the Home Counties.
This had a knock-on effect on capital resources, in the sense that they were taken up with developing general hospital services in the towns away from London.
Second, the area was not fortunate enough to have been chosen for a government-supported demonstration project, despite the key issues of homelessness and health in the inner London areas served.
Third, there was the added problem of the drift into the area from the rest of the country of patients with chronic illnesses.
As was noted above, it was suspected that this was a factor in the lack of a build-up of long-stay patients in the new services established after Powick was closed to admissions.
In these circumstances the long-term future for mental health services in inner London was not good.
Indeed a scenario of resources being drawn from the mental hospitals into the non-mental health budget might be readily anticipated.
Heightened government concern with AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome) and other ‘new’ epidemics, or with organizational change, might easily shift priorities away from the long-stay patient groups.
By deciding upon a resettlement initiative at an early stage, the AHA was therefore making sure that its officers fully took advantage of the climate of growth for mental health services while it lasted.
The release of revenue from Banstead was both to fund improvements at Horton and also to place the NHS elements of comprehensive district services inside the boundaries of the London district.
The strategy for Banstead could be seen in this light as an impressive gamble on resources for mental health being winnable within the region.
As the DGM was to relate shortly after closure had been achieved: ‘Investment capital was the greatest difficulty [together with]the revenue consequences.
We had no idea where the money was going to come from.’
Underspendings from Kensington Chelsea and Westminster (on its demise) eventually provided a source for enabling the strategy to be implemented, and the regional health authority contributed £1.8 million as a loan from its Strategic Development Fund.
This was to be repaid from savings of £7.5 million which were expected to accrue on the achievement of the closure.
The Horton budget was to be increased from £10 million to more than £13 million for upgradings and improvements as the gradual transfer of patients from Banstead took place.
These calculations allowed for £2.1 million to be made available for further community developments in Riverside to follow the closure (all these figures are given at 1986 prices).
The breakdown is shown in Table 2.
To all appearances the AHA and DMT were responding to a local political environment which favoured the closure of asylums.
At this stage the Left in politics was clearly interested in the development of alternatives to the asylums and this interest fed into the caucus policy-making.
The concerns of what might be called the research and development agencies in the NHS, such as the Nuffield Foundation and the Kings Fund, also provided a stimulus for change.
In this sense there was an element of autarchy in the planning of Kensington and Chelsea, responding to local market conditions.
Enhancement of the NHS domain was certainly at the core of the initiative, perhaps because many informed observers thought that members of health authorities would, in the future, become both more representative of the population served and better able to make local management innovations in service.
Policy-making for Banstead clearly did not fulfil the autarchic ideal of mutual adjustment or joint planning between agencies to develop a pan-authority range of services.
Initially at least, NHS resources were not being passed across to the local authorities and the voluntary organizations   active within the Riverside DHA which had by this stage succeeded Victoria DHA in another reorganization.
This form of ‘re-provision’ to achieve comprehensive services was not yet fully established in the thinking of the district management team: ‘It was a debate that revolved around Kathleen Jones’(an academic expert on mental health services).
The DMT was aware of the existence of the concept of a comprehensive inter-agency service, but knew that if they were to test the feasibility of implementing it, ‘it would take an enormous amount of time’.
Nevertheless the hospital beds and places to be opened in London were seen as facilitating the further development of comprehensive community services.
They were thus known by the name of ‘enabling schemes’.
As officers were to acknowledge in the formal consultation document on closure in 1986, community mental health services were not all in place in the Riverside District, but the underlying objective of the strategy, to release resources to fund community service developments, had been achieved.
The negotiations that were taking place between the health authority and other organizations chiefly involved the other branches of the NHS.
One such piece of negotiation offered clear proof of the way in which local rather than national forces were driving the change.
In the analysis of strategic goals in the NHS in Chapter l, it was noted that competitive tendering has been identified as an objective of the highest importance to central government.
To managers of Banstead the policy was nothing but a hindrance and they felt that if the Department of Health insisted on the ancillary services of the hospital being offered to private tender, the process of counselling staff and keeping good industrial relations during the rundown would be railroaded.
The path seemed otherwise smooth enough with a no-redundancy policy having been agreed.
It would be bad enough for staff to deal with the problem of finding suitable alternative work within the NHS on the closure of Banstead.
But to be faced with the short-term threat of redundancy at the hands of private contractors brought in by the health authority would mean that they might feel subject to a considerable degree of provocation.
This raised the prospect of lengthy trade union conflict.
The DGM thus argued for Banstead to be absolved from the competitive tendering process.
Here then, Victoria DHA was resisting the imposition of a cherished national policy in order to achieve its local ends.
For the managers, if the case for absolution from competitive tendering were lost then the strategy for Banstead was rendered non-viable.
After considerable local negotiation staff at Banstead agreed to accept the transfer of patients to Horton provided that managers did win the exemption from the requirement to go to tender.
For their parts, the RHA and the DHSS, since they were already implicated in the Banstead-Horton plan, were unlikely to jeopardize it by opposing the local exemption requested.
Indeed, the local strategists won approval for opting out of competitive tendering without having to approach the secretary of state.
In terms of crude numbers, the implementation of closure involved the transfer of around 350 long-stay and elderly patients from Banstead to upgraded wards in Horton.
About 150 patients, the remainder inhabiting Banstead, would be transferred to community hospitals and hostels in London.
The order of magnitude of these transfers suggests that problems of resettling the elderly long-stay population in the community were considered too daunting.
Their solution was of course a key objective of the Powick project, which was still at an early operational stage in 1979.
As was pointed out earlier government guidance was equivocal on the issue of whether the older generation of asylum residents could live successfully outside that environment.
In fact the local psychiatrists shared a firm conviction that the older generation of the long-stay population should not be moved into the community.
This was an important judgement for management, who might otherwise be cast in the role of rationalizers whose goal was simply to move patients between wards and institutions as the needs of economy dictated.
In the report of the DMT to the AHA in September 1980, which resulted from the intensive summer strategy exercise, one of the most significant paragraphs runs as follows:
It has been widely accepted that it is in the interests of individual patients, that psychiatric treatment and services should be provided as near as is reasonably practicable to the patient's home and community….
When however consideration is given to which patients should be transferred back to locally based hospitals from the geographically remote major illness hospitals, there are comparatively few for whom such a transfer is in their best interests, clinically or socially.
It is the advice of Consultant Psychiatrists at Banstead and Horton that while there may be a ‘small number of patients in other categories who might be suitable on an individual basis for transfer to appropriate alternative facilities, there is only one category of patient which can seriously be considered for transfer.
These are the patients being treated for dementia’.
(my emphasis)
This judgement sets Banstead and Horton within the historical frame.
It was the first big closure to be actually implemented.
In terms of local organizational interests, the twin principles of decanting to London hospitals on the one hand and to another large asylum on the other were not felt to be incompatible with modernization of the service.
These principles were, however, to become the object of fierce criticism, especially as the final symbolic phase of the boarding up of the hospital was reached with its emotional leave-takings.
What was significant about the Banstead strategy in this respect was that offering continued inpatient care to ‘decantees’ was presented by psychiatrists as a protection of patients' rights, particularly the right to stay in hospital where, they argued, ‘many resist any  suggestion that they should leave the hospital and also become more ill when such suggestions are made…to press such a matter against the patients’will would certainly not be in their best interests '.
(my emphasis)
Spotlights on the outcome
Towards the date for closure of Banstead, in mid-1986, two researchers from the national offices of MIND carried out a brief study of the closure process.
This led to the publication of an extremely critical discussion document.
MIND's particular concern was the lack of a coherent strategy between the different health and local authorities which had been served by Banstead.
In their view the recently created Riverside DHA which had become the managing agency, was interested only in providing hospital services and had paid scant, if any, attention to the need for a range of after-care facilities across the statutory and non-statutory sectors.
The enabling schemes were seen as the beginning and end of community care.
Finally MIND bitterly attacked what they believed to be the RHA's intention to cut the Riverside budget for mental health by 45 per cent.
The DHA responded to the MIND critique, strongly refuting the charge of having no coherent strategy and of not seeing beyond the enabling schemes.
Nevertheless it was acknowledged that these did principally involve the creation of acute and continuing care NHS beds, with transfer of resources to local authorities for other schemes still being subject to further consideration.
The DHA assured MIND that there were no plans to cut the mental illness budget, though there were issues about changes in the funding formula within the region for the very long-term future.
As the DGM was later to point out ‘The 45 per cent included the revenue which I had negotiated for transfer to other districts which had been dependent on Horton and Banstead.
That was a part of the Horton and Banstead strategy and wholly consistent with its philosophy of local care’.
But more criticisms were to follow, this time following evaluation of the Banstead outcome by the local Westminster branch of MIND, and a pressure group, the Coalition for Community Care.
They were chiefly concerned with the destiny of the £2.1 million identified within the strategy for community developments (Table 2).
As they understood the position the RHA had stated since that this funding would have to be applied in the short term to supporting the development of acute admission beds at Charing Cross Hospital, to serve the residents of Hammersmith and Fulham.
Had national MIND therefore been correct in their accusation that the enabling schemes actually represented the beginning and end of community care?
The new RHA formula for funding district spending also came under scrutiny.
It appeared that Riverside would be £3.1 million overspent on mental health services if the formula were to be rigorously adhered to.
While this analysis was being made against the background of a worsening position for NHS funding, it is difficult to determine whether the  development moneys will be lost as the critics maintain.
When I carried out a second interview with the DGM in 1989, the district was still arguing the case with the RHA for the £2.1 million (then uplifted to £2.5 million) to be made available.
Aside from the issue of funding beyond the enabling schemes, how were services in the catchment area working after the closure?
Hatch and Nissel posed the question ‘Is Community Care Working?’ in a survey of care in Westminster, again carried out on behalf of the local branch of MIND, and published in October 1989.
As a way of answering this question they studied a sample of 215 patients discharged from Westminster hospitals.
Residents of the City of Westminster, while falling into the catchment areas of three different health districts, did not have recourse to admissions to any long-stay hospitals after the closure of Banstead in 1986.
Hatch and Nissel felt that the outcome of the new style of service was particularly critical for ‘new long-stay’ patients, who, by their definitions while not continuously residing in hospitals, tended to be admitted at regular intervals for brief periods of treatment.
They found that more than half their sample did have previous admissions within the preceding year.
‘By looking at what happens after the long-stay hospitals have closed and at the fate of people who might in the past have found their way into such institutions’, MIND argued, their survey ‘offered a more exacting test of care in the community.’
The survey was somewhat equivocal in its findings.
There were some notable gaps in care but on the whole the research can be considered reasonably reassuring, given the strongly critical stance toward the decision-making for Banstead which MIND's research officers had adopted.
On the positive side ‘three in five of the sample were discharged into accommodation judged by staff to suit them well or to be at least satisfactory’.
On a negative note, more than a quarter of the sample were homeless or of no fixed abode on admission to one of the Westminster hospitals, and the same proportion were homeless on discharge.
This apparent failure to improve housing outcome is mitigated by the fact that a number of this group who were referred to the Homeless Persons Unit, together with others who went to Bed and Breakfast accommodation, would ‘presumably in due course’ have found their way to independent accommodation.
Where patients' views themselves were known, it was found that one-third of those placed in hostels would have preferred unshared, independent accommodation.
On the other hand there was a divergence between staff judgements of need and the judgements of those discharged from their care, with staff opting more often for supported accommodation and the dischargees for independent living.
Three in five were judged to need day care of some kind; for three-quarters of those needing it, day care was arranged.
For MIND itself, the outcome of the survey indicates that if community care has been established, it is not yet working:
The core health and social work services are made available.
[But]the general picture of community care presented by this evidence on the fate of short stay patients following the closure of long stay hospitals is much more disquieting than the evidence on the planned discharge of long stay patients.
Exeter
The difference between the closure process for the Exeter hospitals and those at Powick and Banstead is in one sense highly significant.
In Exeter there was a considerable shift away from the mental hospital-to-general hospital model of change.
This embraced new community mental health centres and the development of hostels for long-term clients in residential areas.
The novelty of these services meant that the area, as a pioneer development centre, soon attracted visitors from all over the country.
However, other circumstances of the changes suggest that similar forces for change were at work to those elsewhere in the country: rationalization, the drive for cost-effectiveness and the redrawing of hospital catchment areas.
Initial attempts at change came in the wake of the 1974 NHS reorganization, when efforts were made to sectorize Exminster, Digby and Wonford House Hospitals, which together made up one administrative unit as the ‘Exe Vale Group’.
Exminster and Digby had been built in the nineteenth century as the County and City lunatic asylums for Devon and Exeter.
Wonford House was a smaller, more modern, hospital.
The Exe Vale group served a largely rural area covering 2,000 square miles with a population of 600,000.
The fact that Exeter, in south-east Devon, was providing psychiatric inpatient care to the whole of the county, mostly based in two large hospitals, presented the worst kind of picture of mental health care, the very antithesis of care in the community.
The position was grimmest at Exminster, the largest institution, which had housed more than 1,500 patients in its heyday, and still had more than 1,000 residents in 1972.
A clinical decision had been made in the 1960s that this hospital should serve elderly people, while the other two hospitals would care for acute admissions and the ‘chronic’ long-stay population.
As one analyst observed;
All the patients and staff had to look forward to at Exminster was death.
After 1970 the Devon catchment area was split into four parts; the North, the South, Exeter West and Exeter East.
However, neither this administrative change, nor the 1974 NHS reorganization, in themselves, brought about a more locality-oriented system of care.
A reorganization committee was established for the thirty-nine wards of the three hospitals.
But there were many problems to be faced.
It was calculated that 80 per cent of  patients would need to be moved between wards to achieve sectorization.
It was not clear whether such moves would be to their benefit.
A great deal of negotiation between sector teams would have to take place to bring about an equitable redistribution from the point of view of staff workload.
In 1979 an operational researcher was brought in from the academic world to look at the use being made of Exminster.
His work revealed that the Exeter District was under-using the hospital, in so far as most patients were being admitted from the other districts in Devon.
Clearly this insight enabled administrators to start thinking about whether, within Exeter at least, a different form of care was not more feasible.
While the rising tide of the elderly population indicated that the need for inpatient care would not diminish, plans had already been made to establish local units for people with dementia at Tiverton and Exmouth.
If the other Devon districts were in fact the chief suppliers of patients and users of the big hospital facilities then it would make sense for management and costs to be handed over to them.
This logic gives a clue as to how the problems of sectorization and staffing were to be approached by Exeter managers.
The general aim was to hand these problems over, if only at a conceptual level in the first instance, to the North and South Devon district management teams.
In this strategy, however, like their counterparts in the North East District of Kensington and Chelsea, officers of the Exeter District would manage the handover.
It was they who would decide upon an equitable redistribution of the hospital revenue which their district controlled.
Exeter would act as principal negotiator with the other health authorities and the county social services department, and with the other health authorities, loaning some of its own senior managers to the latter agencies in order to ensure that they implemented change, so guaranteeing withdrawal from the big hospitals.
The opportunity to achieve a notional transfer of management responsibility to the districts, which were the heavy users of the institutions, was provided by the 1982 reorganization, through which North Devon and South Devon (Torbay) became autonomous districts.
The Exeter district, now free from the shackles of the Devon area authority, could negotiate from a stronger management position with the ‘receiver’ districts.
Two options were canvassed.
The first was for Exeter's own services to be concentrated on Digby and Wonford House Hospitals, with Exminster to provide only for the other Devon districts.
Alternatively, Exminster could remain as the hospital for elderly mentally ill patients, allowing a planned closure of Digby Hospital after short-stay beds had been established in Torbay and North Devon.
A decision was made in favour of the former option and again a similar trend of events to that in Banstead could be detected.
Since Torbay and North Devon had developed very few local services and did not have the capacity to take back their patients from Exminster, some ‘enablement’ programme for such local services would have to be devised.
A financial ‘sweetener’ was made available by the Exeter District to Torbay to help the  latter to establish inpatient provision.
This took the form of a gift of the proceeds from the sale of a hospital farm.
This was a kind of down-payment toward the construction costs of a new psychiatric unit in Torbay General Hospital, which was to be known as the Edith Morgan Centre, after the founder of the ‘Good Practices in Mental Health’ organization.
Beyond this point, it is stretching credibility to make comparisons between Banstead and Exeter.
In Torbay adventurous changes were being proposed, with a focus of service on patch-based care around ‘walk-in’ community mental health centres.
These were to be situated in ordinary houses in the main towns — Paignton, Totnes, Torquay and Newton Abbot.
Although each patch would have a back-up long-term hostel, it was intended that the mental health centres should take over the role of caring for most people with longer-term difficulties.
An outreach team would provide support to those living in independent accommodation.
For elderly people assessment facilities were to be provided in each locality, with long-term care to be given in the private sector.
A further key difference between the South West and the Epsom cluster is that the advice of psychiatrists in the two areas pointed managers in opposite directions.
While the planned closure of both Digby and Exminster did mean some transitory inter-hospital transfers, both the chronic long-stay population and elderly people with dementia were considered to be better cared for in the community.
To the non-expert this is an extraordinary state of affairs.
At one institution a group of medical officers argued that it was against the interests of most long-term hospital residents with chronic illnesses to be resettled in community units.
Indeed, those officers went even further, suggesting that the very promotion of the idea with such patients might lead to an exacerbation of their illness.
At another institution this issue was apparently not even in contention.
In part this difference can be ascribed to the historical framework.
Merger of Banstead and Horton had been decided upon as an option as early as 1979, and NHS managers were unsure of how far comprehensive community service without mental hospitals could be developed.
There was particular caution where London was concerned since communities were less stable.
Decision-making for the Exe Vale group came later on, around the time of the 1982 reorganization, when the debate about local services was no longer simply an academic one.
But the difference also reflects the need for autarchy within district management teams in the NHS, which had to deal with uncertainty about patient outcomes within a vague set of government guidelines.
There was a strong element of a gamble on the future in any psychiatric hospital closure.
Central government was not prepared to take that gamble, but was happy to see the localities take it.
When looking at the local underbelly of the centre initiative at Powick, it was seen that the provision of more than one psychiatric hospital within a district, after 1982, meant certain death for one or other institution.
In  Exeter, there were not two, but three, psychiatric hospitals.
It would have been remarkable if no closures had been planned.
Two practical problems stand out above others in precipitating the predictable management action.
The first stemmed from the arduous shift patterns worked by staff in Exminster in the late 1970s.
For a number of reasons to do with the local labour market and domestic economies, staff clung to a twelve-hour shift system.
This system made it difficult to provide sufficient cover to care for patients above safety or custodial observation levels.
More intensive rehabilitation activities with chronic and elderly patients were ruled out.
Many of these activities would involve staff escorting patients from the wards into the community for ‘trials’ in shopping, using buses, finding directions outside hospital, and so on.
Escorts would require more overlap between shifts to allow staff to go off the ward.
The twelve-hour shift pattern was also an obstacle to change in that it would have made it difficult to recruit new staff for hospital development.
Having visited other long-stay institutions to make some notes about comparable conditions and arrangements, the district administrator was also concerned about the strain on staff imposed by such long hours.
Such strain could easily kindle the kind of staff attitudes that had led to neglect of patients in some of the other large hospitals.
The second factor precipitating change was that Exminster, which consumed most of the resources, was expensive by any account both in terms of revenue and capital.
Yet this expense seemed little justified.
Professionals working in the service in the 1960s and 1970s spoke of poor conditions in the large dormitories with little personal space or privacy.
In fact Devon appeared to be some way behind other areas of the country in the 1960s and 1970s.
But if upgrading of all the wards were to be embarked upon it was evident that it would cost a small fortune.
Nevertheless, the conditions obviously needed improving.
It had cost £0.75 million to bring just one ward up to scratch.
At £15,000 per annum per patient in 1982 the hospitals were 40 per cent more expensive in running costs than asylums at the cheaper end of the range.
As the then district administrator put it, the district had scratched around for every spare penny over the years and sunk it into the hospital, and yet more and more resources were being demanded.
A crucial factor in achieving the change from hospital to community in Exeter was that district finance officers were able to fund their new services from within local budgets.
This got over the critical problem of the ‘double running’ costs: the extra expenses of developing community services while having to support the infrastructure of the institution closing.
The budget for Digby and Exminster was divided between the three districts concerned — Exeter, Torbay and Devon — in proportion to the respective RAWP rating of each.
The implication of the formula was a major redistribution away from Exeter and toward the other two districts.
This clearly provided a major incentive to the other two districts to achieve the development of new services.
The results: overexposure?
the biggest problems in the running of the new services after closure seemed to have been encountered in Torbay.
However, expectations of a nirvana in mental health for visitors to the ‘English Riviera’(as the area is promoted for tourist purposes) may have proved too great for some.
The service was hailed as a pioneering advance in community care.
Its four community mental health centres were modelled on experience in the USA and Europe.
Indeed, this was one of the few areas in the early 1980s to be aware of the significance of these centres for early intervention in psychiatric illness, aimed at countering the drift of clients into inpatient facilities and dependency.
A relatively small number of beds (per head of population) was planned at the DGH in recognition of this new development.
While careful arrangements were made for the placement of every long-stay patient from Exminster, there was no direct reprovision of wards in the hospital as wards in the community.
After eighteen months of the new type of service, it came under strong attack, first in the Press and second from concerned professional observers.
In June 1988 the Torbay Herald Express ran a largely complimentary story on the DGH unit, the Edith Morgan Centre (EMC), investigating why it had been ‘thrust into the limelight…in a string of incidents involving patients treated at the much talked about psychiatric unit’.
The death of a popular local singer had prompted a hunger strike by a friend over policies at the EMC.
But allegations that patients were not given adequate care after they had been discharged from the unit were, on balance, in this investigation, unproven.
Later in the year, according to the Nursing Times , a storm hit the unit.
This began with
South Devon Coroner Hamish Turner's comments on the fact that around half of the 32 people who had committed suicide in the area in the past year had, at some stage, been treated at the centre.
Distressed relatives were soon telling the local press tales of how their depressed loved ones had managed to leave the unit just hours before their deaths.
Nurses and their colleagues were quick to defend   themselves.
During a meeting in which long-standing grievances were aired, staff shortages, poor communication with management and frustration with a badly designed building were highlighted.
Nurses also pointed out that in the initial panic after Mr. Turner's remarks, the centre had been operating illegally by locking patients in the unit.
Staff went into dispute with the Health Authority.
Following this storm over the Coroner's remarks, the RHA asked an academic to carry out a short inquiry into the problem of suicides in Torbay.
The academic chosen, Professor Morgan of Bristol University, found no significant difference between the suicide rate in Torbay and that elsewhere in the country.
Nor was there a difference in the proportion of those committing suicide who had previously been in touch with the psychiatric service.
Nevertheless, Professor Morgan highlighted concern about whether there was an adequate number of both acute beds and long-term  residential places.
He was thus ‘pleased to learn that consideration [had, at the time of his report]already been given to increasing the provision of residential facilities for patients with chronic illness’.
Other issues were that the potential of the day hospital was not being fully exploited and that the mental health centres were evidently not properly integrated with the general hospital unit.
Finally, Morgan commented that enormous demands were placed on the staff of the latter unit and recommended a review of its organization.
In 1988 Virginia Beardshaw of the Kings Fund, a charity promoting innovation in the NHS, and Edith Morgan, who had lent her name to the general hospital unit at Torquay, carried out a survey of the Torbay mental health services.
Like Professor Morgan before them, they were able to feel assured that the new service was working reasonably well.
The development of the four community mental health centres (CMHCs), in particular, seemed to have been successful.
At Culverhay, the first CMHC to be opened, at Paignton in 1984, an analysis of users suggested that a caseload representative of both long-term and short-term clients was emerging.
A trend was nevertheless apparent for clients to form a ‘younger group of people from more privileged socio-economic backgrounds than might be expected’.
Some problems are reviewed in the survey which perhaps owe more to difficulties imposed by the local economic circumstances than to structural features of the mental health system.
These relate principally to employment and accommodation.
Unemployment was higher in Torbay than nationally and the DHA had provided few opportunities for work, most of its effort going into the operation of a light industrial unit at Newton Abbot.
Despite the commercial success of this unit and the facility which it offered of training in a range of skills, places were limited and the site was inaccessible from the south of the district.
As already noted, Torbay DHA maintained back-up hostels for its  localities, with a total of twenty-eight places available for people with long-term problems.
Judged against government norms, this amount of residential provision can be considered relatively modest for a district with a population of 260,000.
Beardshaw and Morgan note the particular problem which letting for the holiday season creates in this popular resort area.
While winter lets are available in abundance, the coming of the spring means that tenants occupying these short lets have to move on.
There are then severe shortages of accommodation for local people for the duration of the holiday season.
While there is further assistance for mentally ill people from a local charity, the Parkview Society, which operates a hostel for ten people, ‘the work of the Society is impeded by the lack of accommodation in and around Torquay, which means that its hostel places are frequently ‘blocked’ for long periods'.
Beardshaw and Morgan also draw attention to the accommodation problems for elderly people.
Though the DHA has made good provision for assessment and diagnosis, accommodation for those requiring long-term care, which is provided primarily by the private sector, was found to be insufficient.
While the Torbay service was unusual in its strong emphasis on mental health centres and movement away from residential centred provision, Exeter DHA adopted a more cautious attitude in the development of local services.
Wonford House Hospital continued to be used for acute and rehabilitation services and though a mental health centre at Tiverton has been developed the schism between the old and the new has not been so marked.
It is probably for this reason that Exeter services have not attracted the baleful glare of publicity.
Summary
The strategies adopted for the closures of Powick, Banstead and Exminster were at once puzzling in their diversity.
At Powick the strongly centrist mode of operation meant that the health authority and local authority service framework adopted was built on assumptions about needs that were established wisdom (though whose, as was seen in Chapter 2, was not clear).
Their relevance to Worcester itself, and to the Worcestershire towns of the 1980s was something which would have to be learned from experience.
At Banstead, while similar centrist elements are present, the DHA was quite ready to contest national guidance.
Not only was it, in Horton, recreating the age of the large mental hospital, but also it was seeking exemption from the DHSS requirement that health authorities put their ancillary services out to private tender.
The strategy for the catchment area looked more than a little unstable, since revenue funding for services beyond the DGH units was not necessarily secure.
In the case of Exminster this strategy was secure, but the rundown was barely comparable with those pursued at Powick and Banstead.
Here there was no need for closure  to hover behind the death-rate, or for one mental hospital to be engorged for another to shut.
The revolutionary proposition was that all patients could live in community units outside the asylums, and that their placements could be funded from the revenue sunk into the big hospitals.
It is no wonder that the service became a centre of attraction for all those with an interest in mental health.
Nor is it surprising that the HAS, on their visit to Powick in 1985, recognized that the lack of a mass resettlement policy at the hospital was one of the demonstration project's principal shortcomings.
Though there were hints of autarchy within Kensington, Chelsea and Westminster AHA, and of a guided change at Exeter, the remoteness of these two asylums from their catchment areas and the obvious over-bedding which their maintenance entailed, fitted them snugly into government policy intentions.
It is possible that local managers were looking over their shoulders in planning ahead; there was little pressure on them from the informed public to achieve rundown and disperse asylum services.
At all three locations there were elements of the themes in community care to which Knapp draws attention.
Probably few of the most stout defenders of direct state welfare provision, once they were apprised of the costs and failings of the asylums in question, would have argued against strategies for their rationalization.
Naturally the major proviso for such accord would be that the resources spent on the asylums be entirely redistributed within modernized health services.
In that sense the British policy context was not contentious.
None of the three schemes appears to have resulted in a worsening of service to mentally ill people.
On the other hand the dramatic improvements which the revolutionary nature of the move would suggest are not in evidence.
The questions posed by the existence of the asylums thus remained as unanswered at the end of these closures as they had been at the inception of their planning in 1978, when NETRHA officers too were also beginning the difficult task of addressing them.
But the NETRHA story was a different one entirely.
Policy-making for the closure of asylums by the North East Thames Regional Health Authority
On 23 March 1983 the Prime Minister, Mrs Thatcher, wrote to the Minister of Health to say that she had ‘spent nearly an hour seeing representatives of the Medical Committee and nursing staff at Friern Hospital’ at her constituency surgery two weeks previously.
She had discussed with those present
the new policy with regard to the provision of services for the mentally ill, the projected closure of the Hospital and the terms upon which a Feasibility Study is to be prepared.
‘Having seen this Hospital through many periods of difficulty’, the Prime Minister continued, she could understand ‘very well’ the problem of staff morale that the representatives had raised.
She asked whether someone from the DHSS could discuss the matter with members of the Hospital Medical Committee, concluding by stating her view that
such reorganisations should be approached very carefully indeed, making sure that any new system is better than the old.
Why did the RHA decide to close Friern and Claybury??
There was no indication that the RHA was being forced into a hasty or precipitate move.
Officers had undertaken a review of the policies in both mental illness and mental handicap in response to the 1975 White Paper and 1976 priority services recommendations.
But it had taken four years from the completion of that review for a decision to be made on the future of the RHA's six asylums.
As the regional medical officer (RMO) explained in an interview with the late Geoff Bromley:
You see, DHSS is saying 75 things at once and they never resource any of them.
It goes in one ear and out the other.
I would honestly  say, and it may sound arrogant, that although the White Paper came out in 1975 and it was some sort of a landmark to point the way, we were never conscious here of any tremendous pressure or even really of any light pressure to reorientate our services to the Priority Services.
There were may factors which contributed to the delay in completion of the RHA's review of its policies on mental hospitals.
One problem was that the RHA needed to ensure that any mental illness initiative was not inequitable with respect to the other neglected client groups.
Officers of all the Thames regional authorities were also heavily involved in the work of the London Health Planning Consortium, which was aiming to rationalize the numbers of acute (general medicine) beds in the capital.
As the regional nursing officer (RNO) revealed:
In 1981 when I came to Region it wasn't our concern with the big psychiatric hospitals.
It wasn't Friern that was engaging our attention….
The complexity of the catchments was why we got involved.
NETRHA officers felt vulnerable on the point that the priority groups should have been getting an increased share of the regional budget.
They believed that mental illness was  substantially underfunded in their region.
However, in the late 1970s they stated quite categorically that they were not able to take an initiative on the priorities set down in national policy.
This was because their programmes for investment of capital funds (i.e. funds for the construction of new facilities), to support which ‘growth’ revenue for the running costs was of course required, were completely taken up with the task of moving general medicine out of over-provided London to the under-provided hinterland of Essex.
They were also busy in following the national NHS plan to put more money into primary care services.
In discussing its Strategic Plan for the decade from 1978, NETRHA set down a number of unachievable objectives, as it was required to do by the DHSS.
The first of these was
major capital investment in the development and improvement of the hospital component of the mental illness and mental handicap services following the recommendations of the health care policy groups.
Instead, AHAs would be expected to put in appropriate bids for development.
In fact ‘enabling’ strategies were already well under way at the area level, with general hospital departments of psychiatry being established in several of the districts.
There appeared to be a much greater awareness of the possibilities and scope for change at the local levels.
The RHA's review was carried out by a small team of experts led by a psychiatrist and including a senior nurse and a senior social services representative.
As events turned out the review was hampered by the illness  of the latter member of the team.
Some of the criticism which its recommendations attracted was due to the perception that it concentrated too much on medical and nursing issues.
The Mezey Report (as the review became known after its principal author) suggested that cautious progress toward rationalization of mental hospital beds could be made to allow two of the six hospitals to close.
Such closures would hinge on three conditions.
First, there would have to be sufficient interest in adopting a new style of service shown by staff working at whichever hospitals were chosen.
Second, it was argued that a range of local services in the catchment areas of the two chosen hospitals would have to be created before any rundown programme was agreed.
Third, the remaining four hospitals from the six were not to be closed but were to become centres of specialist services, such as forensic services, each serving a ‘quadrant’ of the region.
The first point is important because RHA officers were more concerned with devising an objective method for determining which of the hospitals should close.
The choice was inevitably seen as God-given at the local level.
With hindsight the RHA would have attempted to follow the advice of Mezey on this issue and would have sought, as far as possible, change from within the institutions rather than imposing it from without.
The second Mezey argument appeared to be somewhat unrealistic.
Neither local CHCs —‘watchdog’ bodies established in 1974 to protect the interests of health service consumers — nor national MIND felt that local services could be financed without some simultaneous land sales at the contracting hospitals.
The Mezey Report's general recommendations were accepted by the Redbridge and Waltham Forest AHA, whose officers had responsibility for management of two of the psychiatric hospitals, Goodmayes and Claybury.
However, the authority felt them to be impractical to implement because of the assumptions about resources.
They suggested that instead of closure, half of the site of two hospitals might be closed to finance local services.
The hospital management team for Claybury rejected the idea of the quadrant hospital concept, since this could not tie in with the principle of community care.
The Waltham Forest CHC not only was in disagreement with Mezey but also questioned the length of time it had taken the RHA to make time for a discussion of the report (one year).
This of course reflected the RHA's preoccupation with other matters.
The CHC went on to point out that it had already carried out its own feasibility study on the potential for a psychiatric hospital closure in Redbridge and Waltham Forest.
This work had begun in May 1979, when the CHC, jointly with the Waltham Forest District Management Team, commissioned an independent consultant to assess the scope for merging Claybury and Goodmayes.
Gordon Best's study included analysis of inpatient statistics, revenue costs, the capital value of the institutions, trends in population rundown, projected costs of community services and the plans of the health  authorities.
A major focus was the problem of how to resource a strategy for new local services.
Such a strategy had to begin from recognition that
only a fraction of the capital and revenue resources tied up in existing institutions can, in practice, be redirected toward the provision of district or community services.
Intrinsic in the idea of bringing about a shift in resources, therefore, is the assumption that community and district services must be made available before any major reduction in institutional care is implemented.
In other words a capital outlay and revenue allocation will, by necessity, precede the recovery of any sums realised as a result of the reduction in long stay services.
The fact that the two hospitals were less than three miles apart, that they had a combined acreage of 375 acres, that they were outmoded from the point of view of treatment, and that both had ‘spare capacity’ because of the continued decline in the long-stay population meant that there was much to be gained from merger.
On top of these matters of fact, it was held that ‘where appropriate, a substantial body of socio-clinical opinion’ supported substituting community-based services for institutional care.
‘Appropriate’ was of course the key word here.
Best went on to list conceptual and logistical barriers to achieving a merger.
The latter concerned the question of whether reliable estimates of the capital to be realized and of the costs of projected community services would be made.
The former though, brought out once again the weak foundation in national policy for any large-scale resettlement of the long-stay population.
‘Given that many patients in institutions such as Goodmayes and Claybury regard the hospital as their ‘home’, will it be possible', asked Best, ‘to identify that proportion of patients susceptible to, or likely to benefit from, community care?’
Despite the many difficulties which would have to be faced in consolidating the hospitals only two of the twenty-four members of staff whom Best interviewed felt that there was little value in taking the study further: ‘Rather the majority felt that the integration of Goodmayes and Claybury represented a tangible, largely desirable and far from impossible objective to achieve’.
To conclude the report a programme for possible implementation was set out, which involved a development loan being made available to be repaid as the two institutions were rolled into one.
The loan would fund both upgradings at the hospital to be retained and new community services.
The scenario painted suggested that Claybury might realize as much as £25 million, with Goodmayes, like Horton after the closure of Banstead, becoming a hospital of around 1,000 beds.
Work was also going on independently among the main groups of professional care staffs to determine the future pattern of psychiatry within the area.
A year after the Best assessment, the joint care planning team (JCPT) for Redbridge and Waltham Forest produced its final report.
As in the rest of the region planned general hospital units, in this instance at Wanstead  and the King George V sites, were the focus of the discussions.
But the JCPT did not envisage any radical change flowing from the development of these units.
Claybury would continue to serve for ‘sub-regional specialties’, while the team attached considerable importance to the monitoring of the effectiveness of rehabilitation at the general hospitals.
Only a good monitoring system would allow judgements to be made about the possibility of moving long-stay patients out of the asylums on a large scale.
Nevertheless there was a central thread running through the JCPT report which linked it to the feasibility study of merger which the CHC had commissioned.
It was proposed that land should be identified at both hospitals which could be released to fund new community services.
One such innovation would be a pilot community mental health centre linked to a twenty-four-hour emergency psychiatric clinic at the general hospital for Waltham Forest district.
Within the Friern catchment area debate about the closure of the hospital was also widespread.
In September 1980 a meeting of the local CHCs with members of the Camden and Islington AHA was told that the North Camden
CHC had been saying for a long time, and it seemed to be falling on deaf ears that a date should be set for the closure of Friern and that money should not be spent on the hospital but on services in the community.
Admissions should cease to Friern.
DGH units should cater for acute work and long stay units should be established in the Districts.
There was a crucial difference between the debates concerning Friern and Claybury.
The future of Friern was being addressed by the top of the office.
A small group of AHA members, in consultation with officers and the heads of professions, was attempting to develop a plan in line with the recommendations of national policy.
The AHA had in fact been debating the issue of the future of the hospital for some years.
Like the governors on hospital boards before them, their chief concern was to ensure that a scandal was not about to hit the hospital.
They were rather like seismologists trying to detect the vulnerability of the hospital on an imaginary patient-neglect scale where the staff-patient ratio, amount of activity for patients, and the condition of the fabric had to be constantly monitored.
In the late 1970s the AHA made significant efforts to determine a once-and-for-all decision for Friern.
In response to the government's 1975 White Paper, they commissioned a small working party, led by a psychiatrist, to examine the potential for basing mental health services in the constituent districts and away from Friern.
It is interesting that these were exactly the issues that Mezey was concerned with at the same time, though for the whole of the region rather than one area.
One can speculate that if Mezey had not come up with the idea of dispensing with two hospitals, and of the remaining four being given a quadrant of the region to serve each, the idea that it was  an RHA rather than local management responsibility to deal with the issue, might never have stuck in the minds of senior regional officers.
In a tour of only six weeks, the AHA working party concluded that the short-stay admission facilities of the new DGH units, then just established at the Whittington, Royal Free and University College Hospitals, were just about sufficient for the treatment in the catchment areas for the future.
The main gap was in provision for elderly people with senile dementia and for the new long-stay population.
Recommending how such provision could be made within the districts, Glancy (as the report was known after the psychiatrist leading the group) concluded that admissions to Friern could cease after the date when the proposed new services were in place.
This view tied in with that of Mezey.
The scenario at this stage was that Friern would be allowed to die with dignity à la Powick, once the catchment district services were sufficiently strengthened to provide for all new patients.
It was considered inhumane to move out the large number of ‘old long-stay’ residents who had been there for many years.
Their lingering presence would thus save the hospital at least for the lifespan of the generation to which they belonged.
Despite the apparent gentleness of the Glancy approach to the sensitivities of staff at Friern, when the members of the authority attempted to work out a process for implementing its recommendations, they ran into considerable difficulties.
Chiefly, they found that there was no professional consensus in the JCPT that all types of patients be provided for in the districts.
After several meetings between the members and the JCPT it was decided that the hospital should not close but should offer specialist services, such as psychogeriatrics and academic research.
This would be in addition to the plans to house the long-stay patients in new buildings on the periphery of the hospital site.
As at Claybury the sub-regional resource centre option seemed to be coming to the fore, this time with high-level support.
Shortly after Glancy had reported in October 1977, the efforts of the Camden and Islington members to decide the future of Friern received a further impetus.
Serious allegations of patient neglect and abuse were made in the Sun newspaper.
Jean Ritchie, one of the newspaper's reporters, gathered her evidence by taking a job as domestic assistant at Friern for a week.
She asserted that patients were regularly drugged against their will, and that all patients on the ward where she worked were locked in.
Further allegations were made anecdotally in a vivid and disturbing account.
Ritchie painted a number of scenes in the life of the ward:
ITl, l[Scene 1]
It's comedy hour.
The nurses like a laugh at the patients' expense.
An old Russian lady who speaks five languages but most days doesn't speak at all has to endure nurses teasing an old man into kissing her, several times.
She didn't like it.
Unable to speak, she moaned.
It is a low repetitive moan that she keeps up for the rest of the afternoon.
[Scene 2]
A man about 50 wanders zombie like around the ward.
He pees only every couple of days.
When he does the nurses stand around timing him.
Twenty minutes is his record, I am told, as a stream runs half the length of the ward.
[Scene 3]
Harold scares me.
Young, probably only about 40.
Big.
Usually naked.
First thing in the morning before the ‘medicine’ took its effect, he would prowl the ward, opening doors, locking me in a bathroom.
Staring straight ahead always.
Sitting naked in a chair with a book in his hands, flicking through the pages but staring ahead, his legs caked in his own excrement.
Tie him in a wheelchair', a staff nurse told a young male student nurse.
Tying meant fastening him in with a feeding tray.
Harold would stay there all day.
[Scene 4]
Food, good food, comes to the ward on hot trolleys.
First pickings are made by the staff, who fill their own plates.
They are forbidden by hospital rules to eat anything intended for patients.
Hospital authorities go to tremendous trouble to give patients food they like and can cope with.
One old lady seems to eat only roast beef.
A small dish of it comes up for her every day.
She rarely gets it.
One of the staff has it.
Peter Farrier, then hospital administrator, refuted the allegations commenting that the article contained ‘many untruths, gross distortions of fact and lack of understanding of the care of the severely mentally ill’.
His strong defence was supported by authority members, convened in a small working party to investigate the allegations.
The impact of this episode upon the efforts to change the style of services for mentally ill patients is hard to conjecture.
But another national newspaper, this time one of the ‘qualities’, the Daily Telegraph , also pitched into the Friern fray.
An internal 1976 report on Friern by the regional health authority's own long-stay hospital monitoring team was leaked to the Telegraph .
The newspaper's report of its contents constituted such a serious slur on professional care staff that a number of senior physicians at the hospital took legal action against the publishing company.
So for both Claybury and Friern a considered process of local planning within the respective area health authorities was taking place in the late 1970s.
The plans allowed not only for considerable retrenchment of the mental hospital facilities, but also for the possibility that resettling long-stay patients would prove difficult and that more modern on-site village-style accommodation might be required.
Sub-regional specialties were strongly favoured by professional care staff if not by members or managers within the authorities.
Neither hospital was sufficiently remote from its catchment area to warrant the intervention of the centre to impose closure.
To understand why the RHA became involved and wanted to force the pace, it is necessary to turn back to examine the state of affairs which was inherited by the authority from the old metropolitan health board.
The outstanding fact of the position in 1974 was that the region had 6,000 beds within the six large hospitals, but serving a population of fewer than 4 million.
This crude total amounted to a massive over-bedding in psychiatry.
The recommendations in the White Paper of the following year Better Services for the Mentally Ill indicated that it should be the long-term aim of the RHA to axe at the very least one-third of this provision, even if no general hospital units at all were provided.
But such units were being set up.
AHAs planned for new departments of psychiatry to be operational in 1976 at Harlow (West Essex), Chase Farm (Enfield), University College (Bloomsbury), the Royal Free (Hampstead), the Whittington (Islington) and Basildon (Basildon and Thurrock).
All except the latter unit meant some form of withdrawal from the use of acute admission facilities at either Claybury or Friern.
Moreover, there would be considerable scope for a centrally planned scheme of retraction across the six hospitals, since it was estimated that there would be a 34–42 per cent reduction in the psychiatric hospital population by 1986.
If regional officers were to take more than a passing interest in this pattern of change the writing would have appeared to be on the wall, but as the comments of the regional medical and nursing officers cited above revealed, it was some time before their interest was kindled.
By that stage, the work of Mezey had changed the picture of a comfortable evolution of mental health services in which it was seen as an area or district task to put forward plans for development of community services.
By proposing the zone hospital concept to enable closures, Mezey was outlining a pan-regional rather than district-focused development of service.
During the process of consultation on Mezey, regional officers were therefore becoming much more aware of the issues, the opportunities and the constraints.
While the position was clouded by the forthcoming abolition of the area health authorities, regional officers seemed to be forming a view that some areas, left to themselves, would not react in an appropriate way to the circumstances of rundown.
The hospitals would be left to retrench naturally, while community services would remain patchy and slow to evolve.
Institutional inertia and the lack of local interest in mental health services could mean that the opportunities of the period would be missed.
In particular it was unlikely that resources for non-NHS facilities would be carved out from retrenchment savings.
District planners and medical committees were more convinced of the importance of cure for mental illness  at general hospitals with all the supposed technological advantages that they possessed.
These pressures were doubly in evidence in the fashionable and renowned teaching hospital environments of the University College and the Royal Free Hospitals.
Medical interest groups, within the teaching hospitals, including those of psychiatry, had traditionally exerted considerable influence over NHS policy-making.
Their stature presented large institutional constraints to the framework for community treatment.
Commenting at a later stage on the commonly held expectation that London should lead developments in medicine, the Hampstead DGM was able to report that the Royal Free had ‘in many ways been very successful in maintaining and consolidating its position’.
A sceptic at the RHA might thus have good reason to believe that aside from development of hospital units either in teaching hospitals or in other hospitals having a subaltern relation to them through training arrangements, not much else would happen to achieve the aims of the government's priority services strategy.
The policy did represent a major challenge and the RHA was well aware that some authorities would be more able than others to make the change.
Perhaps this was the main anxiety, and the main reason for the RHA taking a role in local decision-making.
It was certainly the view of one senior ember of the regional team of officers (RTO) that
In the case of Camden and Islington, the authority did have good officers, and they did have the capacity to plan for a future district based provision.
There were local initiatives coming through on planning for Friern.
In fact we expected them to solve the problem for us.
We knew on the other hand that Redbridge and Waltham Forest was not a competent authority and it could not have achieved this scale of planning.
This is a significant insight, albeit that it may not have been shared by the main body of regional officers.
Clearly the RHA was also aware that everything was not well at Friern both from the report of its own monitoring group and from the publicity arising from the Sun and Daily Telegraph coverage.
As the RNO put it, ‘Friern had been on the rack’.
The moment the hospital became the responsibility of the new Hampstead Health Authority, one of its senior officers began to canvass regional involvement in an initiative on closure.
In so far as the RHA did feel impelled to act, the constant worry about shortages of staff and inadequacies of conditions at its mental hospitals, making neglect or abuse of patients more likely to occur, played a significant part in decision-making.
But in addition, as the case of Exeter illustrated, the difficulty of containing the soaring running costs of a declining institution was an obvious concern.
The hypothesis of the asylum founders, that cure could be achieved through placement in a segregated and controlled environment, had been nullified many years before.
Whether his comment is taken as a  malapropism or a keen insight, the view of one charge nurse that the hospital had become ‘an archival thing’ was apposite.
For many ‘chronic’ patients they could serve little purpose other than that of the tramping houses for vagrants.
Few believed that they could be transformed to fulfil the goals of ‘modern’ care.
The deep-seated place of asylums in the national psyche would be difficult to break out of.
In the eyes of elderly people many NHS hospitals were still Poor Law institutions, since many had been built originally as workhouses and had not changed a great deal in appearance.
The same applied to asylums.
NETRHA officers were quite open about the costs issue.
The option of maintaining the hospitals for any significant strategic period was simply untenable.
However, it would be wrong to dismiss the initiative on these grounds as primarily a money-saving device.
Going back to the early thoughts of the RHA on the matter in the mid-1970s, it had been recognized that the reduction in the hospital populations meant that there would be competition for any savings between the hospitals themselves and district services.
What the RHA was intending to do was to transfer the hospital budget to community services, with extra funds being made available to support the hospitals through the critical final stages of closure.
Running costs were therefore not to be cut by NETRHA and indeed they were to be substantially increased.
As was clear from the district initiative at Exminster the alternative strategy, a long-term programme of upgrading the asylum wards to modern standards, would hardly have been countenanced by the most avid, non-expert supporter of public spending.
The subjective impressions which RHA managers formed on their visit to the hospitals while they were deciding what to do about them has continually to be borne in mind.
For instance the regional treasurer, who was given the Friem and Claybury brief while still a deputy, had ‘a personal commitment, having visited the hospitals and realised the urgency of getting people out of these awful places’.
But on the issue of the moral imperative, the RHA had evidently felt sufficiently undisturbed by the 1976 report on Friern to exclude priority services schemes from its 1978 capital development programme.
Regional officers had lived for many years with successive waves of moral outrage about the scandalous conditions within the asylums.
Whether and how that might lead to radical change of practice was another issue.
It is therefore very difficult to come to the conclusion that by 1982 there was a moral imperative to close the hospitals.
After all in Scotland, by contrast, the building of new asylums was being considered.
How then did the RHA develop its plan for closure?
The regional team of officers began from the basepoint of the Mezey Report, but this left them with considerable policy problems to solve since the zone hospital concept was supported neither by the constituent health  authorities of the region (the AHAs and the DMTs), nor by the community health councils.
The RTO therefore felt it ‘necessary to re-examine some of the basic premises,[and]to explore further the underlying assumptions before formulating specific policy proposals’.
As the regional medical officer explained:
we had the Mezey report and the ideas about quadrants for mental illness hospitals.
But the logic of the report was that we provide a two tier service [new general hospital wards, old asylum services].
We rejected this concept in consultation.
There was then the general context, RAWP had been sorted out, our other strategy had to be priority care, and we had to fund geographical equity and care group equity.
There was an in house enthusiasm for the closure policy and we then had the quasi objective choice of hospitals exercise [see Tables 4 and 5].
After several years of policy development, the RHA came to the conclusion that it should aim for the closure of all the six mental hospitals, rather than just two.
But since only a limited amount could be achieved within the overloaded RHA capital programme, it was decided to select two for a closure programme within the strategic planning period (1983 to 1993).
This proposal was worked up within the broader terms of the long-promised priority care package.
In July 1982 the RTO launched a consultative document in which the authority's four strategic priorities were listed as follows:
1
Implementation of plans for the development of local services for mentally handicapped people in the West Essex District, and the closure of Essex Hall.
2
Increasing the numbers of community psychiatric nurses.
3
Identifying districts for the development of comprehensive local mental illness services and making firm plans to provide these and facilitate the closure of two large hospitals, and providing local inpatient facilities for severely mentally ill elderly people.
4
Providing community nurses and local residential services for mentally handicapped people to accelerate the rundown of the large mental handicap hospitals.
The estimated requirement for an increase in the resources devoted to priority services, which would be necessary to fund this strategy, was put at £10 million per annum in revenue terms and £62 million in capital.
This amounted to 1.3 per cent of the RHA's annual revenue in 1981–2, and ‘about seventeen months of its [then]current capital expenditure’.
These global figures masked an estimated decrease in the revenue funding for mentally ill patients, for whom it was thought redeployment of the running costs of the hospitals to be closed would, in the long term, fund  the new services.
Compensating this apparent service cut for mentally ill patients was the fact that most of the capital to be set aside for the service developments would be devoted to building the replacement facilities in the community for the two psychiatric hospitals to close.
Accompanying the policy, the RTO put forward a ‘Strategy for Action’, in which criteria for the selection of the two hospitals to be targeted for early closure were put forward.
This ‘quasi objective’ exercise suggested that the RHA's need to sell the most valuable parts of its estate, in order to recoup the capital moneys advanced for the closures programme, was not its officers' primary consideration.
The RHA's use of two of the criteria service indicators and financial indicators — to arrive at a choice of hospitals is shown in Tables 4 and 5.
The analysis not only compared the costs of the six hospitals, but also included the ‘Yates’ measure of the degree to   which a mental hospital was considered to be ‘at risk’because of poor staff-patient ratios, the geographical location of the hospitals relative to catchment area, and the comprehensiveness of local district provision (including social services facilities).
The RTO felt that the most important factor in any closure decision should be the extent to which local provision had been made in the catchment areas of the psychiatric hospitals.
Judged on that basis, the analysis in the policy document suggested Friern as the best prospect and Claybury the second best.
The RHA thus sought to ‘encourage all those Districts which have an interest in a particular large hospital to come together to determine how the service can best be developed to meet local demands within the expected financial constraints’.
At this stage regional officers had not yet committed themselves to any specific role in the implementation of the new policy.
They did however state that there might be a ‘Regional role in coordinating discussions at District level’, owing to‘the special problems faced by Friern and Claybury with their relatively fragmented catchment areas’.
Nevertheless the keenness of regional officers on closure is clear from contemporary minutes of the RTO.
At an informal meeting of the team in August the regional nursing officer spoke to a paper on consultation and implementation on priority services.
She ‘stressed the need for positive action on the proposed closure of two psychiatric hospitals, particularly because of the multi district dimension, which would require regional coordination and overview’.
The regional medical officer spoke too of the importance of a ‘firm coordinating role by the region’.
It was agreed that regional staff of several disciplines would need to be seconded or appointed to ‘spearhead the closures’, while the routine meetings between the management teams of the region and the districts could be used to discuss details of implementation.
Consultation on the strategy was full indeed, with 2,600 copies of each of the care group documents issued.
On the whole responses were supportive of the new strategy.
The regional administrator was able to report to the RHA at the end of the consultation period in November 1982 that ‘there had not been much opposition to the proposed closures’.
None of the bodies consulted came forward with any alternative suggestions and
of particular note was the positive acceptance of Waltham Forest district towards a local mental illness service and the eventual closure of Claybury Hospital.
Hampstead District had not made a formal response within the RHA's consultative period, but it was noted that
Friern Hospital have stressed the importance of their supra district services and the need for a medium secure unit as well as provision for the special needs of long stay patients.
In fact staff at Friern produced a lengthy critique of the RHA policy, while ‘important reservations’ had been expressed by other respondents.
These concerned finance, time-scale, the need for asylum, dependence on the ability of local authorities to develop services, and the criteria for selection of the two hospitals for closure.
The RHA felt that it had sufficient grounds for proceeding with the initiative, and it was proposed to make ‘one or more senior appointments…with specific responsibility for coordinating plans and ensuring implementation’.
But in the light of the reservations of respondents, the RNO suggested that feasibility studies be set up to examine more closely the planning issues to be resolved for the closure of Friern and Claybury.
These studies were to be carried out collaboratively between regional and district officers, and to be completed within six months, to minimize the uncertainty for staff at the two hospitals.
What were the results of the feasibility studies?
A clear consensus emerged that ‘reprovision’ of the two asylums by resettlement of the resident population was feasible, but not within the cost constraints set out by the RHA.
Disbelief that closures could be achieved within these constraints was never to be wholly suspended and in important ways served to hamper the subsequent implementation process.
In their report of the feasibility work, the RHA's officers concluded that substantial rundown was going to happen with or without regional intervention.
The then current trends suggested a further 60 per cent reduction in the long-stay population within ten years.
A lot of patient moves within Friern and Claybury would take place anyway as a result of ward mergers and relocation in line with continuing retrenchment.
It had already been proposed to institute a new RHA funding policy by which the budgets of the long-stay hospitals were to be distributed between the district authorities served by them.
Once implemented, this system would also give an added incentive to these districts to redeploy the funding for locally managed alternative care and treatment.
The fact is that the RHA cannot sensibly opt to do nothing.
The processes that have been described will go on in any event.
The real question is whether the changes — which affect the psychiatric provision of half the districts in the region — should be properly planned; or whether the RHA is prepared, as an impassive bystander, merely to observe them.
There was a further undercurrent of anxiety were major intervention not to be made.
The decade ahead was one in which it was projected that there would be no growth in the Department of Health and Social Security's annual allocation to the NETRHA.
The demographic and technology pressures on the NHS would make it difficult to maintain the then existing  level of service across the specialties.
The RHA could foresee only a worsening of the position on mental health.
This was firmly stated in the report of the closure feasibility studies which was produced for public consultation.
Given the present economic constraints on the NHS it is inevitable that there will be reductions in the present level of resources tied up in these two hospitals.
There did not appear to be any certainty that the RHA would make capital gain out of the exercise, whether or not such gain might be applied for non-mental health purposes.
As a result of the feasibility studies, regional officers were now prepared to make £50 million capital funding available.
Payback remained very much of a hypothetical order.
The Friern site did not have planning permission for development, the frontage of the hospital was a listed building, and large areas were zoned for public open space by the planning authority.
Claybury lay in the Green Belt around London and therefore money-generating residential or industrial development on any large scale was proscribed.
Decisions were being taken well before the British property boom of the 1980s.
Like all other public authorities, the RHA followed the negotiating norms by which new developments were planned in the NHS.
In this instance DHAs had begun the process in their feasibility reports by putting in ‘bids’ for resources which were couched in ideal terms.
The expectation was that the RHA would respond with substantial pruning — whether of staffing or building costs.
DHAs would then try to achieve a lesser level of pruning, and the RHA would consider that position.
By this means the usual order of events led toward a compromise solution eventually being reached.
But this often took years to achieve, and in the case of Friern and Claybury, the whole process was being telescoped into a period of months.
It was because of these expectations about planning that members of the RTO felt they could comfortably cut down on DHA estimates of the revenue required for community services.
This was so even though the DHAs wanted twice as much revenue as was then being spent on the large hospitals.
In an internal RTO memo the comment was made that
It must be remembered that districts have not really given an ‘in depth’ consideration to the respective functional briefs [for proposed reprovision projects].
This is not their fault but entirely due to the speed with which the programme has had to move to meet the RHA target date.
We are, therefore, dealing with last minute ideas and on reflection I am sure that districts would be the first to agree that their desirable costings could suffer refinement without loss of function.
On the capital side, this meant that instead of all residential units being costed as if they would be ‘new build’, twenty-five of them could be sited in existing buildings.
Even so, all developments were to be costed as if the  NHS would be the sole funding agent and that no local authority or housing corporation money would come in.
On the revenue side it meant such devices as changing the weighting of the staff mix so that a greater proportion of unqualified staff were employed than might ideally have been desired.
On the other hand an increase in the amount of revenue funding was now being proposed by the RTO, of the order of 10 per cent.
During their policy work on Mezey, NETRHA officers had initially thought they were significantly underspending on mental health.
This judgement was made by comparing the percentage of the regional budget devoted to this service with the corresponding percentages in other regions.
But in fact, when comparative levels of spending per head of population were studied by the regional treasurer, it was found that NETRHA spending was more or less right.
As the RMO commented:
The result of our review [of funding], contrary to my expectations was that we were not under-resourced for Mental Illness Services.
It showed that, allowing for double running costs,[there was]more revenue for Mental Illness Services than in fact we needed in comparison with the White Paper benchmarks.
This was a big surprise to us, and indeed, in some respects rather embarrassing.
It looked as though we might have been cooking the books.
(my emphasis)
This finding naturally gave the RTO some confidence in dealing with the arguments of the Claybury and Friern districts that they needed very large increases in revenue to fund community replacement services.
Although the RTO felt strongly that it could not stand by, nevertheless its members could have opted to do nothing.
What was surprising in some ways was that the RHA did decide to act.
That the moral imperative was not a sufficient condition has already been remarked upon.
Overall this seemed to be the case with the financial imperative too.
For eight years at least, the RHA had been considering simply shifting resources to the community as the natural retraction of the hospitals allowed.
One option that had been canvassed was for staffing ratios and care standards merely to be maintained rather than improved as the hospitals declined.
By pursuing such a policy, ward closures could steadily release recurring funding for redeployment elsewhere.
Why not follow such a course given the controversy about the issue of district services being autonomous from mental hospitals?
There was clearly increasing competition for resources between the DGH sector and the psychiatric hospital sector.
But what was lacking to underpin a choice between the two was agreement among clinicians about which groups of patients could be treated and/or cared for successfully outside the asylum.
There was a problem about the diminishing proportion of savings from ward closures as the hospitals got smaller, but here the RHA had every reason to leave the issue for provider and receiver districts to sort out between them.
Redbridge and Waltham Forest had accepted that there  would be no major increase in revenue to fund the development of new services before closure and would plan on the basis that half of the sites of two hospitals could be sold to finance the new services.
Was the RHA aware of the conclusions of the Camden and Islington working party on Friern, that there should be new buildings for the old long-stay population on the Friern site, and that the hospital should be developed as a specialist psychogeriatric and teaching service?
Were they aware of the Waltham Forest District and CHC view that merger of Claybury and Goodmayes was a feasible way forward?
While individual officers may indeed have been aware of this work, consideration of it did not form part of the policy-making.
As far as the RMO was concerned the regional authority was starting from scratch and had to ask ‘How do you create a policy and on what do you base it?’
There were no ‘off-the-shelf’ prototypes to work towards other than the DGH cure focused service with all the faults already commented on.
Major problems might lie ahead for the ‘enabling’ health service schemes, if they were not complemented by new local authority back-up services.
The effect of removing the non-health housing and caring functions of the institutions had not been quantified.
In short, it was not clear what would happen to the warehousing process once the warehouses had been removed.
As the RNO observed
Nobody had planned a mental illness service before.
There wasn't much fundamental discussion about it.
The idea that the chronically ill could live in a domestic setting with little professional nursing input was new.
Whereas mental handicap had revolutionized fairly quickly, for Friern and Claybury we were breaking this ground before the consensus had been reached.
All that the RHA could offer were statements of intent about the desirability of building ‘comprehensive joint health and social services for mental illness’.
The details of how such intentions could be realized would be left to local joint planning and financing at the district level: ‘any proposal to move the balance of care from hospital to community should come from the local level’.
The other major problem the region faced in trying to put together a strategy was that neither of the managing districts was actually convinced that it was feasible to provide a service completely devolved from the large hospitals.
Hamstead inherited specialist hospital ambitions for Friern.
Waltham Forest strongly contested the belief that modest revenue increases would be sufficient for reprovision of Claybury.
Perhaps most important of all, the RHA was not anticipating that there would be any serious opposition to the proposal to rundown the asylums.
The responses to the first consultation document on the proposal on the contrary indicated that constituent authorities were very much in favour.
The idea of the feasibility studies was to clear three problem areas: to  determine what kind of after-care provision the DHAs wanted to fund to complement DGH facilities, what kinds of models of service they wanted to achieve, and on the basis of this work to clarify whether district authorities did see asylum replacement as feasible or not.
The feasibility studies were very hastily carried out, however, and financial assumptions which district planners were working on were unclear.
None of the districts came out with a clear resolution of the underlying planning difficulties, and the clear cut local decision in favour of closures which the RHA had hoped for, was not forthcoming.
The general view of DHA planners was that new services would be far more expensive than those of the asylums, and that the funding the RHA was willing to put forward would be inadequate.
This qualification of support for the replacement of Friern and Claybury meant that it fell back upon regional officers, once again, to decide whether to go ahead with the initiative, or to abandon it.
In an interview after she had left the RHA in 1986, the RNO vividly captured the way in which the pressure of the moment was telling on her team:
Three years ago in that very hot summer the RTO spent a week locked in anguished debate.
I don't think I'd ever felt so taxed in my career.
So much of the costings depended on our estimates of nurse staffing.
In the end I said what is the alternative [to closure]going to be?….
I searched my conscience.
With £50m capital we could surely produce something; prevent patients becoming as dependent.
The RMO shared her conviction just as strongly:
We were keen to do right by the priority groups.
We were keen that a comprehensive district based service must be provided.
Friern and Claybury was thus our starting point and we thought we could surely provide something better than that.
So the NETRHA decided to carry on with the Friern and Claybury programme in the absence of feasible alternatives.
But officers were then immediately faced with the problem of how to implement the decision through DHAs not convinced that it could be done.
In the words of the RNO ‘It was the right decision, but it was a vale of tears.’