

UNIX SUPPLIERS ‘MUST SUPPORT ABI EFFORT IN 1993’
By this time next year, SunSoft Inc wants the chiefs of the Unix tribes, Unix Systems Labs Inc's Roel Pieper, Santa Cruz Operation Inc's Doug Michels, and its own Ed Zander, to have declared how each of them will support and implement a common definition of Unix in their respective desktop operating systems.
As reported (UX No 413), the definition — a low-level application binary interface (ABI)— will be owned by Unix International (UI) and is to be published in the next edition of the UI RoadMap, due at the forthcoming UI members meeting in February.
UI and the suppliers hope such an ABI will enable independent software vendors to develop one binary version of an application that will, as far as is possible, run unchanged across shrink wrapped desktop Unix products like Solaris, Unix SVR4.2, UnixWare and OpenDesktop.
With Microsoft Corp's Windows NT effort gathering steam, SunSoft's director of business development and strategic planning, Michael Sears, believes a resolution of the desktop compatibility issue ‘must happen in 1993: it is doable in 9–12 months.’
Although SVR4 ironed out many  differences in the various Unix implementations, the problem of incompatible interfaces has precluded satisfactory resolution of the issue.
USL and SunSoft identified areas of difference in their desktops whilst beta testing the environments earlier this year.
Most differences have been addressed in an object-level interface definition that takes bits from SVR4.2 and Solaris, which will form the basis of the UI ABI.
It will specify that the look and feel of a graphical user interface must, for example, include a common set of widgets, or at the very least, the ability to support them.
USL and SunSoft have spent the last few months working out the commercial implications of the ABI on delivery schedules and compatibility issues.
With time running short, SunSoft, UI and USL technical teams are working to nail down outstanding differences: the accompanying lobbying campaigns do at least bear testament to their efforts.
The success of these individual desires not withstanding, general belief is that some form of compromise is most likely.
UI says it will ensure issues not resolved don't cause major problems for ISVs — they'll be addressed by advanced technology programmes and a new set of relationships with the suppliers.
UI expects a fully-converged ABI to result over time, which will eventually include some form of requirement for a common  development environment.
UK Defence Research Agency's Ten15 Architecture Neutral Distribution Format technology will also be incorporated: UI says it has been working closely with DRA for the last six months on proposals.
Other ABIs for multi-processing and security will follow soon after by which time UI expects SCO to join the party.
Quietly, UI is also expected to begin relationships with firms other than USL for technology development on its behalf.
Not, says UI, to kowtow to any kind of preconditions SunSoft wants UI to meet for the firm to close on the desktop issue, but simply that USL doesn't have resources to do all the development work coming down the line.
SunSoft argues ‘UI needs to move away from USL:’ Sears says ‘many UI members want that to happen,’but denies SunSoft is holding UI hostage.’
TADPOLE TO DEVELOP POWERPC NOTEBOOK FOR IBM — FILES FOR LONDON STOCK EXCHANGE LISTING
Cambridge, UK-based Tadpole Technology Plc is to develop and manufacture a notebook computer for IBM Corp using the PowerPC RISC under an agreement the two signed on November 24.
IBM will implement AIX Unix on the notebook — due in 12 to 18 months — which will be assembled at Tadpole's US arm in Austin, Texas and marketed by IBM.
On top of the announcement, Tadpole is also filing for a full listing on the London Stock Exchange today.
IBM is taking an initial 2.7% stake in the company, worth some $500,000: continuation of the development agreement beyond January 29 is contingent on successful completion of the investment.
Originally a manufacturer of board-level products, Tadpole is now best known for its Sparcbook notebook which uses the Sun Microsystems Inc RISC.
Its SPARCbook 2 notebook computer is expected early next year.
The machine will use a 40MHz Cypress Semiconductor Corp Sparc, rated at 28 MIPS and will come with 16 to 32Mb RAM, 250 to 500Mb disk, run Solaris 1.0 operating system until Solaris 2.1 becomes available and support Open Windows version 3 or Motif interfaces, according to US sources.
With 16Mb RAM, 250Mb disk and colour screen it will be $10,950 in the US — £9,125 in the UK.
Tadpole will use Tsunami and SuperSparc for its SPARCbook 3 notebooks, due in the second quarter of 1994.
The company will also enhance its Nomadic Computing Environment and develop multimedia applications for the SPARCbook.
More details, page two.
NEXTSTEP 486 DELAYED TO Q3
Over in the UK touting the advantages of his NeXTStep object-oriented environment to the City of London's financial services market, NeXT Computer Inc founder and chief executive Steve Jobs revealed that the long-awaited implementation of NeXTStep for Intel Corp's 80486 architecture will not be generally available until the third quarter of next year.
Plans for NeXTStep 486 were revealed at NeXTWorld Expo back in January (UX No 370), and the environment was to have gone into beta test in June: that won't now happen until the New Year.
Jobs claims there will be 250 third party developers working with the beta release by May and says a six month beta period will increase the robustness of the environment.
Personal computer manufacturers like Compaq Computer Corp and Dell Computer Corp have been touted as potential OEM customers for NeXTStep 486 since details first emerged, but Jobs has nothing in writing yet.
Jobs is positioning NeXTStep as a means to ride what he believes will be the next wave in IT — custom applications.
He reckons NeXTStep can do development five to ten times faster than other technologies such as SunSoft Inc's Solaris or Unix System Labs' Unix SVR4.2 which he says are weak development solutions.
Although versions of NeXTStep for other architectures, including RISC CPUs, are expected, Jobs says there are definitely ‘no plans to put NeXTStep on Sun.’
As well as NeXTStep, the NeXT Computer, which currently uses Motorola Inc's 68040 CPU, will also be upgraded to use RISC architecture.
Jobs says the company has now decided on the RISC it will use, but declined to name it, or indicate when a RISC-based NeXT box would be available.
NeXT has been widely expected to endorse Motorola's 88000 RISC CPU as a matter of routine.
However, much publicised defections from the 88000 camp have thrown the future of the part as a mainstream CPU product into doubt, and observers are wondering whether NeXT might not just hotfoot it straight to the IBM-Apple-Motorola PowerPC.
Indeed, insiders suggest that Motorola is now actively encouraging existing and potential 88000 users to start looking at PowerPC: talk of a NeXT portable has been doing the rounds.
Jobs says NeXT has left its loss-making days behind and claims the privately-held company will be in a position to make a profit in 1993.
However this is unlikely to be realised, Jobs says: he plans to raise spending on research and development and sales and marketing efforts.
He is pinning the future of the company on the success of NeXTStep, saying that 90% of its sales effort will go towards marketing the software: ‘customers will decide’ whether NeXT continues as a hardware operation he said.
NeXT has enough cash to keep it going for at least 18 months, according to Jobs, whilst its ballyhoo'd initial public offering is now unlikely before 1994, he says.
Jobs expects to have over 50,000 NeXT users by the end of the year — a figure he claims will double in 1993.
TADPOLE PLACING TO BE FOLLOWED BY IBM SUBSCRIBING FOR AN INITIAL 2.7%
Following the placing of 7.4m shares, 5.5m of them new, in Tadpole Technology Plc by Henry Cooke Corporate Finance Ltd, trading in the shares on the London International Stock Exchange is scheduled to start on Monday.
Keeping it all in house, Henry Cook Lumsden Plc is the broker to the issue.
The company does not have a sparkling financial story to tell — it lost £1.7m pre-tax on turnover of £12.5m in the year to September 30, and its only profitable period in four years was the nine months to September 1991, when it did £684,000 pre-tax on sales of £9.6m.
It lost £270,000 on sales of £6.7m in the year to December 1989, and lost £935,000 on £5.7m sales the previous year.
The company explains its performance by saying that 1989 was the first year that the US contributed the majority of its sales, 61% of the total, and that it was hit that year by a 35% fall in the UK because it was too reliant on one customer; it raised £1.5m in a rights issue.
In 1990 a major supplier failed to complete development of an important microprocessor in time to deliver parts during the year — this was the time when Tadpole was to bring Intel Corp 80860 boards on stream — so it was unable to fulfil US orders for the board.
Everything came through in the first nine months of 1991 so the company was able to trade profitably.
In fiscal 1992, the drain on finances was development costs for the Sparcbook, exacerbated by a fall in demand for the board-level products: these were sufficiently severe that the company had to raise £572,000 in March in another rights issue after having to throw itself onto the mercy of its bankers and creditors in order to continue trading.
Since then, demand for board level products has increased, but the Sparcbook has taken off more slowly than Tadpole hoped, so that by September 30 it had sold 647 of the things, bringing in £3.5m.
The £3m or so net of expenses that it expects from the placing will go to eliminating existing bank loans, which stood at £952,200 on November 13, with the balance going for working capital.
The company looks for demand for board-level products to continue — OEM customers for these have included E-Systems Inc, Polaroid Corp, General Electric Co Inc, Amdahl Corp, Encore Computer Corp, Xerox Corp and Thomson-CSF SA.
IBM to get up to 12.7%
It also plans to develop notebook computers that will be compatible with the workstations made by other manufacturers.
The Sparcbook 2 is nearing release — see front page — and the come-on for potential investors in the prospectus is the agreement with IBM Corp — but this is not signed and sealed yet.
IBM will market the resulting product — to be manufactured by Tadpole — but continuation of the development agreement beyond January 29 is contingent on successful completion of an investment in the company by IBM.
The presently non-binding agreement calls for IBM to subscribe $500,000 for new shares at the placing price of 65 pence, giving IBM 2.7%, and to grant IBM warrants to subscribe for sufficient additional shares to represent a total of 10% of the enlarged equity, also at 65 pence a share, subject to adjustments.
The warrants will be exercisable from October 1993 for seven years, and would take IBM's holding up to 12.4%.
The agreement includes granting IBM a non-exclusive licence to the Nomadic Computing Environment.
SIEMENS, OLIVETTI WEIGH APPLE NEWTON, AT&T HOBBIT HANDHELDS…
European manufacturers are afraid of getting left behind if the emerging handheld personal communicators generate a sudden rush of consumer excitement, and rather than wait for their labs to come up with their own local products, are weighing putting their names on one of the American products and manufacturing it locally.
According to Electronic News, Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG is in final discussions with Apple Computer Inc and the AT&T Co-Eo Inc-Matsushita Electric Industrial Co before deciding whether to go for the architecture of the Advanced RISC Machines Ltd ARM-based Newton, or the AT&T Co Hobbit-based device.
Meantime Ing C Olivetti & Co — which has an interest in the ARM RISC via its 80% holding in Acorn Computers Plc, is developing its own personal communicator, but is also looking at the AT&T Hobbit, and may join the alliance with Eo; its own product would be the next generation of the 2.2lbs Quaderno portable, which uses the 16MHz 8086-compatible NEC Corp V30HL chip.
WORDPERFECT NEXT IN THE QUEUE TO TAKE ON MICROSOFT
In the ‘we-reap-as-we-sow’ category this week there are reports by Computer Reseller News that WordPerfect is now thinking about dusting off its long-standing complaints against Microsoft Corp and turning them into an anti-trust action if the US Federal Trade Commission doesn't hop to and litigate.
Like Novell Inc, which appears to be doing the same thing (UX No 413), WordPerfect reportedly has big-time legal beagles at its beck and call.
Meanwhile, Novell chairman Ray Noorda is said to be circulating a letter among industry executives asking them to be expert witnesses in the FTC case against Microsoft.
Naturally a lot of people are scared witless of getting on Microsoft's blacklist and will only cooperate under subpoena rather than appear to be volunteering information.
SES READIES OBJECT TOOLSET
Right after the holidays Austin, Texas-based SES will unwrap SES/objectbench, an object-oriented analysis (OOA) toolset for developing OOA models for technical systems and commercial applications.
SES/objectbench currently consists of two products: a graphical  modelling tool for creating OOA model and an animated simulator for examining the models' dynamic  behaviour .
Another piece, due later in 1993, will do a statistical analysis of model execution.
The company says the software is the first Shlaer-Mellor toolset to offer on-screen animation and dynamic checking.
It will be available in March on Sparc platforms.
Objectbench Graphical Modeling will sell for $4,900 and Animated Simulation for $14,500 per simultaneous user.
+1 512 328–5544
DUN & BRADSTREET TO CUT WORLDWIDE WORKFORCE 13%
Faced with the gathering rush by users to downsize to open systems, Dun & Bradstreet Software is having to downsize itself, and will cut employment worldwide by about 13%, 400 people, by the end of next year.
It is also closing its personnel applications development and support base in Huntsville, Alamaba and moving the work to its Atlanta base.
One reason cited for its downsizing is that its mix of skills is no longer appropriate, given that the mainframe software business is declining, and its Unix and client-server applications are only now coming to market.
Only seven positions will be lost in the UK, and the 235-strong Bristol-based operation says it'll break out its year-end figures from overall Dun & Bradstreet Software numbers for the first time on December 11.
The unit, which does all of the firm's Unix porting work, will start to blow its own trumpet in the new year when the latest workflow automation techniques in its client/server and Unix software will be on parade.
D&B Software came into being in 1990 from the merger of McCormack & Dodge and Management Science America, mainframe software rivals.
D&B's client/server software, SmartStream (UX No 413), will eventually  supersede the competing mainframe products.
KEW OFFERS RAIDTEC DISK SUBSYSTEM
UK open systems integration firm, Kew Research Corporation Ltd, Uxbridge, Middlesex, is setting up indirect sales channels and OEM deals this side of the water for Redundant Array Independent Disk (RAID) developer Raidtec Corp.
As part of an informal agreement between the two companies Kew will sell FlexArray alongside its systems integration solutions and to find three Unix and Novell NetWare-based distributors by January 1993.
Kew is currently negotiating OEM deals with DEC and IBM in the UK on behalf of Alpharetta, Georgia-based Raidtec: it expects signatures next year.
Raidtec's fault tolerant RAID subsystem offers a storage capacity from 1.2Gb to 7.2Gb per six drive array.
Multiple systems can be  attached to a Unix host via fast and SCSI-II adapters.
It supports RAID levels 0, 1, 3 and 5 — and runs with various flavours of Unix, Novell NetWare and Apple Computer Inc Macs (UX No 395).
Prices go from $3,700 — £2,500 — to $8,500 — £5,000.
Kew specialises in open systems integration for the health, retail and local government markets.
+44 895 253 543
IBM DIVISIONS BATTLE OVER RPGII MIGRATION ROUTES
According to UK firm, Binary Star Ltd, two IBM divisions are at loggerheads about how to provide migration paths for RPG II-based system users.
IBM Corp's System/36 division has signed a worldwide deal with ICS Computing Group — which includes the business of Software Ireland Ltd — to market the Belfast, Northern Ireland-based company's Unibol code converter.
Unibol allows System/36 users to move RPGII-based applications to other IBM platforms, including the RS/6000 and AS/400 (UX No 337).
The tool supports RPG II's program-to-program SSP 6.0 communication protocol and a data-sharing facility which allows Unix applications to access, close, create and update RPG code.
ICS estimates there are some 4,000 System/36 users in the UK.
Meanwhile, IBM's AIX division wants to go one better and negotiate a deal for Kingham, Oxfordshire-based Binary Star Ltd's DeltaStar software (UX No 409), a development programming environment which can re-engineer RPG II-based code to run on any system that supports Micro Focus Plc Cobol or C — not just IBM AIX.
IBM's System/36 division doesn't want its AIX colleagues to cut this deal.
Binary Star's marketing director, Simone Star, says ‘it will be weeks and weeks before this issue is resolved…the divisional dissent is incredible.
The System/36 operation wants to keep sales up, but those running the AIX show want to open everything up.’
Binary Star: +44 608 658179.
ICS: +44 232 833 422.
EDP READIES OBJECT DATABASE FOR FEBRUARY
UK Pick outfit, Electronic Data Processing plc, Sheffield, is readying what it describes as a ‘nested, object-oriented relational database system’ for release next February.
The product, called Univision in the US — Quantum in the UK — will run on Unix SVR4-compatibles and can execute Pick code, according to EDP managing director, Richard Jowett.
EDP bought Via Systems Inc — which has a Pick-based financial modelling package and graphical user interface — and Open Inc, Colorado Springs, Colorado, which markets a portable interface environment called Aspect, for a total of $1.25m last month.
Both sets of technologies will be integrated into EDP's database, which will be developed to include Object Management Group standards.
EDP will use its US acquisitions as outlets for the technology.
EDP: +44 742 621621.
Open Inc: +1 719 527 9700.
AMD MUST DO OWN MICROCODE FOR Am486
Advanced Micro Devices Inc lost a crucial six months of sales in the 80486 market after Judge William Ingram ruled late on Wednesday last week that the company does not have rights to copy any of Intel Corp's microcode under their 1976 contract.
The company was granted rights to use the microcode in its Am386 parts under a separate ruling in a different case, although that, too, is under further challenge from Intel.
The new ruling, which Advanced Micro plans to appeal, means that it will have to write new microcode for the Am486 chip that it has been sampling to a few potential customers and had hoped to ship by the end of the year.
It says it will now take until the middle of next year to get a chip out.
The Am386 is covered by an award from a court-appointed arbitrator, which gave AMD a ‘permanent, royalty-free non-exclusive, non-transferable worldwide right…under any and all Intel copyrights, patents, trade secrets and maskwork rights contained in the current reverse-engineered 80386 family of microprocessors’ as a remedy for Intel's breach of the technology exchange agreement between the two companies.
Intel is now appealing that arbitration decision.
HP AND IBM TEAM ON FC/Open FIBRE CHANNEL CONSORTIUM
Hewlett-Packard and IBM have combined forces to lift a brand new consortium off the ground.
FC/Open is expected to come into  existence sometime next year in support of efforts to standardise high-speed fiber channel interconnects.
Its predecessor organisation, the Fiber Channel Systems Initiative (FCSI), is already up and running, scheduled to reveal itself publicly in six to eight weeks.
FCSI has reportedly attracted the major workstation manufacturers.
Apparently more adherents are being sought.
Its charter is to delineate initial recommendations for computer-to-mass storage, computer-to-computer, computer-to-peripheral, peripheral-to-peripheral, computer-to-outside services and heterogeneous cluster-to-cluster standards via switching.
It is specifically a Unix/workstation initiative with goals larger than ANSI could handle.
FCSI is currently under the management of Hewlett-Packard Co's Components Group and is headquartered in its San Jose, California facility.
After it gets the ball rolling, FCSI is expected to wither away over the next two years, passing the torch completely to FC/Open.
While FCSI will be smaller and more flexible, FC/Open is aiming for membership of some 50 or 60 companies, 15% of which are end users.
Its brief is longer term and written to include missionary work, promotion and oversight of independent interoperability testing and branding.
Siemens Components in New Jersey is currently charged with its supervision.
FC/Open will eventually require its own quarters, staff and budget.
FCSI is reportedly trying to keep its overheads down by being run as a project within HP but it will still cost upwards of a million dollars to organise.
The idea for a consortium was born of the year-old fiber channel alliance between HP and IBM, according to Ed Frymoyer the HP alliance manager who is also heading up FCSI.
Fiber channel proponents claim the low-latency technology is probably faster and more cost-effective than challenger FDDI.
NEW UNIFORUM CHIEF SEEKS CUSTOMER FOCUS
Three weeks into the job and Richard Jaross, Uniforum's spanking new executive director, is talking about revitalising the place and giving it more of a customer focus.
Jaross, a Data General and before that a DEC alumnus, had been director of educational services at DG and intends to make use of that background at Uniforum.
Despite a rising Unix base, he is facing flat membership of 6,500 souls and 69 corporate sponsors and a clear lack of enthusiasm for the old user group even among the diehards.
He feels he needs to spur membership among resellers and commercial end users and will probably use regional educational programmes to support such a drive.
More importantly, however, considering the perilous economic climate and the number of people out of work, he is also considering kicking off an employment register of sorts where Uniforum members looking for jobs could avail themselves of free advertising in the group's magazine Uniforum Monthly.
Sounds like a practical start.
Good luck, Mr Director.
NEXT WINS DEAL WITH DOLPHIN SERVER
NeXT Computer Inc has struck a deal with Dolphin Server Technology A/S, the Norwegian manufacturer of Motorola Inc 88000-based server systems.
From January, Dolphin, the Norsk Data A/S affiliate based in Oslo, will sell NeXT workstations as clients to its own server systems — targeting public service, banking and finance sectors.
A technical element to the agreement sees Dolphin licensing NeXT's NetInfo network administration software for its systems.
NeXT already has a similar agreement with Data General Corp, whose AViiON servers are also built around 88000 RISCs.
UNIX LABS CUTS OSI PRICE BY $40,000
In an effort to resuscitate the moribund Open Systems Interconnection market, Unix System Laboratories is going to try to make its OSI stack a commodity by cutting source code fees from $50,000 to $10,000.
Per copy licences will also be cut 75%.
USL hopes the repricing will spur its vendors to make OSI end-user pricing comparable to TCP/IP, OSI's chief competitor.
It also hopes to short-circuit any notions the vendors might have of building their own OSI stacks.
The US market for OSI has clearly proved a dud, being limited in the main to government contracts.
USL needs OSI to make a better showing to justify the large investment, worth many person/years of effort, that it has poured into the technology since 1987.
DEC AIMS FOR 300MHz ALPHA BY LATE 1994
Digital Equipment Corp told the Microprocessor Forum last month that its Alpha chip is in production at 150MHz, with usable yields up to 182MHz.
Despite boasts months ago, it has of course been unable to get volumes at 200MHz and probably won't until third quarter 1993.
The forecast 1993 volume pricing is $1,096 in quantities of 1,000 and $800 in quantities of 50,000.
DEC expects its next iteration EV-45 design to produce 300MHz chips that could start shipping in early 1994.
Their performance is pegged at 150 SPECint92 and 250 SPECfp92.
Meanwhile another design team is working on a four-way superscalar design called EV-5 specified to produce a minimum 300MHz chip whose performance could exceed 200 SPECint92 and 350 SPECfp92.
DEC figures on getting this EV-5 widget into production in late 1994.
On top of these efforts, which also include an EV-6 eventually, DEC is also working on a low-cost LCA 21066 chip to rival Sun's Tsunami and HP's Hummingbird, apparently meant for high-volume NT systems.
The CPU, floating point, instruction and data caches, memory controller and I/O interface will all go on to a single chip.
It is expected to have 8Kb caches, larger than Tsunami's 4K/2K, and will interface to PCI, Intel's next-generation PC bus.
Due to ship the last quarter of next year, it should clock in around 100MHz to 150MHz but the Microprocessor Report figures its integer performance is unlikely to exceed Pentium's significantly.
The Report's observations on the overall development programme are worth repeating.
It's ‘been hyped beyond what the company can deliver,’ it says, pointing to the failure to produce 200MHz Alphas in volume.
The plan ‘would strain the resources of any large computer company.
Digital, in the throes of major staff reductions caused by billion-dollar losses, will be hard-pressed to keep up’ with it.
Yet it thinks that despite the aggressiveness of the programme, ‘Alpha may be too little, too late.’
Much of DEC's future success, it estimates, rests with how well NT does in the market and whether NT ISVs will be willing to write to Alpha machines as well as Intel and MIPS.
…
UPGRADES OLTP FOR DATABASE SUPPORT
Digital Equipment Corp has upgraded its seven-month-old Tuxedo-based TPframe software to version 1.1 to support a distributed on-line transaction processing environment as well as Oracle, Informix, Sybase and Ingres databases.
The company says the stuff now provides the run-time system and development tools needed to build and deploy Unix-based OLTP applications and integrates Tuxedo with SQL and XA-compliant data management products.
Entry-level pricing starts at $3,000 for a licence on a DECstation 3100.
BORLAND EXPANDS INTERBASE OPERATION
Borland International's InterBase division is appointing new distributors for its relational database in Scandinavia, Benelux, Eastern Europe, the Gulf, Italy, Portugal, South Africa, India and Japan.
Staffing levels are to be increased in all of its 17 international offices: European staff numbers will double to 80.
Canadian software outfit, Cognos Inc, will continue to sell StarBase, its version of InterBase, but the product will revert back to the InterBase name.
Borland refused to disclose international sales figures for InterBase but said it hoped to double what it claims is a 3.6% per cent share of the Unix database market in Europe over the next year.
It claims 10,000 sites worldwide with 400 in Europe.
Borland has no plans to downgrade its Dbase and Paradox database efforts or to encourage these database users to migrate to InterBase.
Steven Husk, strategic sales director for Borland InterBase Europe, said the company will release Quattro Pro, dBase, Object Vision and Borland C++ SQL links to the InterBase database in the first half of 1993.
The object stuff will allow personal computer clients to manage InterBase data as though it were local to the system.
Borland will port Interbase to Microsoft Corp NT, Novell Inc NetWare, IBM Corp OS/2 and Digital Equipment Corp Alpha platforms in the first quarter of next year.
UI ANNOUNCES HIGH AVAILABILITY WORKGROUP — PARALLEL PROCESSING, DEVELOPMENT TOOL GROUPS TO FOLLOW
Unix International has kicked off a workgroup to define a future System V release with greater up-time.
The High Availability Work Group is supposed to provide requirements for technologies that by 1995 will give System V a Class 4 Availability Rate meaning less than an hour of downtime a year in a 24 hour-a-day seven-day-a-week operating situation.
The group intends to have System V achieve a downtime of about five minutes a year by 1999.
It will address fault tolerance, restart speed, automatic reconfiguration and systems management automation.
It will focus on distributed Unix composed of LANs and interconnected WANs where the reliability of multiple system components and large numbers of apps have to be considered.
Members include Amdahl, Bellcore, Chorus, Data General, Fujitsu, HaL, ICL, Locus, Motorola, NCR, NEC, OSSI, Oracle, Pyramid, Sequent, Softway, Sequoia, Stratus, Tandem, Toshiba and Unisys.
Other workgroups for parallel processing and development tools are being lined up.
…
FINDS HOME IN X/OPEN'S TECHNICAL MEMBERSHIP
Unix International, which found its million-dollar seat on X/Open's board of directors as burdensome as the Open Software Foundation did and was threatening to drop out, as OSF did (UX No 404), has found accommodation in X/Open's new cheaper technical membership classification.
UI will continue to participate in X/Open's Online Transaction Processing and System Management Development Group through 1993.
Unix System Laboratories, which has never officially been part of X/Open though it's had a lot of informal dealings with it, is also expected to take advantage of the new technical membership and sign up.
SUNPRO HAS NEW MANAGEMENT TOOLS FOR SOLARIS
Sun Microsystems Inc subsidiary SunPro has introduced a new set of code management tools for software developers using its Solaris operating system on Sparc and Intel platforms: Sparcworks/TeamWare and Proworks/TeamWare.
Noticing that up to 80% of its workstation users have eschewed the use of complex and expensive configuration management tools in favour of basic Unix utilities such as SCCS (source code control system), SunPro says Teamware is designed to bridge the gap between the two extremes.
‘SCCS is great for working on individual files, but it has no concept of workstations or networks — it thinks it is on a single machine,’ says SunPro technical specialist Hank Shiffman.
‘But Teamwork is cheaper and easier to understand and adapt — and remove if necessary — than full-blown configuration management systems.’
Teamwork extends the existing Sparcworks and Proworks programming tools, but is not dependent on them, and will work with third-party tools if required.
There are four main components — CodeManager for tracking multiple software releases and integrating work from multiple locations; VersionTool, a visual layer for the SCCS utility; ParallelMake, which runs the various steps of a software build in parallel wherever possible on a single host; and CheckPoint, which captures prior versions of files or directories of files.
Also bundled in are two existing tools, Manager and FileMerge from the SparcWorks toolset.
Recommended US price is $1,000 for a single licence, going down to $600 per user for 100 concurrent users on the network: UK prices will be set by the various sales channels.
SunPro will sell through the various Sun Microsystems' subsidiaries, OEMS and software distributors.
It is already out at 500 Sun sites, including Kodak, Andersen Consulting and Sun's own Sunsoft Inc subsidiary for the Solaris development team.
JAPAN's NEW 10-YEAR RESEARCH PROJECT
Undaunted by the almost complete failure of the Fifth Generation project, Japan Inc is now embarking on a $480m 10-year Real-World Computing Partnership with the aim of mimicking the human brain in software.
The end product is intended to be a computer that could control a robot to perform such tasks as picking strawberries or blackcurrants.
The Japanese government is putting up 90% of the funds, but 14 private institutions are taking part, including NEC Corp, Hitachi Ltd and Fujitsu Ltd.
INFORMIX TO USE CLEARCASE
Informix Software is going to use Atria Systems Inc's ClearCase software as the core configuration management technology for its worldwide software development environments.
ClearCase will handle both current and future Informix projects.
ClearCase tracks changes, helps build, release and maintain software in parallel and enforces development process policies.
It is specifically intended for Unix-based development.
AT&T CLAIMS FIRST IN UNIX SOFTWARE FAULT-TOLERANCE
A breakthrough in software fault-tolerance is being claimed by AT&T Co's Bell Laboratories in Murray Hill, New Jersey.
As the world comes to depend more and more on telecommunications and computer networks, AT&T is striving ever harder to pre-empt or avoid the kinds of breakdowns that have plagued its long-distance network and caused chaos in parts of the US over the past couple of years.
The target the researchers were working towards in this case was the ability for its systems to recover from transient errors and other faults in the software.
The developments at Bell Labs are two software components — designed to run under Unix — called watchd and libft.
The components provide for automatic on-line retry as a way to achieve high system availability, AT&T says, adding that software fault tolerance can be provided in an application whether or not the underlying hardware or operating system is fault-tolerant.
And it is sometimes more economical to provide fault tolerance in the software than in the hardware.
Watchd and libft are designed to separate fault detection, process restart and volatile data recovery facilities from the application functions and are claimed to provide different levels of fault tolerance with minimal effort and high flexibility.
Watchd is composed of distributed algorithms that can run on a single machine or a network of machines.
It is designed to watch the life of an application continuously, and when it detects that the application has crashed or hung, it recovers that application at an initial internal state or at the point at which data was last saved.
Libft is a library of C language functions that can be used in the application programs to specify and to checkpoint critical data, recover the checkpointed data, log events, do exception handling, and do N-version programming — presumably a means of ensuring that something vital written into the first version of a program survives unadulterated in subsequent versions.
AT&T says that it is already using the two components in its New Generation Testing system that troubleshoots toll-free 800 number services and can pinpoint problems on up to 42 lines simultaneously.
Bell Labs notes that fault tolerance is common in hardware and in operating systems, but generally too costly for many software systems, and says that as far as it knows, these are the first general-purpose software modules, and they set a trend toward low-cost fault-tolerance in user-level software.
AT&T says that it is now exploring the possibility of marketing the components externally.
PARCPLACE DELIVERS OBJECTWORKS
ParcPlace Systems is starting to ship ObjectWorks C/C++ 3.0 this week, having delayed delivery from the summer to add significant features like C support.
The object-oriented software also includes a drag-and-drop Motif-based GUI, an enhanced source-level debugger and a source code annotation facility within the browser set.
ParcPlace reckons the package is the only scalable framework for medium-to-large projects that allows migration of existing C applications to an integrated C/C++ environment.
Product design is intended to make team programming more effective.
Incorporating the two languages into one environment should accelerate project development schedules because there's no need to switch between tools.
The enhanced gdb debugger, integrated with the browser which is able to represent code structure and class relationships graphically, can reportedly debug multiple C and C++ programs simultaneously.
The browser will also browse documentation notes.
The package includes the industry standard cfront 2.1 C++ language system from Unix System Labs.
ParcPlace intends going to cfront 3.0 with the next release.
The company expects the Motif drag-and-drop, which it substituted for its proprietary GUI, to shorten the learning curve.
The $3,000 package is currently shipping on Sun 4 and Sparc machines running SunOS 4.1 and RS/6000s with AIX 3.2.
Users who bought this year can get a $800 upgrade.
Meanwhile ParcPlace introduced a C++ Partners Programme for companies that offer complementary products including Aggregate Computing Inc, Mercury Interactive, NewCode Technology Inc, ObjecTime, Ontos, Persistance, Pure Software, Rational, Servio and Versant Object Technology.
ParcPlace will distribute a CD-ROM with evaluation copies of some of the partners products with each shipment of ObjectWorks C/C++.
HP READIES LOW COST HUMMINGBIRD 7100 FOR ENTRY LEVEL TSUNAMI KILLER
The Lord High Muckamucks at Hewlett-Packard Co always figured there was a cheapo HP workstation on the cards.
Now with Sun Microsystems Inc doing Tsunami at $3,995 there's more reason than ever to step on it.
HP has a low-cost entry-level 7100LC chip in the works called Hummingbird apparently bound for an under-$5,000 box possibly due in the second quarter.
The Microprocessor Report reckons these boxes will make Sun's new Tsunami-based machines look ‘truly  anemic .’
The 800,000-transistor single-chip, designed in 0.8-micron CMOS, is expected to yield 50MHz to 75MHz.
Michael Slater calls it ‘the most aggressive superscalar organization yet revealed for a PA-RISC microprocessor.’
He figures it will be significantly faster then the PowerPC 601 and dramatically faster than Tsunami.
Hummingbird is the first PA-RISC chip to support both little-endian and big-endian byte ordering.
Slater thinks little endian was added to support Microsoft Corp Windows NT, the operating system HP hasn't committed to yet.
There is some multimedia hardware on-board that the company is trying to keep pretty much under wraps.
Suffice it to say many important graphics and sound algorithms can take advantage of the design.
Claimed applications include image processing, digital video and digital audio.
The Microprocessor Report suspects that Hummingbird may be aimed at MPEG full-motion video/audio applications and could eliminate the need for a separate MPEG chip.
If so, HP could hit the full-motion video market long before its competitors and, with NT in tow, might wind up in the thick of the battle for dominance in the next wave of PCs.
Hummingbird's performance, however, being close to what the current PA-RISC mid-range offers, probably implies HP will have to boost the ratings on its mid and high-end machines.
P5 ‘AT WORST A FRAUD,’ SAYS MICROPROCESSOR REPORT…
Not everybody's impressed with the P5-aka-Pentium.
In the latest issue of Microprocessor Report, editor Michael Slater concludes that ‘Intel's pre-emptive strike against the ACE Initiative turns out to be, at best, a result of wishful thinking, and at worst , a fraud.’
Calling the P5 a ‘paper tiger’ responsible for the collapse of ACE and claiming that the chip fails to live up to its promises, Slater notes that ‘the P5 is turning out to be not a few months behind the R4000, but over a year later — and by the time the P5 is shipping, the MIPS semiconductor partners will be shipping the R4400 with perhaps 50% better performance than the P5.’
…
HEAT SINK AND FAN CONFIRMED
Meanwhile, Intel still denies that there is any delay in volume deliveries of the Pentium 80586 microprocessor for public consumption, but vendors briefed by the company have confirmed that, as we revealed a few weeks ago (UX No 410), the part at present needs a heat sink and a fan, and that Intel is unlikely to be able to ship in volume before the fourth quarter 1993.
Developers told Computer Reseller News that the company has several fixes in the works, including asking them to install a fan on a small board to blow directly on the chip.
The paper quotes Intel's Dave House saying that the part will initially appear in the promised 66MHz version and a cheaper 60MHz version — Siemens AG is said to have been unable to drive the chip faster than 40MHz with cooling before it burned up.
It also notes that applications will have to be recompiled to get full benefit from the chip.
TATUNG COMPSTATIONS CUT UP TO 16%
Tatung Science & Technology Inc, San Jose has cut prices up to 16% on its full Compstation 40 line of Sparcstation 2-compatible systems.
A high-end Compstation 40 with Solaris and Motif software now costs from $9,000 with 16Mb CPU and 520Mb disk, 19″ colour monitor, a 1.44Mb floppy drive and a single-slot GX accelerator board.
It comes with Solaris 1.1 and TSTI's Mdesk 2.0, a set of programs that features Motif 1.1.4, release 5 of the X Window System, and IXI Ltd's X.desktop 3.0 icon software.
OPENFORUM ‘92, UTRECHT — UNIX SYSTEM LABS AND THE OSF
by John Abbott
Roel Pieper reacted strongly to claims by SunSoft Inc European general manager Peter Watkins (reported in UX No 410) that Sun had developed up to 80% of Unix System Labs’ SVR4 operating system.
‘It is more like 20% of SVR4.0, but only 5% of where we are now’, he said.
Pieper warned that some ‘open’ vendors were now beginning to backtrack and introduce non-standard elements into their product offerings, in an attempt to lock-in their customer bases.
He pointed to Unix International as a forum for limiting the damage caused by arguments over technology, and said that the UI RoadMap of future Unix developments would be broadened to encompass technology from other member companies aside from USL itself: ‘It'll help keep them honest’.
Pieper is also looking to achieve a generic ‘Unix’ brand for all Unix vendors.
‘The industry has caused the perception of Unix fragmentation itself, yet it takes only days or a week to port between an IBM and HP machine’.
Pieper also promised delegates at Open Forum that the first wave of systems management tools and utilities for Unix System V.4 would be available during the first quarter of next year.
In what seems like a big complement on our powers of imagination, Unix System Laboratories chief Roel Pieper and Chuck Reilly, vice president of operations at the Open Software Foundation have been re-writing history, claiming at Utrecht a few weeks back that the press made up the entire Unix Wars all by themselves: ‘they never happened’ pleaded Rielly, who didn't join OSF until 1989, after some of the worst was over.
Anyway, Unix now faces a much tougher fight for survival against Microsoft Corp — or are we imagining things?
A determined outbreak of agreement between Pieper and Reilly during their combined keynote led Hans Strach-Zimmerman of Grassbrun, Munich-based iXos GmbH to ask if plans for a merger were back on again: ‘The reasons for a merger three or four years ago are now history,’ they said: ‘we both have our own programmes working in parallel.’
Despite a great deal of talk about the Foundation moving emphasis away from operating systems towards its Distributed Computing and Distributed Management Environments, DCE and DME, Reilly claimed that the number of OSF/1 binaries shipped this year — set at 100,000 — would be doubled next year.
While DEC is the only company currently using OSF's integrated kernel, IBM and Hewlett-Packard are shipping the OSF/1 commands and library set, which Reilly says makes up 75–85% of the whole.
As for the microkernel system, IBM recently demonstrated the ‘multiple personality’ concept at Comdex, running OSF/1 and OS/2 concurrently on a PS/2 on top of the Mach kernel.
Reilly insists that the future Mach 3-based OSF 1.3 operating system is not simply a research product, but will be on the market in two years time providing support for multiple personalities, real-time, B3 security and clustering of distributed systems.
That again leaves two contenders for the microkernel operating systems business — OSF's Mach-based work and USL's technology from its Paris-based partner Chorus Systemes SA.
While Chorus is signing up some impressive allies, including the Santa Cruz Operation, Tandem, ICL and Inmos, Carnegie-Mellon's Mach has found favour with the US defense industry.
Roel Pieper says there's room for both efforts, with USL more interested in the fault-tolerance and distributed computing aspects of microkernels rather than OSF's emphasis on multiple personalities, especially attractive to OSF partners with numerous ‘legacy’ operating systems.
But Pieper claims it won't matter which microkernel underlies Unix as long as all the standard interfaces are kept to.
UNIX IN THE ASCENDANCY: ASSEMBLY OF ICL DRS 6000s CAN START AT LAST IN TATARSTAN…
Some 18 months after the announcement that it had formally established a manufacturing joint venture in the autonomous republic of Tatarstan, ICL Plc is finally about to start shipping components to its joint venture ICL-KMECS in Kazan.
In 1991 the partners had agreed on a trading plan that stated ICL would be paid using a raw materials barter arrangement for its components.
However the Tatarstan authorities then failed to grant the necessary licences.
Asked how the impasse was overcome a spokesman for ICL Moscow says: ‘It was by us taking a firm line.
They realised we were not going to budge until the plan was implemented.
ICL-KMECS will assemble ICL's DRS 6000 Unix systems.
The first machines are now likely to be shipped in the first quarter of 1993.
The training of six Russian managers in Ashton-Under-Lyne, Lancashire can now also start.
PRICE OF SPARCSTATIONS TUMBLES FOR RUSSIAN CUSTOMERS
Next month the Russian research Institute of Information Technologies and the firm ArgusSoft are due to open an Open Systems training centre equipped with Sun Microsystems Inc Sparcstations.
The centre will have a network of 12 computers.
For the Russian Ministry of Science this represents a large investment.
The centre will provide free training for Ministry staff and some other state organisations.
With the movement of responsibility for the Russian market from the UK to its Mountain View headquarters in California Sun has made a considerable drive in the scientific and academic markets in Russia.
At a recent presentation in Novosibirsk, Commonwealth of Independent States regional manager, Robert Hall, said Russian customers will be given slight market discounts on top of the 20% to 40% educational discounts the company already offers.
This is different from Sun's previous strategy which basically charged Russian customers European list prices plus high shipment costs.
Hall said that organisations in Novosibirsk will now be able to buy Sun IPC workstations for as little as $3,000.
PARSYTEC REPORTS PROGRESS ON ZEUS EUROPEAN PROJECT
Aachen, Germany-based massively parallel computer manufacturer Parsytec GmbH and the European Community are co-funding a European-based project, Zeus, aimed at boosting European industrial performance through the application of massively parallel processing.
The German, Dutch and Greek participants, which joined the project in July, all have freshly installed T805 Transputer-based GigaCube computer systems from Parsytec.
Each is to pursue its own individual goals, but will also ‘loosely’ collaborate on research, mainly into ‘Grand Challenge’technical and scientific supercomputing applications.
The two largest installations are in the Paderborn Centre for Parallel Computing and the Mathematical Institute of the University of Cologne in Germany.
Both have 1,024-node Parsytec machines, featuring 16 64-processor Gigacubes.
The Paderborn system is to concentrate on algorithmic research, mainly for fluid dynamics and financial forecasting.
Cologne University, which acts as a supercomputing centre for industries in its area, is to concentrate also on business economics, global economic models, currency exchange trends and fluid mechanics.
Since the university has close links with DLR, the German Space Research Society, it is an ideal partner too for the German aerospace industry.
The University of Athens and University of Amsterdam both have entry-level 512-node — or eight-Gigacube Parsytec computers.
The Greek machine is to be used primarily for image processing, parallel databases and satellite communications.
The University of Amsterdam is to share fluid dynamics research expertise with the Shell Oil Co among others.
Together the participants form a supercomputing research base similar to government funded models in the US.
The first Zeus report based on research completed this summer into the parallelisation of physics applications, is to be published next year.
It is hoped that the initiative will continue to snowball, attracting new participants from European supercomputer manufacturers and sponsorship from wider industry into research projects.
Where possible, applications created under the project will be marketed, mainly in Europe — but also in niche US and Japanese markets — to help generate cash.
Well over £1m has gone into the project so far but exact figures are not available.
UNISQL READY WITH RELATIONAL/OBJECT DATABASE
This week Austin, Texas-based UniSQL Inc is supposed to come up with the world's first heterogeneous database management system supporting both relational and object-oriented databases.
The UniSQL/M Multidatabase System, which the company first talked about back at UniForum in January and was due earlier this year (UX No 368), reportedly lets Unix users unify the schemas of various distributed multi-vendor databases into a single homogeneous database schema accessible through SQL/M's object-oriented query language.
Users can represent relational data as standard relational tables which are fully accessible via SQL or as object-oriented classes with full support for methods, composition, inheritance, encapsulation and polymorphism.
A key feature is the system's automatic two-phase commit support for distributed transactions spanning multiple heterogeneous databases that support two-phase commit.
SQL/M is integrated with the company's other products, the UniSQL/X DBMS and the UniSQL/4GE application development environment tools for a complete application-enabling platform.
SQL/M is available for beta testing on Sparc machines with Ingres 6.4 and UniSQL/X DBMS 1.2.
When generally available in January, it should support IBM's RS/6000.
Oracle, Sybase and DB2 implementations should follow.
Future versions will support Informix, IMS from IBM and RMS from DEC.
A single-user licence begins at $4,000 including education.
Meanwhile, the company expects to flesh out its next-generation product offerings with UniSQL/4GE ObjectMaster, an object-oriented rapid application development and prototyping tool that allows users to develop customised reusable GUI-based multimedia-enabled applications.
It is available for early testing on Sparc machines and should become generally available in April supporting RS/6000s as well.
ObjectMaster provides inherent support for various concurrency control protocols, data drill-down algorithms, multimedia data access, sophisticated inter-window message passing and integration with existing non-UniSQL tools, applications and network services.
It includes both an ObjectMaster Editor for non-programmers to build graphical apps and an ObjectMaster Application Folder that acts as a central repository for application modules that can be reused, recombined or extended to build additional application prototypes and ultimately components in production applications.
A single-user licence begins at $1,800.
UniSQL is funded through 1994 via an R&D agreement with the $2bn-a-year systems integrator NTT Data Communications Systems Corporation.
+1 512 343–7297
LEGATO PROMISES NETWORKER CROSS SYSTEM BACK-UP FOR UNIXWARE
Palo Alto-based Legato Systems Inc intends making its Motif-based cross-system back-up and recovery software, Legato Networker, available for UnixWare at around year-end.
It has just come out with Networker for 80386 machines supporting Santa Cruz Unix and MS-DOS and will include UnixWare in the same ClientPak II later.
Networker will back up UnixWare to either NetWare or Unix servers such as RS/6000s or Sparc boxes via TCP/IP.
Back-up media will be interchangeable between the Networker back-up server for NetWare and the one for Unix.
ClientPak II lists for $1,500.
Networker server software will be sold separately, and starts at $2,000.
DELL UNLEASHES 80486 BLITZ WITH 18 CHEAPER MACHINES
Hoping to deflect attention from its currency-dealing embarrassments, Dell Computer Corp, Austin, Texas, last week added 18 new 80486-based personal computers for immediate shipment.
The new systems replace Dell's existing line of 80486 desktops and are priced lower than their predecessors while offering improved performance and such features as integrated Local Bus video, ability to be upgraded to Intel Corp's Pentium chip, and embedded system diagnostics.
There are models using the 25MHz and 33MHz 80486SX, 33MHz and 50MHz 80486 and 50MHz and 66MHz 80486DX2.
The systems are separated into four product families — 486/L, five low-profile AT bus boxes at from $1,200, 486/M, five mid-size AT bus systems starting at $1,450, 486/ME, a mid-size group of five EISA bus machines starting at $1,750, and 486/T, a new class of three AT bus floor-standing systems, beginning with a 33MHz 80486 system at from $1,950.
Prices include 4Mb CPU, 80Mb disk and one floppy.
A variety of Dell monitors are available, at from $250 for a VGA colour display.
PICK SYSTEMS SETS OUT TO CONQUER RUSSIA, SEEKS TO HIRE ANOTHER 70 PROGRAMMERS BY YEAR-END
Pick Systems Inc, Irvine, California is making a serious drive into the Russian market, says Constantin Stovolosov, head of the European office of Pick Systems in Moscow.
Pick products are in use at the Russia Ministry on Finance, and the former foreign trade  monopolist Stanko import and Traktoreksport.
The total number of installations in the Russian Federation is put at 200.
Pick Systems plans to start distribution of Pick Hits electronic catalogue of software usable in Pick environment.
At present Pick Europe has the use of about 32 Russian programmers engaged in development of Pick products.
The plan is to increase the number to 100 by the end of the year.
HEWLETT, INTEL, NCR, 16 OTHERS TEAM ON CONSORTIUM TO IMPROVE CUSTOMER SUPPORT
The industry threatens to collapse under the weight of industry bodies and lobbies, yet still they keep being born.
Latest, announced from up in Redmond, Washington, brings together 19 computer industry and high technology companies claiming aggregate annual revenues exceeding $110,000m in the Customer Support Consortium.
The group represents a wide cross section of the industry from Hewlett-Packard Co to Intel Corp, NCR Corp to US West Inc, and its mission is to develop an enterprise-wide product knowledge management system to help resolve product-related problems suffered by customers.
The aim is a dramatic improvement in customer satisfaction levels and a significant lowering of the cost per customer contact.
The effort will be conducted by the support organisations of the member companies and will be managed by Symbologic Corp, based in Redmond, which claims expertise in customer-support technology.
The product knowledge management system now under development includes software tools and applications to automate acquisition, management and use of large and complex bodies of product knowledge.
The system will use intelligent retrieval technologies to increase the speed, ease and accuracy of answering customer support calls.
It will be conceived as an enterprise-wide system because customer support organisations need to share product knowledge with sales and engineering organisations, and will be designed to enable members to distribute product knowledge to corporate help desks, system integrators, value-added resellers and strategic business partners; it will be an open, portable client-server system.
Results will be released to the members throughout next year.
Founder members not already mentioned are 3M Co, Active Voice Corp, Advanced Technology Laboratories Inc, Banyan Systems Inc, BBN Software Products Inc, ComputerLand Corp, Compuware Inc, Digital Communications Associates Inc, Dun & Bradstreet Software Inc, Maxtor Corp, Santa Cruz Operation Inc, Silicon Graphics Inc, Sybase Inc and something called WSIPC.
SOFTWARE PARTNERS RUNS TO UNIX
Software Partners/32 Inc which has laboured long in the DEC vineyards is branching out into Unix for the first time.
The nine-year-old Topsfield, Massachusetts company is extending its Tapesys VAX/VMS tape management system to Unix clients via ThruNet, an automated tape backup and restore facility.
ThruNet, still in beta, will allow Sparc and Ultrix clients to backup and restore their files to a VAX storage device using Unix commands.
SP/32 anticipates adding AIX and HP clients and by the middle of next year will come up with a Unix server model for Sun, IBM, HP, Ultrix and perhaps Alpha OSF/1.
The company touts the product as providing Unix systems with the sophistication of VMS by recognizing multi-file backups.
ThruNet supports VAX servers running TCPware or MultiNet TCP/IP.
Prices range from $2,500 to $12,500 depending on configuration.
+1 508 887–6409
MINIGRAMS
UK, London-based Schroder Ventures' latest investment report says the firm has some $250m venture capital funding available for IT companies: +44 71 632 1000 for a copy.
Univel Inc was down taking pictures for its scrapbook of the first editions of UnixWare coming off the production line last week.
First ships went out Friday December 4, four days later than last forecast but who's counting.
It says its got 43 distributors worldwide and 150 major hardware and software vendors shipping or announcing availability of their products for UnixWare.
Canadian firm Elegant Communications Inc's software for monitoring reliability and security of networked Unix machines, XRSA, which can be used in conjunction with network managers such as IBM's AIX NetView or Hewlett-Packard Co's OpenView, is now available in the UK from Winchester, Hampshire-based Avington Systems Ltd. +44 962 779 894.
Hewlett-Packard Co has won a ‘several hundred million dollar’ piece of action with PRC Systems Inc, prime contractor for the $2.5bn AFCAC 300 US defence contract: HP is to supply up to 5,200 Unix workstations to PRC over the next five years.
Excalibur Technologies Corp, developer of the PixTex/EFS document image management and control system which has been well received in the US, launched a UK subsidiary last month: Excalibur Technologies International Ltd, based in Windsor, Berkshire is the first of several operations the company plans for Europe.
The price wars that have left them bleeding and dying in the personal computer field this year are going to spread to the margin-rich personal computer server, Computer Reseller News predicts.
Prices on RISC- and Intel-based servers are expected to fall 20% to 25% early next year, it says, as vendors respond to the low-priced entries of the IBM Server 85 XP486 and the trend-setting Compaq Computer Corp ProSignia.
Even high-end servers won't be safe, it claims.
As a result, however, server sales, flat from 1991 to 1992, could increase 19%.
The problem in today's computer industry is that a company needs to be not just adequately well run but superbly well run to turn in acceptable numbers: Hewlett-Packard Co, now doing over $16,000m of business has 20,000 fewer employees than Digital Equipment Corp, which is still stuck at around $14,500m.
Intel Corp is developing its own 100MHz 80486 chip to rival IBM Corp's 486SLC offering, shown at Comdex a couple of weeks ago: the chip is called P24C, and should be available towards the end of next year, unless Advanced Micro Devices Inc manages to escape Intel's protracted law suit.
If that happens, Advanced Micro will be releasing its own version, and Intel will be under pressure to speed its schedule up.
UK firm VisionWare Ltd, Leeds, is enhancing XVision, its X-Windows-under-Microsoft Windows software, to support Novell Inc NetWare, thereby allowing Univel Inc UnixWare application servers to integrate with NetWare-based personal  computer networks.
+44 532 788858.
Oracle UK Ltd has won a 16-year contract with the British Army valued at £4m which will standardise all of the Army's IT projects around the Oracle database.
Intel Corp says it expects to spend about $2,500m on capital expenditures and research and development in 1993, an increase of 25% on estimated 1992 spending of about $2m, saying that the expenditures, unusually high as a percentage of sales even for a high technology company, are needed to address the increasing complexity of microprocessors and the high cost of chip plants; the company has started paying a dividend, making its shares attractive to a wider range of institutions, and the expectation is that it will tap the market for new funds.
Digital Equipment Corp has named Mark Brown to head its Cambridge Research Lab in Massachusetts.
He had been senior consultant engineer at the company's System Research Center in Palo Alto, California.
The Lab is working on futures in parallel processing, distributed data-sharing systems, transaction processing, graphics, multimedia and visualisation.
Jeff Mason is now assistant general manager of marketing inside IBM Corp's brand new Client/Server Group (UX No 413).
His role as director of Advanced Workstations and AIX Systems has been filled by Tom Jarosh, formerly vice president in the company's General Sector Division.
NEC Corp has started shipping a 95-MIPS deskside workstation, the EWS4800/380, built around a Mips Technologies Inc R4000SC processor claiming it outperforms its predecessor 140%.
It comes with a maximum 64Mb internal and 29.5GB storage.
Sun Microsystems Inc planet SunConnect is moving its headquarters to Grenoble in France to create an international platform for its network business.
General manager Denis Yaro, a newly minted Sun vice president, will move there by mid ‘93.
The planet had a technical operation in Grenoble even before Sun spun it out.
Now it is moving its sales and marketing centre there.
It will maintain its presence in the US.
Much of its strength rests with the third-parties alliances it has created and wants to expand on.
Mountain View, California-based, Network Computing Devices Inc PC-X Division has come up with a $200 software package that lets a personal computer at home or in the field access applications on remote Unix- or VMS-based host computers.
PC-Xremote Edition turns a personal computer into an X Window System server so that the user not connected to a LAN can access hosts supporting X via a modem or RS-232 serial connection.
Available immediately for DOS and Windows PCs, it was created by removing standard LAN driver support from NCD's PC-Xview X servers and integrating the company's XRemote protocol stack instead.
NCD's going after volume with the aggressive pricing.
Having ported Advanced Pick 5.2 on to SVR4-for-Intel (UX No 413), PickTel Corporation is now touting the Pick database on DECSystem 5000s under Ultrix at $14,400 for a 32-user system.
Availability is immediate.
There's a theory being nurtured in certain quarters that Microsoft Corp Windows NT is less a strategic product than it is a dike against Unix and that Microsoft is trying to freeze the marketplace long enough to bring on Cairo, the Taligent Inc/Sun Microsystems Inc Project Distributed Objects Everywhere-like object-oriented environment it's working on.
Others say no, that's impossible.
Cairo is too far away to be anything more than just a stake in the ground against IBM/Apple Computer Inc while the hoopla surrounding Windows For Workgroups is meant to distract attention away from an increasingly late NT.
Folks are now saying the best case for a NT rollout is May/June, more likely June, and other ISV types are shaking their heads and betting its September.
How strategic is NT anyway after it moves NT stuff like memory management and multitasking into Windows 4.0 and DOS 7?
Oldtimers will remember the famous panel from the US comic strip Pogo that had one of the cartoon's forest creatures utter the immortal words, ‘We have seen the enemy and he is us.’
In the face of the fight against Microsoft Corp (not to speak of the old Unix Wars) we leave you this week with the observation that this is more true of the Unix industry than not.