

UNIX TO BECOME A NOVELL TRADEMARK AS UNIX SYSTEM LABS GOES IN $320m STOCK SWAP
After months oon and half-hearted denials Novell Inc last week finally made the move to acquire all of Unix System Laboratories Inc from AT&T Co and its eleven other stockholders.
On Sunday December 20th at 10pm it signed a letter of intent to make the acquisition in a stock swap valued at roughly $320m for the 95% of USL it does not yet control.
The sum is about four times USL's current revenues.
The whole of USL was valued at $325m eighteen months ago when AT&T sold off the first 21.7%.
Novell expects to close the deal in the first quarter of 1993.
It has the blessings of USL's board, which includes representatives from Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA, Fujitsu Ltd, and MIT, but the merger must still be approved by USL's other stockholders like Sun Microsystems Inc as well as the appropriate regulatory agencies.
The three companies have been hammering out their understanding over the last few weeks: AT&T and USL have sought and reportedly received personal assurances from Novell chief Ray Noorda of the continued independence of Unix and the observation of the proprieties of open systems, neutrality and level playing fields.
These terms must now be translated into a definitive agreement and a modus operandi that will be worked out on a daily basis between the two companies.
USL will be run as a free-standing wholly-owned Novell subsidiary.
Its current relationships with its OEMs and organisations such as the Open Software Foundation, Unix International and X/Open will be left intact as will its early access programmes.
Its product line, including the Tuxedo transaction processing monitor, will be separate from Novell's.
However, Novell, which claimed it was acting on the urgings of its customers, is expected to press the integration and interoperability of NetWare and Unix, the development of common management framework and common application framework ABIs to put at the service of third-party software developers and mission-critical accounts intent on rightsizing and employing distributed solutions.
NetWare will be played as the network services provider and Unix as the application server.
The desktop will be anybody's game.
Novell is promising tighter integration with MS-DOS, Windows, OS/2, Apple Mac and Unix clients.
Bad blood
On the day the merger was announced, USL president Roel Pieper, who will report to Noorda, claimed a positive reaction to the move from AT&T's old enemies Hewlett-Packard Co and IBM who always fretted over AT&T's control, its hardware biases and its association with the bad blood that drove the industry apart.
He told Unigram.X that the Novell takeover gives these companies ‘a more logical and fundamental opportunity to line up more,’ hinting that it may foster ‘things the market hasn't seen yet.’
It is believed the alignment of Novell behind Unix will make it more difficult for Microsoft Corp to run roughshod over the industry.
Novell anticipates lending USL marketing, educational, services and infrastructure help that will accelerate the adoption of Unix.
Sun Microsystems and its own software facility, SunSoft Inc, remain the merger's wild cards.
Pieper tried and failed to get hold of the outfits to brief them and to gauge their reaction.
Sun's warm and cuddly alliance with AT&T, the original cause of the bloody Unix wars, has now turned almost 180 degrees with Sun looking increasing out in the cold.
AT&T said it should realise a gain in excess of $100m in net income and will hold 3% of Novell's stock.
It expects it to increase in value.
Novell is handling the transaction as a purchase rather than a pooling of interests and will take a one-time write-off of up to $250m the quarter the deal closes.
It will amortize the rest of the next five to fifteen years.
The only affect on the merger plan disgruntled stockholders, if there are any, could have is apparently to demand cash.
TRADE COMMISSION MOVES ‘LOOK GRIM FOR MICROSOFT’
The Federal Trade Commission has completed its 30-month investigation into the business practices at Microsoft Corp and has decided that the company has engaged in anticompetitive behaviour, according to the December 28 issue of BusinessWeek.
It says the investigators are preparing a wide range of recommendations on how to proceed against Microsoft — everything from splitting the company into pieces, to erecting a Chinese Wall between divisions, to altering the way its software is sold to computer manufacturers.
If the commissioners vote to proceed against Microsoft, they may move quickly, the magazine says.
Agency staffers want the Commission to seek a Federal court injunction barring Microsoft from what they consider abusive practices.
Some Wall Street analysts responded in rage to the report, Reuter reports: ‘Even to have a recommendation of splitting up the company is ridiculous,’ says Piper Jaffray analyst David Rothschild.
LARRY MICHELS RESIGNS FROM SANTA CRUZ
Unix pioneer Larry Michels, president, chairman, chief executive and co-founder of The Santa Cruz Operation Inc, has resigned in the wake of a civil suit filed by three former executive secretaries charging him with sexual harassment (UX No 415, 416).
Jim Harris, a member of the SCO board of directors since 1988, has been named president and CEO in his place.
Michels, who is now no longer even on the SCO board, has reportedly retained his own lawyer to fight the suit, determined to keep SCO's involvement to a minimum.
On advise of counsel, the company officially declined to comment on the allegations.
Michels, in a statement of his own made last week, maintained his innocence and termed the allegations ‘false and unfair’ as well as the source of much ‘pain and anguish.’
The internal announcement of the resignation circulated December 21 also spoke of his ‘leave of absence’ from the company but Harris' appointment is believed to be permanent.
Harris, 49, who was appointed by the board to assess the charges on December 10, retired from Microsoft Corp in 1987.
He had been vice president and general manager of OEM Division there for five years.
Previously he had been with Intel Corp and Burroughs.
Harris, who has been living in Minnesota and will eventually have to relocate, is to chair SCO's executive committee, which includes vice presidents Doug Michels, Sam Spadafora, Dan Steimle and Lars Turndal.
This change in the SCO hierarchy comes at a highly interesting time.
The company has been preparing to go public, a process the suit could have adversely affected, while at the same time it was believed to be object of some takeover desires by Unix System Laboratories (UX No 396).
Now that Novell has finally made its move with respect to USL — see opposite — SCO could look doubly attractive.
Even SCO insiders are speculating on the possibility that Novell could pick up where USL left off or that Microsoft Corp, which already owns a minority piece of SCO, could come back for more.
A company such as IBM Corp, currently down on its luck, might nibble at the bait or that Sun Microsystems Inc, feeling perhaps increasingly isolated, might seek new alignments.
1993 PREVIEW
Tim Palmer
JANUARY.
Revealing losses matching the company's (shrunken) turnover in Germany, IBM chairman John Akers says he sees real signs of recovery.
In his final act as President, George Bush declares trade war on Japan over chip imports, and warns the Japanese to remember Pearl Harbor.
IBM is selling mainframes at 37% of list.
French farmers are in revolt over imported British agricultural software.
Unisys figures show that the company is starting to grow again.
Germany refuses to cut interest rates.
The Danish Krone falls out of the Exchange Rate Mechanism.
The Nikkei falls below 16,000.
FEBRUARY.
Steve Jobs says NeXTStep 486 will ship by the end of the year.
IBM is selling mainframes at 33% of list.
Acer Group of Taiwan appoints Ken Olsen chief executive.
Sun Microsystems turns SunSoft into a holding company with nine subsidiaries.
Olivetti files bankruptcy papers; Italian government can't help: it's bankrupt too.
Germany raises interest rates as inflation hits 5%.
Al Gore falls asleep as he makes maiden speech as Vice-President; no-one notices — they're all asleep too.
The Irish punt falls out of the Exchange Rate Mechanism.
The Nikkei falls to 15,000.
MARCH.
Olivetti is rescued by the Vatican and renamed Holivetti.
The Pope declines the post of Papa and chief executive.
Compaq says Prolinea backlog is two months.
IBM is selling mainframes at 29% of list.
Bob Djurdjevic bones up on pork belly futures.
Intel insists that there are no overheating problems with Pentium, delays ships to May.
The Italian government describes Denmark's presidency of the European Community as the worst since Britain's.
Germany refuses to cut interest rates.
Britain says it remains fully committed to rejoining the Exchange Rate Mechanism when the time is right.
Norman Lamont delivers his budget and tells the House he wants to spend more time with his family.
The Nikkei falls below 14,000.
APRIL.
Losses at Amdahl exacerbate a major cash crisis at Fujitsu, which rushes forward the flotation of ICL.
Sun forms SunDries for computer supplies and SunTruss for support.
Unisys starts paying dividends again.
IBM is selling mainframes at 23% of list.
Nazi thugs burn down Sony's Berlin premises: Chancellor Kohl wins big cheers when he says the perpetrators are just high-spirited hooligans, reminds listeners that German-Japanese friendship goes back more than 50 years.
French farmers are revolting again.
Norman Lamont's family says it doesn't want to spend more time with him.
Germany refuses to cut interest rates.
The French franc falls out of the Exchange Rate Mechanism.
The Nikkei dips to 13,000.
MAY.
Fujitsu floats 25% of ICL at 225 pence a share.
ICL shares soar to 465 pence in first week of trading.
The factory testing Intel's Pentium burns down.
Intel delays ships until October.
The German government persuades Siemens to take over IBM Deutschland after it reports losses that exceed turnover.
IBM is selling mainframes at 17% of list.
IBM System User relaunches as Microsoft User.
Italian government falls as it is revealed that Vatican money to rescue Olivetti came from the Mafia; Cosa Nostra says ‘we were just doing Our Thing’.
John Major, unable to find anyone willing to succeed Lamont, reminds the House that he is First Lord of the Treasury and takes the job himself.
Germany raises interest rates as inflation reaches 7%.
The Nikkei falls below 12,000.
JUNE.
Apple merges with Motorola, buys all rights to the PowerPC from IBM.
Norman Lamont joins IBM as chief financial officer, says he sees glimmers of green among the brown shoots of economic winter.
IBM is selling mainframes at 13% of list.
Advanced Micro Devices starts shipping Am586 in 100MHz, 150MHz and 200MHz versions.
The German budget deficit soars as Chancellor Kohl bribes Hitachi and Toshiba to close their German operations and transfer them to Northern Ireland; a relieved Toshiba says ‘IRA terrorists are rank amateurs compared with Nazi thugs’.
French farmers are still revolting.
The Nikkei rises to 12,000.
JULY.
Full year losses are bigger at DEC as Alpha gets off to slow start.
First half losses at Groupe Bull cause the company to plead with the French government to take it over.
Government points out that it already owns it.
Francis Lorentz makes Paris Metro pay by replacing all personnel with computers.
ICL shares soar to 720 pence.
French farmers are on vacation.
The Dutch guilder falls out of the Exchange Rate Mechanism.
IBM is selling mainframes at 7% of list.
The Nikkei dips below 12,000.
AUGUST.
Cash crisis deepens at Fujitsu: it tries and fails to sell Amdahl to Electronic Data Systems.
General Motors tries and succeeds in selling Electronic Data Systems to AT&T.
After disappointing year-end figures, Sun consolidates all subsidiaries back into parent, renamed SunSet.
NeXTstep 486 is renamed NeXT step Pentium.
Intel promises Pentium by year-end.
Acer under Olsen buys DEC.
IBM mainframes go for 3% of list.
The French government engineers a merger between Bull and the Paris Metro, where Francis Lorentz is in charge.
French farmers drive cattle through the tunnels of the high-speed RER in protest.
Germany refuses to cut interest rates.
The Belgian franc is forced out of the Exchange Rate Mechanism.
The Nikkei plunges below 11,000.
SEPTEMBER.
ICL shares hit £10.
Fujitsu sells another 30% to ease its cash crisis.
Compaq says Prolinea backlog is six months.
IBM bundles a mainframe with every RS/6000 it sells.
French farmers are even more revolting.
Germany refuses to cut interest rates.
The mark stands firm in the Exchange Rate Mechanism.
Siemens abandons computers, sells user base to Unisys for $1.
The Nikkei dips to 10,000.
OCTOBER.
ICL takes advantage of its highly-rated paper to buy Dell; Michael Dell becomes chief operating officer.
Apple-Motorola buys Acer.
Sculley fires Olsen, kills Alpha.
Britain says it remains fully committed to rejoining the Exchange Rate Mechanism when the time is right.
IBM third quarter losses exceed the gross domestic product of California as warehouses fill up with unsold RS/6000s.
An emergency board meeting is called for November 28.
Intel promises Pentium by mid 1994.
The Nikkei hits 9,000.
NOVEMBER.
ICL buys Compaq.
Prolinea backlog shrinks to one week.
IBM's emergency board meeting ousts the entire management, but Thanksgiving by IBM employees is short-lived as it appoints W Michael Blumenthal to succeed John Akers.
The UK government just survives vote of confidence by one vote as opposition leader John Smith votes with Tories saying ‘You got yourselves into this mess, I'm not getting you out of it.’
Germany cuts interest rates as inflation falls to 11%.
The Deutschmark falls out of the Exchange Rate Mechanism.
Luxembourg says it remains fully committed to keeping its currency within the ERM.
Jacques Delors reminds Luxembourg that it doesn't have a currency.
The Nikkei falls below 7,000.
DECEMBER.
Hailing the historic opportunities for synergy and manufacturing efficiencies, IBM under Blumenthal makes a highly leveraged hostile bid for General Motors with money borrowed from an unidentified Arab country.
GM shareholders take the money and run.
ICL buys Fujitsu, sells mainframe side on to AT&T's Electronic Data Systems.
Hitachi asks AT&T to take its mainframe business as well.
Hewlett-Packard buys the rest of Hitachi's computer business.
Intel cancels Pentium, promises Sextium in early 1995.
NeXTStep 486 becomes NeXTstep Septium.
President Clinton wants to spend more time with Gennifer Flowers.
France unilaterally abrogates the Maastricht Treaty when President Mitterrand realises that the Common Defence Policy requires conscription of French farmers.
The UK ratifies the Maastricht Treaty.
Our sister paper, Computergram International is summoned to appear before the California Committee on Politically Correct Conduct.
The Nikkei hits a new high of 55,500.
Happy New Year.
BULL CHIEF BERNARD PACHE SAYS THAT MORE JOB CUTS ARE INEVITABLE
Compagnie des Machines Bull SA's managing director, Bernard Pache, said in a committee meeting between labour and management last week that without doubt he would have to cut employee levels further.
According to Les Echos, union officials said that Pache would give no indication of the size or timing of staff losses.
Management indicated, however, that manufacturing sites in France, heavily pruned in previous restructuring, will be spared.
Indeed the plant at Angers is expected to recover notably in the coming year, when it begins to manufacture GCOS 8 mainframe systems currently manufactured in the US.
Such news indicates Bull's persisting difficulties.
In the first half, the group registered an operating loss of $158.7m and a net loss of $312m, on revenues down 9.6% at $2,600m.
The newspaper Liberation believes that Bull's operating loss for the full year could hit $185m, with net losses exceeding $370m.
Bull management refused to comment.
Bull has confirmed its intention to re-group several development teams within Bull Systems Products, ‘which are working on common programmes but in different establishments.’
It also intends to close its Ave site ‘for general cost-cutting reasons’ as well as Gambetta in Paris's 20th arrondissement.
This ‘would enable us to save over $15m and would add to the decision to transfer group headquarters to Bull's tower at La Defense, generating supplementary savings of $7.5m a year.’
ENTERPRISE BRINGS IN CROSS ACTION SYSTEM FOR PROVIDING SQL ACCESS TO NON-RELATIONAL DATABASES
Despite Hewlett-Packard Co's Image/SQL interface announcement (UX No 416), Wokingham, Berkshire-based consultancy firm Enterprise Computer Services Ltd is to distribute what it says is the world's first development environment for providing transparent SQL access to disparate non-relational databases.
The system was designed for IBM back in 1989–90 by Santa Clara, California-based Cross Action Inc.
It acts as an interface between client-server software, providing access to DB2, Focus, Model 204, Oracle VSAM and IMS databases.
Other systems are being added to the list — precise details are not available — and will be available in the first quarter of next year.
Cross Action intends eventually to build support for all widely used databases into its eponymous system.
The system is based around IBM's Systems Application Architecture SQL language with DB2 extensions and provides access to information stored under IBM's VM and MVS systems and Digital Equipment Corp's VAX/VMS.
It is compatible with IBM's AIX Unix system and so can run on an RS/6000, but Cross Action has yet to add support for DEC's Ultrix.
It comprises a number of modules, designed for each specific system, which reside on all the hosts and satellite machines the user wishes to connect.
Communication is via TCP/IP and LU6.2 protocols.
As Cross Action is compatible with DB2 SQL and Cobol commands, Enterprise says developers will need little or no extra training to use it.
Applications can be developed on the user's preferred system and data will be accessible regardless of where it resides.
Enterprise says the system is ideal for large companies wishing to organise their data management systems into a more coherent whole while preserving their current hardware and application investments.
Cost depends on application, but it ranges, on average, from around £100,000 to £500,000.
The system is available now in the UK, and follows in the first quarter next year in Germany, through Enterprise.
CYPRESS: 400 TO GO AS IT CLOSES SAN JOSE WAFER FAB
Cypress Semiconductor Corp, San Jose is having to restructure to improve its manufacturing cost-effectiveness, at the cost of an other 400 US jobs.
It says that based on the cost reduction it has achieved in transferring 75% of assembly and test to Bangkok, Thailand, it would transfer the rest of its production to Bangkok over the next six months, enabling further cost reductions and facility consolidations at its San Jose site.
All wafer fabrication at San Jose will transfer to the Minneapolis plant, leaving it with just two fabs, the other being in Texas.
Research and process development will remain in a scaled-down San Jose facility.
It is also to pay Advanced Micro Devices Inc $4.25m to settle a four-year suit.
It also gets licences to 22V10-type programmable logic devices and Am9116 16-bit bit-slices.
USL AND NOVELL: SUN REACTION
Sun Microsystems Inc chief, Scott McNealy, told Unigram.X that he is delighted with the amount of ‘advertising’ and sense of energy and power the Novell Inc/Unix System Labs merger will create for Unix SVR4.
He is unsure of the ‘philosophical’ position that Novell will take and figures it could be a year before the industry knows for sure.
On the other hand, he has a great deal of confidence in Noorda's intellectual prowess and innate capitalism to deliver for Sun what Sun needs from USL as USL's ‘largest customer’: low  royalties , available source, open interfaces, technological innovation and resolution of any channel conflict with SunSoft.
…
WINDOWS NT ON SPARC ‘IS OK IF MICROSOFT WANTS TO PORT IT’
Surprisingly, perhaps, it is technology innovation that seems to be the burr under McNealy's saddle.
He claims the good exciting source code is coming these days from Hewlett-Packard Co, Open Software Foundation and his own SunSoft Inc — not USL.
As for breaking away, he says that cannot happen — there is no place to break way to.
He figures in the future, the world's management information system departments are going to juggle two environments, Microsoft Corp Windows NT and Unix and that the real loser is all of this is IBM's OS/2.
McNealy says he is perfectly willing for NT to go on the Sparc RISC if Microsoft wants to port it.
He is willing to throw in a couple of technical support people to explain to Bill Gates how Sparc works, and he will even sell naked hardware to an OEM like Dell Computer Corp or Electronic Design Systems.
He is just not willing to put it in his price book.
He says he is equally willing to do the same for any other operating system.
IBM: 30% KICKER, EIGHT-WAY 9021MP, DB2 BOOST FOR FEBRUARY
Despite the all the cutbacks that so clearly indicate that IBM Corp now acknowledges that the mainframe cannot remain a dominant part of its business for much longer, the company does have new models up its sleeve for early next year — February is thought likely, our US associate Technology News of America hears.
The blitz will be headlined by the long-awaited eight-way system and a 25% to 30% performance boost for the uni-processor 9021, which is expected to tail off somewhat as more processors are added and coupling overheads multiply.
There will also be some kind of performance boost for DB2 — either more microcode or conceivably the dedicated DB2 processor that IBM has been speculating about for 10 years now.
The bad news is that the eight-way — and seven-way — machines will not be single-image systems but two fours — or a four and a three — tied together in an MP configuration, so that software has to be loaded on each side.
The mid-range 9121 uniprocessor is expected to be goosed even more — perhaps by 40%, further encouraging users to avoid calling in the plumbers — or to call them in to tear the chillers out.
There will also be a slugged version — or a different, lower power 9021 CPU.
Something on the 9221s — the 9730 successors, is also likely, but they have been such poor sellers that there is little interest.
As for pricing, IBM will try to limit discounts on list prices but the market will likely dictate that it remains ‘name-your-own-price’.
JAPANESE UNIX FAIR
Japan's annual Unix Fair was held a couple of weeks ago at a new venue in Yokohama, attracting 89 exhibitors and 37,000 visitors.
Staged in parallel was a less well-attended series of seminars.
Speakers included Walter De Backer of the European Commission, giving the European view of how to migrate to open systems.
Anita Byrnes reports on the pick of the exhibits on show.
KAWASAKI SHOWS CHARLES RIVER 80486-BASED UNOS BOX
Kawasaki Steel Corp displayed for the first time the Universe FR fault-resilient computer which it sells under a distribution arrangement with Charles River Data Systems, Framingham, Massachusetts.
The Universe II FR series is a new line, successor to the Motorola 68000 series first released in 1987, and uses the Intel Corp 80486 in fully duplexed CPUs, running the company's System V.4-based Unos operating system, with extra support of an event count function for real-time processing, the Veritas file system and incorporating the Informix relational database.
Kawatetsu is targeting factory automation system integrators for applications such as on-line data gathering and control, production control systems and large-capacity file servers from April.
SONY BIGNEWS IS BOOKSIZE STATION; SONY-TEK FOR X
Sony Corp has a new ‘booksize’ workstation it calls bigNEWS NWS-3150, and has priced it at $5,645, making it just possible for the individual user to afford.
With dimensions of 12.7″ by 14.3″ by 2.7″, 9 lbs 14 oz in weight, it is based on a 40MHz R3081 chip, which achieves performance of 37 MIPS, runs just one hour on the internal battery; the display puts up 1,024 by 768.
Sony Tektronix Inc, the 50–50 joint venture between Sony Corp and the Beaverton, Oregon company, displayed two series of X-terminals: two models in the XP11 series, the 19 inch XP12 mod el, and the 17″ XP18 256-colour X-terminal, both low-end, low-price displays aimed at business applications; and four models in the XP330 series, based on an R3000 RISC chip, designed as an X11.4 server in technical applications.
In Japan, a Tektronix representative admitted to some disadvantage from not having full Japanese language support — though kana-kanji keyboards and kanji fonts in Flash EPROM are supported.
It sees the Japanese market for X-terminals growing at 100% over the next few years.
FRAME TECHNOLOGY IN SHAPE TO CONQUER LOCAL DESKTOP
Frame Technology Inc, San Jose, also exhibited in support of its numerous partners in Japan, exhibiting a new version of Japanese Framemaker 2.1X desktop publishing, which has a number of new features to suit the Japanese environment, including tategaki and automatic numbering of kanji and numerics.
Framemaker al ready supports 7,000 JIS kanji characters, use of FEP for kana-kanji henkan and the Japanese version has compatibility with other versions of the software including French, German and Italian.
Frame Technology has a number of sales channels in Japan, including Rikei Corp on Sony NEWS, Oki Electric on the OkiStation, Sparcstations, Matsushita Computer with its PanaStation.
SRA Corp is Frame Technology's development partner for implementing on new Japanese environments.
Frame claims 38% of the world market for desktop publishing under Unix; nearest rival is Interleaf Inc, and in Japan expects to win at least the same market share, according to senior vice-president Pat House.
FUJITSU's SUBARU CATCHES THE EYE
Fujitsu Ltd showed the Subaru three-dimensional computer graphics system system launched in October.
It is based on an in-house ‘reconfigurable parallel processing architecture’.
The software switches between a traditional pipeline structure for high-speed shape and colour rendering and an information exchange structure for photorealism.
Fujitsu says the thing does 1m polygons per second with a single unit and up to 5m polygons per second with a fully-configured five-unit system, enabling generation of real-time animated graphics for TV and movies.
The system incorporates special hardware, a main processing unit consisting of two control processors and 32 computational processors arranged as a four by eight array; and is front-ended by a Fujitsu S series (Sun Microsystems) workstation running Solaris and supporting PHIGS and XGL for CAD/CAM applications and PEX for photorealism.
Fujitsu hopes to use the system to present computer-aided engineering output, atmospheric temperature, or molecular structures, exploring all such data as a virtual world in real time.
MARUBENI FLIES AXIL SPARCSYSTEMS
Marubeni Electronics Co showed Sparc workstations from Axil Inc of San Jose, a subsidiary of Hyundai Electronics Co.
The S210 is a 40MHz Sparcstation 2 clone, and the S310, a Sparcstation 10 clone; also shown was the Axil 230 based on the SuperSparc, incorporating a facsimile modem instead of the ISDN board.
Axil aims to price 20% below Sun and that it is targeting non-technical markets such as manufacturing, transport, financial services and health-care.
Marubeni was to make a definite decision on whether it would carry the Axil workstation products depending on reaction at the show.
SURI GIKEN SHOWS MENTAT's STREAMS
For the first time in Japan, Suri Giken Co displayed the Streams products from Mentat Inc, Los Angeles, with which Suri has just concluded a licensing agreement.
Streams is an independent implementation of the System V Streams product, and provides a common system for communications protocols.
In a non-System V.4 kernel, the original TLI, XTI and Socket lib are replaced by Mentat TLI, XTI and Socket lib, on which runs the Mentat MPS, and under than the Mentat TCP/IP module, XTP module and XNS module, and other protocols.
In the US Mentat numbers among its customers IBM, DEC, Hewlett-Packard, and the Open Software Foundation — Streams is incorporated in OSF/1.
For example, in HP-UX, use of Mentat MPS provides a common environment for use of protocols such as TCP/IP, AppleTalk and X25.
Xerox Corp is Mentat's largest customer, having commissioned and using the Mentat XNS module.
In Japan Suri Giken will be seeking to make OEM sales to workstation vendors and board vendors, particularly those manufacturers of embedded systems.
One customer has already been signed but that product is still under development and no announcement has been made as yet.
EUROPEAN ROUNDUP
Auspex Systems Inc has picked up distributors in Europe and the Pacific Rim including Storage Data Systems International in France, RacTech GmbH in Germany and Edata in Scandinavia.
Sydney, Australia's Dawn Technologies Pty has formed Auspex Systems Australia to market Auspex's servers there and in New Zealand expecting $3m in sales its first year.
UK-based Salford Software Ltd, Salford, is offering a Fortran compiler for Microsoft Corp Windows NT on Intel Corp platforms: FTN77 will be available by the middle of this month — the company claims it will compile 55,000 line of code per minute on a 33MHz 80486 box running developer versions of NT.
No prices given.
+44 61 745 5678.
Houston, Texas-based, Talus Corp and the Electronic & Computer Science Centre (ESCS) of the Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology have released the first Russian programme for NeXt Inc's NeXtStations.
The programme called, pVisor, is a 3D molecular visualisation system that allows users to display complex molecule formulae on screen.
pVisor, already available in French and German versions, will begin to ship Russian versions in October.
Further additions to Sybase Inc's European management include Gerhard Romen as area director for central Europe and Andre Andrieux who becomes are vice president for southern Europe: both report to Robert Albers, vice president of European operations.
Westmount Technology bv, Delft, Netherlands, will unveil release 3.0 of its Open I-CASE ISEE environment on January 15: +31 15 610815.
A Real-Time Systems ‘93 exhibition will be held at the Palais des Congres, Porte Maillot, Paris, France, between January 13 and 15 +1 331 4451 5500
O2 Technology SA, France, has signed Horsham, West Sussex-based, Tenet Systems Ltd to market its object-oriented database management system in the UK.
O2's database includes an object-based database manager, a fourth generation language, O2C, the object query language, O2SQL and interface toolkit O2Look. +44 403 711555
Unix SVR4.2-on-Intel house, Consensys Corp, Toronto, Canada, has signed a boatload of European distributors for its Consensys 4.2 implementation of Unix System Lab's desktop operating system: Garmhausen and Partner Belgium, Sterrebeek, Belgium; RCM Company AB, Karlstad, Sweden; Garmhausen & Partner GmbH, Bonn, Germany (for Croatia, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, Romania and Slovenia); Future Soft, Paris, France and Onsite Computer, Allershausen, Germany — the rest of Europe will be handled by Consensys’ European operation in Reading, UK. +44 734 833241.
DigiBoard has appointed Jon Williams as European marketing manager: Williams joins from Novell Inc, where he was a senior European product manager, and will be based at DigiBoard's German operation in Cologne.
+ 49 2203 81083.
In the UK, Unix consultancy, Paragon Project Services, Bracknell, Berkshire, has acquired the software support division of MS-DOS shop, LSI Computers, Dublin, Ireland.
Former Multisoft Systems Ltd co-founder, Chris Stevens, and sales director, Chris Sharp, now at UK software house Fourfront Ltd, Petersfield, Hampshire, have introduced a Copyright Accounting Suite in the UK which runs on Unix, MS-DOS and NetWare-based systems: prices for the nine modules go from £1,000 for an eight-user version.
SoftwareFabrik GmbH, Vienna, Austria, has come out with version 2.0 of Archiv+light+, its Windows-based document management system that also runs over Unix client/server networks: the system controls the scanning and archiving of paper documents on optical disks, and will retrieve, display and print documents in the system.
Ontario, Canada-based Hummingbird Communications Ltd has signed a licensing agreement for its HCL-eXceed PC X server with the Austrian Federal Ministry of Science and Research.
Supplied by MSB Mikrocomputer Software Handelsges mbh of Vienna, the X-Windows-for-PC package will be for use by all Austrian universities and polytechnics.
An organisation known as EAST, the Environment of Advanced Software Technology, has a team of 70 engineers ready to provide tools and support for software engineering and development projects: EAST operates out of the offices of SFGL, Boulogne, France, a subsidiary set up by Bull SA, CAP Sesa, Cisi, Sema Group and Steria back in 1985 to develop software engineering solutions for the whole software life-cycle.
EAST: +33 1 46 94 7700.
UK Unix office software supplier, Uniplex Ltd, based in Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire, has opened an Italian subsidiary, Uniplex Italia Srl, in Milan.
The company claims 110,000 users in Italy.
Danish consultancy, International Datasupport A/S, Copenhagen, is now offering analysis, design and development services for Unix-based commercial document publishing systems.
Data Sciences UK Ltd, Farnborough, Hampshire, has appointed Hospitality Perspectives Inc, Stamford, Connecticut, to distribute its Champs property management system in the US.
Meanwhile, the UK firm is to market Toronto, Canada-based SLM Software Inc's ESP-Link financial software in Europe.
+44 252 544321.
ICL plc hopes to achieve upwards of 8,000 transactions per second on its Cypress Semiconductor Corp HyperSparc-based the server by mid-1994 (UX No 411).
Ready Systems Inc, Sunnyvale, California and Norwegian firm Enea Data AB are to jointly develop and sell new real-time software for the embedded systems market: under the deal Enea will also integrate its OSE kernel into Ready's Spectra backplane.
Ready: 1 408 736 2600
The Ukraine's first ‘modern’ computer-integrated manufacturing centre, using a broad range of equipment from IBM Corp, has been inaugurated in Kiev at the Kiev Polytechnic Institute, and while it was there for the ceremonies, IBM took the opportunity of establishing a Representative Office in Kiev, the first to be established outside Moscow in the former Soviet Union.
Equipment includes an ES/9000 Model 150, seven RS/6000s, 13 high precision graphic workstations and Catia software for computer aided design, manufacturing and engineering.
UK firm Object Designers Ltd, Henley-on-Thames, Oxfordshire, has launched a sister company — Object Trainers Ltd — geared to providing courses on all types of object technology across Europe.
+44 491 410222.
UK firm Hamcom Systems Ltd, Banbury, Oxfordshire, is offering 16Mb and 64Mb memory boards for Sun Sparcstation10s at £610 and £3,600 respectively.
London-based Alex Technologies Ltd says its Alex graphical user interface builder now supports Moolit — the Motif Open Look intrinsics toolkit — in Univel Inc's UnixWare.
Intergraph UK Ltd, Swindon, Wiltshire, has won a £1.7m contract from London-based systems consultant Logica plc for 30 workstations and five servers that Logica will use to develop a records maintenance system for Anglain Water Services.
Now owned by ICL plc, Warrington-based Technology plc will start a subscription catalogue service for open systems solutions in the new year, aimed at corporate users: Technology distributes DEC, HP and Grope Bull (IBM) Unix kit alongside ICL systems.
+44 925 830404.
Camberley, Surrey-based Admiral Software Ltd is to distribute Versant Object Technology Corp's object database software in the UK: +44 276 692269
Evans & Sutherland Computer Corp, Salt Lake City, Utah has formed an industrial design unit in Europe and named Peter Keuschnigg the European general manager: the new unit, in Munich, is responsible for sales and support of Evans & Sutherland's industrial design products in Europe, including the CDRS software.
Brussels-based ODA Consortium will publish the first release of its Open Document Architecture toolkit for EDI on March 31st next year.
The initial version supports text, image and graphics: release 2, due at the beginning on 1994 will support desktop publishing.
The ODA Consortium is a European economic interest group set up earlier this year — members include Groupe Bull, DEC, IBM, ICL, SNI and Unisys: +32 2774 9623.
MINIGRAMS
Observers expect the Santa Cruz Operation to announce a profit for its first quarter shortly: the market is expected to want the company to prove it can be profitable for one further quarter through to March — without Larry Michels — before issuing an initial public offering next April with the aim of going public in June.
Jim Harris, new president and CEO of the Santa Cruz Operation, was one of the very earliest in the door at Intel Corp, where he made his fortune: since 1988, aside from his position on SCO's board, he has has been occupied as a farmer in Minnesota.
With IBM Corp's stock in the cellar and as hopes dim it will ever again return as the flagship of the US stock market, The New York Times last Sunday 20th was searching around for a successor and came up with — you guessed it — Microsoft Corp.
Then on Monday 21st on its front page The Wall Street Journal suggested that the technology torch slipping from IBM's fingers is being picked up by its own creations: Intel Corp and Microsoft with Pentium and NT.
IBM is bringing back two retired executives, Paul Rizzo and Kasper Cassani, to help chairman John Akers run the joint.
The Wall Street Journal figures current management isn't strong enough to meet the mounting crisis but doesn't know yet whether Akers is loosing the support of his board.
The company denied his authority is being undercut.
Both Rizzo and Cassani are ex-IBM vice-chairmen and according to IBM Akers called them back as ‘counsellors and advisors’ with Rizzo for the US and Cassani for Europe.
It seems the extra help is wanted to get IBM's division to function more as independent companies.
Calling it a significant strategic alliance and the new cornerstone of its Unix division, Gates/FA, the US national distributor, will be distributing the developer's Interactive System Unix to its resellers under license from SunSoft Inc.
The deal expands SunSoft's access to the Intel crowd.
Network Computing Devices Inc has agreed in principle to make a $4m investment in NetManage Inc, a two-year-old Cupertino, California-based vendor of networking protocol software for the Microsoft Windows environment, giving it a 10% ownership position.
The two firms will cross-license and resell each other 's products.
NCD will resell NetManage's Newt, a TCP/IP communications protocol stack for Windows PCs, as well as its Chameleon and Chameleon/NFS suites.
As we went to press, DEC was getting ready to set up nine new business units as part of its reorganization struggle, some of them reportedly headed by leaders brought in from the outside and others have yet to be chosen.
Univel Inc has outgrown the offices it was leasing from its parent Novell and has moved to new premises in the  neighbourhood also belonging to Novell.
Its new phone number is +1 408 729–2300.
DEC says its Ultrix MLS+ has become the only high-performance Compartmented Mode Workstation to pass the US government's Initial Product Assessment Report Technical Review Board, the last major step before entering Formal Evaluation.
It is asking for B1 certification, the requirement for a trusted CMW.
Meanwhile, OpenVMS and its companion piece the security-enhanced SEVMS have gone into Formal Evaluation aiming at C2 and B1 certification respectively.
SNA communications house Systems Strategies Inc says it has designated UnixWare as the primary development platform for its new Express 2.0 Unix-to-IBM (AS/400 and mainframe) comms software.
Tatung Science & Technology has cut prices on its COMPstation 40 Sparcstation 2 clones by up to 16%.
A high-end configuration with 520MB, 16MB RAM, 19-inch colour monitor, single-slot GX accelerator, Solaris 1.1, Motif, X11R5 and X.desktop 3.0 is now $9,000, down from $10,700.
IBM's direct sales force will be selling VMark's uniVerse post-relational database management system on RS/6000s under a new Cooperative Software Provider pact.
We're warned to be on the lookout for Hermes, a suite of server-based network management tools Microsoft Corp is developing for NT to track client configurations.
Reports suggest Sanyo Electric Co will release a Mips R4000-based Unix server by the middle of next year.
Matsushita expects to start shipping two Viking-based workstations, co-developed with its investment, Solbourne, in February: a four-processor Series 6/700 and an eight-chip 6/900.
They figure they can get a thousand out over three years.
San Francisco, California-based Tesseract Corp is porting its Primrose parallel processing application development environment to Pyramid Technology Corp's MIServers, which Pyramid will market as PrimroseSMP.
Integrated Device Technology Inc says Orion, the low-power Mips Technologies Inc R4000 VRX derivative developed for it by Quantum Effect Design Inc (UX No 409), will be taped out by the middle of next year, with samples due twelve months from now.
Neuron Data Inc, Palo Alto, California, will have a version of its Open Interface graphical user interface builder for Univel Inc's UnixWare out in the first quarter of 1993.
Neuron Data UK:44 71 408 2333.
Cinncinatti, Ohio-based SCH Inc has formed a Professional Services Division which will focus on helping users move from proprietary to Unix-based software solutions.
+1 513 579 0455
In the quarter to June 30, Nippon Silicon Graphics Inc increased its revenues 20% over the same quarter last year, to the equivalent of $107.9m.
Oracle Corp is to support Novell Inc's NetWare running native on Hewlett-Packard's Precision Architecture RISC NetWare server, which is expected to ship in 1993: Oracle will offer a version of its Oracle7 database NetWare Loadable Module.
Digital Equipment Corp is apparently gearing up to launch its VAXft 810 fault-tolerant box, originally due in August, sometime in the first quarter: DEC has merged its fault-tolerant development unit into the general Alpha-VAX Systems operation.
VMark Software Inc, Framingham, Massachusetts, has made its uniVerse post-relational database available on Tandem Computers Inc's fault-tolerant Unix systems.
Digital Equipment Corp is to phase out its Boston manufacturing facility, where about 190 people are employed making cables for computers.
IBM Corp president Jack Kuehler says that we've all got it all wrong with regard to the company's $1,000m cut in 1993 research and development budget (UX No 416): he says that the cut is off the gross budget, which is $9,000m, not the net budget, which is $6,000m, the difference being that the net figure takes account of software development costs written off as incurred; most people reckon that a cut of $1,000 is a cut of $1,000m and is a very big sum to lose in one year.
Sequent Computer Systems Inc figures it will be seeing $30m over the next eight years from selling its Symmetry 2000/750 and 450 machines to the US Department of Veteran Affairs as part of a multi-vendor team led by systems integrator Federal Data Corporation.
The US agency is modernising its system and will be servicing 12,000 users in a client/server architecture for on-line transaction processing.
Hewlett-Packard Co and Cimage Corporation have signed a strategic agreement to port Cimage document and image management software to HP's Unix-based Series 700 workstations and Series 800 servers.
The packages include Cimage Document Manager, Engineering Workflow System and ImageMaster software.
Cimage: +1 313 761 3147.
In Japan, DEC expects to ship 12,000 Model 400 series Alpha machines — available in seven guises — by the end of June 1994, and 6,000 Model 300s.
Three-quarters of  respondents to a  survey by the Malaysian National Computer Federation are currently using proprietary systems — 81% of those said they'd be moving to open systems in future.