

UI REDRAWS UNIX ROADMAP ‘WITH USERS IN MIND’— PLANS OBJECT-ORIENTED DESKTOP MANAGER
Unix International's 45-page 1993 Roadmap will be distributed at this week's annual members meeting in New Orleans.
It will be the first set of requirements that UI has published that have been validated by 50 major users worldwide.
In fact, UI claims the whole Roadmap process has been recast to be user-rather than independent software vendor-focused, detailing user-specific information such as when their suppliers will provide them with certain technologies.
UI is labouring to bring required technologies to market quicker and will broaden its supplier base to make deliverability a priority, it says.
New requirements include an advanced kernel architecture, multimedia enablers and an Object Management Group-compliant object management environment.
UI promises to identify reference technologies this year for the enablers and the management environment, plus a Microsoft Corp Windows emulation package and interconnectivity with several legacy systems.
The Roadmap describes the multimedia support package it is after as including a framework, driver, file systems, application interface and communications.
It also says the complete object management environment will include an interface definition language compiler, Object Request Broker, object adapter, object storage system and set of common services for creating and deleting object instances.
Next year UI plans to specify an object-oriented desktop manager and programming environments.
The consortium intends picking suppliers for federated naming (which may be used in the object management system to enhance seamless support for multiple object managers), multimedia support and object management in the third quarter.
Windows emulation and AppleTalk, LU6.2 and NetWare interoperability technologies will be detailed in in the fourth quarter, while an interapplication communication facility to compete against Windows NT should be unveiled in the second quarter of 1994.
The Roadmap also reinforces UI's commitment to deploy the Sunsoft Inc-developed ONC+ distributed computing services beginning in the second quarter of this year, the Unix System Labs-developed Distributed Systems Management scheme beginning in the third quarter, and the Open Software Foundation's Distributed Computing Environment beginning by the end of the year.
…
OLIVE BRANCH EXPECTED
Meanwhile, Unix International is being very secretive about an announcement it expects to make this week that it hopes will propel the industry further along the path of unity.
UI has also got OSF chief David Tory and either Novell Inc chief executive officer Ray Noorda or some Novell senior executives coming along to its members meeting.
OSF TO PAY ITS WAY IN 1995 — NEW WIDGETS FOR MOTIF
The Open Software Foundation says it is well on course to achieving its stated aim of self-sufficiency by the end of next year (UX No 374).
OSF turned over $55m in 1992, of which $28m came from sales of technology licences — predominantly for the Motif graphical user interface — the other $27m being the $4.5m a year membership dues paid by each of the six remaining founders, Digital Equipment Corp, Hewlett-Packard Co, Hitachi Ltd, IBM Corp, Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG and Groupe Bull SA.
Claiming it is ‘going into implementation mode,’ OSF believes it can double its licence revenues over the course of this year with Distributed Computing Environment technologies now coming to market and a string of new business partnerships it will establish — see page five.
Indeed, OSF expects sales of DCE licences to contribute at least $55m to its coffers in 1994.
By 1995, it reckons, founders will no longer have to fork out the $4.5m they do at present to keep the organisation going.
Other forms of sponsorship — donations and new membership categories — are being considered.
OSF will retain its membership-driven, not-for-profit status.
Meanwhile, OSF will shortly announce that it has chosen DEC, IBM Corp and Lotus Development Corp to supply new object-based widgets for the Motif graphical user interface.
A new text widget should support a range of colour and typefaces.
Also expected are combination and control widgets providing PC-like functionality such as a spin button file stepper and there'll be a notebook too.
The new modules are the first to emanate from OSF's Request for Technology issued last summer for the supply of components to the next generation of its user interface, UEC II (UX No 399).
UEC II is part of an attempt to evolve Motif into what is essentially a developer toolkit, into an end-user environment.
It is part of OSF's object-oriented GUI Application Interoperability Initiative, GAIA.
SUN SPRING ‘HAS NO AT&T CODE’
A source tells us that one of the reasons SunSoft Inc has been so discreet about Spring and Project DOE (Distributed Objects Everywhere) object-oriented stuff, is that it doesn't want Microsoft Corp to know too much.
Be that as it may, our source notes that Spring has been written from scratch, is not Unix and owes nothing to AT&T's code.
Therefore it would be royalty-free (UX No 421).
(Which brings to mind notions of whether Sun will ever offer a cross-licence to Unix System Labs for some reason or another.)
We're told it's good at garbage collecting, has built-in exception handling and strong type checking.
It supposedly has a ‘real’ remote procedure call system, ‘much better than Open Network Computing RPC,’and can communicate within a machine or between machines.
We're also told to say that it has ‘strong separation of the interface from the implementation.’
Sun's first problem will probably be getting Sun people themselves to use the stuff, the transition from C or even C++ to objects not being without its hazards as object people know.
MICROSOFT TO ANNOUNCE PC-NFS SUPPORT FOR NT
One of the problems for Unix system users who may be thinking about adopting Microsoft Corp's forthcoming Windows NT operating system as part of a heterogeneous IT environment is that NT does not support Unix's widely-used Network File System protocol or indeed a native Unix file system.
Although NT does include the remote procedure call — and it is just the RPC — found in the Open Software Foundation's Distributed Computing Environment, DCE remains an embryonic technology.
Unix users with NFS would have to change over to the unfamiliar — and untried — DCE or find themselves unable to integrate with NT easily.
However, Microsoft now says it will soon formally announce support for the Sun Microsystems Inc PC-NFS networking technology that allows personal computer users to share files and services with Unix systems.
SunSelect — Sun's PC-to-Unix connectivity satellite — demonstrated technology enabling NT users to access Unix systems via PC-NFS at last November's Comdex Fall trade show and the two firms have been in discussions ever since.
It is unclear whether Microsoft intends to support PC-NFS on one or other or both client and server versions of NT.
DATA GENERAL IN NEGOTIATIONS TO ASSEMBLE AVIIONS IN HUNGARY
Data General Corp and its partner, Microsystem RT, one of Hungary's highest profile private companies, are talking about setting up an assembly and testing site for AViiON servers in the country.
Microsystem technical director Andras Csicseri said that although no firm decision had been taken, comprehensive local support and the availability of technical expertise were critical to the region.
He suggested that Hungary may act as a support centre for Data General's entire Eastern European operations, while a local manufacturing site could help the company secure more of the large projects currently being financed under the European Community's PHARE scheme — European-based suppliers are favoured under PHARE criteria.
Data General is a relative newcomer to Hungary.
But in December 1992, a month after taking a 5% stake in Microsystem, Microsystem won a contract from the National Labour Council to supply the central servers for a project, intended to computerise the management of unemployment claims.
Details of the deal were previously unavailable due to the political sensitivity of unemployment issues in the country.
Microsystem will supply Data General's AViiON 6280 and 6225 servers with an FDDI link, plus a 30Gb CLARiiON RAID 5 storage subsystem.
The estimated total value of the contract is between $10m and $20m, but tenders are still being assessed for the mid-range and front-end sections of the project.
The Council rejected a mainframe bid from IBM Corp, even though it has previously supplied equipment to the organisation.
Csicseri estimates that for Microsystem's financial year ending September 1993, it will generate $2.5m turnover from its Data General hardware business, up from $500,000 last year.
The company's total 1991 revenues were $30m.
Foreign investors include the Hungarian-American Enterprise Fund and the International Bank for Reconstruction & Development, and Microsystem shares its Budapest headquarters with Professor Erno Rubik of cube fame.
DIGIBOARD HAS UNIX VERSION OF DESKTOP I/O BOARD
Input/output controller board manufacturer, Digiboard Inc, Eden Prairie, Minnesota will release a Unix version of PC/2e — its two-port intelligent asynchronous board for desktops — and introduce a new Unix version of its fax software this quarter.
The PC/2e has been targeted at Windows and NetWare markets until now — the Unix version includes serial ports for connecting personal computer local area networks using TCP/IP.
Windows NT and LAN Manager support will follow later this year, the firm said.
Digiboard is negotiating for IBM Corp's PowerPC division to OEM the thing.
IBM already markets the Digiboard's 128-multiport intelligent cluster boards for the RS/6000s (UX No 411).
Meanwhile, version 2.6 of Digifax, the company's distributed fax software, will be released at the end of the month.
It supports multi-user and multi-modem connectivity on local and wide area networks, Hewlett-Packard Co  PostScript laser printers, VGA graphics and has an X-viewer to view faxes on X-Windows screens.
It runs under UnixWare and NetWare, SCO Xenix and Sunsoft Interactive Unix.
Digiboard will show further offerings at the CeBit Hannover Fair in March, including an Apple A/UX, AppleTalk, X.25 and ISDN network hardware and software.
MOBIUS DEBUTS ITS PROTEGES
Emeryville, California-based Mobius Computer Corp has introduced a new family of 66MHz Intel Corp-based 486DX2 graphics workstations, called the Protege series.
The Protege line comprises three machines.
The P466ii is configured with 8Mb RAM, 212Mb disk, Ethernet interface, three ISA slots and a graphics subsystem which supports 1,024 x 768 screen  resolution .
It is priced at $2,500.
The P466icx, has the same configuration, but comes with an EISA bus system and a graphics accelerator.
It costs $3,000.
A server model, the P466IS comes with 16Mb RAM, 540Mb disk, and eight expansion slots — it is priced at $4,000.
The machines will run Santa Cruz Operation Inc SCO Unix and Open Desktop, Univel Inc UnixWare, Sunsoft Inc Interactive Unix 3.2 and Solaris 2. x. +1 510 460 5252.
INFORMIX's EAST EUROPEAN SUBSIDIARY
Informix Software Inc intends to set up a wholly-owned subsidiary in Eastern Europe during the next few months, but 80% of its business will remain with value-added resellers and distributors.
Eastern European marketing communications manager Francesca Lahiguera said the company also plans to win a toe-hold in the Commonwealth of Independent States market, and will be ‘rooting around’ for partners at the Comtek 93 show in Moscow in April.
INFORMIX SHIFTS EMPHASIS TO WINDOWS DEVELOPMENT
Leaving an OSF/Motif version of its 4GL++ object-based graphical development environment to tread water for a while, Informix Inc, Mountain View, California, is hurrying along Microsoft Corp Windows and NT ports in a bid for a quick return on its investment.
Informix UK marketing manager, Tony Lacey-Thompson, said ‘we can't afford to ignore Microsoft's 90% stronghold over the personal computer market.
Volume numbers of Unix-based PC's aren't there yet and Motif can't give us the cash returns we're looking for with this product’.
The switch to emphasize Windows — and NT — has impacted planned availability this quarter, and 4GL++ won't now ship until year-end (UX No 394).
Informix is also gearing to release its new reporting tool, Storm, over the next couple of months with the promised Siemens Nixdorf  Informationssysteme AG-derived data dictionary by June.
Storm is a graphical query and reporting tool, enabling users to access, extract and manipulate data as in an executive information system fashion, the company says.
Forms and reports can be created using a graphical front-end palette of tools.
The data dictionary — being developed using SNI's Entity Relationship Model (UX No 409)— will form the basis of a planned Informix repository which is at least a year out and doesn't have a target interface environment yet.
HARLEQUIN SHOWS OBJECT SOFTWARE
UK language outfit Harlequin Ltd, Cambridge, which has moved its US operation to Cambridge, Massachusetts (from Salem, New Hampshire), was showing off its wares at last week's ObjectWorld ‘93 event in Boston.
The company's core product is its object-oriented LispWorks development environment.
Other packages, such as KnowledgeWorks — for designing and building knowledge-based systems are built on top of LispWorks.
Current flagship product is HyperQuery, a graphical front-end database access mechanism that uses English language-like commands on top of SQL and has been ported to Informix, Ingres, Oracle, Sybase and Unify databases.
European and Japanese language versions of the environment are planned and its application programming interface allows developers to integrate HyperQuery with external applications written in C or C++.
HyperQuery runs under OSF/Motif on Unix kit, Microsoft Corp Windows, and is ‘NT ready,’ according to the firm.
Harlequin has a range of tailored data presentation applications such as Watson — for criminal investigations — and a crew rostering system.
UK Harlequin UK: +44 223 872522
UNIR TARGETS SPARCS WITH RE-NAMED C+at
Unir Corp, Naperville, Illinois, the systems integrator with the non-exclusive agreement to resell AT&T's object-oriented environment and language Calico as C3 (UX No 421), has decided to change the name of the language to C+at (say Cat) to avoid being confused with military product referred to as C3 (jargon for command, control and communications).
Unir wanted to wait and push the stuff for Windows NT but then changed its mind when Sun Microsystems Inc brought out the Sun Classic workstation and looked like it was going to get a larger installed base.
Unir also wants to port to Intel Corp platforms (maybe with BSD/386 or SCO) and AUX.
Calico, which got started back in the early 1980s and which Unir claims AT&T couldn't push because of USL and C++, has reportedly 200 man/years invested in it.
FREEDMAN SHARP NEW NETWORK LOAD BALANCER
Canada's Freedman Sharp and Associates Inc has released its Load Balancer v3.1, an automatic job queueing and load distribution program for the network.
It reportedly uses centrally maintained configuration information along with dynamically gathered performance information to choose the best suited computer for each application.
Users can submit and manipulate their jobs from any machine on the net.
The Load Balancer handles licensing, security, multi-platform speed/memory/swap differences, priority for interactive users, time-of-day limits on workstation usage and per-user permissions for each machine and application.
It includes a network-wide batch queueing system with 256 priority levels.
Tests in a 5-node seismic processing environment reportedly showed a reduction in the run-time of a series of jobs from 2.5 hours to 43 minutes.
It will be available for Sun, HP, DEC and Silicon Graphics machines come April priced in the US at $1,500. +1 403 245–0036
NEW SIEMENS-NIXDORF MACHINES AT CEBIT TO INCLUDE 12 PROCESSOR RM600
Munich, Germany-based Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG (SNI) is set to launch new machines in its RM line of Unix V.4 mid-range systems at the Cebit Hannover Fair at the end of March.
The new machines include the RM400 Model 10, using the 50–100MHz Mips R4000SC processor, and the RM600 model 25 multiprocessor, which uses from two to 12 R3000A Risc processors: both run SNI's Sinix V5.41 implementation of Unix, and should be generally available during the second quarter of the year.
An R4000SC multiprocessor is also under development, and should be out in the third quarter.
The company is also to market Silicon Graphics Inc's 50–100MHz RW450 workstation using the Irix V.4 operating system.
On the Intel side, the PCE-5S Pentium machine will be shown: it is currently running at 50MHz, but is eventually intended to be a 66MHz machine — all being well at Intel Corp.
The PCE-5S will include built-in server features such as dual SCSI-2, on-board EISA-Ethernet, software controlled power-on/power off and security.
Also out at Hannover will be a new version of SNI's UTM distributed transaction monitor for Unix, backup and spool and a modularised version of the Sinix operating system for use on personal computers.
SNI has spent years attempting to unify conflicting technology inherited when Siemens AG, SNI's parent company, fused its Data and Information Systems Group with Nixdorf Computer AG.
It now seems resigned to abandoning further developments on the proprietary Quatro range and 680X0-based Targon systems it inherited from the Nixdorf side of the business, as well as its mid-range Intel-based MX line, in favour of the Mips-based RM Unix products.
A third of SNI's revenue still comes from mainframes, and 18 new 7500 machines running the enhanced BS2000/OSD1 operating system — promised to be Posix compliant and running the Open Software Foundation's Distributed Computing Environment by the end of 1994 — will also emerge at Hannover.
The company has also developed FHS-Doors for the mainframe, a graphical user interface allowing interoperability with MS-DOS, Unix and Windows applications.
OBJECTS: HP HAS DISTRIBUTED SMALLTALK
Among manufacturers, Hewlett-Packard Co is one of the furthest down the object-oriented route, and doesn't intend to surrender its lead.
This week it introduced HP Distributed Smalltalk, claiming it to be the first complete implementation of the Object Management Group's Common Object Request Broker Architecture specification for distributed computing.
The technology, based on the Smalltalk language, is designed to enable programmers to develop object-oriented applications that can be used simultaneously by multiple computer users.
It adds features and services on top of the Object Broker and Smalltalk to provide a rapid development environment for portable applications to be shared by workgroups, including a full set of object services and many sample applications, in the hope that this will enable developers to build new application objects quickly.
These objects will be able to link to data stored anywhere in the enterprise using the company's OpenODB object-oriented database.
No prices were given.
It cites the forecast of Hurwitz Consulting Group, Newton, Massachusetts that software products that incorporate object technology will account for over 60% of software sold in 1995.
REED CANCELS WHICH COMPUTER SHOW — UNIX SHOW UNDER REVIEW
In the UK, the Reed Exhibition Co Ltd has cancelled one of its biggest events, the PC-oriented Which Computer Show, which was to have taken place at the NEC, Birmingham this April.
A number of late decisions not to participate, and too many prospects still undecided led to the decision, the company said.
The cancellation coincides with the closure of Reed's computer and electronics division at Richmond, Surrey.
The moves put the future of London's Open Systems Show, still currently scheduled for November, in much doubt.
Further work on the show, which is sponsored by Unix user group Uniforum UK, will be carried out from Reed's Solihull, Birmingham office.
Reed spokesman Ian Melville denied that the event had been cancelled, but admitted that a number of options were under consideration: one being the merger of the event with the bi-annual Communications Solutions Show, to be held at the Birmingham National Exhibition Centre next Spring.
Last year's Open Systems Show went ahead without the support of some key vendors (UX No 405), and attracted fewer people than anticipated.
Rival EMAP Exhibitions cancelled the European Unix Show at the beginning of last year (UX No 369).
In its place it is running the Solutions with Workstations Show, at Olympia, between May 11–13th.
INTEROPERABILITY ENHANCEMENTS EXPECTED FOR TUXEDO TP MONITOR
Unix System Labs Inc will announce some significant enhancements to its Tuxedo transaction processing monitor on February 15th.
TP watchers expect the new release to include greater interoperability features, such as links with IBM Corp's CICS/6000 transaction processing environment which is based upon Transarc Corp's Encina TP technology.
Ways of providing higher levels of co-existence between Tuxedo and CICS/6000 have already been outlined in a Unix International guide prepared by UK firm Data Logic Ltd called ‘Open Enterprise Transaction Processing: integrating the Tuxedo system with mainframe CICS’(UX No 404).
The London-based firm was responsible for melding Encina with CICS.
At present, transaction processing systems and monitors can only swap files — new capabilities in Tuxedo will likely address the ability to process transactions and even parts of a transaction in a CICS/6000 environment.
Such functionality requires a set of application programming interfaces allowing Tuxedo and CICS/6000-based TP systems to acknowledge each others' transaction requests.
Indeed, TP watchers say a range of interfaces are urgently needed to unify disparate OEM Tuxedo implementations along with a fourth generation language tool.
Other things USL could usefully address, they say, are a systems management solution and a distributed security environment for Tuxedo.
RAXCO AND UIS TIE THE KNOT
Digital Equipment Corp systems management provider Raxco Inc, Rockville, Maryland, and UK-based UIS Ltd, Epsom, Berkshire are to merge after more than a year of negotiations.
The new entity called Raxco/UIS Inc will be headquartered in Raxco's offices, Rockville.
Former Raxco chief executive officer and president, Richard Lefebvre, will head the operation.
The firm's combined European operations will be run from UIS' UK-based Epsom offices — existing UIS European subsidiaries will remain open.
Raxco will close its UK Richmond, Surrey office and staff relocated to Epsom.
The firm will market a combined complement of DEC VAX/VMS and Ultrix software, which comprises security management software, resource management and file and retrieval storage systems.
MICRO FOCUS OFFERS CONCURRENT USER PRICING ON UNIX
Micro Focus Plc has come up with a new method for charging for licences to its Unix software, which it calls Unix Concurrent User Licensing.
Under it, the cost of software is tied to the number of users who actually use the software rather than an arbitrary number of perceived users.
Micro Focus Cobol for Unix v3.0 is now $1,250 per concurrent user under the new plan, Toolbox for Unix v3.0 costs $625 per user, the two together are $1,875, and Dialog System for Unix v3.0 is $1,250 the firm said.
JACQUES STERN's FIRM IS ALPHA LICENSEE
Digital Equipment Corp has found its first partner in France for the Alpha AXP RISC in the shape of a start-up company formed by Jacques Stern, founder of software and systems integration house Sesa SA and former chairman and chief executive of Compagnie des Machines Bull SA.
The new company, Advanced Computer Research International SA, or ACRI, of Lyon, has signed a co-operation agreement with DEC France under which DEC will take an undisclosed minority stake to seal the pact.
DEC's 64-bit Alpha AXP microprocessor will be incorporated in the original architecture of the parallel ACRI system and the two companies will work together to optimise DEC's implementation of the OSF/1 Unix operating system for highly parallel multiprocessor systems.
Richard Poulsen, the new president of Digital Europe, commented ‘We were impressed by the ACRI system architecture design and the outstanding quality of its international team.
This collaboration between DEC and ACRI will play a key role in building a competitive high performance computing infrastructure in Europe as reflected in the European Commission's recent Rubbia Report’— the European Commission asked Professor Carlo Rubbia to chair a committee of experts from industry and public research laboratories to assess Europe's standing with respect to high performance computing and networking.
The report, presented in November 1992, said that while Europe was totally absent from the vector supercomputing arena, there was a unique opportunity to establish a high performance computing and networking programme.
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES
HOPE FOR NEW INTERNAL JOINT VENTURES
IBM Corp's Advanced Workstations & Systems Division (AWSD), the company's increasingly pivotal RISC systems unit, is smack in the middle of two internal joint ventures that together with AWSD could be the remaking of IBM, given enough time.
Last week AWSD let out that it had clasped hands with IBM's once-proud flagship, its now-sullied mainframe operation Enterprise Systems, in setting up a co-funded unit to develop scalable mainframe-class multiprocessor RS/6000 RISC-based machines such as the SP1 Power Parallel system showed off last Tuesday.
However, before that, in December, AWSD announced internally that it had cut a similar deal with IBM's Entry Systems Technology Group to set up a Personal RISC Systems joint venture to design, build and market all of the company's PowerPC-based goods as well as such items as the X terminals and PC-priced M20 baby RS/6000s introduced last week.
Maybe even hand-held devices.
Both initiatives, to be run as profits centres, are the work of AWSD president Bill Filip and his peers.
They are not imposed from above nor was the consent of the top floor or the company's famed Executive Committee apparently even sought.
Strategy for Personal RISC Systems began to be laid two years ago, according to Filip, who consulted with PC chief Jim Cannavino and cut the deal with Nobi Mii, head of the Entry Systems Technology Group.
Willie Shih, who heads development of workstations at AWSD's main Austin, Texas facility, has been named to run the unit, which will apparently he headquartered in Boca Raton, Florida, home to IBM's PC operation.
Filip, Mii, assistant general manager Lee Reiswig and IBM's Research vice president Jim McGroddy are on the venture's board, Filip said.
Other executives may become involved.
This entry-level operation will be responsible for putting AIX Lite (UX No 369), OS/2, Hunter Systems' XDOS and a Macintosh emulator on the M20 later this year, Filip said, a move still capable of producing a chill in competitors like Sun Microsystems Inc.
…
POWER PARALLEL SYSTEMS BUSINESS UNIT
Meanwhile, at the high end, there is the new Power Parallel Systems joint venture with Filip's predecessor at AWSD, Enterprise Systems' chief Nick Donofrio, as chairman and Filip and McGroddy on the board.
The organisation is being run full-time by general manager Irving Wladawsky-Berger, formerly Enterprise Systems' assistant general manager of supercomputing, and part-time by AWSD systems and technology vice president Phil Hester.
The unit is meant to revivify IBM's large systems with RISC technology and as such its charter includes developing 390-based offerings like AIX/ESA and 390 supercomputing market development.
(Considering the cries for a more revolutionary approach it sounds a lot like the same old thing, doesn't it.)
The business will be involved in supercomputing application management, supercomputing strategies, systems development, software development, services and support.
System development will incorporate the work of IBM's Highly Parallel Supercomputing Systems Lab, RISC-based mainframe and workstation technology development.
Filip said the Personal RISC unit would focus on implementing the single-chip PowerPC 601, 602, 603 and its architecture.
(One of Florida's daily papers, however, quoting the internal memo suggested the venture would also move its stuff to Intel's Pentium.)
Power Parallel, on the other hand, will content itself with multi-chip versions of the current RS/6000 chip Rios, Filip said.
In some cases these Rios 2 chips will overlap the PowerPC in performance while others should outperform it 50% to 100% at the same clock speeds thanks to superscalar technology.
McGroddy is also kicking some financial resources into Power Parallel and will help with chip design, high-speed switching and parallel compilers.
In between these two new efforts sits Filip's Advanced Workstations & Systems which has, he notes, taken unto itself over the last year all the ingredients needed to be a stand-alone company bar a dedicated sales force.
The sales force is a problem they've been working on for awhile and could be in a position to snap off in a few months.
AWSD will focus on workstations and servers, uniprocessors and SMP configurations as well as clusters and parallel machines with distributed and shared memory.
It will continue working on Power 4, a special 4-way RPQ RS/6000 with both distributed and global memory.
IBM's Advanced Workstations & Systems president Bill Filip said last week that the company's emergent RS/6000 business broke even or may have even done better than that in calendar 1992 though it was still ‘overinvesting on development.’
The figures for the full year are still a bit squishy because of items like estimated costs but the unit is positive it was profitable in the fourth quarter.
Demand, he said, continues to be strong, above 1992, claiming that they are ‘almost sold out for the quarter.’
Commercial and technical are at parity.
IBM FRANCE FORMS UNIX SYSTEMS DIVISION; HARDWARE OUTLOOK FOR 1993 IS BLEAK
IBM Corp in France has created a Unix systems division to try and fulfil its aim of becoming market leader by 1994 and, in particular, to focus on high-margin software and services.
The operation has 100 staff to deal with sales and technical support.
‘IBM is tying itself strongly to Unix,’ said director of the new division Jean-Louis Descharreaux.
‘It is clear that there is a place for Unix in the information systems architectures of all our customers, so we intend to accelerate our activity in this market.’
He said that in 1992, IBM France generated approximately $175m of turnover from its RS/6000s and related software and services.
Although he had no figures for 1992 Unix sales worldwide, he did note that France normally comprises 16% of European Unix revenues.
While 1992 volume sales of Unix computers in France grew between 30% and 35%, turnover from this sector only increased between 0% and 3%.
Descharreaux said the trends that characterise the personal computer industry — growth of unit sales, but flat revenues and diminished profits — are beginning to show in the Unix market too.
As a result, he said, Unix software and services will increasingly generate higher profits and growth.
In fact, he said, one of the reasons IBM France decided to set up the new division was to cater for software partners and other customers.
Descharreaux expects first half 1993 turnover in France to be ‘terrible, due to the constricted investment climate’, adding, ‘Don't forget there have been eight consecutive quarters of decline in investment in France’.
He anticipates that Unix system revenues will be similar to 1992.
FILENET ADDS NEW RS/6000 MODELS
FileNet Corp, Costa Mesa, California has added two new models of its Series 6000 family of servers based on IBM Corp's Power RISC.
The Model 6220, based on the RS/6000 Model 220 is an entry-level desktop server, intended to provide an imaging system at a price comparable with many standard personal computer servers, but running the image management and WorkFlo software.
The Model 6580, using the RS/6000 Model 580, is the new top-of-the-line server, with 35% more performance than the Model 6560.
They run under AIX/6000 Version 3.2, and FileNet is now supporting disk mirroring, with redundancy for all data files.
They ship in March at from $14,400 for the Model 6220 and from $85,000 for a Model 6580.
And FileNet is to put its FileNet's document imaging and WorkFlo software products up on Hewlett-Packard Co PA-RISC systems by year-end.
BLUE NOTES
IBM is very touchy on the issue of morale: last week in New York when we got around to asking Bill Filip what the mood was around the joint, the spin doctors converged and shuffled him off.
Good thing we waited until the end.
At the RS/6000 launch, Filip said that the workstation business was definitely profitable in the fourth quarter of 1992, and in the current quarter has been growing faster than the 30% to 35% achieved for all of 1992.
Filip said that figures for all of 1992 were not clear enough to state if the workstation business was profitable in the year but in the fourth quarter, even assuming a margin of error in accounting for the workstation operations as a distinct business, the operation clearly was profitable.
IBM has been counting up its hangers-on and finds that it currently has some 40 OEMs doing things like boards and systems with the PowerPC chip.
IBM is expected to launch 18 new ES/9000s mainframes this Tuesday, ranging from air-cooled 9121 frame models to the eight-way 9021.
And IBM has a further round of announcements set for next Tuesday 16th which will see the AS/400 move into the open systems frame with new Posix functionality and possibly a future game-plan that would see it share Rios 2 — or beyond — chip architectures with the RS/6000.
That's right, hit the company when it's down.
The Peruvian headquarters of IBM Corp were severely damaged and at least 17 people were injured after urban guerrillas of the Maoist Shining Path terrorist organisation detonated a powerful car bomb in front of the computer company's offices in southeast Lima.
According to United Press International, the explosion blasted out hundreds of windows in the area and caused a mushroom cloud of smoke that rose nearly 250 feet.
IBM JOINS THE FRAY — GOES FOR SUN, HP WITH SUB-$4,000 RS/6000
As well as updating its RISC System/6000 series with new machines designed specifically for commercial, technical and parallel computing markets (UX No 420), the company last week pitched itself into the thick of the Unix workstation price war with the introduction of a sub-$4,000 offering.
With the exception of the parallel technology, the new uniprocessors use IBM's basic Rios 1 RISC chipset.
On the technical side, the most interesting new addition is the $3,995 — £3,908 — 33MHz PowerStation M20 workstation, which comes with with 16Mb to 64Mb RAM, two-dimensional Power Gt1 graphics, 17″ colour monitor and is rated at 16.3 SPECint 92 and 26.7 SPECfp 92.
There are three other upgradeable desktop offerings, the $16,000 — £7,800 — 42Mhz PowerStation 355; a $19,500 — £9,970 — 50Mhz PowerStation 365 and a $25,230 — £16,360 — 62.5MHz PowerStation 375.
All come with from 16Mb to 128Mb RAM, 400Mb to 2Gb disk, Power Gt3i graphics, 19″ colour monitor and are rated at 40.5, 48.4 and 59.8 SPECint 92 and 81.6, 97.0 and 118.2 SPECfp 92 respectively.
On the commercial track there is a new 50MHz and PowerServer 360 and 62.5MHz PowerServer 370 — they can also be configured as workstations — which are priced at from $19,700 — £11,220 — and $25,700 — £18,850.
The desktop machines, which come with up to 256Mb memory RAM, 400Mb to 2Gb disk, are rated at 48.4 and 59.8 SPECint 92 and 97.0 and 118.2 SPECfp 92 respectively.
Deskside 50MHz PowerStation and PowerServer 570 configurations — with 32Mb to 1,024Mb memory and 2Gb to 7.2Gb disk — are 50% faster than the existing 530H models, IBM claims.
The 570 is rated at 48.4 SPECint 92 and costs from $45,475 — £34,680.
New rack-mounted 50MHz 970B and 62.5MHz 980B servers come with 128Mb memory — double that available on the existing 970 and 980 equivalents.
The two systems come with from 4Gb to 37Gb disk — the 980B has eight additional expansion slots — and are rated at 47.8 and 59.2 SPECint 92 and 101.0 and 124.8 SPECfp 92 respectively.
The 970B starts at $97,825 — £86,375 — the 980B is $117,825 — £109,680.
The commercial 360, 370, 570, 970B and 980B models can also be configured as technical systems.
All the new RS/6000s are available in March, along with a new X-terminal, the Xstation 150 — priced at $5,550 — with a claimed performance six times that of the existing model 130, and the Legato Systems Inc-derived tape back system and software.
Auspex file servers
First fruits of IBM's tie-up with Network File System server specialist Auspex System Inc, Santa Clara, California, are also built around the basic Rios 1 chipset.
The 7051 network file server models 800 and 840 — aimed at sophisticated network system users — come with up to eight Ethernet ports and up to 48Gb and 144Gb disk respectively.
Prices go from $177,600 with deliveries to begin in May.
Parallel, multiprocessing
Long-awaited multiprocessing — as distinct from parallel processing — RS/6000s, on which Compagnie des Machines Bull SA is collaborating with IBM, are due volume at the beginning of 1994, if you listen to Big Blue.
On the other hand, Bull is promising a multiprocessing version of AIX in the third quarter and says it'll have multiprocessor boxes in the fourth quarter.
The multiprocessor will use the multi-chip, single board Rios 2 Power implementation which is due in the second half of the year.
Rios 2 parts will also find their way into IBM's widely previewed high-end parallel computing effort which will come as a scalable, eight to 64 processor, one-to-eight 8GFLOPS Power Parallel RISC/6000 9076 SP1 system running AIX Unix version 3.2.
It starts at $312,000.
The machine is the first to emerge from an alliance between IBM's Advanced Workstations and Enterprise Systems divisions and will ship in October.
PowerPC
As far as the PowerPC RISC is concerned, IBM says the 603 — for notebooks and entry-level desktops — the 604 — for mid-range and multiprocessing desktops — and the 64-bit 620 multiprocessing part, designed for commercial systems, will be out at the end of next year or beginning of 1995.
IBM said growth of its 1992 Unix business was lower than expected — it blames price competition and low margins.
Europe accounted for $1bn, or 43% of IBM's worldwide Unix revenues last year.
With a 28% share, Germany was IBM's largest European Unix market.
France contributed 16%, with the UK at 15%.
Desktop RS/6000s accounted for 47% of Unix sales in Europe.
OSF SIGNS UK's PROTEK AS BUSINESS PARTNER
The Open Software Foundation plans to establish a string of new business partnerships across Europe and the US and which will provide support, training, education and consultancy services for users and potential OSF technology customers.
First to sign on the dotted line is UK distributor Protek Ltd, Maidenhead, Berkshire, which will focus on the Distributed Computing and Management Environments.
With OSF's help, Protek will have a training and integration centre up and running by May with a range of hardware platforms running DCE.
It'll be staffed by eight Protek employees currently being trained by OSF and Protek will bring a further 50 industry consultants onto the project in the near term.
Financial costs of establishing the programme are to be split between OSF and Protek, likewise; revenues generated by the project will be spilt between the two.
PROTEK TO MARKET TIVOLI FRAMEWORK…
In addition, Protek has also signed a UK marketing agreement with Austin, Texas-based Tivoli Systems Inc to supply and support the object-oriented Tivoli Management Framework software, a key component of OSF's Distributed Management environment, also being used by the likes of Unix System Labs and SunSoft Inc.
Protek is offering the Tivoli software at £800 per seat.
…
OSF PROMISES DCE PACKAGES IN MAY
Meanwhile, OSF claims there are some 150 pilot sites up and running DCE and promises packaged DEC-based applications will be on show at its interoperability Challenge ‘93 exhibition in Boston this May (UX No 404).
Meanwhile, the OSF/1 operating system, currently treading water whilst potential suppliers like DEC and HP work out their Unix strategies, will have 2,000 applications available for it by the end of the quarter, OSF claims.
And like IBM Corp, Hitachi Ltd is now expected to endorse OSF/1 MK, the Carnegie-Mellon University Mach-based micro-kernel version of the OSF operating system.
ALAN COHEN's COBOL-TO-C CONVERTER
UK software consultancy, Alan Cohen Consultancy Ltd, London, is moving into the Unix market with AL/1, its source code analysis toolkit for users looking to downsize Cobol-based applications to C. The company has signed software Hypersoft Corp to market the kit worldwide.
AL/1 enables users to analyse and migrate mainframe-based Cobol data to personal computers.
The software acts as a transformation engine and feeds converted data into spread sheets and libraries, as well as database repositories and Data Structure Models for analysis before an application is re-engineered.
AL/1 runs on PCs under Unix and MS-DOS and on DEC VAX/VMS systems.
Unix versions are priced at from £1,500.
Hypersoft UK +44 273 834596
EUROPEAN ROUNDUP
Belgian firm BIM sa/nv claims its ProLog compiler has achieved 1,275,000 inferences per second on a Sun Sparcstation 10 Model 30: the compiler costs $9,000. + 32 2 759 5925.
Minitech UK Ltd, Derby, claims its Warp Drive disk array can improve input/output processing speeds by up to 300% with access times of less than three milliseconds for Unix sites with 4Gb or more database data.
+44 332 521235.
Oxnard, California-based, Network Research Inc has signed UK-based Workstation Source Ltd, Maidenhead, Berkshire, to distribute its Fusion family of network products.
+44 628 75252
Sun Microsystems Inc SparcCenter 2000s are ousting IBM, Amdahl Corp and ICL mainframes at Durham, Hull, Leeds, Liverpool, and Newcastle universities.
And Sema Group Plc is working with Sun to put its Pleiades suite up under Solaris.
RTS Ltd, Isle of Man, is to package JIMI Software Consultants Inc's CExecutive real-time operating system with Network Research Corp's Fusion TCP/IP.
+44 624 623004
O2 Technology SA, France, has signed Horsham, West Sussex-based, Tenet Systems Ltd to market its object-oriented database in the UK.
O2's database includes an object-based manager, the O2C 4GL, O2SQL query language and O2Look interface toolkit. +44 403 711555
Unix SVR4.2-on-Intel house, Consensys Corp, Toronto, Canada, has signed a boatload of European distributors for its Consensys 4.2 implementation of Unix System Lab's desktop operating system: Garmhausen and Partner Belgium, Sterrebeek, Belgium; RCM Company AB, Karlstad, Sweden; Garmhausen & Partner GmbH, Bonn, Germany (for Croatia, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, Romania and Slovenia); Future Soft, Paris, France and Onsite Computer, Allershausen, Germany — the rest of Europe will be handled by Consensys’ European operation in Reading, UK. +44 734 833241.
Embedded Sparc system supplier, Force Computers Inc, Campbell, California is to OEM graphics accelerators from UK firm Du Pont Pixel, Egham, Surrey.
+44 784 470 555.
Pick Systems Inc has appointed Glyn Yarnall as UK sales director.
Data Sciences UK Ltd, Farnborough, Hampshire, has appointed Hospitality Perspectives Inc, Stamford, Connecticut, to distribute its Champs property management system in the US.
Meanwhile, the UK firm is to market Toronto, Canada-based SLM Software Inc's ESP-Link financial software in Europe.
+44 252 544321.
Adobe Systems Inc wants UK resellers for its Unix technology.
UK, Cambridge-based, Tadpole Technology Plc, has the first multi-processor implementation of Motorola Inc's 88110 on VME architecture.
Tadpole did the design for a large customer who reportedly has 88110 samples.
The real-time computing engine takes one or two 88110s to get to a maximum 200 MIPS/200 MFLOPS.
When it becomes generally available, Tadpole's dual-processor TP810V, which supports the pSOS+ operating system, will go for $9,250.
Micro Focus Plc's Cobol tools are to be encapsulated into HP's SoftBench.
Ingres is being ported to the Topsy loosely-coupled computer at the London City University's Parallel Applications Centre: Topsy runs a distributed Unix-compatible kernel called Meshix, and uses Motorola 68030 or MIPS R3000 chips.
UK firm Object Designers Ltd, Henley-on-Thames, Oxford shire, has launched a sister company — Object Trainers Ltd — geared to  providing courses on all types of object technology across Europe.
+44 491 410222.
Version 5.0 of Redwood City, California-based Ross Systems' GemBase 4GL is now available in the UK for DEC OpenVMS, Ultrix, OSF/1 and Hewlett-Packard Co's HP-UX: +44 272 221850.
Australian controller board manufacturer, Stallion Technologies Pty, Brisbane, has introduced Easyreach, an intelligent cluster-based I/O solution for Unix systems supporting up to eight cluster boxes: prices start at £1,575. +44 21 778 6153
Oracle UK has developed a front end customer service system for Telecom Securicor Cellular Radio Ltd's Cellnet mobile phone users: it runs on Hewlett-Packard Co Unix systems but will take two years to implement across the firm's sites.
Atel, Milan, is to distribute the Tadpole Technology plc Sparcbook notebook in Italy.
Software engineering house LBMS has appointed Stephen Jermyn to head up its UK CASE sales operations: he joins from Ernst & Young where he was managing director.
Darmstadt, Germany-based Software AG now supports TCP/IP for Unix, VMS, Novell Inc SPX, Netbios and IBM SNA LU6.2 protocols in its Entire Net-Work communications software.
Inglewood, California-based Locus Computing Corp has recruited French company Pacer Europe SA, Paris, to distribute PC-Interface for Apple Computer Inc systems across Europe: PC-Interface enables MS-DOS, Windows, Macintosh and NetWare users to share files, applications and print services on Unix servers.
Protek Ltd, Drayton, Middlesex, has developed Graph/X, a set of 40 widgets for Montreal, Canada-based Visual Edge Software Inc's UIM/X graphical user interface builder: available in the UK it is priced at £7,000. +44 628 75959.
French software house Ilog SA, Gentilly, Paris, has introduced Ilog Views, a C++ toolset for drawing, animating and editing portable two-dimensional objects for Motif, Open Look and Windows.
Ilog UK Ltd: +331 4663 6666.
Massively parallel Unix system builder Parsystec GmbH, now established in St Petersburg, Moscow, Varna, Budapest and Prague via its Chemnitz, Germany-based Eastern Europe division, has won the  Russian Academy of Sciences as a customer for its transputer-based Giga Cube which runs Parix, the company's parallel extension to Unix environment.
Amsterdam, Netherlands-based Uniface Corp has joined Digital Equipment Corp's Complementary Software House programme and will provide support for DEC's Network Applications Support (NAS) software and 64-bit Alpha AXP systems.
Locus Computing Europe has signed Swiss distributor Credal AG, Zurich, to market its products in Europe.
+41 1741 1115.
Rank Xerox Ltd has chosen France for its second European research laboratory (the first is in Cambridge), for which Italy, Germany and Spain were also in the running.
The lab, to cost $20m over four years, will be in Grenoble and will employ about 150 researchers working on advanced computer methods of retrieving and translating documents into different languages.
The French government will pay about 10% of the cost in the first two years.
According to ROCC Computers Ltd, the Unix market in the Czech and Slovak republics is starting to move because customers there have more cash to spend on new systems than other central European countries.
The firm has won contracts worth approximately $100,000 to supply Motorola Unix computers to four companies in the Czech republic.
In the UK, Unix software house Motis Systems Ltd has moved offices to Salford, Manchester: it was previously based in Warrington.
+44 61 877 7544.
Software distributor Berkhamstead, Hertfordshire-based AI International Ltd says its begun shipping ParcPlac Software Systems Inc's ObjectWorks C/C++ Unix development environment.
ObjectWorks is available on Sun Microsystems Inc Sparcstations and IBM RS/6000s — and is priced at £4,000. +44 442 876722.
Motorola Computer Group has appointed systems integrator Datapoint UK Ltd, London, as a reseller for its Unix RISC 88000-based 8000 systems in the UK.
The Hungarian Central Statistics Office, has upgraded its computer centre signing an $11.5m deal with Hewlett-Packard Co to replace its IBM Corp 4381 mainframe with Unix kit.
The Office is now waiting for approval from the European Community, which is partly funding the project: agreement by the EC is expected to help Hewlett-Packard in its aim of making the Hungarian system a reference point for other Eastern European state organisations.
MARKET ROUNDUP
Intel Corp says it has now received over 30 orders for its Paragon parallel supercomputer, which began shipping in September, and Thinking Machines Corp, Cambridge, says it has 20 CM-5s already installed with customers; it just sold a $15.8m CM-5 to the University of Illinois National Center for Supercomputing.
Nashua, New Hampshire-based Storage Computer Corp has introduced StorComp RAID 7 which features an asynchronous hard ware design with a real-time embedded operating system to control access to the disk drives and data flow to the host.
StorComp RAID 7 platforms are available in desktop, integrated rack-mount and modular configurations with one to 141Gb of protected storage capacity on network file servers, Unix workstations including Sun Microsystems Inc Sparcs, IBM RS/6000, DEC and HP and mainframes.
Available now, StorComp RAID 7 is priced from $16,000 to $19,500.
Eden Prairie, Michigan-based, Emphasys Software Inc's RPG-to-Unix migration software, Cross/36 RPG, now supports Hewlett-Packard Co Unix systems.
According to US reports, Oracle Corp has sent out beta copies of 14 next-generation application development tools to developers.
The difference between these and existing Oracle tools is that these will be the first designed to develop client/server applications for other databases.
Dickens Data Systems Inc has picked up Data General Corp's Clariion storage system to distribute for the IBM RS/6000 servers it resells to US VARs.
Pricing begins at $28k for a 2.5GB system.
It's also picking up DG Clariion tape arrays for the 6000.
Cayman System Inc, Cambridge Massachusetts has updated its XGato software for turning a Apple Macintosh into a X-Window client for users of standard server release 2.0 which support colour monitors.
It also adds zoom in screens, automatic application launch and remote restart: it costs $30 for a single user license or $3,000 for 10.
Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA is expected to report operating losses of up to $245m for 1992 in its end of year figures due over the next couple of months, according to Italian press reports.
Following poor 1991 figures, ongoing cutbacks and restructuring charges will again contribute to another large net loss at the company.
Reports suggest that up to 5,000 of Olivetti's 46,000 staff could be laid off under the company's latest restructuring plan for the coming year.
MINIGRAMS
Micro Decisionware Inc has agreed with NeXT Computer Inc to provide connectivity between NeXTStep and its Database Gateway product line.
The strategic pact provides for certifying NeXT's Database Kit, its object-oriented Release 3 desktop tool, accesses DB2 and other databases through Database Gateway.
NeXTStep customers will be able to access DBA, SQL/DS and non-relational host data.
Marlborough, Massachusetts-based Stratus Computer Inc has signed with Unix Systems Labs to sell and support USL's version of the Open Software Foundation's Distributed Computing Environment, DCE/SVR4.
Stratus expects to release a DCE/SVR4 edition of its Unix fault-tolerant operating system, FTX, in the second quarter.
A special $20 edition of the The X Resource journal is devoted to draft specifications of the X Consortium's X Wire protocol for version 4.12 of the X Image Extension standard: +1 707 829 0515.
Reports suggest Microsoft Corp has nearly completed a compiler that will be used internally to generate applications for the PowerPC RISC being developed by Apple, IBM and Motorola.
Microsoft Corp is expected to introduce a new version of Microsoft C/C++, renamed Visual C++, this quarter: now in beta test, Visual C++ includes Visual Workbench — a Windows-based development environment — foundation class libraries, App Studio — an editor which alters bit maps, dialogue boxes and cursors — as well as debuggers and browsers.
Visual C++ is not compliant with AT&T's CFront 3.0 C++ environment.
Could it be that Sun Microsystems Inc president Scott McNealy's voice is being heard this side of the Atlantic, after he reportedly told Novell Inc's Ray Noorda to fire everyone at Unix System Labs except a handful of marketing guys and the engineers?
(UX No 421).
Last week, London-based USL Europe made four of its 40 staff redundant — jobs went from accounts, marketing, technical and systems administration departments.
According to an insider the cuts were made ‘to satisfy calls from Novell to get costs down,’ before the acquisition is complete.
USL Europe's poor financial performance over the the year also contributed to the decision.
The redundancies apparently came as a complete surprise to USL staff who were assured before Christmas that no jobs would be lost through the Novell deal.
And its not good news down the road at Unix International Europe either.
UI is having to downgrade some of its marketing activities in Europe  because of a new budgeting arrangement which allows member companies to determine how, and in which geographical areas their donated cash is spent.
Most US companies it seems, want their membership fees spent over there.
Their European subsidiaries will have to stump their own monies towards a pot that also includes fees from the likes of ICL plc, for UI European campaigns.
First to suffer is UI UK's hard-working public relations agency, now retained for project work only.
Microvitec Plc, Bradford is to sell its loss-making Logitek Plc distribution division to its management for £2.49m.
It bought the firm for about £3.5m in shares in May 1991.
The sale will cut Microvitec's gearing to under 50%.
Hewlett-Packard Co and Cimage Corporation have signed a strategic  agreement for the Cimage document and image management software to HP' Unix-based Series 70 workstation and Series 80 servers.
The package includes Cimage Document Manager, Engineering Workflow System and ImageMaster software Cimage + 31 76 3147.
Massachusetts-base  Ipswich Inc announced Merq, its NFS client for Novell Inc's LAN WorkPlace, which let OS/2 users  access files on networked NFS servers.
Distribute Processing Technology Inc, Orlando Florida say its 32-bit EIS SCSI driver features SunSoft Inc's Solaris-on-Intel operating system.
Marietta, Georgia-based, Maxtech Computer Technologies Inc has launched, Double Vision, remote control software for Intel Corp iAPX-86 Unix platforms: Double Vision allows one user to control another user's terminal — both screens look identical to the user and the terminal's keyboards are interchangeable.
Prices start at $500 for a 32-user licence.
Nashville, Tennessee, Arnet Corp has introduced an X-Windows  facsimile viewer programme for Intel iAPX-86 Unix systems: prices start at $1,300.
The company has a new director of marketing, Fred Berry, who joins from Emulex Corp.
Concord, Massachusetts-based, Software Maintenance and Development Systems Inc has launched Lakota, an embedded kernel for adding object-oriented features to existing software: available on Sun, IBM, DEC and HP Unix workstations, prices go from $3,000.
Candle Corp is implementing Posix 1003 and 1003.4 real-time extensions for IBM's MVS/ESA 4.2 operating system running 3090 and ES/9000 mainframes: testing begins now, Posix-compliant versions will ship this year.
Westborough, Massachusetts-based, Epoch Systems Inc has unbundled its Sparc-based EpochServ network data management software, previously only available on its Epoch-2 Data Servers for OEMs and resellers: EpochServ is priced at from $27,500.
Sun Japan, which just released Sun Microsystems Inc's latest low-end boxes, plans to ship 10,000 Sparc Classics, 6,000 LXs and 2,000 SparcCenter 2000s the first year out.
Fujitsu Ltd, Toshiba Corp and Fuji Xerox will also ship the boxes OEM from Sun.
Locus Computing Corp has been given a grant by the US National Science Foundation to investigate system software optimised for networked portable computers.
It's for initial research into the unique problems experienced by portables users when detached from the network like loss of access to data.
Locus vice president of corporate marketing, Chris Sanders, claims what's needed is a ‘virtual network’ so important services are still available.
Some results are expected this autumn.
Two struggling companies, Sequoia Systems Inc and Ultimate Corp have decided that squabbling will get neither of them anywhere, and have settled the lawsuit brought by Ultimate alleging that Sequoia had violated the terms of an agreement under which Ultimate resells Sequoia machines.
Jeff Papows, president and chief operating officer of Canadian software house, Cognos Inc, Ottawa, will be replaced by vice president of business management and development, Ron Zambonini at the end of Cognos' fiscal year in October: Michael Potter will remain chairman and chief executive officer.
DEC has cut a joint marketing deal with AT&T that will port AT&T's BaseWorX Applications Platform to the Alpha family running OSF/1.
The system will be pitched at the telecoms industry.
SunSoft Inc is out dropping bombs in Santa Cruz Operation Inc's backyard: it's running a two-page advertising spread in SCO's vanity press SCO Magazine headlined ‘Just Say No to SCO and Watch Your Profits Grow.’
We're getting mail back from Winix America Inc, the Beaverton, Oregon start-up that did the combined Windows 3. x/Unix networking software for the Norwegian government and then Americanised it (UX No 380), marked ‘out of business.’
Burlington, California-based Object Design Inc has put ObjectStore, its object-oriented database system, on SunSoft Inc's Solaris 2.1, making it the first object database ported to the system.
Object Design and SunSoft already have a deal for Object Design to develop a Persistent Manager Engine for Sun's object-oriented environment Project DOE.
This technology will reportedly provide Solaris users with upwardly compatible ObjectStore functionality and supply the basic storage capability for applications using SunSoft's OMG-compliant CORBA software.
Information Presentation Technologies Inc and Xcelerated Systems Inc have made their respective products Partner and Liken 100% compatible.
Partner allows connectivity between Sun and Mac platforms; Liken allows Mac applications to run on Unix stations in an X Window.
Now Liken will have continuous bi-directional connection to networked Macs and Partner will be able to run non-Sparc specific versions of Mac software on networked Suns.
Los Angeles, California-based Tiger Media, the multimedia authoring start-up, has gone down the tubes: its venture capitalists sold off the assets last month to New Hampshire-based AimTech Inc, a PC company.
San Rafael, California-based Island Graphics Inc has acquired the Motif-based eXclaim! graphical spreadsheet and Master Plan project management software from 10-year-old Quality Software Products Inc, Culver City on undisclosed terms.
In the second quarter, Island will ship Island-branded versions of the products that will share text, data and graphics with its own Island Write, Draw & Paint and IslandPresents.
Meanwhile, it will move the Quality versions for Sparc, HP and IBM.
Corollary Inc has picked up Truger Technologies Inc in Canada and PC Distributing Inc out of Illinois to distribute its communications and multiprocessing lines.
Ex-Sun Microsystems Inc executive Bill Keating who traipsed off about 18 months ago to become vice president and general manager over at Rational Inc (UX No 349) is now winding down out of that job and consulting with the new Lachman Technology Inc, helping to get that start-up going (UX No 418).
However it doesn't look as if he'll take the presidency there.
Chicago's too cold.
So he'll be on the loose soon.
+1 415 961 0500
Roel Pieper's 10-month-old promise to set up 10 international joint ventures for Unix Systems Labs (UX No 380) is reportedly bearing more fruit.
The company has done deals in France and China already and will soon have Unix System Technology structures set in Mexico, Canada and Australia.
Suppose, just suppose, that all this sudden talk of finding a  successor for Ray Noorda at Novell Inc doesn't mean the man is moving out but moving up — up the board of AT&T.
Apparently there's a dose of speculation that the new relationship between Novell and AT&T is a lot deeper than they're letting out and will eventually result in AT&T's  acquisition of Novell.
In the meantime, AT&T could be a neat vehicle for Novell's schemes.
Besides which it's a heck of a time for Noorda to be discussing succession — when so much of what can be accomplished with Unix seems to depend on his personal touch.
A reputable type who got his information from Bill Gates says Gates told him months ago that Microsoft Corp had Windows NT running on Sun Microsystems Inc's Sparc RISC in the labs.
Our source figures the exercise was in one respect a porting proof.
Now it'll probably degenerate into a game of chicken between Gates and Sun chief Scott McNealy.
The thought has come up before but it may be worth revisiting.
How much insurance is SunSoft Inc taking out with Solaris-on-Intel?
Its existence means Sun Microsystems Inc's transition to Pentium will be a lot easier, so the thinking goes, if Intel Corp eventually trounces Sparc.
A source within Hewlett-Packard UK claimed that its first quarter 700 Series workstation figures showed revenues up 120% over the same period last year.
Forrester Research Inc, Cambridge, Massachusetts , estimates the worldwide client-server software market will expand to $28 billion in 1996 from $2.5 billion last year.
Oracle7 and trusted Oracle7, the secure implementation, are now generally available on Data General Corp, DEC, Fujitsu Ltd, Hewlett-Packard Co, IBM Corp, ICL plc, NCR Corp, Pyramid Technologies Inc, Sequent Computer Inc, Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG and Sun Microsystems Inc machines.
Hewlett-Packard Co says its new HP 9000 Series 800 Model H40 running Informix 5.0 recorded 406.65 transactions per minute (tpmC) at a cost of ownership of $2,786 per tpmC using the Transaction Processing Performance Council's latest TPC-C on-line transaction processing benchmark test suite.
DEC will have its Alpha AXP compiler for Microsoft Corp Windows NT ready by early March.
Locus Computing Corp is supplying its latest PC-to-Unix connectivity to IBM Corp for use under its AIX Unix.
X-Windows technology suppliers are bandying together as the X Industry Association to promote X at the behest of the X Business Group.
The not-for-profit consortium members include ADDS/NCR, Adobe Systems Inc, AGE Logic Inc, DEC, Grafpoint Inc, Hummingbird Communications Inc, ICS, IXI Ltd, Kinesix Inc, Network computing Devices Inc, Non Standard Logics, Omron Advanced Systems Inc, Shographics Inc, Tektronix Inc, TeleSoft Inc, Visual Edge Software Inc and Walker, Richer & Quinn.
+1 510 226 1075.
In Reading, UK, X/Open Co's chief marketing manager, Alan Davies, has been replaced by Graham Bird, former product profile manager.
Carrera Computers Inc, Laguna Hills, California, is delivering a Mips Technologies Inc R4000 motherboard for PCs running Microsoft Corp's NT: the Cobra ARCsystem is priced at $5,000. +1 714 545 3117.
At last week's Object World in Boston, Pure Software Inc rolled out version 2 of its Purify run-time error detection tool for C and C++ developers which includes a new linker and mail mode: it is priced at from $4,000 on Sun Sparc systems.
+1 408 524 3094.
Business Objects SA, a French software house that markets an object-oriented data access tool for end-users which bypasses SQL, will be launching itself onto the UK market next Wednesday.
Intel Corp's P67 part — between P6 and P7 — is we hear, being positioned as a replacement for the ill-fated 80860 RISC (UX No 420).
It won't be compatible with the i860 — its lab number is pre-fixed with P as in P5, P6, rather than N as i860 iterations were given.
Sources say the 64-bit P67 is being developed in Israel and may run iAPX-86 software via an emulator.
‘It would be nice if Intel put some stakes in the ground for software developers,’ one former i860 ISV commented, ‘otherwise they [Intel]will have the same problems as they had with the i860.’