

SUN MICROSYSTEMS OUTLINES LONG-TERM SPARC RISC PLANS
Sun Microsystems Inc will be building its next-generation workstations and servers out of a family of 64-bit multiprocessor chips it's designing called UltraSparc.
These chips should take Sun machines close to the end of the decade.
Internal chip design, which began at the same time that HaL Computer Systems started developing its own proprietary 64-bit Sparc chips, aims at producing a 500MHz microprocessor part by the fourth quarter of 1996.
This high-end UltraSparc-III will be preceded by the UltraSparc-I and UltraSparc-II.
Sun plans several iterations of each of the three family members.
It expects to have early silicon of UltraSparc-I in the fourth quarter of next year.
UltraSparc boxes could begin appearing later in 1995.
If HaL meets its reported dates, it could beat Sun to market with a 64-bit system — but it is Sun which expects to create a high-volume 64-bit market supplying both its own needs and those of its cloners.
HaL is unlikely to sell its chips on the open market.
Sun also revealed details of near-term Sparc developments with its SuperSparc and MicroSparc (Tsunami) efforts.
Details, page 7.
JUDGE LIFTS RESTRICTIONS ON BERKELEY SOFTWARE DESIGN UNIX
Unix System Laboratories has suffered a surprise setback in its suit against Berkeley Software Design Inc for copyright infringement and misappropriation of trade secrets.
US federal judge Dickinson Debevoise earlier this month denied USL's pre-trial motion for a preliminary injunction halting distribution of any of BSDI's BSD/386 code.
The decision lifts restrictions placed by the court on BSDI several months ago forbidding it from distributing advanced BSD/386 beta code or and production software (UX No 413).
It intends shipping production code for the first time this week, saying it has hundreds of orders.
USL made its motion based solely on its copyright claims anticipating a victory at the upcoming trial and a court-ordered permanent injunction.
The court denied the motion based on its finding that USL has no valid copyright on 32V Unix, an early 1978 version of the software from which Networking Release 2 (Net2), the University of California, Berkeley code derives.
BSDI's BSD/386 in turn derives from Net2 and the court found that Net2 was in fact derived from 32V.
USL is appealing the judge's decision claiming he is mistaken on a matter of law.
Although a very early copy of 32V may have carried a copyright notice, it was removed based on the then-prevailing legal opinion that a copyright notice implied general circulation which, if true, would taint 32V's trade secret protection.
USL maintains that 32V was a limited publication, further restricted by contractual restraints and subject to limited publication law and therefore did not require a copyright notice.
The judge however found that it was published, the ruling USL is contesting.
The court was not asked to rule on any of USL's trade secrets claims, according to USL's chief counsel Sandy Tannenbaum.
Whether or not USL is successful in its appeal, it believes it can still win its case on its other claims of misappropriation, misrepresentation, trade mark infringement and breech of contract.
NATIVE MAC APPLICATIONS UP ON POWERPC
Apple Computer Inc previewed its forthcoming Macintosh Application Services software for the PowerPC RISC chip last week at the launch of the new PowerPC supporters club Power Open Association Inc.
The software, which will include a native implementation of the Macintosh Toolkit for the PowerPC architecture, allows the Macintosh Finder and well-behaved Macintosh applications to run within an X-Window on PowerPC and IBM RIOS-based systems.
The demonstration, using an IBM RS/6000 Model 560 — said to be the equivalent of a PowerPC system — was shown running WordPerfect for Macintosh ‘faster than the fastest Quadra’, according to PowerOpen's new president, Domenic LaCava.
The  demonstration was based on technology provided by AT&T-backed start-up Echo Logic Inc, and contained ‘no emulation at all’, according to Echo's Brad Burnham.
But licensing details have yet to be agreed, and availability is expected to be late this year or early next.
Technology for platforms other than the PowerPC appear to be even further down the line.
Details, page 4.
COSI ‘IN THE BALANCE’
Will they or won't they?
Hewlett-Packard and IBM Corp were still vacillating over whether or not an announcement of the COSI Common Open Systems Interface initiative would be forthcoming on March 17th at UniForum in San Francisco (UX No 424, 425).
Although originally IBM's idea, HP now appears to be taking the lead — but the inclusion of other companies such as SunSoft and Novell Inc is far from assured.
The original idea is in danger of becoming diluted, and if everyone's technology and operating systems have to be  accommodated , the danger is that — like the ACE Consortium — the result won't add up to anything at all.
OSF BOWS TO PRICING PRESSURE
OSF is apparently bowing to DCE user pressure and will announce significant price reductions for one-time DCE licenses, distribution rights and royalty fees at Uniforum on March 17.
OSF admitted that calls from big industry players such as Novell Inc, who've shied away from committing to DCE until now, persuaded the organisation to reconsider its pricing policy (UX No 424).
OSF was also inundated with complaints about its complex price list, which has at least two dozen options — covering everything from object code fees, optional services and royalty guidelines.
Currently ISVs that want to build applications pay $15,000, and hardware vendors implementing DCE code into their operating systems pay $150,000 for full distribution rights.
However, on top of these fees there are royalties for each unit shipped, which can range from $5 to $75.
CONTROL DATA SYSTEMS WANTS EVERNET
Now that it has flown the nest and decamped to Arden Hills, Minnesota, Control Data Systems Inc feels confident enough to start making acquisitions, and for its first, it has gone for Evernet Systems Inc, a Los Angeles network systems integrator that sells NetFrame Systems Inc servers.
It has signed a letter of intent to acquire the $40m-a-year company for an undisclosed sum in cash and shares.
Evernet claims to have installed over 175,000 nodes in more than 5,000 networks across 48 US states and in Europe, Asia, Canada and Mexico as well.
PARALLEL PROCESSING: TWO PACTS GET KENDALL GOING
The mission of Waltham, Massachusetts-based Kendall Square Research Corp is to bring what it sees as the benefits of highly parallel computing to the commercial market, and the company is on its way with the signing of its first two customers, airline operator AMR Corp and direct marketing services company Neodata Inc.
AMR Corp, parent of American Airlines Inc, has agreed to take delivery of a KSR1 later this year and signed a letter of intent to collaborate for five years on a project to simplify the task of analysing and manipulating massive amounts of data.
With Neodata, and its partner on the project, Electronic Data Systems Corp, Kendall Square is working on a project to create the largest production of relational database in the commercial sector, consisting of more than 1Tb of data when it is complete this autumn.
Oracle Corp will supply the software development environment to Electronic Data Systems for the NCORE Neodata Customer-Oriented Relational Environment with the aim of combining the power of an extensive marketing environment with a highly optimized and efficient operational engine to deliver an array of flexible services to the direct marketing industry.
The services will be integrated through a single customer database that will provide a comprehensive view of psychographic, syncographic, demographic and order history data, all to be held on a KSR1 running Oracle7 at Neodata's Boulder, Colorado database marketing arm.
A second KSR1 is going to a General Motors Corp lab in Detroit for development and conversion of systems management tools.
LONDON STOCK EXCHANGE PULLS BACK ON TAURUS
The London International Stock Exchange last week voted to bring the costly Taurus paperless trading fiasco to an end and kill the project.
The Bank of England established a task force on securities settlement following an approach by the Stock Exchange, to consider the best way forward for development of securities settlement, share registration and share transfer in the UK.
It will identify possible alternatives to Taurus, having regard to speed of implementation, cost, ownership, governance  and financing, as well as system structure, and will recommend a preferred option, make recommendations for managing its implementation, and report to the governor of the Bank of England by the end of June 1993 at the latest.
The abandonment of the project, which cost the Exchange 75m and City firms preparing for it a lot more, cost 220 direct employees and another 130 contractors their jobs.
INFORMIX FOUNDER SIPPL READY WITH NEW CLIENT-SERVER VENTURE
Roger Sippl, the retired founder of Informix, wants to be back doing what he's good at; running a software company.
So he's building another one, hoping to call it Very Visual Software.
It's not a unique product plan as Sippl himself is first to admit.
He's watched the success of companies such as PowerSoft Corp and aims to cut himself off a slice with a new cross-platform client/server graphical desktop development environment to build database applications.
Using object-oriented 4GL technology, his differentiator in this mature market will be the extremely visual part, the goal being to practically force developers to write friendly software.
Naturally stuff like that would find a home amongst large corporations with their huge staffs of determined non-computer literates.
Applications can be like teaching machines, coaxing users to the right choices without penalties, says Sippl.
The next stage is shopping for components, such as forms software, and raising an initial $2m to help with the funding over the next couple of months.
Depending on how well Very Visual does, it'll probably take $5m-$10m before it's cash-flow is positive.
Windows, DOS, NT, Motif and Mac on the client side and Unix and NT on the server side are likely to be encompassed.
Beta versions are not in the plan before the end of the year.
Sippl, who rues the fact the Unix industry can't agree on a common desktop interface (UX No 426), reflects that it's ‘scary that one vendor is about to take over what we spent a decade building’ largely because he offers the customer homogeneity.
Sippl is also involved in groupware start-up ProActive Software Inc,(UX No 394).
APPLE WILL LAUNCH LOW COST SERVERS AT CEBIT
Apple Computer Inc will launch its first family of network file servers at CeBit, in Hannover, on March 25, according to US press reports.
To be called Apple Workgroup Servers the machines are based on the Apple Centris 600 series and Quadra 800 and 950 platforms.
Designed to provide file and print services and database support for from 15 to 50 users, the servers will comprise three systems: the AWS 95, AWS 80 and the AWS 60.
The AWS 95 is based on the 33MHz Motorola Inc 68040 Quadra 950 and comes with a high-performance I/O card and a Unix-based version of AppleShare, Apple's file server software.
It will ship with A/UX 3.0, the firm's new implementation of Unix.
The AWS 80 is a revamped 25MHz 68040 Quadra 800 and comes with AppleShare 4.0, a new version of its network software developed to run under Apple's  Macintosh System 7 operating system.
Apple's low-end machine, the Centris 610-based AWS 60 is also configured with AppleShare 4.0 and the System 7 operating system.
The Centris-based server will sell for around the $5,000 mark and the Quadra boxes will go from $10,000 to $20,000.
Client-server document management software may also be launched at Cebit.
DEC TO OPEN UP ITS ACMS TRANSACTION PROCESSING MONITOR
Digital Equipment Corp is expected to make its move into the open systems on-line transaction processing marketplace this month with OSF/1 and Windows NT versions of its ACMS Application Control and Management System.
DEC is likely to add an open application programming interface to ACMS, which has previously only been available on VMS-based server platforms.
Both Alpha and Intel versions are anticipated.
DEC is also thought to be considering marketing the software for non-DEC hardware.
ICL HAS SOLARIS-COMPATIBLE SVR4.2 FOR DESKTOPS AND SERVERS…
ICL Plc has incorporated Solaris compatibility within its new Unix System V Release 4-compliant operating system, due to be launched at UniForum.
DRS/NX version 7, its implementation of Unix System Labs' SVR4.2 desktop operating system for Intel and Sparc platforms, includes X/Open XPG4-compliance, multiprocessing support, and support for both OSF/Motif and Open Look interfaces.
ICL promises compatibility with SunSoft Inc Solaris 2. x applications, and says that Solaris users will also be able to access ICL SVR4.2 applications.
Version 7 comes with disk striping, disk mirroring and file management functions, a set of graphic monitoring and administration tools and C2 level security.
Other features include print, restore and backup facilities and support for Novell Inc's NetWare, TCP/IP, SNA, X.25 and OSI protocols.
Details of pricing for the Sparc server version will be released when it ships in April.
Support for Pentium machines will be available by the end of the year.
DRS/NX version 7 for Intel is priced from $500 to $1,600.
DRS/NX will become ICL's mainstream Unix implementation on both desktops and servers, and there are upgrade paths for current SVR4 users.
It will be sold through ICL's existing direct and indirect sales channels and in Europe by Technology Plc — its personal computer and peripherals subsidiary.
ICL says it is also encouraging Solaris ISVs to market the product.
…
INTRODUCES ACCESS SECURITY SOFTWARE FOR CLIENT PCs
ICL will also introduce Access Manager 200, which allows users secure single point of login to enterprise-wide networks from PCs.
The Windows-based client environment supports Microsoft Corp's LAN Manager/X.
It includes workstation security — which can restrict users' access to specific applications — multiple secure window options and personal ID passwords.
Sparc DRS 6000 and Intel Corp-based DRS 3000s are supported as hosts, with Sparc client support by the end of the year.
Available next month, priced at $200 per licence.
OSF ENHANCES DCE, OUTLINES DISTRIBUTED COMPUTING ROADMAP
The Open Software Foundation will release the next major implementation of the Distributed Computing Environment, 1.0.2, and announce a new pricing structure for the technology at Uniforum in San Francisco this week.
DCE 1.0.2 will include enhancements to its security services such as single point of failure facilities and improvements to relational database security access.
It has also refined the Distributed File System to enable it to handle things such as groups of files instead of single lines of files, as well as getting rid of a number of DFS bugs.
OSF will start shipping DCE 1.0.2 developers' kits in the next 90 days.
It claims over 1,000 ISVs have already signed up for the new version.
OSF also outlined the DCE roadmap for the year.
The next release of DCE, version 1.1, will incorporate internationalisation specifications and initial integration requirements for the Distributed Management Environment (DME) Distributed Management Services — which is due for release in September.
It will include hierarchical cell and audit trail services and provide provisional OSI specifications.
The fourth release of DCE is scheduled for the end of the year, when OSF will offer integration specifications for DME's Management Framework services.
It will also include object-oriented support, conforming to Object Management Group specifications and on-line transaction processing  facilities .
Final OSI requirements will also be included.
OSF will also introduce a suite of validation tools for DCE this week, at the cost of $20,000.
QUORUM'S EQUAL MAC ADAPTER GETS FIRST SHOWING
Mac-on-Unix house Quorum Software Systems, a hit at last year's Uniforum, this week will stage the first public, albeit belated, showing of its end-user product Equal at the Silicon Graphics and Sparc International booths.
Equal, originally due in December, is now scheduled to ship in the second quarter.
Quorum, who says some of the blame for Equal's delay has been on the legal hassle it had last year with Apple (UX No 393) which held up financing and staffing, will position Equal as a Mac application adapter rather than an emulator.
The company's research has found that users are interested in running Mac programs native under Motif out of performance considerations and have little truck with bulky emulators.
Luckily Equal is not an emulator.
Quorum also found 80% to 85% of its potential audience are interested in running just off-the-shelf Mac packages of Word and Excel which is what Quorum is currently polishing up and will be showing.
It says other programs run, but the company will have to ward off criticism that it does not have a significant inventory of tested packages.
Quorum will also announce a long-awaited deal with Adobe Systems Inc to license its software developers' Latitude for porting its Mac programs to the Unix platform under Display Postscript, Motif or Open Look.
HUMMINGBIRD READIES NEW X SOFTWARE FOR WINDOWS NT
Canadian X Server software house Hummingbird Communications Ltd of Markham, Ontario, will introduce three new products at Uniforum this week, including exceed/NT, its new X-Terminal software for Microsoft Corp Windows NT; exceed/Xpress, a suite of products that access X applications over serial lines; and an OSF/Motif toolkit.
It will also announce enhancements to exceed/W, its flagship X server software.
Exceed/NT will enable users to concurrently access X Window clients and applications running under Windows NT.
It includes two windowing modes, which allow users to execute X clients and local MS-DOS, Windows and NT applications at the same time; X11R5 scalable fonts, font server and XDCMP security.
It supports Microsoft's TCP/IP Windows Socket Transport API, as well as a window planner and plane mask support.
The software also includes Hummingbird's XDK developer kit, which enables users to port applications to and from personal computer and Unix environments.
Xlib, Xt intrinsics, Xaw and Xmu libraries are also included.
Exceed/NT will be available at the end of the month and is priced at $600.
Exceed/Xpress enables remote PC connectivity to X Window applications via modem or by RS232 serial connection.
It is priced at $250.
The OSF/Motif Toolkit will enable users to develop Motif X Window clients on a personal computer rather than a remote host.
This costs $150.
Hummingbird will also introduce version 3.3 of exceed/W, its personal computer X Server software for Windows.
Enhancements include Telnet support for VT220, a Microsoft Windows Socket API and non-X application support using Xstart, which starts up the application on the host system.
Exceed/W also supports Univel Inc's Unixware.
No prices were given.
+1 416 470 1203.
SANTA CRUZ PENTIUM COMBINATION ‘HAS NOT BEEN RECOMPILED’
At the Cebit Hannover Fair towards the end of this month, the Santa Cruz Operation is expected to launch its SCO and Intel Corp Pentium combination under the banner Power Now.
Does this mean that SCO has re-compiled its operating system to take full advantage of Pentium's performance?
Not according to our sources at the company.
That means that the product has not been optimised for the 486 or Pentium, and won't take account of Pentium features such as the dual pipeline, or work around some of the clock cycle quirks that emerged in the 486 post technical documentation.
It all sounds as if the compiler technology — an essential element of the Pentium's claimed performance benefits over the 486 — isn't quite there yet.
Watch this space.
UI HELPS DEVELOPERS PORT BETWEEN SVR4.2 AND SOLARIS…
Unix International will use UniForum to launch a guide to the porting differences between Unix System Labs' SVR4.2 operating system and Sun Microsystems' Solaris, in an attempt to counter the widely-held perception that the two are incompatible.
UI worked with both USL and Sun on the guide, along with a third, unidentified company.
It doesn't rule out the possibility of further guides covering other similar, but not identical, Unix implementations.
UI also promises a detailed study of downsizing, with case studies of Burlington, the Toronto Stock Exchange and Motorola Inc, including the costings.
And it will introduce a new affiliate membership level to Unix International for VARs and software houses who don't need the detailed specs that come with Associate membership.
The price will be well below the current $10,000 associate membership fee.
…
PLANS THREE REFERENCE TECHNOLOGY SEARCHES THIS YEAR
Having opened up the process of selecting technologies that surround the core SVR4 operating system beyond Unix System Labs (UX No 42), Unix International plans to go to the industry at large for three technologies this year, according to UI president Peter Cunningham.
The first will be for a standard way to support multi-media applications under Unix.
The second will aim to cover the implementation of distributed object management, following specs already laid out by the Object Management Group.
The third area was not revealed, but it is thought to cover a Unix alternative for the Microsoft object linking and embedding and dynamic data  exhange technologies.
Any company can submit technology, and UI members vote to find the winner.
The provider of a selected technology must agree to provide specs, APIs, test suites and general availability before being accepted.
LUCID HAS NEW VERSION OF ENERGISE — LOOKS BEYOND SPARC
Lucid Inc is promising to release a new version of its Energize C++ application development environment, launched a year ago (UX No 366).
It also has a new release of its native C++ compiler, bringing it up to Version 3.0 compatibility, and will be announcing the availability dates for Solaris 2. x products.
Lucid expects to see revenues from its C product lines overtake those of its original LISP products sometime next quarter — it says that LISP is a niche (though still growing) market, and that the market for C products is from 10 to 20 times larger.
Currently concentrating on Sparc-based hardware, Lucid has an agreement with NCR Corp that will see its compiler technology and Energize ported onto the Intel 486 under Unix SVR4 and SCO Unix: compilers have already been ported to the IBM RIOS chip, and Lucid has its eye on Hewlett-Packard's PA-RISC.
MAC APP SERVICES POINT TO BINARY TO BINARY TREND OVER EMULATION
The Macintosh Application Services software previewed at the IBM PowerOpen launch last week (see page 1) is an indication of the growing popularity of binary to binary conversion techniques over straightforward emulation, which is still associated with poor performance.
Such technologies are becoming available not only for the Macintosh, but also for Microsoft Windows, and are likely to be in evidence at UniForum this week.
Macintosh Application Services includes the Macintosh System 7 Finder (although System 6 was demonstrated), a Motorola 68040 emulator, the native toolkit, and Macintosh System Services for memory management and input/output to files and devices.
The portions of the application that do have to be emulated can be loaded in via floppy disk.
Many Macintosh applications, such as PageMaker and Quark XPress, spend up to 90% of processing time within the Toolbox, according to Apple, which is why a native implementation was developed.
A multi-mode code switcher will allow 680x0 and new PowerPC applications code to run side by side.
Holmdel, New Jersey-based Echo Logic Inc provided Apple with its FlashPort tools to help the effort along, producing a binary to binary translation of the 68000 code and producing native Power PC code.
Echo President Brad Burnham says the major technical feat is FlashPort's ‘aggressive static analysis software that can follow the flow of control from the Macintosh ROM, transforming the application to conform to the native execution model of the PowerPC’.
But it is not yet clear if the Echo technology will be used in production release software from Apple, as there are at least two separate ongoing efforts within Apple to move the Mac environment over to the PowerPC, one using a large amount of translation, the other a large amount of emulation.
Those working on the eventual PowerPC version of the Apple Macintosh, as opposed to providing a Macintosh environment within an X-Window under Unix, are thought to favour the emulation model at present.
That box is due out early next year.
The ‘cat in the hat’ effort that will see the Macintosh environment on other RISC processors, appears to be a different effort again, and may be a long way down the road, licensing issues aside.
Rival software houses such as Quorum and Xcelerated Systems are not unduly worried.
‘Apple is trying to create fear, uncertainty and doubt’, said Nick Sturiale of Quorum.
‘They've been showing this stuff for two years’.
UNIFORUM ROUND UP
Locus Computing Corp will introduce PC-Interface Plus, an updated version of its widely-used PCI product line that enables Unix, MS-DOS and Macintosh users to share files, printers and data across networks.
It includes better network printing capabilities, the TinyTerm terminal emulation set and the ability to run multiple, concurrent terminal emulation sessions. +44 442 236111.
Bristol Technology Inc, Ridgefield, Connecticut, has announced the availability of its Wind/U, software (UX No 385) that enables Microsoft Corp Windows applications to run as native Unix/Motif-based applications.
Windows applications ported to Unix will maintain their Windows functionality, including features such as PostScript, combo boxes, multiple document interfaces and dynamic data exchange.
Wind/U is priced at $10,000. +1 203 438 6969.
Look out for the Unisys Corp stand this week, it'll be demonstrating the U6000 PC, its new Unix desktop system configured for Univel Inc's UnixWare behind the scenes.
Albuquerque, New Mexico-based Basis Inc will demonstrate BDxProgression/4, its revamped third generation application development environment for client/server environments.
BDxProgression/4 software enhancements include a new set of data dictionaries, file system extensions and communication links into relational databases such as Oracle, Sybase and Informix.
It also provides migration links to the firm's fourth generation language tool, BDx/4.
BDxProgression/4 supports Santa Cruz Operation Inc SCO Unix and IBM's AIX.
Cumulus Technology Inc, Palo Alto, California will announce Personal Touch, a full-featured Window manager for the Cumulus Alpha Terminal.
It enables users to move, resize or select windows and other on-screen features by point and click or through hot key commands.
OSF Motif or MS-DOS style windows can be selected at set up.
It provides start-up dialogues, macro dialogues and exit dialogues to open and close applications.
Open applications can be displayed as full-screen, stacked or tiled windows depending upon user requirement, it says.
+1 415 960 1200.
Dublin, Ohio-based Information Dimensions Inc will introduce DOCworks, a document management system for client/server environments.
It can review and edit images, graphics and spreadsheets, and provides links into relational databases such as Oracle, Informix and Sybase.
DOCworks supports Novell NetWare, PC/NFS and DEC's Pathworks protocols.
It runs on Sun Microsystems Inc Sparcstations, Hewlett-Packard Co HP 9000s, Unisys Corp U6000s and IBM's RS/6000s. +1 614 761 7262.
Macintosh software emulation developer, Tenon Intersystems Inc, Santa Barbara, California will introduce the latest version of Mach/ten, its Mach System 7 emulation software for Unix.
Based on Berkeley BSD 4.3 Unix, Version 2.1 will include virtual memory support, which provides protected model execution for Unix processing, Macintosh-like dialogue boxes, debugger and a new set of software development tools.
+1 805 963 69833.
Cleo Communications Inc, Ann Arbor, Michigan, will demonstrate its IBM RS/6000 compatible 3270linkix emulation software.
The package allows users to operate as IBM 3x74 controllers and display terminals in SNA networks.
Users also get IBM 3287 printer emulation.
The initial release provides up to 254 simultaneous mainframe sessions, file transfer through CICS and CMS and support for IBM's Netview network management system.
3270linkix also supports SCO Unix and Interactive Inc Unix.
It is priced at $7,250.
Edison, New Jersey-based Four Seasons Software Inc says it has added Cobol file structure support to the SuperNova 4GL.
The Cobol support will enable users to build SuperNova applications which maintain Cobol files, as well as providing migration paths for Cobol data into relational database management systems.
SuperNova 4GL is priced from $1,000 to $100,000 depending upon platform.
Desktop publishing house, Frame Technology Inc, San Jose, California, will begin shipping versions 3.1 of FrameMaker and FrameViewer with native support for Univel Inc's UnixWare this week.
+1 408 954 39964.
San Diego, California-based Acucobol Inc will preview AcuView 1.1, the latest release of its graphics package for Cobol.
The package enables reports written in Acucobol-85 to be presented as graphs, charts and tables.
It provides 124 standard chart designs including bar charts, pie charts, table charts and word charts, as well as a variety of customization options.
Integraph Inc will preview Microstation, its flagship CADCAM software, running Microsoft Corp's Windows NT — it'll also show its new plug-in-and-go CAD system, the PC 466.
The PC 466 is a 66MHz Intel Corp 486 box, which comes with 32Mb RAM, 426Mb disk, TCP/IP and graphics accelerator.
Available now it comes with a 17″ or 19″ colour monitor.
Microstation for NT will ship the second half of the year, it says.
Corollary Inc will announce the availability of CNS-1600, a built-in surge protection feature on its Connection Station communication servers.
CNS-1600 is an Ethernet device, which enables users to hot key between multiple  simultaneous sessions with the same or different host.
It provides protection for up to 16 serial lines.
Available from this week, no prices were given.
American Digital Data Association Inc, Baldwin Park, California, will  demonstrate the ADS/3000 Disk Array Subsystem, a host-independent disk array system that supports RAID 0, 3 and 5.
It can be connected to any Unix host machine with a SCSI I and II interfaces.
ADS/3000 comes in a five channel configuration and supports fast and wide SCSI and can store up to 5Gb of data.
The ADS/3000 is priced at $7,000. +1 818 369 2332.
Schaumburg, Illinois-based Concepts Dynamics Inc will preview the latest release of its CDI financial management software, version 4.2.
The software contains two modules the General Ledger and the Job Control system.
Enhancements to the General Ledger include cost allocation functions in the General Ledger, on-screen view and edit of data feeds, accounting organiser, user defined  menus , and customised reporting functions for financial statements.
The Job Control system includes six levels of project definition such as project tracking, costs and time estimation as well as an enhanced customer billing system and an employee expense system.
+1 708 397 4400.
CompuServe Inc, Tampa, Florida, will introduce Unix-based versions of World Class, its human resources and payroll software for IBM RS/6000s and Hewlett-Packard Co HP 9000s at Uniforum. +1 813 872 9990.
New York-based Systems Strategies Inc will introduce Express Peer-to-Peer, its real-time communications software, for linking Unix systems to IBM AS/400s.
Express Peer-to-Peer enables users to perform bi-directional file transfer, execute remote job submissions, print documents on both Unix and AS/400 printers and develop program-to-program applications using IBM's LU6.2 protocol.
In addition the software supports TCP/IP and IBM's APPN network.
Available at the end of the month it is priced at $20,000. +1 212 279 8400.
Canoga Park, California-based Andromeda Systems Inc will demonstrate the SCSI CacheMaster, its software which adds cache memory and RAM to SCSI-based computers.
CacheMaster resides between the SCSI host adapter and the tape and optical devices and is available in 2Mb or 320Mb memory sizes.
Cost per Mb is $250. +1 818 700009 7407.
Canadian firm KL Group Inc, Ontario will show XRT/3d for Motif, its software that provides Motif applications with three-dimensional surface and contour colour widgets.
XRT/3d for Motif is available on Sun Microsystems Inc Sparcs, Hewlett-Packard Co HP 9000s and IBM RS/6000s.
WANG, HEWLETT-PACKARD IN UNIX HARDWARE-IMAGE SOFTWARE TIE
In what looks like a remarkable commentary on the nature of its agreement with IBM Corp for the RS/6000, Wang Laboratories Inc is to market Hewlett Packard Co's Unix machines under a deal announced last week.
Wang is re-writing its imaging and office integration software to run on the HP 9000 Series 800 business servers, and in a technology swap, Hewlett-Packard will be reselling this software to its own customers.
The pact is expected to generate around $100m of sales over three years.
There have already been suggestions that Wang's deal with IBM to sell the RS/6000 has not lived up to expectations — in June 1991 IBM took a stake in the financially troubled company, in return for which Wang agreed to sell the AS/400 and RS/6000 machines (UX No 39), but late last year said that it would not be adding to its stake as it had the right to do under terms of the agreement.
Wang UK's Freddie Cook admitted that RS/6000 sales were initially slow, adding that demand was now picking up nicely.
The poor start, he suggested, was partly due to a dearth of applications for IBM's AIX Unix implementation.
Cook characterises Hewlett-Packard's Unix as being closer to standard Unix than IBM's and the company's boast of being the worlds largest supplier of Unix systems is an obvious attraction.
HP will be actively selling Wang's Open/Image, Pace for Open Systems; Open/Office and Cobol Resource software to its own customers, where IBM took nothing.
Cook said that IBM was aware of the announcement and is relaxed about the deal, despite its potential to diminish Wang RS/6000 sales.
IBM TO RELEASE UNIX RELATIONAL DATABASE
IBM Corp is expected to to announce the Unix version of its DB/2 successor to OS/2 Database Manager this Tuesday, although the company was expected to preview it in Paris last Friday: it is IBM's first in-house relational database offering for AIX users, and should help the RS/6000s fit into DRDA (Distributed Relational Database Architecture) and SAA environments — but it's unlikely to appeal to those more used to going to third parties for their database technology.
…
IBM TO OFFER AUSPEX SERVER AS AN OEM PRODUCT
IBM Corp is to offer its Rios-RISC version of the Auspex network server, launched last month (UX No 421) as an OEM product.
The 7051 Power Network Dataserver, described as a high-performance, high-capacity Network file System server, and developed with the help of Santa Clara-based Auspex Systems Inc, will be available for OEMs from May.
It is designed for workgroups requiring fast performance and large amounts of on-line data, and attaches up to eight Ethernet local area networks with storage capacity up to 8Gb to 144Gb.
It does over 2,000 input operations per second, three to five times better than the average Unix server, IBM says.
It costs $170,000 with 28.8Gb disk.
Auspex itself uses the Sparc chip for its own version of the product.
NEWS ROUND UP
Novell Inc has released NetWare NFS Gateway, a set for NetWare Loadable Modules for NetWare v 3.11 for those wishing to access Network File System (NFS) file services on remote Unix systems.
Versions for five, 10, 20, 50, 100 and 250 users are available, with a suggested retail price ranging from $1,500 for five users ($300 a seat) to $12,495 for 250 users ($50 a seat).
Available from April 5th.
For those wanting full TCP/IP access to Unix files, Novell's existing LAN WorkPlace and LAN WorkGroup products are available.
The much flagged NetWare Release 4.0, tidied up to better support large corporate networks, was finally released last week: a 4.0 version of NFS Gateway is under development.
Wind River Systems Inc, Alameda, California developer of the VxWorks real-time operating system kernel, has filed to go public with an initial public offering of 1.9m shares, 1.7 of them new, at a target price of between $8 and $10 per share.
The $1m or so net proceeds will be used for product development and working capital.
Co-managers are Hambrecht & Quist and Wessels, Arnold & Henderson.
Wall Street is beginning to firm up its forecasts for IBM Corp's first quarter figures, with the consensus at around 20 cents a share and the more bearish going for 50 cents — but if Technology News of America's straw poll of the market around the US and Europe is anywhere near right, the loss is going to be a whole lot worse than that: the returns suggest that the company will have sold at best between 25 and 30 mainframes this quarter, where the Wall Street forecasts assume it did nearer 50 machines.
Siemens AG is disputing a politically-sensitive article carried in The Wall Street Journal Europe on February 16, which claims that, for the first time, a top Siemens manager, Heinrich von Pierer, said he was looking for a strategic partner for ailing Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG: Pierer allegedly stated that he was not interested in a ‘one-sided partnership’, rather in one that involved ‘real co-operation’; according to Computerwoche, Siemens denied any claim that it was seeking shelter for Siemens Nixdorf under the umbrella of Japanese or US competitors, ‘like the other three European computer firms’; the Journal's London office says the paper is sticking by its story.
ICL Plc chose Paris for the launch of what it called its biggest ever collection of personal computers and related products last week: the new ErgoLite desktops and note books and Ergo-Pro notebook to ErgoView terminals which come with a variety of ‘personalities’ or emulations — no prizes for guessing that the company is pushing the new product line's ergonomic design.
Orem, Utah-based WordPerfect Corp is chasing objects: it says Word Perfect Presentations 2.0 for Windows will support Object Linking and Embedding, the Twain image acquisition standard and direct CD-ROM sound; and it has done a deal with IBM Corp's IBM Programming Systems for a joint development agreement to provide users with consistent object interaction and data interoperability across multiple workstation products and operating systems — the agreement encompasses WordPerfect for OS/2, WordPerfect for Windows, WordPerfect for MS-DOS and WordPerfect for IBM's AIX Unix.
Tadpole Technology Plc last week announced a deal with ‘a major multinational’ for the design of its first Texas Instruments Inc microSparc motherboard and an implementation of Solaris 2.1 for it.
The deal is thought to be worth 1m over eighteen months to two years.
ULTRASPARCs, SUPERSPARCs and MICROSPARCs WILL FULFILL SUN's SCALABILITY PROMISES
Maureen O'Gara
UltraSparc-I — Sun Microsystems' 64-bit Sparc implementation (see front page) is meant to carry the Sparc design into the realm of 140MHz-200MHz clock speeds, producing chips that measure between 220 and 300 Specint 92 and between 350 and 500 Specfp 92.
First silicon of the follow-on UltraSparc-II a year later should start where UltraSparc-I leaves off, going to 275MHz with Specint 92 ratings between 325 and 475 and Specfp 92 between 550 and 750.
The earliest UltraSparc-III silicon is scheduled for Q4 1996.
The UltraSparc-III will break with the 0.5-micron CMOS technology of its predecessors and use 0.5/0.4-micron BiCMOS techniques instead.
Like all of Sun's chips, UltraSparcs will be manufactured by one or more of its semiconductor partners.
Texas Instruments is a likely choice.
The chips, upwardly binary compatible with preceding generations, will adhere to the Sparc V9 specification published by Sparc International last year.
Sun intends UltraSparc to be highly superscalar and handle four instructions a cycle.
It will include dual-launch floating point and be made out of a 4-level metal process.
Supersparcs
Scalability issues have dogged the 32-bit SuperSparc, Sun's current high-end microprocessor.
Design flaws made it hard to manufacture in volume at 40MHz until recently though it was originally targeted at high clock rates.
Despite these serious hiccups, Sun maintains the continued scalability of Sparc and claims that simulations prove the viability of the UltraSparc.
As a result of changes in the original masks, Sun now speaks of a SuperSparc and a SuperSparc+.
The former is the result of its initial work and produces its current 33MHz-40MHz Vikings.
The SuperSparc+, producing early silicon now, will take it from 45MHz to an anticipated 60MHz in the fourth quarter.
(Sun says it's getting 50MHz parts now.)
In first quarter of 1994 a SuperSparc-II kicks in with first silicon around 65MHz and by the fourth quarter it should be up to 90MHz.
Systems introductions will lag all silicon by some months.
The 0.7-micron SuperSparc+ should benchmark from about 75 to 100 Specint 92 and from 108 to 135 Specfp 92.
The SuperSparc-II will move to a 0.6-micron technology and Sun will add an enhanced integer unit, new floating point and dual-launch floating point.
When combined, these enhancements are expected to increase the II's floating point to a integer ratio.
It should benchmark between 115 and 150 Specint 92 and between 162 and 200 Specfp 92.
Texas Instruments will manufacture the new SuperSparcs as it does the current ones.
All SuperSparcs will follow the older 32-bit V8 spec.
These multiprocessors will do three instructions a cycle and be built out of a 3-level metal process.
Microsparc
Sun is also developing multiple iterations of Tsunami, its low-end low-cost high-volume single-chip MicroSparc engine.
Sun could move the manufacture of these parts from TI, which began it quite successfully, to Fujitsu, which has been very anxious for the business.
Sun figures it could have 75MHz versions of its current MicroSparc by summer.
By the end of the year it should have early silicon on the MicroSparc-II, designed to go from 70MHz to 100MHz by Q4 ‘94.
MicroSparc-II will get a new floating point unit, an enhanced integer unit, 4x cache and power management.
Manufacture will move from a 0.8-micron process to 0.5 micron and from a 2-level metal to a 3-level.
Voltage will shrink from 5 volts to 3.3.
It should come in around 45 Specint 92 and top out at around 60.
The sketchier MicroSparc-III, expected to produce silicon in early ‘95, will pick up at 100MHz and go to 125MHz by the beginning of ‘96.
It will use faster transistors and an external cache.
All MicroSparcs are uniprocessors capable of one instruction per cycle and again follow the 32-bit Sparc V8 guidelines.
Sun reckons its only competitors are Intel and the IBM PowerPC.
In fact it figures the three companies will be the only survivors of the coming silicon shoot-out.
To insure its place it is wading into the vapourchip fray from what it claims is a more defensible position.
Its products are more seamless and easier to work with because its compilers and operating system are factored into the design.
It wrings higher performance per clock than anybody and it has not broken compatibility the way Intel intends to do with the P6 (UX No 420) and the way IBM has done with the Rios and its subset the PowerPC, having apparently failed to scale it down to the desktop and having been forced to strip out 40 instructions and substitute a software emulator.
IBM'S POWER OPEN ASSOCIATION KICKS OFF WITH FIVE SPONSORS — MORE IN THE WINGS
The PowerOpen Association Inc unveiled itself last week with five sponsor members — Apple, Bull, IBM, Motorola and Thomson-CSF — spending an initial $750,000 and annual $250,000 to fund the Billerica, Massachusetts-based outfit.
Harris Computer Inc and Tadpole Technology Ltd are principal members, spending a lesser $150,000 per annum.
DEC veteran Dominic LaCava is president, and a further eight to 12 staff should come on board this year.
Sponsor members get a vote on the board and on all committees and working groups, principal members get representation on the board and committees, with one vote on all working groups.
Associate membership costs $100, and is mainly aimed at software developers, forty of which endorsed the effort.
PowerOpen will publish an Application Binary Interface — based on IBM's AIX — this Summer, along with test and verification software for both system vendors and application developers.
Other Unix-based operating systems, such as Bull's BOS/X and Thomson-CSF's real-time Uni/XT will be grafted on top by individual vendors, and IBM said it would keep its mainstream RS/6000 systems in-line with the specifications.
The aim is to create a single binary standard for software running on PowerPC and RIOS-based systems.
Further sponsors and at least one ‘multi-million unit company’, not expected to be in the mainstream computer systems business, is said to have signed up for PowerPC, and should reveal itself within two months, claimed PowerOpen officials.
MINIGRAMS
We hear Intel Corp has written up a bunch of Q&As for its people to use answering questions that touch on DEC's competitive Alpha chip, while Microsoft Corp has written up a similar document on Unix compared with NT.
In what may be the first of several similar moves, Alpha Microsystems Inc has agreed to acquire the assets of the hardware maintenance division of MGI Group International, a Los Angeles-based Unix integrator with 294 local service contracts adding $1.2M to Alpha's nationwide annual service revenues.
The acquisition, whose terms were undisclosed, is expected to be completed later this month.
Sun Microsystems Inc says the Cypress/Ross HyperSparc is still only in pre-production mode and that until it advances they can't make a decision about using it.
And Sun reportedly has a number of other chip projects on the drawing board besides the UltraSparcs, SuperSparcs and MicroSparcs described inside: these iterations however are all actively funded and staffed.
Sun Microsystems Inc shares were off $2.50 at $32.375 last week after the company's chief financial officer suggested that the quarter's results may fall below expectations, prompting analysts at Dean Witter and Goldman Sachs to express concern about the workstation maker's order levels this quarter.
Question: When is LAN Manager for Windows/NT not LAN Manager for Windows/NT?
Answer: when it is called Microsoft Windows/NT Advanced Server — Microsoft Corp says that it has invoked the name change so as not to confuse customers since a lot of the functions of the OS/2-based LAN Manager which we know and love are already incorporated into the base operating system and Advanced Server will provide only the extras such as multi-domain management; coincidentally of course, Microsoft will avoid discouraging any users that weren't particularly enamoured of LAN Manager's original incarnation.
Clear seems to be all the rage these days, what with Miller Brewing coming out with a beer that not only tastes watered, but actually looks like water, a Clear Tab from the Coca Cola Co and Pepsi Co pushing something called Pepsi Crystal, so it's nice to see that IBM Corp is right up there with the trend — enter one of those hallowed and long-standing computer rooms these days and like as not you'll be able to see right across it with no Big Iron to impede the view — the transparent mainframe.
If you need to refer to a scorecard, DEC's Alpha chip and the Mips Technologies Inc's R4000 part are already 64-bit.
IBM is also making the transition along with Sun (see page one) but its first 64-bit silicon, the 620 PowerPC, is still a year away.
An essay in the latest issue of the Microprocessor Report makes the point that the chips that are pressing the clock speed argument in their design such as Mips, HP and DEC are the ones winning the performance not the people such as Sun, IBM and Motorola who contend its all in the instructions per cycle.
The complexity of the Sun, IBM and Motorola designs can also negatively impact time-to-market: a six-month slip, such as Sun had with the SuperSparc, can make a new CPU suddenly uncompetitive.
IDG World Expo is trying to pull together a Unix Fair ‘93/Tokyo for December 8–10 at the Pacifico Yokohama: It's got a hospitality suite set up at the San Francisco Marriott this week trolling for prospects.
It's open 10 to 7 March 16 through 18 in the Sierra Conference Suite A. DEC has just named company veteran John O'Keefe, formerly vice president, channels marketing, to the post of vice president, Unix marketing reporting to vice president, Bill Demmer.
IBM and Sybase Inc have cooked up a co-development/co-marketing deal revolving around the RS/6000 that they're expected to announce this week.
Microsoft Corp chairman has been quoted in the US press as saying SunSelect's Praxsys Windows-on-Unix product would violate Microsoft's intellectual property rights unless it gets a license from Microsoft.
SunSelect says its lawyers are  satisfied there are no legal obstacles to selling the stuff.
Oracle Corp will team with Sun Microsystems Computer Corp to develop and sell products and services for the pharmaceutical industry.
The partners look for about $200m in hardware, software and services from the venture by 1997.
It will include a systems integration effort for complicated tasks such as document tracking, and joint development of software to expedite computer-assisted new drug design.
Cincinnati-based Cincom Systems Inc has won a five year, $10m contract to supply its LAN database, Supra Server, to the US Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA) and the Defense Commercial Communications Offices.
Another name can be crossed firmly off the IBM Corp list: John Sculley, chairman of Apple Computer Inc has now gone on the record saying ‘I would like to respond to the persistent rumours that I might leave Apple and go to IBM — I have told Apple's board of directors and our executive management team that I am not available or interested in being chief executive of IBM; I believe Apple has a tremendous opportunity to be extremely successful in the years ahead, and Apple will be the most important innovator and leader in the industry; 10 years ago this April I signed up to do a job, and there is still a lot that I would like to accomplish with all of us; I hope this statement will put to rest the speculation that I might go to IBM, and also serve as a clear message of the confidence that I have in Apple,’ he declared.
Unify Corp has appointed Reza Mikailli as senior vice president of product development: he joins from Informix, where he was responsible for development of Informix On-Line.
Liant Software Inc has sold off Template Graphics Software Inc, its corporate graphics business unit to Landmark Ventures Inc, a Connecticut-based investment management company.
It will be run as a free-standing entity.
Liant says it wants to focus on its strategic base of programming languages and application enabling tools.
Oops!
We got the telephone number of Ontos Uk Ltd, Richmond, Surrey wrong a couple of weeks ago, its +44 81 332 7245.