

TIVOLI OFFERS UP AN OBJECT API TO DESKTOP EFFORT
Tivoli Systems Inc, Austin, Texas, is racing to fill the systems management void left open by the Common Open Software Environment alliance at Uniforum.
Last week it volunteered to create a common applications programming interface (API) based on its object-oriented framework and submit it gratis to X/Open Co Ltd as part of the COSE standard.
It says it will submit the API in the next 90 days to the COSE work group for systems management that COSE promised to form.
The Tivoli initiative has not gotten any kind of endorsement from any of the COSE group.
However, through all the long years of the Unix wars Tivoli seemed to be the only thing that all the key parties could agree on.
The Tivoli framework is central to Unix International's Atlas and the Open Software Foundation's DME systems management standards, hence with what Unix Systems Labs, Hewlett-Packard Co and IBM Corp are doing.
It is also key to Sun Microsystems Inc's Project DOE (Distributed Objects Everywhere) scheme.
Tivoli president Frank Moss believes it would be relatively painless to bring these three endeavours, representing the main COSE players, into alignment.
Although he has received some personal encouragement from the COSE chieftains, he cannot tell whether they will be predisposed to adopt his technology again.
Moss is concerned by what he heard at the COSE announcement that they aim to achieve systems management harmony at a lower level, perhaps at an applications level, than the single high-level link Tivoli is offering.
He believes such an outcome would only tick off independent software companies.
COSE also has no time to go off on an invention tear, he said, if it aims to take on Microsoft Corp.
Microsoft previewed Hermes, Windows NT's systems management scheme due in the second half, at InterOp recently.
Moss describes it as ‘sort of distributed,’ offering node-to-node management, no security and no policy.
Clearly he believes Tivoli would be a real COSE asset.
88OPEN PLANS SEPARATE COMPANY TO MARKET TESTING SERVICES
Faced with the choice of reinventing itself or hanging up its boots, 88open, the supporters club for Motorola Inc 88000 RISC vendors, is reportedly finalising a plan to offer up its conformance testing expertise to the industry at large, via a separate organisation that will develop and port test suites for suppliers of other RISC architectures and consortia like PowerOpen or Sparc International it sees as potential customers.
The current schedule envisages the organisation dividing into two separate concerns from May (UX No 409).
With support for the 88000 as a system architecture dwindling to a few hardy companies, a core 88open unit will continue to service their requirements, testing and branding system software and applications.
There is no danger of that part of 88open being lost — its members have already paid all their dues, some $3.5m, for the new fiscal year starting in April (UX No 424).
Most indicators — though things could change by May — point to the creation of a new private company, with another name, that'll attempt to win specification, standards creation, certification and branding work from users, as well as other RISC vendors and consortia, possibly doing independent software vendor recruitment too.
As well a facing a falling roster of 88000 adherents, 88open's scheme to license its compatibility technology also stalled, having pulled in only Hewlett-Packard Co as a customer.
According to 88open chief, Tom Mace, potential buyers wanted the stuff customised for them and 88open as it is, just isn't in a position to do that for them.
In addition, 88open says software companies using its 88000 certification process have asked specifically for the group to put its stuff up on other architectures.
Issues still being worked through include who owns the testing technology already developed and how 88open's not-for-profit status will be affected by the changes.
More details next week.
HAL WORKING ON FOUR 64-BIT SPARC SYSTEM LINES
HaL Computer Systems Inc, Campbell, California, remains one of the most difficult companies to ferret information out of so we're grateful for even a glimmer of intelligence.
According to what we've been able to piece together using what may be dated information, it's been working on four lines of development, all using the company's proprietary 64-bit Sparc implementation and the VME bus.
Included are entry-level workstations, uniprocessor servers, a one-to-four symmetric multiprocessor and high-end clusters that are both tightly and loosely coupled.
At one time or another these projects were respectively code named: Alaska, California, Montana and Nevada.
Alaska and California each had two versions named after cities such as Fairbanks and Nome.
These two are still believed to be targeted at the sub $10,000 and sub $20,000 price points respectively.
Product plans from 18 months ago called for first Alaska shipments this quarter, a date HaL is obviously not going to make.
Observers however believe it will ship its first product before the end of the year after a lengthy alpha and beta cycle.
These observers also think HaL has outdone its original specification for Fairbanks and Nome and will get better than the 100 MIPS and 175 MIPS they were shooting for.
Originally California was due in second quarter 1993, Montana in fourth quarter 1993 and Nevada in fourth quarter 1994.
NEW SUN UNIT TO PEDDLE CPU, SYSTEM DESIGNS…
Looking to get more serious in its efforts to encourage a real Sparc compatible community, Sun Microsystems Inc will open a new business unit next month that'll licence the silicon and system designs of its next generation, 64-bit UltraSparc, SuperSparc+ and MicroSparc (UX No 426).
The Sparc Technology Business (STB) division, will operate out of SMCC offices in Mountain View, California, and is to be headed by vice president, Derek Meyer.
STB plans to offer three types of specifications; for silicon, Sparc Unix system and operating system-independent hardware.
SuperSparc+ and MicroSparc-II specifications will be out in the summer, SuperSparc designs should be available next month, whilst UltraSparc specifications won't be ready until the fourth quarter of next year.
STB will also market Sun's home-grown chip design tools, which include a database for each CPU plus diagnostic, simulation and debugging software.
STB's brief also covers responsibility for third party distribution rights.
Sparcstation 10 and Classic LX system specifications will be available next month: plans for 45MHz SuperSparc+ Sparcstation 10 Models 52 and 54 and 50MHz SuperSparc+ Models 62 and 64 will follow later this year.
Hardware design kits for boxes that'll run non-Unix operating systems already announced for Sparc — such as Novell Inc NetWare and real-time environments — are available from next month, other operating systems will no doubt follow.
No prices were available.
…45MHz, 50MHz SPARCSTATIONS, EIGHT-WAY SUNBOX ANTICIPATED
Meanwhile, sources report that orders for Sun Microsystems Inc's SuperSparc-based Sparcstation 10 Model 41 dried up pretty early in the current quarter reportedly because the boxes weren't leading edge enough or priced low enough to satisfy.
The company is also reportedly having difficulty moving a significant amount of lower-end series 10s out of the channel and into end-user sites.
Meanwhile, expectations are rising that Sun will soon announce its anticipated 45MHz Model 52 and 54, set to be dual and quad machines, along with perhaps an unanticipated 45MHz uniprocessor (the Model 51?) and a 50MHz single, dual or quad configuration (the Model 61?).
There is also talk of an eight-way desktop/deskside called SunBox again touted for the second calendar quarter.
MCI AND SUNCONNECT TO EXTEND SUNNET
MCI Communications Corp, Washington and Sun Microsystems Inc's SunConnect communications software subsidiary have announced a development agreement to target the wide area network management market.
MCI's support is a boost for SunConnect.
While SunNet Manager is widely used in local network-based and local network interconnect environments, it has so far had little support in wide area networking and telecommunications, where Hewlett-Packard Co's OpenView is seen to have won greater interest.
The system will also compete with British Telecommunications Plc's Concert and AT&T Co's Accumaster systems — although British Telecom has just announced alliances with both SunConnect and Hewlett, as well as the Hermes-based enterprise-wide management system that is under development by Infonet Corp and Microsoft Corp.
The two companies say they plan to incorporate SunNet Manager, SunConnect's distributed network management system, into HyperStream, the name umbrella name that MCI gives to its Frame Relay, Switched Multi-Megabit Data Services and broadband ISDN networks.
The idea is to use HyperStream's customer network management service, HyperScope, with the SunNet Manager software to monitor and control high-speed wide area virtual data networks.
The two companies claim the agreement will mean that customers switching from leased line services to local network interconnect systems will be able to maintain the level of control over their internetworks to which they have become accustomed.
SunNet Manager includes a set of applications for automated fault isolation, diagnosis and network monitoring and control.
A range of third party applications is also available, providing analysis capabilities and visual displays.
X WINDOW, UNIX?
IT SCORES, BUT IT JUST ISN'T CRICKET
The English cricket season is almost upon us, and things will never again be the same.
And we're not just talking about all the matches in the venerable County Championship being four-day events — so much more of an event than a three-day match.
No, the revolution this season is much more fundamental, consigning to the annals and archives of the game all those beloved green-ruled score books with their lines and squares and numbers carefully laid out to register every ball in best pencil.
This season, the scoring system is going high-tech thanks to a joint venture between Goole, Humberside-based press agency Computer News Services and the Test and County Cricket Board.
The new system, which should be in place by the end of this month, will replace the current pen and paper score sheet method with 30 laptop computers — one for each scorer — connected to a database.
It runs on Compaq Computer Corp Contura notebooks, complete with colour screens and internal and using BSD 386 Unix with X Window software, and has been designed with user friendliness in mind since the nation's cricket scorers are largely computilliterate 70- to 90-year-olds.
Scorers will use mouse clicks to mark off, on-screen, details like where each ball bowled landed, whether a run was scored, whether a wicket fell, and which players caught which batsmen out.
This information is electronically mailed back to a central Sun Microsystems Inc database and a Compaq personal computer, held in Computer News Services' offices.
A second copy of the database will also be held, at a secret location, to ensure security.
The new system will not only provide subscribers with up to the minute, page-ready results but will offer cricket coaches a means of analysing players' performance — for example a batsman's record against certain bowlers.
The money raised from subscription to the new service, will be used to recoup the £140,000 that was spent developing it.
O2 SIGNS WITH OBJECT CONSULTANCY
O2 Technology SA, the object-oriented database start-up in Versailles, says it has signed a partnership agreement with Paris-based Ingenia SA, a consultancy specialising in object-oriented technology, artificial intelligence and man-machine interfaces.
Under the non-exclusive agreement, Ingenia will sell O2 to its clients in the  defence , agro-chemical and automotive industries.
O2 is an object-oriented database that has yet to make its mark as a commercial success.
MEGATEK EXTENDS X-CELLERATOR FAMILY
Megatek Corp, San Jose announced the newest member of its X-Cellerator family, a $1,500 Esprix CL accelerator supporting multiple workstation users on a single Sparc CPU, enabling for independent users on a Sparcstation 10.
The CL also provides Sun's new Classic and LX boxes with a low-cost graphics accelerator.
Performance equals 1m two-dimensional vectors a second.
Megatek casts the widget as a cost-effective alternative to colour X-terminals.
It is compatible with X Window and OpenWindows applications: ships begin next month.
BUNDESPOST TELEKOM IN OPEN SYSTEMS SHAKEUP
By 1995, Deutsche Bundespost Telekom intends a root-and-branch reorganisation of its data processing activities, by consolidating its 36 existing computer centres into six, and condensing its 45 applications development centres down to five.
According to the German weekly Computerwoche, Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG is said to be one of the hot favourites to win the multimillion dollar contract.
The deal would involve supplying the company with standardised data processing technology, and a network to link up all of its 100,000 users.
Siemens Nixdorf has the edge because it is currently working closely with Telekom to develop the Ocis office communication software, which is already installed in several sites.
XSOFT LAUNCHES WORKFLOW MANAGEMENT SOFTWARE
XSoft Inc, part of Xerox, has introduced InConcert, client/server document-based workflow management software for distributed computing environments.
It is said to model and coordinate all components of a work process intuitively, including the people, procedures and data, and offers real-time access to the status of things.
To be sold primarily through VARs and system integrators who will customise it for vertical markets, InConcert serves Unix and PC users in configurations from entry-level workgroups up through the enterprise.
InConcert automatically prompts and tracks all tasks in the workflow process to locate the right documents and software tools for each step of a project and deliver them at the right time to the right people.
These documents can include spreadsheets, images, graphics and forms.
Managers can obtain progress reports on any project at any level of detail at any time.
XSoft claims InConcert is the first product of its kind to manage people and work process in an organisation-wide setting with multivendor software and platform compatibility.
US revenues for this kind of software is projected to increase from $226m in 1992 to over $2.5b in 1996.
InConcert is independent of other applications and requires no proprietary imaging, office automation or publishing software.
Third-party applications can be integrated.
Users can reportedly modify the workflow process on the fly.
InConcert uses a graphical user interface and object-oriented user environment.
It also uses standard RDMBs such as Sybase and Oracle to implement workflow management.
Its capabilities are based on a job model for collaborative process automation.
InConcert is available as a server on Sparcstations and RS/6000s.
The client is available for Sparcstations, RS/6000s and 386/486 PCs.
Its base configuration, a Unix server, two developer licenses and eight end-user licences, lists for $21,000.
Additional developer licenses are $3,000 and additional end-user licences go for $1,500 or less depending on quantity.
Site licences are available too.
InConcert begins shipping this month.
AT&T took a stab at this kind of thing awhile back with Rhapsody based on Workhorse out of Dublin.
It never got off the ground.
Xerox, meanwhile, pride of the office technology set, is trying to wash its hands of its PC-based desktop publisher Ventura because of losses.
Informed sources say they started shopping it around last week through Goldman Sachs.
NCR's RAPID RESPONSE UNIT
At UniForum last week, NCR Corp announced its Client Server Rapid Implementation programme, a consulting service that it says develops Unix-based client-server computing prototypes for a customer in less than 60 days.
The programme is intended to introduce users to the client-server model and offer a flexible networked solution to solve a business problem.
Using actual data from the customer, NCR will work with the major database vendors — it names Oracle Corp, Sybase Inc and Informix Software Inc, to build a custom prototype that combines NCR hardware and software.
The programme is pitched at Fortune 1000 companies that have embraced open systems for strategic applications and the company suggests that it could develop a prototype to consolidate financial reporting from a company's strategic business units into corporate headquarters, connecting disparate computer environments into a client-server system.
It will first work with the customer to identify business problems to be solved, and after the design has been determined, NCR will build the prototype around an NCR 3450 or NCR 3550 symmetric multiprocessing server — it's going after people downsizing from mainframes here.
The NCR 3450 departmental or workgroup server is available as either a uniprocessor or multiprocessor, expandable to four iAPX-86 microprocessors and the NCR 3550 is designed for use as a powerful symmetric multi-processing server for transaction processing and database applications and is expandable up to eight microprocessors.
The application could be a combination of NCR's Co-operation and workflow automation software, with software from other independent vendors.
ACER READIES PURPOSE-BUILT NT BOXES
Acer Group Inc is hitching its wagon very closely to Microsoft Corp's Windows NT's star by developing a Mips Technologies Inc R4000/4400 six-chip chipset specifically for NT personal computers.
It expects entry-level boxes built with the ‘PICA’ chip and the Acer reference design to go for under $3,500 yet offer a five time performance leap over 66MHz Intel 486DX2 machines.
Acer will introduce a line of the PICA boxes to be called the Formula 64-bit PCs at Comdex Spring and will sell the blueprints and OEM motherboards to other vendors.
It believes it already has takers.
The M6100 PICA chipset, short for Performance-enhanced I/O and CPU Architecture, includes a high-speed 64-bit local bus to accelerate graphics and networking.
Acer intends licensing the bus to the PC industry.
The design also includes an ISA bus and AT expansion compatibility.
The chipset reportedly supports NT's multitasking and multithreaded I/O operations.
It will be able to handle R4000 and 4400 chips up to 200MHz.
PICA partitions the system into four subsystems: processor, I/O, video and memory.
Each subsystem concurrently communicates via a 25MHz 64-bit bus and the CPU local bus running at 50MHz.
The memory subsystem is a high bandwidth design offering 200 Mbyte/second data transfer and capable of addressing 8MB to 256MB of memory.
The 200 Mbyte/second video/memory bus is exclusively shared between the 64-bit CPU and the 64-bit I/O master so it yields a high bandwidth for the 64-bit video system.
As a result, it can reportedly support high-performance graphics that currently require more expensive technical workstations.
Acer is kicking off an ISV programme to attract software house to write to NT.
Early Formula development systems will be available.
Acer says PICA, developed by Acer Labs in Taiwan, can be modified to support other 64-bit MPUs running NT because of its modularity.
The chipset is sampling at $199 apiece.
UNIR WILL BRING AT&T's CALICO OBJECT SYSTEM TO MARKET
AT&T and Unir Corporation have extended their marketing agreement on AT&T's Bell Labs-developed Calico object-oriented programming language and operating environment technology that Unir claims is the successor to Unix (UX Nos 421, 422).
Unir will now be able to negotiate with large computer vendors and software houses on AT&T's behalf to facilitate Calico's transfer to the commercial marketplace.
Pricing will depend on the type of technology transfer involved.
Maximum access to all of Calico's object-oriented technology including source code, documentation and licensing rights should run about $750,000.
Currently Calico is available on 68000 and Sparc systems.
Under a previous pact, Unir is porting it to Intel.
Unir, which is pressing the time-to-market argument, says Calico can be applied to pen-based computing, object-oriented database servers, real-time object-based systems and special-purpose telecomms systems that are either open or proprietary.
Unir will continue to develop and support its Calico-derived C+@ (Cat) programming language and Conix operating environment.
It says it is currently negotiating with several Sparc cloners to ship Conix as a standard component on every machine.
Volume pricing is less than $50 a workstation.
Conix can run all existing apps as well as apps developed under C+@.
Unir says binaries developed using C+@ can be run without being recompiled on any processor that supports Conix, allowing developers to distribute the same binary for Sparc, the 68000 and Intel.
UNIFACE CLAIMS TO BE THE FIRST TO SUPPORT IBM's DB2/6000
Uniface Corp, Alameda, California claims to be the first proprietary language vendor to support IBM Corp's new DB2/6000 relational database for AIX Unix on the RS/6000 (UX No 428).
The company says it is developing an interface that links the Uniface development system with DB2/6000 servers and host databases, providing transparent read/write access to DB2/6000 databases, complete support for all DB2 features, including host and DB2 security, error handling, data integrity and recoverability.
It will support all DB2 data types and offer the ability to develop stand-alone applications using OSF/Motif, client-server applications that link MS-DOS, Windows, OS/2 and Unix clients to DB2/6000 servers across local area networks, and will offer full support of IBM Distributed Database Connection Services/6000, the company says.
The DB2/6000 Interface Driver will be out 60 days after IBM ships DB2/6000; no price till then.
’ FORGET NT’— WINDOWS 4 SOUNDS LIKE THE KILLER
All the hype surrounding Microsoft Corp's Windows NT has drawn attention away from the fact that the real monster seller that for at least its first two or three years of life will relegate NT to niche product status is Windows 4.0.
Being developed alongside MS-DOS 7.0 under the code-name Chicago, Windows 4.0 is expected next year.
It will incorporate the functionality of Windows for Workgroups, and will include its own native 32-bit file system and device drivers integrated with a Windows kernel so that it will not technically require MS-DOS to run, although it may be packaged so that MS-DOS 7.0, which will also include the 32-bit features, has to be installed first.
But Windows 4.0 will support the full Win32 application programming interface, and will include pre-emptive multi-tasking, and it will also have a user interface that is similar to, if not identical to the parallel Cairo object-oriented development effort.
Windows 4 will also  include release 2.0 of Object Linking and Embedding, and should run most NT applications.
MS-DOS 7 will have full 32-bit internals but no 32-bit programming interface, InformationWeek reports, because, Microsoft says, developers have taken advantage of so many 16-bit MS-DOS features that moving to a 32-bit programming interface would be virtually impossible.
Cairo is now being described as the next major release of NT, and may well be the release that the market waits for before deciding to commit to NT.
It will include graphical interface enhancements and offer a distributed object-oriented file system.
As for NT, Microsoft is back describing it as primarily a server operating system, and acknowledging that vendors are unlikely to bundle it with more than about 10% of the desktop machines they ship.
INTEL ANNOUNCES THE PENTIUM…
Intel Corp says it has begun shipping production versions of the Pentium microprocessor, but as the company already indicated, it will not be talking price until May, when it frees its customers to start announcing machines.
Manufacturers — such as Compaq Computer Corp, which rushed to discuss its Pentium plans in general terms, say they expect their first Pentium machines to list for as little as $4,500, half the price set for early model 80486 machines in 1989.
The Wall Street Journal hears that the company has listed the 60MHz version at $905 for 1,000-up, and gone as low as $850 each for its best customers; the 66MHz version is said to cost $1,000.
Intel expects to ship ‘hundreds of thousands’ of Pentiums in 1993, and reach a manufacturing rate of 1m in 1994.
Last week's edition of US PC Week says that its test lab found that the Pentium runs identical software about 80% faster than a similarly clocked 80486 in tests of an Intel-configured Pentium evaluation system.
…
RATING IT AT 112 MIPS
Intel Corp rates the 66MHz version of the Pentium chip at 112 MIPS — well it is claimed to execute two instructions per cycle — one for each of its parallel arithmetic-logic units — two five-stage execution units, and claims that it is five times more powerful than the original 80486 microprocessor and over 300 times faster than the 8088.
It contains 3.1m transistors, compared with 1.2m for the 80486.
It is manufactured in Intel's 0.8 micron three-metal layer BiCMOS process technology, has two 8Kb on-chip caches and a fully compatible floating point unit that is up to five times faster than the one on the 80486 at the same clock speed.
To get around the problem that the thing can squeal to a halt when it comes to a branch that stalls the instruction stream, it includes branch prediction, where the chip remembers prior instruction pathways and predicts the correct pathway for a new instruction.
D&B SOFTWARE's SMARTSTREAM 2.0 USES MICROSOFT ACCESS
The UK arm of Dun & Bradstreet Corp's Atlanta, Georgia-based Software Services division last week previewed version 2.0 of its SmartStream client/server accounting and decision support software which will debut this summer on a range of platforms.
Enhancements over last year's initial 1.0 release include workflow activity managers which prioritise tasks for execution or delegation, the addition of Microsoft Corp Access as the query and reporting tool, a more flexible version of the Cognos Software Inc PowerPlay data analyser it already incorporates and new batch cycle processing and TCP/IP connect functionality in SmartStream's InterQ communication application.
Transaction processing for SmartStream will be offered in a Financial Stream application, also due this summer, with personnel, manufacturing and logistics packages following in 1994.
SmartStream is intended to provide a means for mainframe users to move to client/server arrangements without abandoning their existing systems.
In the D&B SmartStream scheme, mainframes can be retained as a file servers whilst cheaper Unix boxes take over its traditional tasks.
Using the Sybase Inc SQL Server relational database and a Microsoft Windows front-end, SmartStream — plus its associated applications — provides information access, distribution, presentation and development functions for managing integrated purchasing, asset management and manufacturing systems, the company claims.
Using InterQ, SmartStream applications can access data from D&B's Expert (the former Management Science America software) and Millenium series mainframe applications and from IBM Corp DB2 and CICS systems and send it to the server system.
Although the SmartStream bundle is tied exclusively to the Sybase database at present, interoperability with other platforms is being considered and other database engines can be accessed via Information Builder Inc's EDA/SQL gateway.
In moving to a SmartStream client/server environment, most organisations would have to replace predominantly dumb end-user terminals with more expensive personal computer clients needed to run the Windows front end and other tools as well as buying a slew of different software packages, albeit from a single supplier.
D&B says it evaluated a dozen query tools before deciding on Microsoft Access, which proved more user friendly than any of the others, and doesn't require SQL programming skills.
Evaluating NT
D&B says it has done $5m of business on SmartStream since its debut last summer, has some 30 customers, with five orders worth over $300,000: the software is aimed at organisations with revenues in excess of $150m.
SmartStream can access IBM 370 or compatible, CICS/MVS VSAM, DB2, APPC LU6.2, VAX 4000 through 8000 VMS and DECNet environments.
It supports Intel Corp 80486, Hewlett-Packard 9000, Data General AViiON, VAX 4000 through 8000 and OS/2 servers and personal computer clients running windows.
The firm sees little demand for Unix front-ends yet.
Support for other platforms — including DEC Alpha-OSF/1 and Sun Microsystems Inc Sparc — is expected to be announced as soon as D&B's exclusive distribution arrangements for HP, DG and VAX of SmartStream versions are up.
Curiously, given that its UK arm does a significant amount of work on VME mainframes, there is no place for ICL Plc kit in D&B's initial plan — not so smart, perhaps — but again, support is expected to follow shortly.
Networks supported include IBM LAN Server, Microsoft LAN Manager, Novell NetWare, DEC Pathworks and TCP/IP.
D&B is also evaluating Microsoft Windows NT as a host environment for its products, and has the beta NT release up and running in its labs.
In conjunction with the organiser, D&B carried out an open systems and NT survey at last week's UniForum Unix trade show in San Francisco.
Even though Windows NT has not yet been released, 37% of the 1,000 or so survey participants said NT will offer benefits not yet available under Unix.
Kent Godfrey, director of D&B Software responded by saying ‘no single operating system’ can achieve the goal of providing users with access to open systems technologies.
D&B's competitors include Walker Interactive Systems Inc, SAP, Oracle and PeopleSoft.
DATA GENERAL PLANS CUT-PRICE DOCUMENT MANAGEMENT SOFTWARE
Data General Corp is going into document imaging/forms management to move hardware, taking what it learned in the minicomputer business and applying it to current events.
It will attempt to commoditise software that currently sells for 10 times what DG will charge.
It comes from a third-party source DG declines to identify and is already used in high-end sites.
Some of the functionality that lets it be sold for over $10,000 has been stripped out like technical image editing and the ability to scan in pages over 11 x 17.
However, for $700 a seat for five users it is still very sexy stuff.
Because of its Hypersoft compression technology or rather because it doesn't require image decompression 100 full-screen zoomed images can be viewed in less than 17 second, 1,000 in 3.5 minutes.
It requires a tenth the usual disk space and  one-fifith the usual memory.
DG figures imaging is an untapped high-volume market because of the prices that are being asked, the complexity of current software and the time it takes to implement.
DG believes its formula is not only affordable and easy-to-use but takes advantage of networks, databases and applications that are already installed.
The software, which DG is styling AV Image, is based on an SQL client/server architecture and runs on Windows-based PCs, Motif-based workstations and X terminals networked via NetWare or TCP/IP to a relational database on an AViiON server.
AV Image includes Win-Track, a Windows-based universal document manager to create, scan, index, delete, search, edit, mail and print documents and images and AV Image Viewer for viewing and annotating.
DB Links and AV Imagizer Toolkit, a programmer-level package of run-time C and dynamic link libraries and documentation, are options as is a MasstorMind Optical Storage Manager.
(The software will be free with optical jukeboxes.)
DBase support includes Sybase, Oracle, Ingres, Informix or Progress using a DB Link option.
DG considers relational databases overkill and says run-time versions are enough.
They add $300 a seat to the cost.
For smaller environments of less than 20 users, AV Image includes a Paradox PC database engine with networked multiuser file management on the server.
The products, internally tested the last six months and now going into formal beta, will be available direct and through VARs in the second quarter.
DG aims to hit what it figures is the largest of the imaging markets: the turnkey multiuser arena.
Its Professional Services people will pursue users that require customisation and OIS integration.
It will use partners at the uppermost reaches which require, say, a workflow component to be supplied by UK, London firm Staffware.
CONGRUENT HAS THE TOOLS TO ENABLE MICROSFT NT TO SUPPORT X TERMINALS
Congruent Corp, a small band of  techies operating from the heart of Manhattan, has come out with technology that will enable Microsoft Corp's Windows NT operating system to support X Window applications running on X terminals and workstations.
The system will enable developers of Unix applications to do versions will run under NT and still host X Window applications.
Organisations that want to standardise on Windows NT will be able to continue to take advantage of the features and economy of X terminals.
The offering consists of conversion tools that enable X applications now hosted under Unix to migrate them to NT — Congruent is developing NT implementations of the programming libraries and the X sample applications, including Xterm, enhanced to take advantage of advanced features of NT.
LYNX UNVEILS NEW VERSION OF REAL-TIME OPERATING SYSTEM
Los Gatos, California-based Lynx Real-Time Systems Inc has introduced version 2.2 of LynxOS, its real-time operating system.
Enhancements to the new release enhancements include Posix 1003.4 real-time  extensions , which enable users to execute Ada code in Unix environments.
Improved library functions have been added to increase the performance of Threads and semaphores (special-purpose datatypes).
It supports the Futurebus+, increasing the number of user priorities LynxOS can process to include rate, multiprocessing and scheduling.
LynxOS' Unix compatibility has been improved and now includes Unix SVR4 Streams support, binary compatability with Unix V.3.2 system calls and Unix shells.
Other features include memory expansion to 512Mb and 2Gb of storage space.
Version 2.2 is  available now and runs on Sun Microsystems Inc Sparcstation 2s, Mips Technologies Inc's R3000, IBM RS/6000s and Hewlett-Packard Co HP 9000s.
ANDF PRODUCT PROGRAMME TO FOLLOW END-OF-YEAR MEET
With the US Defense Advanced Research Project Agency and European Commission Esprit project now backing it, the Architecture Neutral Distribution Format (ANDF) application portability mechanism has now achieved the critical mass needed to drive it to market, believes Open Software Foundation chief technologist, Ira Goldstein.
Indeed, at least one unspecified outfit is thought to have reckoned ANDF commercially viable now.
However, whilst ANDF is unlikely to appear in the market this year, Goldstein says OSF plans a conference on the technology for the end of the year to find out which companies are interested in running the stuff to market and how it can be best introduced to an industry audience already blinded by science.
Goldstein fully expects an ANDF product programme to be initiated during in 1994.
Since its conception, ANDF has been winning hearts and finds as a useful mechanism.
It should enable software vendors to write and distribute a single version of an application that'll run unchanged on laptops, workstations and large scale systems alike.
The problem has been how to get get it out of the labs and into the industry, and ‘I can't tell what's going to happen when the horses are lead to water,’ admits Goldstein.
Apart from a concerted effort by its backers, which could be shaped at the end of year meet, Goldstein says only  catalytic events will otherwise drive ANDF to market.
Things like a single influential company adopting ANDF unilaterally for portability across multiple hardware and operating system environments; a standards body like X/Open Co Ltd, IEEE or NIST mandating it; government procurement bodies insisting on it; or a significant new technology coming to market on it.
The ANDF specification is now complete and a beta release will be testing later this year.
In fact most outstanding problems were ironed out over the last couple of months, Goldstein says; bug fixing remains.
Commercial quality ANDF installers will become available for a range of architectures, as will a reference implementation of ANDF using public domain GCC compilers.
All property rights to ANDF are owned by the UK's Defence Research Agency, which developed and subsequently licensed ANDF to OSF and Unix System Labs — licences are  available from both.
DEC ADOPTS ENCORE's TECHNOLOGY FOR CLUSTERING AXPs UNDER OSF/1
Digital Equipment Corp and Encore Computer Corp have advanced their Alpha RISC-centred collaboration, and DEC says it will incorporate and distribute the Fort Lauderdale company's high-speed Memory Channel, which directly links the memory subsystems of multiple node processors, and Infinity File System, which enables processors to view data stored on the disks of all the CPUs in a cluster as if it were part of a single database.
The products will be offered by DEC on its Alpha AXP systems — initially the DEC 7000 and 10000 AXP systems running OSF/1.
Oracle Corp will offer the Oracle7 Parallel Server for clustered environments.
APPLE ‘WORKING ON MACINTOSH SYSTEM 7.1 VERSION FOR 80486 MACHINES’
Users of 80486-based personal computers may be able to run Macintosh System 7.1 on their machines if a project under way at Apple Computer Inc comes to fruition.
According to MacWeek magazine, Apple has a project under way under the code name Star Trek which involves a rewrite of System 7.1 to provide users of machines built around the 80486 and above an alternative to Microsoft Corp's Windows.
It sounds as if the project has the active backing of Novell Inc, because it is said that the software is being built atop a future release of the DR DOS MS-DOS-compatible operating system.
Apple is said not to have made a final commitment to release the software, and the big question is where Apple sees the base of applications for it, but word is that if the go-ahead is given, the product could come to market before the end of the year.
WHAT WE GOT WASN'T UNIFIED UNIX IN MORE WAYS THAN ONE
We couldn't help but notice that some of the coverage following whatever it was we were witness to at Uniforum referred to it as ‘Unified Unix.’
Well, it may be a catchy phrase but what was announced as COSE — Common Open Software Environment — wasn't ‘Unified Unix’— not philosophically, spiritually or literally.
‘Unified Unix,’ as it turns out, was an entirely different kettle of fish.
A month or more before the March 17 announcement, IBM Corp and Hewlett-Packard were partner-less and trudging around this huge all-encompassing mother of all application programming interfaces that they called ‘Unified Unix’— despite Digital Equipment Corp's recent appropriation of the name (UX No 423)— to independent software vendors trying without success to get their support.
Reportedly it was a soup-to-nuts A-to-Z kind of thing that ISVs rejected out of hand as offering them nothing.
There was no agreement on the kernel (but then COSE doesn't either); it wasn't as desktop-centric as COSE nor as graphical user interface-oriented nor as networked.
It didn't pick up specific vendors implementations of technologies either, the way COSE purports to.
But it was what they meant when they said ‘Unified Unix.’
Meanwhile, the firms which endorsed COSE, like the database companies, are now trying to figure out what exactly they backed.
COSE being such a last orders affair, they weren't given much time at the time they were asked, apparently by Sun Microsystems Inc.
It all happened just the day before and there were all those supporting press releases to write, print and stuff into public relations kits.
By the way, if anyone has a complete collection of all the iterations of main press release, we'd love to see how it changed.
COSE prides itself on its un-organisation: no dues, no structure, no consortium, no budget (UX No 428).
It's hard to reckon how such a motley crew, left to its own devices, can even begin to expect to defeat Bill Gates, master of the media, without a common war chest and a seriously orchestrated propaganda campaign.
The game afoot has gone way beyond technology into the realm of perception where Microsoft Corp holds almost total sway.
Unix System Labs president, Roel Pieper, said in a talk with a bunch of software developers that he might license the tag ‘Desktop Unix’ to his COSE partners but never the unadorned word Unix.
Industry watcher Nina Lytton publicly sized up the COSE alliance as the ‘triumph of the obvious.’
In its March 17 press release, COSE gave as the reason for its existence ‘increased customer demand for consistent technologies across multiple platforms, greater technology choice, increased cost savings and quicker time to market.’
Goldman Sachs VP John Levinson says this statement should actually be read as: ‘no vendor operating system value-add, commoditisation of hardware and software, faster price reductions and shorter product life cycles.’
COSE may make a pass at enriching the Motif spec with stuff from Open Look but the effort, if there is one, probably won't get very far.
SunSoft president Ed Zander was probably ill-advised suggesting at the announcement that serious changes would be made.
Meanwhile, Unix System Labs is probably going to have to make a business decision about whether to get Motif from the outside.
The COSE people are working on multiple areas beyond the five or six initially outlined at the announcement.
They intend to give us some notion of what they are when they roll out the API in 90 days.
What do you suppose the Dutch word for COSE is?
We suspect our Dutch-speaking friends Roel Pieper and Wim Roelandts cooked it up.
Then Wim went off and tagged IBM and when IBM and HP agreed to support a common position Sun eventually found it couldn't resist, especially with Novell nudging it on.
SCO and Univel are only supporters; not key players.
HIGH-PERFORMANCE FORTRAN
Alison Hawkings
What's happened to Fortran?
For the last five years Fortran has led a very quiet life, so quiet in fact the launch of new Fortran specifications two years ago, called Fortran90, have pretty much gone unnoticed even by Fortran users.
Fortran77, released as the name suggests in 1977, is still the most widely used development language in the massively parallel market.
But its future hangs in the balance.
The advent of distributed computing and the changing nature of the massively parallel market itself demands new programming  flexibility , which Fortran77 has so far not addressed.
The new Fortran90 specifications are already considered outdated by many Fortran users, because they don't provide a migration path from Fortran77.
The lacklustre success of Fortran90 is historic, Fortran watchers say.
The current Fortran 90 specifications were born out of failed attempts by industry vendors in the US to update Fortran77 to Fortran8X in the late 1980s.
The initiative was annulled after two years when developers couldn't agree on final specifications.
Fortran8X was laid to rest for another five years before being resurrected and renamed Fortran90.
Coalition
Despite these problems a new force has surfaced in the Fortran arena.
The High Performance Fortran Forum is a coalition of 40 hardware and software vendors, research institutes and Fortran users, which has clubbed together to revamp Fortran90 — and its first offering is a new set of Fortran90 extensions called High Performance Fortran (HPF).
The organisation has garnered support from the US Defense Advanced Research Project Agency and National Science Foundation in the US and from the Esprit project run by the European Commission.
The Forum is not a sanctioned standards body.
However, the group's work has been endorsed by massively parallel hardware vendors including Digital Equipment Corp, Intel Corp, MasPar Corp and Thinking Machines Corp, which promises to ship HPF compilers this year.
The High Performance Fortran Forum came into force a year ago spearheaded by research at the Center for Research on Parallel Computation at Rice University in California.
The initiative's primary goal was to provide greater Fortran functionality in massively parallel computing, especially in the fields of data parallel programming; the provision of non-uniform memory access costs on parallel computers; and common code tuning application programming interfaces for different architectures.
Secondary aims included conforming to existing industry standards and defining interfaces to other languages.
From these goals three areas for enhancement were specified: new directives — structured comments that download commands to the compiler — new constructs — a definition for operations that can affect the way a program is interpreted — and language restrictions, which limit the use of sequence and storage association to avoid conflicts with distributed data.
In order to provide greater support for parallel data programming, the group enhanced existing Fortran90  specifications — developed from the Fortran 8X draft — by adding larger data libraries.
These include code reduction functions, prefix and  suffix operations, scatter operations and data sorting.
The Fortran8X draft was based on the FORALL statement, which allowed assignments to more general blocks of arrays than array expressions.
The HPF FORALL is based on this development, but adds nested FORALL statements, limited function calls and multiple statement capabilities.
HPF also supports parallel applications which don't need to share data through an independent directive.
This ensures loop applications don't conflict with each other.
Flexible
To maintain a high level of performance in modern parallel architectures HPF also provides non-uniform memory access capabilities.
Most parallel environments operate best when accessed data shows its local point of reference, the Forum says.
In traditional Fortran versions, the language's hierarchical data storage order isn't flexible and cannot provide this information.
To override this problem, HPF includes specific directives to describe the alignment of data and the way it is  partitioned amongst processors.
To do this, compilers allow data to be aligned in a series of array dimensions (an encapsulation of similar data types), sub-dimensions, collapsed or replicate dimensions.
Before distribution the dimension is then divided into large or small tasks to balance the load of processing.
In addition, HPF also includes several intrinsic functions, which enquire about machine size and the distribution of an array.
These interfaces provide access into other programming languages operating in supercomputing environments, such as message passing sub-routines.
According to the Forum, these can also be used to develop algorithm applications.
Draft 1.0 of the HPF Language Specification can be obtained by e-mail softlib@cs.rice.edu
ADAPTIVE ADDS PARALLEL NEURAL CNAPS/64 AT $35,000
With the overriding need to introduce their systems to a wider market, massively parallel systems builders are having to come out with ever smaller configurations of their machines to get the entry price down, and Beaverton, Oregon-based Adaptive Solutions Inc has cut its CNAPS pattern recognition system down to 64 processors to create the CNAPS/64.
The new model of the system, originally launched just two years ago, brings the entry price down to $35,000 from $55,000.
CNAPS stands for Connected Network of Adaptive ProcessorS, pointing to the fact that the system applies neural network technology, although as neural networks are less fashionable than parallel systems at the moment, the company is describing it as the lowest priced massively parallel system on the market.
The CNAPS/64 is designed for computational-intensive pattern recognition applications such as image and speech recognition, forecasting, signal processing, and neural network training.
The building block processor is a chip the company calls the N64000, which includes multiplier, adder-accumulator, shift logic and on-chip memory, and the machine implements single-instruction, multiple data architecture.
It comes with 8Mb of external memory, and can be upgraded to the full 512-node configuration.
It is designed to be used as a server to a Unix workstation, and is claimed to execute 1G multiply-accumulates per second.
On the software front, the company added the BuildNet and CNAPS-C software tools.
BuildNet includes pre-written versions of the two most popular neural network algorithms, Back-Propagation and Learning Vector Quantization 2, and an X Window-Motif-based graphical user interface designed to enable users to run the algorithms on the CNAPS computer and display test results graphically, even if they have no programming experience.
CNAPS-C, an extension of the C language, is conceived for creating new algorithms and applications, and both run on the Unix workstation.
CNAPS-C programs can be launched with either the BuildNet or CodeNet command-line interface.
The CNAPS-C compiler provides two compilation paths, one producing ANSI C code that is compiled into host executable code for debugging on the host workstation with standard ANSI C development tools, the other producing CNAPS Programming Language assembly code that is assembled into CNAPS executable code.
For optimum performance in key sections of code, in-line CPL assembly code statements can be incorporated into the C program; BuildNet costs $3,000, a development kit with CNAPS-C and CodeNet costs $4,500.
CRAY EXTENDS ITS C90 FAMILY DOWN TO REPLACE Y-MPs
Cray Research Inc, Eagan, Minnesota hopes that flattery will get it everywhere in Japan, and so it chose Tokyo for the worldwide launch of a range of new models in its C90 line to replace the existing Y-MP machines.
The new models are about 20% more expensive than the models they replace, but are about three times more powerful, which it reckons works out at an average 2.5-fold improvement in price-performance.
The new line includes the first air-cooled machines in the C90 series, a two-processor C92A and a four-processor C94A, which it says were developed in response to demand from Japanese commercial users.
The other models are the liquid-cooled Cray C94, the eight-processor liquid-cooled Cray C98, and an expansion of the 16-processor Cray C916 system, which was introduced way back in November 1991 and has up to now been marketed as the Cray Y-MP C90.
BRITISH TELECOM TEAMS WITH SUN, HEWLETT ON NETWORK MANAGEMENT
British Telecommunications Plc says it is working with both Hewlett-Packard Co and Sun Microsystems Inc to develop products that will provide customers the ability to manage complex internetworks consisting of local area networks and British Telecom's internetwork services.
The phone company reckons that while this evolution of integrated management is seen as a critical need for users, it has yet to be fully addressed by network service providers.
British Telecom says it plans to develop links between the two companies' local network management systems — Hewlett-Packard's OpenView and Sun's SunNet Manager, and its own Concert system — and chose those two companies as its first partners because it believes that between them they control about 60% of the local network management market.
British Telecom says it is considering provision of local management services in conjunction with its portfolio of managed communications services once the new products are finished: it sees commercial products and services in early 1994.
The partners will co-operate on development of products that enable users to monitor remotely and manage in an integrated fashion, both their local and British Telecom-provided wide area network services.
The computer companies will develop interfaces between their respective management systems and Concert, which will conform to the Network Management Forum's OminiPoint specifications, based on the Common Management Interface Protocol, CMIP.
The claimed benefits include rapid identification and isolation of faulty local network segments, dynamic control of network capacity, and integrated monitoring of performance parameters of both the internet and local network.
Users will be able to order additional services and report faults direct to British Telecom service centres, and its Syncordia Corp will also offer facilities management services.
SNI MOBILISES UNIBOL, SINIX FOR DECLARATION OF WAR ON IBM IN ITS AS/400 HEARTLAND
Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG is expanding its Sipra range of IBM Corp mid-range-to-Unix migration software to cover not only System 36s, but also the AS/400.
According to Computerwoche, the AS/400 version will start shipping in the third quarter of this year under the name of ‘Unibol 4xx’, following demonstrations at the IBM mid-range show, Expo 3x/400, in Frankfurt at the end of June.
Unibol 4xx enables users to run their AS/400 applications under Siemens Nixdorf's Sinix version of Unix on MX and RM boxes, without needing to dispense with their existing application environment or their investment in peripherals.
The product consists of a migration suite, development tools and emulation facilities for 5250 terminals.
The Sipra team has been been trying to tempt System 36 users to buy its product for years, but has not had much success.
It also received little support from Siemens Nixdorf's mid-range division, as a result of the confusion that followed Siemens merger with Nixdorf.
But this situation has changed fundamentally under the guidance of Siemens Nixdorf manager Wolfgang Wichmann.
He has set up a sales organisation within the company's trade and industry division, in conjunction with four partners — Braunschweig-based Unilab Software GmbH; CTS GmbH, based in Heusenstamm, near Frankfurt; Dresden-based SRS GmbH; and DOM GmbH of Munich.
…
ACQUISITION OF NIXDORF ‘A DISASTER FOR THE SPANISH END’
The merger of Siemens AG and Nixdorf Computer AG to form Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG was ‘the worst thing in the history of the corporation’ that had happened in Spain.
The company's vice-president, Horst Nasko, said that, before merger, Nixdorf was the second most important manufacturer in the country as regards volume sales.
It is now seventh.
He blamed the decline in sales on ‘the erosion of distribution channels’ and on management philosophy, which ‘must clearly undergo a radical change’.
But he declined to comment on future plans for the Toledo-based factory, saying that managers at the Spanish subsidiary were responsible for that.
EISA GROUP READIES NEW 64-BIT BUS
The Extended Industry Standard Architecture  subcommittee is planning a 64-bit replacement for EISA bus that will transfer multiple data packets faster than 200Mb per second.
The new bus is expected to be launched later this year on Intel Corp Pentium-based machines and is being developed by the National Semiconductor Corp.
But versions configured for existing ISA and EISA-based systems are also planned.
According US press reports, the 64-bit bus architecture will be backwards compatible with ISA and EISA cards, but not upgradable.
Instead the new bus will be designed as an asynchronous bus capable of handling streaming data.
The EISA bus was originally developed by a consortium of nine companies, led by Compaq Computer Corp.
ORACLE BENEFITS FROM UNIX TAKE-UP
Commenting on its third quarter and nine month figures — see below — Redwood City, California-based Oracle Corp notes that during the third quarter, licence sales grew by 30% year-to-year while service revenues expanded by 25%.
Growth in Oracle's Unix and Desktop businesses continued to outstrip older proprietary systems — mainly VAX and ES/9000.
Unix licence revenues increased 43% over the third quarter of fiscal 1992, with Desktop licence sales growing 35% over the prior period, and the two together comprised 75% of total licence revenues for the quarter, compared with 69% of total licence revenues a year ago.
Geographically, Oracle says its domestic US business improved on a strong second quarter — fuelled by Oracle7 sales, it was up a remarkable 65% on a weak fiscal third quarter 1992, but that the strong dollar limited revenue growth at Oracle Europe to just 4% — but the currency translation was unfavourable by 11%.
Oracle Intercontinental revenue grew 37% over the third quarter of fiscal 1992.
Pre-tax margins were 18.6% for the quarter, up from just 9.3% a year ago, the company said.
The firm's third quarter net profits was up 73.9% at $29.2m on turnover that rose 27.8% at $370.1m.
Net profit for the nine months fell 11.0% at $29.1m after a $43.5m charge for the cumulative effect of the change in the method of recognising revenues, on turnover that rose 25.9% at $1,030m.
Net earnings per share, up 67% to $0.20 in the quarter, slipped 13% to $0.20 in the nine months.
WIND RIVER HAS NEW REAL-TIME SYSTEM
Alameda, California-based Wind River Systems Inc has introduced version 5.1 of VxWorks, its real-time embedded development environment.
The new release includes enhancements to the VxWorks operating system, a new set of  software tools and improved communication links between the two environments.
The VxWorks operating system now complies with ANSI C specifications and supports Posix.4 real-time extensions.
It includes improved memory management functions that provide memory partitions for a variety of Unix-compatible routines.
The partitions are used to combat memory fragmentation and to enable users to configure the size of target systems memory pools.
New software modules include VXVMI, a virtual memory tool, which sets up virtual memory  capabilities on target systems for run-time and debugging purposes.
It also comes with a programmers interface that enables users to customise virtual memory features.
VxMP, Wind River's multiprocessing module, extends VxWorks support for system-wide control of up to 20 processors.
VXMP is based on a shared memory architecture, which reduces run-time memory requirements and extends the message queuing facilities across a network.
Wind River has also enhanced its WindX X-Windows client package to support Motif.
The product now allows users to develop applications on target machines and then graphically display them on Unix workstations or X-Terminals.
Enhanced communication support includes new remote procedure calls (RPC), which enable VxWorks tasks to be carried out on other systems; and extensions to semaphore signals (a semaphore is a special-purpose data type).
VxWorks version 5.1 is available on a wide range of Unix machines including Hewlett-Packard Co HP-UX, DEC Ultrix, IBM AIX and Sun Microsystems Inc SunOS — support for SunSoft Inc's Solaris will follow this year.
The product out now, is priced at $20,000 — £15,000. +1 510 748 4100 or +44 21 359 0981.
LOTUS PULLS OUT ALL THE STOPS WITH NOTES 3
Lotus Development Corp duly launched Release 3 of its Lotus Notes client-server applications environment for workgroups last week (UX No 428).
The Notes Starter Pack, priced at $1,000, features a new Notes Server for Windows 3.1 and supports Novell Inc NetWare, Microsoft Corp LAN Manager and Windows for Workgroups local networks; a Notes Starter Pack for OS/2 is planned.
Volume shipments will begin in late April, and Unix versions of Notes will be available in client and server implementations in the second half of 1993 for Solaris, AIX, HP-UX and Santa Cruz Operation Inc Unix.
A version of Notes for IBM Corp's OS/2 Workplace Shell and a NetWare Loadable Module version will ship in the second half.
A single Notes Release 3 client or server licence is $500.
It is also enhancing support and Customer Support arm will offer expanded options to make sure customers succeed with installation, use and deployment of Notes 3.
Basic Telephone Support is $300 per year or $50 per call in the US.
Premium Telephone Support is $2,500 per year or $150 per call.
The fees associated with On-Site Services range from $1,200 per day, with typical engagements being half a day to five days.
It plans a broad-based programme for developing an industry of Notes partners, and a two-tier distribution strategy designed to make the thing readily available through distribution channels used by personal computer networking and application developers.
A new Notes Developers' Programme is underway to recruit and provide technical services to commercial software developers providing products based on Notes technology.
MINIGRAMS
Just after we closed for press last week, news came  through that NCR Corp's chairman and chief executive Gilbert Williamson would retire from the company in May and would be succeeded by Jerre Stead, currently president of AT&T Co's Global Business Communications Systems, which he is credited with having turned around; Stead, 50, will have the title group executive-NCR, and will be succeeded by Patricia Russo, currently vice president-national sales and service for the Global Business Unit; although the switch is being presented as amicable, there are mutters that AT&T is concerned that NCR has not had a higher profile since acquisition.
Unix International has shut down its one-person Australian outpost leaving only secretarial liaison.
The Unix festival, Uniforum ‘93, didn't feel like it was as successful a show as it was last year.
Spread out over a lot more acreage and split into two widely separated pavilions, attendance looked sparse and the aisles empty despite show management's claims of a 10% increase in traffic.
Like as not, its thinking about pre-registration which was up.
Unofficially we hear attendance was down.
Uniforum is still more a Unix celebration than anything else.
It remains to be seen whether there will still be things to celebrate or whether  erosion has set in.
Ascii Corporation, the Japanese software company founded by Bill Gates’ erstwhile buddy K Nishi, is going to start peddling UnixWare in April figuring it can do $4.2m in sales year one.
A Japanese-language version is due in July.
Ascii figures 30–50 VARs out of the 200 who sell Informix should bite.
Like clockwork, just as we promised (UX No 424), Unix System Laboratories wheeled out its SVR4.2 versions for Sparc and Mips RISCs at Uniforum, saying they were immediately available.
ICL Plc and Fujitsu Ltd, which helped with the Sparc port, and NEC Corp, which helped with the Mips iteration already have them on their machines.
Microport Inc, Scotts Valley, California, which recently became the first non-hardware licensee of Unix System Lab's unannounced SVR4.2 ES/MP, has started shipping an ANSI C Compiler for Intel Corp's Pentium processor from Unix System Labs.
The optimized compiler has a blended mode option for applications that will run on 80486 and Pentium boxes as well as a Pentium-only mode.
Microport thinks it is the first USL licensee to make the compiler available in shrinkwrapped form.
It is available as a $400 option on Microport's multi- and uniprocessor Unix SVR4 software.
The compiler is reportedly 10% to 20% faster than the top-ranked GNU C Compiler.
DTK Computer Inc says it has a Tsunami-based Sun Microsystems Inc workstation compatible with three times the graphics performance of the Sun Classic.
Called the DTK Station Classic+, it comes with either Solaris 1.1 or 2.1 and an optional second 240MB hard drive, CG3 graphics for 1152 x 900 resolution and a 14-inch colour monitor.
It's priced at $3,700 with availability starting in May.
French outfit Option Plus, in Nanterre, is selling the DTK clones as its Saturn series on the continent.
+33 1 4725 1818
X/Open Co Ltd is about to embark on the largest Xtra process ever.
It expects to invite 50–75 user groups worldwide to participate, get 35–50 of them actually involved and circulate 10,000 multiple-choice questionnaires in six languages: English, French, German, Spanish, Chinese and Japanese.
Right now it's trying to figure out how to get feedback from the non-industrial nations.
Results will probably be unveiled in Rome in early December.
Electronic News claims Cypress Semiconductor Corp/Ross Technology Inc is talking to Intel Corp about applying HyperSparc's cache controller/memory management and multiprocessor technologies to the P6 chip.
The company didn't deny it.
Quoting Cypress chief TJ Rodgers, Electronic Engineering Times adds that the Ross Technology subsidiary could be shuttered if Sun Microsystems Inc doesn't pick up the 66MHz HyperSparc chip in a next-generation box.
The company's next Sparc processor, the 100MHz Viper, has been backburnered pending Sun's decision.
An 80MHz HyperSparc is expected to sample soon.
Precision Software GmbH, the German distributor of Boulder, Colorado-based XVT Inc's graphical user interface builder is opening an operation in Swindon, UK, called Professional Software Ltd: the unit, run by former Cambridge Computer Graphics sales and marketing manager, Paul Morgan, will take over XVT distribution from London-based Personal Workstations Ltd, which will become a customer for the product.
The Santa Cruz Operation is reportedly going to change the name of Open Desktop to something more in keeping with the server: Open Server perhaps?
One of our little birds claims IBM Corp has been negotiating the sale of its PC division.
The would-be acquirer is said to live within the city limits of Santa Clara, California.
Geography may not be our strong suit but, if it's true, the rumour smacks of Intel Corp which, let's face it, has the gall and the cash to do it.
Are people really going to buy PCs without true blue Intel inside?
If IBM is contemplating dumping PCs, which cost it money every time it sells one, that would make Rios and soon-to-be PowerPC machines its entry level.
Interesting notion.
IBM also, it seems, has rights to develop and market Intel Corp Pentium derivatives.
The betting last week according to The Wall Street Journal was that IBM would tap the cookie cutter, RJR Nabisco's Louis Gerstner, 50, as its new CEO, perhaps this week provided they can sew up his compensation plan.
He's not a technologist.
He was a McKinsey & Co consultant, then president of American Express and is brother of former IBM Corp top staffer Richard Gerstner.
Under Gerstner's reign, RJR has slashed its $29,000m debt by more than 50%, partly by selling off corporate assets —‘He is a guy who likes to break things up,’ commented Curt Rohrman, a First Boston analyst who follows IBM.
There's talk of setting up an advisory board for him to consult.
In response to the news, IBM stock took another hit, off more than 3 points.
AT&T decided as a going-away present to present a bunch of ‘Unix Awards’ at its ‘End of an Era’bash at Uniforum (UX No 428).
Recipients included Robert Fabry, CSRG at UCB; Deborah Scherrer, LBL; and Bob Schiefler, X Consortium in the Academic Driver category; Mike DeFazio, USL, Armando Stettner, ex-DEC, Bruce Weiner, Mindcraft and Bob Marsh of Onyx and Plexus fame for Unix Evangelism; Steve Bourne, Vinton Cerf, Jon Mashey and Eric Schmidt for Technology; Jim Bell, Walter De Backer and Heinz Lycklama for Standards; Frame Technology, Informix, Oracle and Sybase for Applications; Larry Crume, ex-AT&T now Lotus, Geoff Morris, X/Open and Yoshiro Yoshioka, Fujitsu for Global Market Building; HP, SCO and Sun for Business Commitment; Burlington Coat Factory, DHL, Federal Express, Hyatt and Wal-Mart for using the stuff; Pamela Gray, Bill Joy and Doug Michels for Lifetime Achievement; and Mike Azzara, Open Systems Today; Ed Taylor, Pencom; and our own Maureen O'Gara for Special Distinction.
Two of the crystal awards were stolen during the ensuing festivities.
That long-anticipated non-profit X trade association, the X Industry Association, brainchild of The X Business Group, is getting off the ground.
They've picked themselves a chairman in David Harris of Adobe and the board includes Peter Winston of Xhibition, Peter Shaw of AGE Logic, Stephen King of Tektronix, Brian Fitzgerald of DEC and Michael Harrigan of NCD and Anil Malhotra of IXI.
Members include ADDS, Grafpoint, Hummingbird, Kinesix, Non Standard Logics, Omron, Shographics, TeleSoft, Visual Edge and Walker, Richer & Quinn.
It's going to market, promote and educate in the name of X, leaving the X Consortium, while it still exists, to grapple with the technical issues.
Unix System Labs' ex-director of strategic marketing Paul Calkin has surfaced as a principal in Systems & Software Integration & Distribution where he and his staff are consulting with PC and low-end Unix companies on high-end strategic and sales issues.
Don't know why we never realized it before but Sun chief executive officer, Scott McNealy is the firm's largest single shareholder with about 2.1m shares or 2.2% of the outstanding stock.
That makes him worth about $60m on the hoof.
Not exactly Bill Gates but then who is.
Well, ladies, with Bill Gates getting married that leaves Sun's Scott McNealy to soldier on alone as the industry's most eligible  bachelor .
We couldn't help but notice he had almost as much trouble saying the word ‘marriage’ at the COSE announcement at Uniforum as the word ‘Motif.’
According to the front page of The Wall Street Journal last week, Gates, 37, is engaged to Melinda French, a 28-year-old Dallas-born Duke University MBA and six- year Microsoft veteran currently in charge of the company's Publisher desktop publishing software.
Rivals are apparently grateful, hopeful marriage and a family will take some of the edge off of Gates' competitiveness.
Microsoft stock closed up 3.25 points.