

STATUS AND WEALTH
IN THEIR most rudimentary state the returns which form the basis of this study amount to nothing more exciting than parallel columns of names and sums of money flanked, in the musters, by notes of military particulars.
The occasional person is classed as a gentleman, and very infrequently mention is made of the occupation of some humbler mortal, usually (one suspects) to distinguish him from a neighbour of the same name.
It is only too evident that the scribes considered gentility the only status worth recording, and even in this they were not consistent; civic dignity was almost invariably ignored.
Consequently the first problem in tackling this mass of data, comprehending nearly 70,000 names, is to devise a taxonomy capable of transcending the obvious fact that some were richer (or poorer) than others — one, moreover, which bears some tangible relationship to the structure of society at the time, and preferably is verifiable in terms of contemporary theory.
THEORIES OF SOCIETY
Interest in the nature of society was not lacking in the sixteenth century, and in one way or another commentators found a good deal to say about it.
Granted, many of their observations are fragmentary, confined to particular social groups, most commonly the gentry and clergy, vagabonds and beggars, and directed more to their conduct (or rather misconduct) than to anything else.
Where anything resembling an analytic survey was attempted the outcome is prone to reveal more about the background and interests of the author than the matter in hand, describing the aristocracy and gentry in detail while displaying markedly less understanding of the composition and characteristics of the lower orders.
Edmund Dudley, Henry VII's minister, composed The Tree of Commonwealth in the Tower while awaiting execution for treason.
Primarily a political tract, it can in no sense be regarded as an empirical analysis of society.
The concept of the social order is schematic, a simplistic division into three estates, the chivalry, the church and the commonalty.
The first of these was the landowning class, the nobility and gentry; the leaders of the community, whose duty it was to set a good example to the rest, to be ‘the helpers and releuers of poore tenantes, and also be the maynteynors and supporters of all poore folkes’.
The commonalty embraced the remainder of the laity inclusive of ‘merchants, craftsmen (or artificers), franklains and husbandmen’ as well as‘serving men’.
But where, on the one hand, the hierarchy of the chivalry is systematically catalogued, from dukes to mere gentlemen, the commonalty is differentiated only to the extent that a passing reference to ‘the chief of theis folkes, as the substantiall marchauntes, the welthie grasiers and farmers’ acknowledges the existence of sub-species.
Unconcerned with the affairs of such people, the author does not attempt to do more than define their essentially subordinate role: they should not ‘presume aboue ther own degre, nor conterfete the state of his Better, nor excede in their apparell or diet’.
It was the duty of merchants and craftsmen to trade honestly with one another, of husbandmen and artificers to apply themselves diligently to their labours and take pleasure in them, eschewing ostentation as well as hunting and hawking, which were the privileges of the gentry, nor wasting their time and substance in alehouses or playing unlawful games.
‘And how well content will men be from the highest degre to the lowest, to encrease ther howshold seruantes and laborers, whereby all idle people and vagaboundes shalbe sett a worke.’
Servants too ought to be diligent and refrain from gaming and other dissolute pursuits, although at the same time they were fully entitled to ‘competent wages and clothing with trew payments of the same’.
Surveying the state of England in 1551, Sir Thomas Smith dealt more circumstantially with the question of social status.
He identified four ‘sorts’ of people — gentlemen, citizens or burgesses, yeomen, and artificers or labourers.
The clergy no longer formed a discrete estate, the religious having disappeared while the secular establishment had been deprived of its privileges.
Gentlemen corresponded to Dudley's ‘chivalry’, with peers defined as being ‘the greater sort’.
‘No man’, he  adds, ‘is created baron excepte he maye dispend of yearly reuenue one thousand poundes, or one thousand markes at the least’, figures that were normally exceeded by the estates of earls.
Legally an income of £40 a year rendered a freeholder liable to take up knighthood, but as a result of inflation £120 was now desirable to support the dignity.
Esquires are described simply as men who bear arms.
The definition of gentleman is explored in some detail.
The rank was either conferred by birth or else acquired by practice of the law, medicine or the liberal sciences, membership of a university, or serving as a ‘captain in war’.
But the qualifications were elastic; anyone who could ‘live without manuell labour, and thereto is able and will beare the port, charge, and countenance of a gentleman, he shall for monie haue a cote and armes bestowed vpon him by heralds and therevnto being made so good cheape be called master and reputed for a gentleman euer after’.
What Dudley had dismissed as the faceless commonalty Smith perceived as three distinct status groups, and accordingly found space to comment on each.
By citizens and burgesses he meant the freemen of corporate towns, taking it for granted that his readers would understand that this privilege had in practice come to be restricted to the richer inhabitants — merchants, not working craftsmen.
Unlike Dudley he was well aware that merchants, a fast growing class, were not segregated from the gentry by an unbridgeable gulf, but ‘often change estate with gentlemen, as gentlemen doo with them by a mutuall conuersion of the one with the other,.
The definition of yeomen was complex, a matter of subtle distinctions.
Freeborn men and small landowners, they were in theory able to ‘dispend of their owne land in yearlie reuenue, to the summe of fortie shillings sterling, or six pounds as monie goeth in our time & commonlie liue wealthilie, keepe good houses and travell to get riches’.
Within the community they made no attempt to ape the gentry, were accorded no special title, and yet enjoyed ‘a certeine preheminence, and more estimation than labourers & the common sort of artificers’.
Nonetheless, having surveyed the yeomanry at length, Smith too reached the point beyond which he possessed little specific knowledge of the people under discussion, unless he felt that there was little that could usefully be said about those who had ‘neither voice nor authority in the commonwealth, and no account is made of them but onelie to be ruled, not to rule others’.
This ‘fourth sort of people’ did not own land in freehold, but comprised poor husbandmen, day labourers and copyholders, with some retailers and all artificers.
There were also ‘great swarms of idle servingmen’, whom he seems to have regarded as  peripheral to ordered society, if not actually outside it, quoting a proverb, ‘Young servingmen, old beggars’.
In the Discourse of the Common Weal Smith (to whom it is now attributed) did not set out to delineate the structure of society, but rather to present and analyse the responses of the four main economic interests in the community to the crisis of the late 1540s.
Freed thus from the constraint of traditional  stereotypes , he was able to develop a dynamic model of society, although the four sorts of people are still present.
The knight speaks for the landed interest, the merchant for international trade, and the capper for the working master craftsman.
Agriculture is here represented not by the glamorous (and faintly mythical) yeoman but by the workaday husbandman, or small peasant farmer, counterpart of the craftsman.
To the extent that it preserves the concept of De Republica the scheme would appear designed to mirror an ideal that was ordinarily taken for granted.
But the author, assuming in the guise of the Doctor the role of moderator, reminds his interlocutors of the existence of an additional element, a large class of landless peasants who were almost entirely dependent on wages for their livelihood.
In effect it is conceded that society was in a state of flux, consisting not of four but of five estates, subject nevertheless to fundamental reservations, for the labouring poor are not adjudged worthy of an independent voice.
Almost a hundred years later the Levellers, in the Putney debates, were to reach deadlock over the problem whether men without an assured livelihood could be admitted to the political nation.
The common feature of all these interpretations is, however, that, the gentry apart, they define rank and degree in none but the most general terms.
At best they furnish little more than an outline guide to the interpretation of the numerical data, a hint of the kind of hypothesis that needs to be tested.
THE SUMPTUARY ACTS
The official definition of social status found expression in sumptuary regulation which, between 1510 and 1533, was embodied in several statutes.
Apart from any need to counter persistent infringement of the rules of dress and display, the number of enactments is indicative of considerable uncertainty, for not only did the legislature feel impelled to extend the terminology of rank with monetary equivalents, these latter were made the subject of continual amendment within the broad  permanent framework.
Here again it was the nobility and gentry who got the most attention, but at the same time the inferior ranks of society were defined with some rigour.
Peers, naturally, posed no problem.
Knights too were readily identifiable, but it had become imperative to make provision also for the many untitled men whose wealth was as great or even greater.
Consequently in 1510 these were bracketed with squires of the body and other court officers, while the 1533 act specifies in addition esquires or gentlemen eligible for knighthood or to serve as knights of the shire.
Even this proved insufficient to cover all cases, and so the class was enlarged to embrace ‘other men’ possessing incomes from land of 200 marks a year (1510) or £200 (1533); these might have been merchants or any other persons whose wealth was of recent acquisition.
Taken as a whole the acts envisage several grades of gentleman.
The highest rating was £100 a year, the next 100 marks, which was equated with ‘other’ landowners of £100, the implication perhaps being that the latter had not yet got as far as quartering their arms.
Next came gentlemen on incomes of £40 and £20, respectively.
The second amount bore a twofold significance, since a statute of the previous century stipulated a minimum of £20 per annum for justices of the peace, while two of the sumptuary acts evidently assumed this to have been the minimum for any gentleman by defining a class ‘under the degree of gentlemen’, including university graduates, having £10 a year in lands or £100 in goods — a clear reference, it would seem, to merchants.
Room was also found in one act for men of £5 per annum plus yeomen, or servants, who were 40s. freeholders.
Finally came men who did not own freehold land: husbandmen, servants in husbandry and the servants of artificers — anyone whose estate in goods and chattels did not exceed £10.
By process of elimination a further group intermediate between these and the smaller freeholders can be inferred, men owning personal estate worth £10 — £99, such as larger tenant farmers, provincial merchants and so forth.
Last of afl there were wage labourers.
These categories reveal an intricate relationship between social rank and economic standing, so much so as to invite the conclusion that by this date, if not much earlier, it had come to be acknowledged that status was a function of source and level of income, subject to the proviso that land took precedence over personal property.
Yet since the facts have to be assembled from statutes passed at different dates without any discernible attempt at harmonisation, it is not easy to formulate an exact statement.
In approximate terms the picture may be sketched as shown in Table 1.1.
In the process of definition the subdivisions of the gentry are shown to have been as numerous as those of the peerage (which for the present purpose need not be set out in detail), and noticeably more complex.
Knights naturally took precedence as the leading members of the class, and there is no difficulty about demonstrating that they were also the richest despite the existence of a good many whose incomes fell far short of £200.
The clear inference must be that the average knight was expected to have at least the £120 a year postulated by Smith, and indeed the median of twenty-three in Buckinghamshire, Suffolk and Sussex in 1524–5 lay between £120 and £160, while nationally the median of eighteen feodary surveys works out at £204.
In the same counties, with the addition of Cornwall and Rutland, the median for eighty-five esquires was about £60 compared with £80 from 124 feodary surveys; several men were worth upwards of £200 and clearly correspond with the first group of gentlemen in the table.
As the law requiring £40 landowners to take up knighthood was seldom observed, the sumptuary acts conceded that it was reasonable for the many men who did not choose to do so to adopt the dress appropriate to the standard of living they must certainly have enjoyed.
Indeed, the specification of grades of untitled gentlemen of £40 or more amounted to an admission that the qualification was obsolete, that this level of  income was totally inadequate to support the ‘port and charge’ of the dignity of knighthood.
The borderland between gentlemen and others occurred in the region below £20 a year.
Only one of the statutes accords the title of gentleman to landowners of this magnitude, yet it is clear that a great many, if not most of them, laid claim to the style even at the risk of carrying a bigger sail than they could bear.
Among them must have been many new men pushing up from below.
Graduates, whom Smith classed as gentlemen, and men of £10 a year were privleged to dress like their betters; it is also reasonable to infer that a sizeable proportion of those who feature in the various returns as minor landowners were in effect ex-officio gentlemen, qualified by tenure of lesser public appointments.
The elliptical phraseology of the law, amounting in places to ambiguity, obscures the cut-on point for gentility, if indeed there was one in vew of the presence in the musters and subsidy rolls of a not inconsiderable number of gentlemen of extremely limited means.
Already as early as 1436 the word had lost its original connotation of nobleman, and been extended to cover merchants and yeomen who had got rich, together with some landowners of as little as £5 a year claiming the title.
The statistical confirmation of the reality of so many gentlemen ‘made good cheape’ may have been what prompted Garter King of Arms' decision in 1530 to set a minimum qualification of £10 per annum for sporting a coat of arms.
Dr R.B. Smith adopts this criterion in his study of West Riding society in the 1530s, but for the 1520s, albeit the genuinely hard cases (including one assessment as low as £1 per annum) were few and far between, men of £5 or more per annum tended on the whole either to be designated gentlemen or else can be linked with gentry families.
Accordingly a minimum of £5 will be preferred in the present work, not so much as an arbitrary demarcation, but rather as one which should prompt us to seek further evidence to confirm the holder's status.
Certainly the intermediate standing of many of these men is plain to see; the alternating qualifications of £10 in lands and £100 in goods seem specifically designed to cater for small-town merchants and the less affluent London ones, conceding statutory confirmation of the observation that they ‘often change estate with gentlemen’.
The category yeomen or servants of £2 a year underlines not only their theoretical status as 40s. freeholders but also a much older meaning of the word ‘yeoman’.
The drafters of the 1533 act can readily be imagined looking up the statute of Richard II which referred to ‘varlets called yeomen’ in the service of lords — the Canon's Yeoman  no less.
Several yeomen in Rutland were described as servants, while the Discourse of the Common Weal comments ‘xl a yeare was good honeste wages for a yeoman afore this time, and xxd a wekes borde wages was sufficient’.
Conservative in aim, it was natural for this legislation to emphasise an obsolescent, legalistic definition, and evade contemporary reality.
The two final categories call for no comment at this stage beyond the fact that the fiscal evidence shows that the overwhelming majority of husbandmen did actually have less than £10 worth of personal estate; the £10-£99 group looks like an intrapolation to accommodate a broad spectrum of well-to-do peasants (including yeomen), master craftsmen and small-time merchants.
The term ‘wage earner’ sums up what the acts list as servants in husbandry, shepherds (some of whom were recorded in Rutland)— common labourers, and servants to artificers in the towns.
To be precise it should be remarked that this catalogue concludes with husbandmen worth less than £10, and as such corresponding almost exactly with Smith's fourth sort of people.
In the eyes of their betters the rank and file of the peasantry formed a single class with the labouring poor, the customary epithet ‘the poor commons, covering them all.
OCCUPATIONAL WEALTH
Only three of the muster books provide the information necessary to relate assessed wealth to status and occupational groups.
Fortunately the areas to which they refer represent sharply contrasted types.
Coventry was a provincial capital, one of the half-dozen largest provincial cities and the fourth richest.
Babergh hundred in Suffolk was possibly the most intensively industrialised district at the time; while Rutland can with confidence be accepted as representative of the rural East Midlands, a region of mainly traditional farming, innocent of any industrial growth.
In quality the evidence varies somewhat.
The survey of Rutland not only covers a complete, if miniature, county, but also records the status of virtually every inhabitant in all but three townships; although the subsidy rolls contribute useful supplementary material we will, for the present purpose, restrict ourselves to the muster book.
The other two returns, the Coventry one especially, are much less comprehensive though none the less indispensable.
With a few exceptions labourers and servants in Rutland were men whose assessments were below £2, which in turn were virtually identical with subsidy assessments based on wages.
The overlap with husbandmen can be attributed in large measure to uncertainty as to the precise status of a minority whom one return called labourers (or servants) while the other described them differently.
George Rogerson of Stretton was a servant who owned goods valued at £4 and was reclassed as a husbandman in the subsidy.
Some must have been employed as supervisors.
In 1549 the ironworks at Sheffield and Worth in Sussex were each managed by ‘one man, hyred by the year, to attend upon the works and workmen, all the tyme, and wey the iron ffrom the workman to the merchaunte, and hath for his wages, by the yeare, iiij, a liuerie or x, mete  and drinke’.
Two waggoners were also employed at Sheffield at £2 a year each, the rest of the hands at both sites being ‘hyred after a rate of taske work’.
Although the Rutland subsidy rated 38 out of 270 labourers at £2 on goods, and one as high as £3, all £1 assessments were made on wages or ‘profet of wages’.
Husbandmen, as was to be expected with the most numerous class — and as the typical countrymen — comprehended a broad spectrum.
Below the £10 mark identification is a simple matter, thanks not least to the corroboration of the sumptuary acts.
The £10-£19 group also consisted predominantly of husbandmen, as often as not occupying the position of leading members of the village community, ‘commonly made churchwardens, sidesmen, aleconners, now and then constables, and many times enjoy the name of headboroughs’.
In fourteen out of fifty-one Rutland townships there was no one who was better on.
Many of those at the foot of the scale, whose substance was equalled by that of superior labourers, must have occupied very small holdings, and had to eke out a livelihood with occasional labouring or working at some by-employment; they have aptly been termed ‘cottage farmers’.
No wonder the muster takers and subsidy collectors sometimes experienced difficulty in classifying them.
In the nature of things a leavening of the poorer husbandmen (and yeomen, for that matter) may be presumed to have been elderly and retired from active farming.
The top end of the range is confusing.
In view of the fact that £20 constituted the base line for richer taxpayers, it is difficult to explain why mere husbandmen, who typically were small farmers, should have formed three-quarters of the £20-£39 class, far outnumbering yeomen, businessmen, and even gentlemen.
The tiny minority worth as much as £40 should almost certainly be counted as yeomen.
As regards yeomen the statistics serve chiefly to emphasise the difficulty of pinning them down to a precise definition.
In Leicestershire their probate inventories show them to have been essentially large-scale farmers, generally working 100 acres or more, sometimes occupying two or more farms extending into more than one parish, renting additional pastures, and with few exceptions distinguished from plain husbandmen by superior wealth.
Half the yeomen of Rutland were also freeholders, unlike the majority of husbandmen, though few had as much as 40s. a year.
The median value of their personal property was £15, but £20 was the most typical assessment, well above the £6 of the average husbandman.
Men of this stature were onset by others whose status, if not questionable, shows that the meaning of yeoman was passing through a transitional stage.
With some of the poorer ones the possibility of misunderstandings cannot be ruled out.
The village of Belton was singular in containing several of decidedly slender means.
Thomas A. Leycester, worth £2 in goods, was styled yeoman only by the subsidy; he at least had 6s. a year from land, but two husbandmen rated at £4 and £6 owned real property worth 13s. 4d. and 8s., respectively.
Several Oakham yeomen plied trades, including a pewterer called William Plavis who would appear to have employed at least two journeymen or apprentices and was one of the two or three richest men in the shire with £200 in goods besides a 40s. freehold.
Some, like Robert Fishlock of Thistleton, were taxed on wages; perhaps he was somebody's chief servant, and in any case the muster described him more realistically as a labourer and valued his goods at 30s.
Fifteen yeomen were stated to be in the service of some lord or other, four being ‘reteyned’ by them; six acted as bailiffs of townships, and the remainder were simply ‘servants’, like Christopher Lacy of Riddlington, ‘Seruant in the Howsehold w the Lord Hastings’, who had £15 in goods, reduced to £8 in the subsidy, where he was described as husbandman.
The earl of Huntingdon's household, in 1564, included two yeomen who received the same wages as gentlemen, i.e. 26s. 8d. per annum, and twenty-two more at £1.
The exact nature of some of these relationships is not stated, and is consequently rather baffling.
John Parker of Belton was a servant of Lord Hastings though retained to Lord Mountjoy.
The bailiff of Teigh, servant to Thomas Sherrard, Esq., was styled husbandman despite owning personal estate to the tune of £30, while a retainer of Sir John Digby worked as a barber in Oakham.
However, the keepers of Whaddon Chase, Bucks., employed by Mrs Pigott, can be traced in the muster book, and of these the head keeper, Robert Wyllyott (Willett), would certainly have ranked as yeoman with 40s. in land and £20 in goods; his salary was 40s. with 6s. 8d. for livery.
Richard Cocks, one of several on 20s. with 6s. 8d. livery, had 3s. 4d. in land and £5 in goods, though all John Sewster of Mursley owned was 20s. in goods; if the identification is correct he would appear to have been of lower status.
Behind these miscellaneous qualifications a residual military function can be detected.
Smith devoted some space to explaining how, imbued with martial spirit, yeomen followed the lords of whom they held their land to war, serving on foot as archers.
This, it seems, was a widely held assumption: ‘If the yeomanry of England were not, in time of war we should be in shrood case; for in them standeth the chief defence of England.’
No fewer than half the yeomen in Rutland owned arms and armour; eleven had a ‘whole harness for a man’, while six had two or more outfits.
We can imagine them standing by for orders to levy and equip soldiers from among their lords' tenants when the king summoned his tenants-in-chief to furnish them.
The bailiffs of Sir Thomas Lovell at Ryhall, wealthy men worth £80 apiece, each owned three harnesses which might have been the property of their master.
Nevertheless, if men such as these were in fact the local recruiting agents, not all were equipped for the job; Nicholas Hill of Oakham, though servant to no less a figure than the king, possessed neither arms nor armour.
In time ‘yeoman’ came to mean primarily a farmer who had raised himself out of the ruck of common husbandman, ‘such as be exempted out of the rascalitie of the popular bee called and written yeomen, as in the degree next vnto gentlemen’; and while careful to avoid making wealth appear the sole criterion, Smith adds that ‘these tende their owne businesse, come not to meddle in publike matters and iudgements but when they are called and glad when they are deliuered thereof’.
A sound recipe for getting rich!
But again the accent was on seniority: ‘Commonly wee do not call any a yeoman till he be married, and have children, and as it were some authoritie among his neighbours’.
Different records might call the same man husbandman and yeoman, but as he progressed, the latter description would be used with increasing consistency.
The final word may lie with the distribution of wealth.
In view of the abrupt falling on in the numbers of husbandmen above £20, plus the fact that this figure coincides roughly with the wealth of the average yeoman, farmers assessed at and above it can pragmatically be counted as yeomen.
With the gentry this overlap in personal wealth counted for far less since, as a class, their hallmark was ownership of land.
Esquires were  straightforward, men of position whose broad acres produced incomes in the range of £30-£80 per annum.
Their relatively smaller personal estates reflect perhaps more than anything else a generally modest standard of living in the shires, for while the greater apparent wealth of some yeomen consisted mainly of farming stock, a big landowner, burdened with a large family and heavily encumbered estates, might find himself compelled to endure a spartan existence; unlike a yeomen, moreover, he might have to support a train of unproductive servants.
The wide range covered by ‘mere’ gentlemen could be the product of a variety of factors.
Among the ‘poor’ ones John Digby was farmer of the parsonage of Preston, and the low value of £4 assigned to his moveables may well have been the result of indebtedness: liabilities reduced the estate of John Ranson of Bicker, Lincs., from £57 to slightly less than £16 in 1542.
Another man who lived in modest circumstances was Thomas Harington of Ridlington, a non-landowner with only £7 in goods; yet he must have been related to the squire, John Harington the younger, whose servant he was.
Some men of this type cannot have been anything but gentlemen farmers.
Many could well be taken as illustrations of Sir Thomas Smith's tart comment on those self-styled gentlemen whose pretensions outran their resources.
Two men of Yardley, Worcs., who died early in 1554 (by which date inflation was distorting values) exemplify the lower stratum.
John Praty's inventory totalled £23, of which two-thirds were accounted for by livestock, implements, etc., making him a farmer in all but name: he also held the lease of a mill in Birmingham.
Three-fifths of Daniel Bentford's estate of nearly £20 represented the contents of his house, such as they were.
Beds, bedding and linen formed the largest single item; clothing, pots and pans (some of them pewter) and kitchen stun made up most of the remainder, and apart from a couple of coffers, a table board, two ‘chairstools’ and a few small boards and forms, totalling 7s., the house was almost bare of furnishings.
Outdoors there were two horses, eleven head of cattle and five store pigs.
He also owned ten bushels of wheat, and fourteen of barley, and had sown three dayworks (roods) of winter wheat, but no husbandry implements were listed.
Finally his estate was reduced by debts to £4 net.
As in the case of yeomen, terminology tended to obey certain rules.
‘Gentleman’ was applied to, for example, the cadets of eminent families: thus four of the £100 assessments in Rutland belonged to the younger brothers and sisters of Francis Brown, Esq., of Little Casterton.
Again there might be uncertainty when a man was rising in the world; Edward Watson of Lyddington had a personal estate of £200, and as a  justice of the peace should be reckoned as esquire; but in Rutland, at any rate, his income was small, a mere £8 per annum.
JPs were for the most part recruited from the greatest landowners in a county, although commissions of the peace often included a few of the humbler type, possibly men with a legal background who were appointed to do the chores.
In Sussex William Earnley was the son of the Chief Justice of the Common Pleas; in contrast to most of his colleagues, who had at least £40 a year with an average of £100, he had only £26 produced by a medley of very small properties, in addition to which he leased Cakehan manor from the bishop of Chichester.
As the returns normally distinguish them the wealth of the gentry can be surveyed more generally, as shown in Table 1.3.
To these can be added rough figures from Staincline wapentake in Yorkshire, where status had to be inferred as it was not recorded.
There, out of nineteen possible examples, the minimum was as low as 6s. 8d., the maximum £200, and the median £6. 13s. 4d.
As many as three owned less than a pound's worth of personal property, and only four more than £20.
The only knight there, Sir Henry Clinord of Carieton, was assessed at a wretched £8 in moveables, although his income was given as £80 a year.
In nearly every respect the wealth of the gentry matched the poverty of the district, and Dr Smith, moreover, has concluded that Yorkshire knights and esquires as a whole were less affluent than their counterparts in the south.
As to Rutland, if at first glance its gentry look significantly less prosperous than similar men in other Midland and southern counties, the impression may well be a by-product of the very completeness of the survey, resulting in virtually everyone answering the description being accounted for, whereas with Suffolk and Sussex in particular the subsidy returns, which provide the sole evidence, highlight gentlemen whose goods exceeded their lands in value, and on which in consequence they were taxed.
Landed income was the true measure of the gentry, and will be discussed in due course.
As regards trades and crafts, the Rutland material lists too few for generalisation.
In fact tradesmen were part-timers, for one from one return is sure to be represented as a farmer or labourer by the other.
It will suffice to observe that those on higher assessments were mostly merchants, and the poorer ones manual workers, and to conclude that a tiny farming community was incapable of generating more than a limited demand for their services.
The much ampler statistics for Suffolk and Coventry bear out this superficial impression, besides underlining the primacy of the woollen textile industry.
Although chance dictates that the evidence relates to two major centres, the situation thereby depicted does not necessarily misrepresent the economy as a whole, inasmuch as clothing was the only really large-scale manufacture, ranking high even in towns like Leicester and Northampton which had leather wares for their principal products.
Coventry, moreover, differed fundamentally from the Stour Valley.
Its prosperity was on the wane, weavers were outnumbered two to one by operatives in the finishing processes, while cap making was easily the biggest trade.
The entrepreneurs who organised the cloth trade and marketed its products were sharply differentiated from the operatives employed at the various manufacturing processes.
Two-thirds of the Coventry artificers were valued at less than £2, in Babergh hundred, Suffolk, a clear half, many to re-appear in the subsidy lists as wage earners.
Better-heeled artificers must almost certainly have been master craftsmen employing labour themselves.
If £5 be taken as the minimum above which there can be no question as to their status, it is noteworthy that half the Babergh men in this category worked in the skilled finishing trades.
The  sole Coventry man stated to have kept a journeyman was assessed at £5, the master of two apprentices was worth £30; on the other hand, a third, who also had an apprentice, owned no property that could be valued.
In passing it may be observed that journeymen and apprentices were seldom specified, although this must have been the status of many of the servants that were listed.
Two ‘servants and apprentices to Richard Coke’ were registered at Exeter among a total of nearly thirty, but the listing was arbitrary, nearly all of them being certified in just two parishes.
William Cosyn, servant to William Browne (who was worth no more than 20s.), may very well have been a journeyman, for he is followed in the list by Stephen Martyn, ‘apprentice to the same William’.
For practical purposes £10 was the minimum assessment of clothiers and men of similar standing; the high proportion in Suffolk worth upwards of £100 is not matched by any other extant muster book, and is unlikely to have been equalled anywhere else outside London.
Apart from one draper and one mercer all were clothiers, some of them worth several hundreds, and one, Thomas Spring of Lavenham, ranked among the richest men in the land with no less than £3,200.
Only one Coventry man was returned as a clothier, but an exceptional weaver valued at £40 must have qualified as one in all essentials.
Most of the top men there were mercers and drapers, but one was a dyer and two were Merchants of the Staple, or wool exporters.
Association with the cloth trade was a necessary step towards getting to the top in Coventry, and when wealthy baker Thomas Astelen became mayor in 1529 he was described as a clothier.
The wealth of other trades was on a much smaller scale, one that cannot have been untypical of most provincial communities.
Except in the various branches of victualling the effective upper limit was just about £40 — indeed, only a tiny minority of assessments exceeded £20.
In the manual occupations it is difficult to determine a man's actual position: a smith, for example, was a smith regardless of whether he was assessed at £2 or £20.
Superficially the safe solution is to assume that nil and £1 assessments indicate journeymen and apprentices, while from about £5 most must have been master craftsmen.
But although this might be tenable for booming Babergh, it will not do for depressed Coventry where many masters were quite poor, and John Langwood (craft unstated) was not the only employer — in this case of an apprentice — who owned no goods worth assessing.
Predictably the solitary three-figure assessment in Babergh belonged to a Sudbury grocer, an importer of costly spices; in Coventry there were two, plus a vintner (or importer of wines) and a baker in this bracket.
Innkeepers (in Suffolk) and  butchers — both districts specialised in cattle raising — were prominent among the next highest classes; in general, distribution, exchange, and service occupations were consistently more remunerative than production.
If the highly developed woollen textile industry be disregarded, the structure of crafts and trades of Babergh may not have been in any way unrepresentative of the shires at that time.
Large mercantile fortunes were largely concentrated in regional capitals.
At Exeter twenty citizens (3 per cent of the total) were rated at $100-£300, and there was a flourishing overseas trade.
Coventry had an equal number of men of the top rank, the two richest being a mercer and a draper worth 2,000 marks and £1,000 respectively.
Next to these came a Merchant of the Staple, or wool exporter (one of two), assessed at £666. 13s. 4d.
Another Stapler lived in the tiny Buckinghamshire village of Hogshaw, but his assets, totalling £300, were exceptional for a country district; he ranked as a gentleman and was a justice of the peace.
Finally it may be noted that the gentry of Babergh hundred were more sharply differentiated from the remainder of the community than their fellows in Rutland.
The lesser ones probably opted to seek their fortune in the clothing trade.
Spring, the greatest of the clothiers, owned land there valued at £105. 10s.; his ancestors had been gentlemen, and his son John, in 1522 a gentleman in the household of Sir William Waldegrave at Smallbridge, Bures, dissolved the business on succeeding his father in 1523.
Here again is found a degree of confusion as between yeomen and husbandmen, although it is easier to appreciate.
Towards the top of the scale the relatively large number of prosperous husbandmen must be taken as reflecting the high overall level of wealth reinforced by the demand of the manufacturing population for food; at the lower end the paucity of £2 assessments can almost certainly be attributed to the cottage farmers having turned over to weaving and kindred trades.
At the same time it must be remembered that the occupations of a quarter of the inhabitants were not stated; some of them must have been farmers, and it is quite conceivable that many of the omissions were the result of uncertainty as to whether or not to class the persons in question as agricultural or industrial.
Precisely four-fifths of the yeomen owned land, but even though this was far more widely diffused than in Rutland there remained a marked contrast between them and the husbandmen, of whom rather less than half were freeholders.
As everywhere, labourers (and of course many artificers) virtually accounted for the two lowest levels of assessment.
Nevertheless, they were not unaffected by the general prosperity of the district: more than one in three owned goods valued at 40s. or more, suggesting (over  and above the usual affluence) a wider, more varied range of jobs and responsibilities created by a more developed economy.
The absence of descriptions of status and occupations from most other certificates is not really an omission.
In Essex at least they would have been required for aliens only.
Nevertheless, the wording is not entirely free from ambiguity, and no doubt some officials decided to play it safe.
Strictly speaking this information was superfluous; at Coventry it was inserted perhaps with a view to recording guild affiliations.
So most certificates distinguish only the clergy, as was required, and the gentry were bound to be noticed as landowners and the lords of many other men.
Having dealt with these it was safe to lump everyone else together as what Smith dismissed as ‘the fourth sort of men which do not rule’, i.e. day labourers, poor husbandmen, merchants and retailers, copyholders and artificers.
If Rutland was typical of agrarian society it would have been understood as a matter of course that most men were peasant farmers and smallholders; indeed, husbandman was the commonest description there, followed by labourers and servants whose status was one of dependence, and landless peasants who did not conform to the stereotype of a society composed of small independent producers.
The very few designated as tradesmen and craftsmen in the musters were almost without exception represented as farmers or labourers in the subsidy (and vice versa), implying that their trades were subsidiary.
There was also the practical reason to provide convincing reasons why so many men were possessed of so little or no assessable ‘substance’, and in the subsidy to justify the assessments of wages which only became effective in the absence of taxable goods, and, moreover, masters were responsible for the payment of their servants' taxes.
Desirable as these descriptions may be, they are not indispensable, for in the light of what has been noted above the assessments themselves are self-explanatory.
In fact, in cobbling together what turned out to be a crudely progressive scheme of taxation, government and parliament cannot have been unaware that they were evolving a fiscal taxonomy which corresponded to the main divisions of society.
FISCAL CLASSIFICATION
Pragmatically the key figure was £20.
This was set as the minimum for contributions to the first loan, in 1522, men of less substance being let on until, perhaps, the yield had proved disappointing.
In the subsidy  goods of this value were taxed at 10 per cent for the first two years, the same rate as for land, the owners of which were mostly drawn from the wealthier strata, and double what was levied on smaller assessments.
In the range £20 — £39 a clear majority of people were taxed on goods, many not owning any land at all, and since personal property at this level was insufficient to confer gentry status, members of the group occupied an intermediate position, lacking on the one hand the landed property necessary for gentlemen; they were, on the other hand, judged competent to pay tax at the same rate as gentlemen, making them men of undeniable substance in comparison with the rank and file of country folk.
The consensus of opinion, nevertheless, was that the fundamental demarcation occurred at £40.
Fiscally it signified little, for the total tax liability (inclusive of the loan payment) remained unaltered at 20 per cent, though there is the important social difference that from this point the proportion of subsidy assessments on landed incomes increases sharply.
Some instinctive appreciation of this fact may have given rise to the mystique which surrounded £40 a year in contemporary culture.
In addition to the theoretical nexus between this and knightly status, the sumptuary act of 1533 bracketed men in general worth that much with some of the knights who took precedence as esquires.
As a conventional yardstick of unchallengeable gentility, it featured prominently in the semi-egalitarian manifesto of the Norfolk rebels in 1549 which, although hostile to the gentry at large in important respects, was directed primarily against those whose pretensions rested on no very sure foundation of landed property, and the position of £40-a-year men was expressly reserved throughout.
It cannot have been only in relation to land that £40 had a special significance.
For the purpose of the Anticipation — the advance payment of the first instalment of the subsidy on assessments of £40 — both lands and goods were treated alike, their owners being considered equally capable of paying sooner than anyone else.
Furthermore, the prominent courtier Sir John Hussey's sycophantic resolution, moved in the midst of haggling over the subsidy bill, burdened landed estates of £50 with an additional shilling in the pound, making a total of 15 per cent compared with the general 10.
When the gentlemen in the Commons realised what they had committed themselves to, they quickly extended this surcharge to the goods of merchants (and others) of like value.
The choice of this figure suggests a well-judged ploy to restrict the highest rate to the truly rich, for it is noticeable that the majority of assessments between £40 and £100 were bunched around the minimum figure.
In Rutland there  were very few assessments at £50 in 1522, and all were prudently reduced to £40 (more or less) for the subsidy; men on £60 or more could not so plausibly shed their surtax liability.
The incidence of this higher rate of tax — totalling, inclusive of the loan, 25 per cent— is therefore misleading; in effect it acknowledged the superior position of £40 men while seeking to evade the full implications.
Many rural taxpayers at £40 and upwards on goods were yeomen who made up in substance what they lacked in status.
Some were actually poised on the threshold of gentility, a state they could well afford to maintain, and to which they very frequently attained through the acquisition of real wealth.
In contrast, a good many mere country gentlemen possessed very limited personal estates, arguably because their fortunes were declining or, at best, were static, while the wealth of leading yeomen consisted mainly of flourishing, well-stocked farms.
It is not altogether improbable that the moveables of the gentry were often undervalued thanks to some lingering influence of fourteenth-century tax rules, which exempted articles such as jewellery and armour which dignified their rank.
It was not necessarily that the rich were more adroit at tax avoidance.
The owner of large, complex estates, who did not manage them personally, might never have a clear idea of his full income.
Moreover, the upper classes lived habitually, indeed ruthlessly, in debt, putting on paying their bills for years until desperate creditors were driven to offer to accept a fraction of their due and forget the rest.
So certain privileged persons would place society under tribute, and since no doubt prices tended to be adjusted in compensation, the effect was comparable with that of shop-lifting at the present time.
The range £40 — £99 embraced the main body of the gentry, the more successful yeomen and provincial merchants.
A hundred pounds and above covered knights and other leading gentry as well as merchants in overseas trade.
Consistency suggests placing assessments of upwards of £300, comprising the very rich, in a separate category, as the base point for the higher rate of 133 per cent in the loan of 1522, making a total liability of 28⅝ per cent.
Men worth £1,000 indeed were supposed to pay the loan at an even higher rate, determined by the commissioners.
However, most county returns contain very few at £300, let alone £1,000; except in the unique circumstances of industrial Suffolk they would form but a tiny group.
Even in the biggest cities their numbers were extremely limited; while Coventry contained six, including two worth upwards of £1,000, there were no more than four in Norwich, the second city in the kingdom, and just one at Exeter.
As already indicated, £20 — £39 embraced an assortment of yeomen, minor gentry, and lesser merchants and manufacturers who in towns, other than the biggest and most important, might well have formed the ruling elite.
Below the £20 mark were to be found the mass of people, 90 per cent and more of the population.
Although very much the ‘poor commons’ paying for the most part a 5 per cent tax on their goods, they were anything but an undifferentiated whole.
Those worth £5 — £19 were roped in for the second loan, in 1523, so paying a total of 15 per cent, not so very much less than what was expected of the £20 men, and of course a proportionately heavier burden.
The difference is that not only was their subsidy rate half that of wealthier people, but evidently it was not originally planned to levy the loan on them.
As a rule non-parliamentary taxation fell on the shoulders of those who were better able to bear it, and hence was not exactly unpopular.
Resentment of Wolsey's experiment must have been due largely to its extension to the relatively (though far from inarticulate) poor of the burden normally confined to the rich.
The category £10-£19 covered middling or larger peasant farmers, tenants for the most part, though sometimes owner-occupiers, as well as highly skilled craftsmen; in the village community they might well hold positions of responsibility.
At £5 — 9 were the main body of peasant farmers and the less-skilled craftsmen.
Men with £3 — £4 were probably smallholders, but, although £2 attracted the same rate of tax, men at this level tended to overlap with those beneath, their assessments being reduced to £1 on some occasions.
As likely as not they were cottagers partially dependent on casual labouring, while not infrequently assessment on wages gives practical expression to the class of servants mentioned by the act of 1533.
Typically they were smallholders or cottagers, village craftsmen and superior servants.
It is not improbable that men worth £1 or less did not begin to attract attention until the later stages of the subsidy bill, as a result of the Commons' determination to shift the burden of taxation downwards, for if the intention was to rope in labourers and servants as a makeweight, it could not have been seriously supposed that any substantial amount could be wrung from them.
The rule devised was that if a man's goods could be valued at £1, but less than £2, or alternatively if he owned nothing but received wages of £1 a year, he should pay 4d.
These were mostly artificers, labourers or servants, many of course being taxed only on wages, as were many of those assessed at nil in the musters; the status of any who were later taxed on wages is obvious, while those never assessed at all almost certainly included the unemployed and, probably, vagabonds and beggars.
It was in the nature of things that the trading-manufacturing element should tend to cluster in towns and industrialised villages, although cottage industry was widely dispersed, especially in the north and west, where population was dense and common land extensive.
The rich clothiers of Suffolk were unique, not matched even in the contiguous parts of Essex.
There were indeed three men of £200 at Cirencester, a major centre of the West of England wool trade, but they had few peers locally; Newbury had four big clothiers, including the son of the legendary John Winchcombe, who was worth £630, but here too there was no concentration of wealth comparable with that of Suffolk.
Although persistent overlapping and the resultant anomalies means that none of these economic groupings were exclusive, the character of each is governed by the bias of its composition; the minor gentlemen comprehended in the £10. — £19 range for instance, were too heavily outnumbered to be in any real sense typical of it.
A WORKING MODEL
Although any clear-cut classification is too much to expect, application of common sense to the broad outlines of the numerical data enables us to pick our way through this statistical minefield with tolerable assurance.
Logic suggests that in most circumstances the £100 man is most likely to be the squire of a village, a merchant in a town; while men from £3 to £10 will almost all be small farmers and craftsmen.
To disentangle the yeomanry from the middling and lower gentry — and indeed from the richest peasants — is more difficult, but this is in the nature of things since yeomen emerged from the ranks of the husbandmen, while the gentry did not form a closed caste, and in many cases there was little to choose between their respective scales of wealth.
To sum up, personal wealth can be used as a broad guide to status as follows: Two reservations must be made.
Firstly it would seem logical that the nil group must have included paupers, a challenging question that will be considered in due course.
Secondly, assessments of the gentry can be misleading, insofar as large personal estates result in mere gentlemen with relatively little land being classed with major landowners, some of whom had only modest net personalty.
THE STRUCTURE OF PERSONAL WEALTH
THE DISTRIBUTION of personal property gives the most comprehensive overview of the wealth of the English people in the sixteenth century, because almost everybody must have owned a certain amount of goods and chattels, and, as required, a value was assigned to ‘every man's substance’, if only a few shillings — commonly reduced to a curt ‘nil’— representing the clothes on their backs and other personal effects.
Of course, in a predominantly agrarian economy land constituted by far the most important capital asset.
Almost certainly Thomas Cromwell was thinking of the data assembled in 1522 when he estimated the nation's wealth at £4 million, one-quarter of which was annual income from land, which should be multiplied by twenty — the customary rate of capitalisation — to effect a valid comparison with the three million comprised by the capital value of moveables.
Ownership of this asset accordingly conferred unchallengeable power and influence on a comparative minority, while at the same time working it gave the overwhelming majority of the population their livelihood.
According to this record landowners were rather thin on the ground, a little more than one in ten of all persons listed in Rutland, and fewer than one-quarter in Buckinghamshire, a county of contrasts.
Nor was every man assessed on landed income an owner, for some used to take leases so as to be able to sublet them for profit.
In due course we shall see that people's standard of living hinged broadly on their position in the landholding hierarchy, and it will be necessary to examine this after reviewing the material conditions it enabled them to enjoy.
Assessments of less than £1 were not made in the subsidy, and nearly all below £2 were based on wages, except for a few based on income  from land; and since the statutory proviso, doubtless intended to allay fears raised by the inquest of 1522, restricted taxation to one form of wealth only, any personal property belonging to persons so taxed was ignored.
As earnings rank as personalty in any case and they must have had something in the way of moveables, especially those taxed on land, it is reasonable to treat all assessments as though made on goods.
In fact one Sussex gentleman was taxed at £66. 13s. 4d. on goods in 1524 and £40 on land in 1525; at the lowest level some returns used goods and wages almost indiscriminately, the tax payable not being affected.
RURAL SOCIETY
Social structure was closely related to farming systems.
Everywhere in lowland England peasant husbandmen and smallholders, worth £2 — £10, occasionally £15 or more, in personal estate, formed the solid core.
Their farms were rarely large, the ordinary Norfolk peasant having 20 sown acres on average.
Officially 20 acres of arable land was regarded as standard, but with some of it left fallow each year, many people must have got by with much less in practice, for in East Anglia,c .
1600, average tilled acreage was less than 10, compared with about 15 in Sussex.
Since arable farming was labour-intensive and its efficiency proportionate to scale, this peasant nucleus was flanked in major corn-growing regions, such as Norfolk and the Berkshire Downs, by wealthy yeomen and swarms of poor labouring people (see Table 2.1).
The subsidy rolls show much the same profile on the Sussex Downs and coastal plain, though, with trifling exceptions, assessments below £1 were not made, and most below £2 were on wages.
Neither big farmers nor labourers were conspicuous in most pastoral regions, where livestock, principally cattle, formed, as always, the standby of the smallholder; indeed, in some of these districts the minimum, and commonest, assessment was £2 on goods.
At a time when water formed the only practicable means of bulk transportation, the cultivation of grain was profitable in Norfolk and Sussex, where the arable districts were next to the coast, wheat and malt being the chief commodities clearing the ports there, much of it bound for London, though some went farther afield, including victuals for armies operating against Scotland.
Berkshire's outlet was Reading, situated on the Kennet just above its confluence with the Thames, and on the way to becoming a major river-port, forwarding malt and meal to  London, to which Great Marlow shipped Chiltern corn brought down from High Wycombe.
Easy access to the markets of the capital for its corn, dairy produce and fatstock brought the marshland of southern Essex great wealth, of which almost two-fifths belonged to a fairly large class of rich men; smallholders also prospered, the number of £2 assessments more than offsetting the relatively few £1 ones.
The overall impression of similarity cannot entirely mask significant differences between these districts.
At the western end of the Vale of the White Horse in Berkshire dairy farming afforded greater opportunities to smallholders, and poor labouring folk were far fewer than on the Downs.
Though the proportion of such people on the Sussex Downs and coastal plain looks small by comparison, in fact it varied greatly from one administrative division to another, reaching almost three-fifths in the Liberty of the archbishop of Canterbury where, as on many ecclesiastical estates, the condition of the people tended to backward-ness, with villeinage lingering on.
At the same time a good many Sussex, and indeed Essex, wage earners were comparatively well paid, not least in the households of magnates like Lord La Warr at Offington and Lord Marney at Layer Marney; the structure of wealth in the little town of Arundel attests to the prosperity generated by the great Fitzalan family, whose seat was the castle there, whilst Chichester city contained not only skilled artisans but also men employed in various capacities in  and around the cathedral.
Since also the percentage of assessments below £3 was much the same in Sussex as in Norfolk and Berkshire, a good many farm workers there might have been cottagers who had their own plots of land.
On the heathland of north-west Norfolk many poor men of no military value were ignored until taxed on wages in the subsidy; above the £1-level people there resembled those who lived farther to the east, except that the outstanding men were great landowners and yeomen, in contrast to the north-eastern district, where peasants were firmly entrenched, usually taking the initiative over enclosure, which had made more progress there.
At the top of the scale, landlords and big yeomen farmers owned not much less than one-third of the wealth of Norfolk and Sussex.
In Berkshire the Newbury clothiers were the richest men, although it looks as if the decline of the local broadcloth and kerseys had already begun, leaving a trail of poverty.
The Norfolk worsted manufacture, unique in having spread from Norwich to an arable farming district, had always remained dispersed in small units without great clothiers and had never recovered from its recession in the previous century.
Although the thin soils of the South Downs were less productive than some — Lambourn hundred atop the Berkshire Downs was very similar — rich men were few, mainly because two leading landowners, the earl of Arundel and Lord Bergavenny, were assessed separately as peers, and a third, Sir John Gage, was taxed in the royal household as Comptroller of Calais.6
The Chiltern hundreds of Buckinghamshire broadly resembled the Berkshire Downs, though there was no cloth industry and the hills were ‘well woodyd and full of enclosures’.
The corn-and-sheep husbandry was varied by pig fattening in the beechwoods, where arable fields generally occupied the sunny slopes, pastures the shaded ones, and there was a well-defined local method of improving the lighter soils.
Well situated to serve the London market, the district supported numbers of thriving yeomen and husbandmen, those worth £20 — £99 forming the most prominent group.
However, the most distinctive part was not the chalk uplands but the little Thames-side hundred of Stoke, lying on the richest soil and closest to London, where little short of half the aggregate wealth belonged to just a dozen men — 2½ per cent of the listed inhabitants — rated at £40 and upwards, indeed practically one-third belonged to the five rated at £100 or more.
Already perhaps it was commuter country, where the richest man, worth £500 in personalty, had no land at all within the shire: for courtier, and future Master of the Mint, Edmund Peckham, Denham made an admirable rural retreat, an easy ride from either Richmond, Hampton Court or Windsor.
Lacking comparable communications, the northern division of Buckinghamshire could not match the wealth of the Chilterns and other arable regions.
Barley, supplemented towards the east by legumes, was the ubiquitous cereal; with investment in crops and livestock evenly balanced on the smaller holdings, mixed farming for subsistence was probably the norm.
In contrast to the Chilterns, the top people were sharply divided from the great mass of poor peasants who doubtless thought a combination of the two safer than exclusive reliance on either crops or livestock, just as many customarily sowed mixed seeds, such as maslin (wheat and rye) counting on one at least to come up.
The meagre returns from tillage stimulated the conversion of arable land to pasture for sheep, which was proceeding actively in the early decades of the century.
This region was one of those most affected by the depopulation of villages and hamlets, several having recently been enclosed; large numbers of poor in parts point to consequent loss of employment, although it is not clear whether people had actually been turned off the land or the townships had gradually contracted.
Although most peasants preferred self-sufficient, family-sized holdings, agricultural labourers were common enough in this and similar regions of thoroughgoing mixed husbandry.
Doubtless many a canny husbandman claimed an allowance for wages paid notionally to his sons, who of course would then be taxed on them.
Against all odds, too, smallholders persisted in trying to grow com, for ploughing and reaping, rather than minding sheep, was held to be a man's proper work; the argument that the cornfield was the nursery of archers, who still formed the backbone of English armies, looks like a rationalisation of this instinct.
In some conditions the task was beyond them.
At the western end of Suffolk, which was ‘eether wholly champion or neer, the feilding abounding by tillage and flockes of sheep doe from thence emprove their greatest commodities’, the soil was not naturally productive, so that‘the husbandman before he can test the fruits of his labour endureth much travell’.
The demands of the barren Breckland effectively squeezed the more affluent sort of peasant out of Lackford hundred, where nine out of ten taxpayers were worth less than £5, and with scarcely anybody in the £5-£19 range, it was almost entirely peopled by big farmers and swarms of poor labourers.
The nearby open-field country around Saffron Walden in Essex was comparable, though the absence of extremes of wealth made peasant husbandmen the most conspicuous group.
These extremes of wealth and poverty apparently inseparable from corn-and-sheep husbandry did not exist in most pastoral regions, where, as a rule, little more than a tenth of all wealth belonged to men worth £50 or more.
Even in industrial Babergh hundred, Suffolk, stripping the surface layer from the record exposes the original economy of the wood-pasture country — specialised dairying, pig fattening and horse breeding, in almost half its villages, which preserved this traditional system, the top people accounted for not more than 14 per cent of the wealth, a solitary £100 man for just 4½ per cent.
In prosperous districts too — most strikingly in central Suffolk — the labouring element was minimal, few assessments falling below £2, and many people had their own smallholdings which, even if not always big enough to afford a really adequate livelihood, at least restricted working for wages to a subsidiary role.
Crop husbandry was limited to basic subsistence and animal feed.
Large numbers of low assessments in certain districts, like the Forest of Dean, were generally the mark of a lower overall scale of wealth.
Away from the coastal marshes, the grasslands of lowland England consisted of clay vales, and heaths and forests, which differed radically in wealth and social structure.
In Gloucestershire the average man in the vale, situated between the Cotswold Edge and the river Severn, was half as much again better off as in the Forest of Dean across the river (see   Table 2.2).
Again subsidy rolls show very much the same situation in other comparable areas.
The true proportion of people worth less than £2 in the vale was probably closer to the 32.7 per cent in Barton near Bristol hundred than to the 14.8 per cent in Whitstone, just south of Gloucester.
Due perhaps to changing conditions, however, a good many men of substance were finally taxed at 20s. on wages, including, no doubt, independent craftsmen who still dominated the local manufacture of fine cloth which, except in the Stroudwater Valley, had not yet come under the control of capitalist clothiers, as prominent in the West Country generally as in East Anglia; pending this development earnings were evidently high and the really poor not numerous.
Over much of this county the effective minimum valuation of personal property in 1522 was £2, the trifling possessions of some mere cottagers being disregarded, before each village list concluded with a string of nil assessments; strictly, dependent members of peasant families owned nothing individually; persons of both types reappear in the subsidy rolls taxed on wages.
The economy of the vale was founded on livestock.
At the northern tip, where it merges with the Vale of Evesham, some grain was also grown, but the Vale of Berkeley, towards the south, was an area of small dairy holdings where arable farming was restricted in scale.
Employment for agricultural labourers was correspondingly limited, and by no means all holdings were too small for subsistence.
The prosperity of the wood-pasture region of Suffolk was fully comparable; with minimal arable it did not require the same great numbers of labourers as the cornfields farther west, a feature that clearly marks the boundary between the chalk soils and the clay loams.
An anonymous seventeenth-century chorographer remarked: Robert Reyce described High Suffolk as ‘Parts inclining to the east’ where pasture ruled, the people ‘contenting themselves onely with so much tillage as will satisfie their own expences’.
In the belt extending from Hoxne to the Orwell estuary the percentage of assessments below £2 hardly exceeded twenty, save in a few places, and overall more were  on goods than on earnings.
The 40s. men formed the biggest group, many in Hoxne hundred being described as craftsmen or labourers.
‘The middle,’ Reyce continues, ‘although enjoying much meddow and pasture, yett far more tillage doe from thence raise their cheifest maintenance.’
Between Ipswich and Bury St Edmunds the percentage of sub-£2 assessments was at least 35–40, rising towards the west as the proportion of arable increased.
On the coastal sandlings the scene changed again.
The chorographer (though not Reyce) points out: ‘That p't of the countrye that is nere unto the sea is nothing so fruiffull neyther so comodious for cattell as the other but more fitte for sheepe and come,’ and so contained many more 20s. men — upwards of 43 per cent in Blything hundred, and more than twice as many as in townships situated wholly on the clay.
In Colneis hundred, between the Deben and Orwell estuaries, the percentage was only 14½, much the lowest in the shire.
The exceptionally rich soil here was producing carrots for London by the end of the century when, perhaps, the trade was already long-established.
Cattle fattening on the coastal marshes supported a prosperous peasantry as in Lincolnshire.
The district with the most poor people was virtually the ancient Liberty of St Edmund, later to become the county of West Suffolk, which has always possessed a unity of its own centring on the town of Bury.
East of this, £1 assessments topped the 45 per cent mark only in Samford hundred, which was practically coterminous with the ‘rich loam’ area, identified by Arthur Young, and in the north-eastern corner of the county, which he was ‘much inclined to class’with it, and was almost a part of Norfolk.
The southern half of the western division was, nonetheless, situated on the central clays, Babergh and Cosford hundreds forming the nucleus of the clothing trade which extended from Clare (Risbridge hundred) down the river Stour to East Bergholt, in Samford hundred.
Here the density of the labouring population speaks for itself, though while in the Cosford villages it reached almost 55 per cent, in the rising centre Hadleigh it amounted to less than a third.
On the northern fringe of the wood-pasture belt fewer than a quarter of the people of Blofield, East Flegg and Walsham hundreds in Norfolk had less than £2, almost as many having £5 — £9.
To the south, Mid-Essex was more varied, interspersed with arable tracts, while the farmers and smallholders of the Thames-side marshes prospered on meat and dairy produce for the London market; doubtless too the proximity of the  metropolis affected earnings in Becontree hundred, where many labourers were taxed at 40s.
On average (£5.44 per capita) the Wealden vale was filly comparable with the com-sheep region (£5 — £5.55) and far more affluent than the forest ridge to the east (£4.64), where, in contrast to the rest of Sussex, the scarcity of truly rich people placed the biggest concentration of wealth in the range £10-£19 instead of £20-£39.
The Wealden clays supported a richer, more diverse agriculture than the Hastings Beds formation, where impoverished sandy soils combined with abrupt contours largely restricted farming to stock keeping, and grain often had to be brought from elsewhere.
Broad tracts of woodland and common wastes along the ridge attracted squatters irresistibly, and with the whole Weald teeming with people many obscure forest dwellers might easily have contrived to elude the taxman altogether.
In arable districts most usable lad must already have been taken up, and with the commons jealously guarded by farmers to whom they were essential for keeping the animals on which cultivation depended, the landless man stood a better chance of carving a niche for himself by drifting to a less-developed, mainly pastoral terrain.
Nevertheless, in the long run the prospect was apt to prove illusory, poverty being the enduring characteristic of this and similar regions, which, in consequence, attracted by-employments of many kinds.
Although in fact ultra vires , taxing many men worth less than £2 on goods must have been considered justified by circumstances, for their numbers alone made them an important element in the local community.
Legally those having less than the minimum of 40s. in goods should have been assessed on wages or ‘profits for wages’, which were often treated as interchangeable, though sometimes carefully distinguished: in Goldspur hundred on the Kentish border assessments on profits were specified in 1524, but in the next year the assessments roped in more small taxpayers and divided them into fifty-one on wages, forty-six on profits and seven on goods.
Implying the piece rates paid to nominally independent cottage craftsmen by the capitalists who controlled most rural industry, ‘profits’ looks like an elliptical term for ‘wages’.
In the Weald they probably embraced the earnings of woodcutters, colliers and other forest workmen; a form of share cropping, which was not unknown, need not be ruled out.
In eastern Sussex most sub-£2 assessments were on earnings, but in central districts goods were the rule; in the vale, in common with most of West  Sussex, almost all were on wages, and, with much land under the plough, probably those of farm workers.
In pastoral Suffolk fewer than half this class were dependent on wages, presumably younger men who were not yet cottagers.
In both regions petty landowners were fairly common, though still only a tiny minority.
If Leland had gone there, he might well have described the eastern Weald as he did the Forest of Dean: ‘more fruitful of wood and grass than corn’ with ‘many iron mines and forges’; yet although he judged it self-sufficient in corn, Dean was very much poorer than the Weald.
The north-east corner of Worcestershire escaped the extremes of heathland poverty, though the spacious commons of the ancient Feckenham Forest, which was still not completely cleared, attracted landless squatters.
Down towards the river Severn, the Kidderminster area was relatively more prosperous, more like the clay vales, but in some villages near Worcester, the average per person was little more than £4, even though fewer than 30 per cent of assessments were under £2.
Having no really rich men, the community enjoyed a measure of equality, similar to Arden — the name of the forest in Warwickshire — where farms averaged just over 30 acres, with less than one in five exceeding 50, and three-quarters of the land under grass; farmers raised beef cattle for profit, and crops — rye, oats, barley and drage — for subsistence, some growing none at all.
Sheep flocks were small; diversification and improvement began only towards the turn of the century in response to the challenge of population growth.
Almost one-fifth of the assessments in Yardley, a poor parish, were of £5 — £9, the highest only £11, yet though nearly half were under 40s., only one man in seven was taxed on wages.
Various by-employments foreshadowed subsequent industrial development; indeed, Droitwich salt already enjoyed wide repute, although fifty-four nil-assessments among seventy-five listed townsmen underlines Leland's description of its poverty.
Certain parts of southern England also do not slot neatly into any regular classification.
Essex displayed strong individual characteristics, not even the forested western fringe being markedly differentiated from the adjacent parts.
The primary division was between the southern saltings and the rest, though stock keeping was general.
The mixed-farming central area differed from the north-west corner mainly in having rather fewer poor, even on the prime wheatlands of Chelmsford and Ongar hundreds, but, with few men of the richest sort, average wealth was lower, especially towards the north.
Despite its maritime location, Lincolnshire stagnated economically.
Louthesk and Ludburgh wapentakes formed a rather poor district; even the most affluent  resident, who was taxed on £60 a year and whose family estates were worth double, owned personal estate of only £43, more than half of which comprised a none-too-prosperous farm; whether he was unlucky or incompetent, no one outside the thriving little market town Louth was doing much better.
Almost all the people of the wold villages were small husbandmen and labourers, showing no sign of the gulf between rich and poor usual there.
The coastal villages were a little bigger, containing many landless peasants, represented by numerous 20s. assessments, who lived by grazing stock on the common saltmarshes.
A scarcity of poor people sharply differentiates the Cotswold Hills in Gloucestershire from other corn-sheep husbandry regions.
Although a good 30 per cent of assessments in Kiftsgate hundred were nils, the other hundreds returned none at all.
Nonetheless, the absence of labourers is more apparent than real: the local practice of not assessing goods of less value than £2 did not mean that any personal property owned by people of the labouring sort was generally ignored, for a good many men later taxed on wages owned goods worth anything up to £10 in 1522, which (unless perhaps having disposed of, say, a beast or two) they managed to conceal from the taxman and convince him that they had nothing but the minimum in wages.
Though not exclusive to the Cotswolds, this scaling down is regular enough to give labourers there the  appearance of modest prosperity, with sub-£2 assessments hardly rising above 35 per cent anywhere; Brightwells Barrow hundred closely resembled the contiguous (and mainly pastoral) Berkshire hundred of Shrivenham, which contrasted strongly with the arable parts of Berkshire situated to the east of it.
Too steep for tillage, the higher slopes of the hills carried innumerable sheep, and the mild, damp climate made the land less suitable than chalk downlands for the sheep fold and wheat growing.
As the Cotswolds specialised in the production of fine wool, and Cirencester was one of the greatest marts in the land, strategically sited to serve both the Gloucestershire and Wiltshire manufacturing districts, with lesser centres at Chipping Campden and Northleach, the balance might have become decisively tilted towards sheep.
The condition of many villages points to depopulation, but, although Sezincote had been enclosed as early as 1486, the region as a whole was ‘remarkably free’ of depopulating enclosure.
The abbot of Hailes, who kept a flock of 900 head at Longborough, was accused at one point of harassing his tenants there preparatory to enclosure, though he never went through with it.
Locally depopulation was a wasting process to which enclosure contributed little.
Although the land was largely champaign, some  demesnes had never lain in common field, or had long ceased to do so.
With few exceptions, villages were tiny, shrinking communities with the irreducible minimum of the poorest people: at Hawling, where the population was well short of a hundred, only three of the twenty different men recorded in the combined muster and subsidy were assessed at less than £2, and none out of eleven at tiny Batsford.
Almost unknown in the region at this time were the tiny freeholds conventionally linked with the proliferation of paupers, whether cottagers clinging to a precarious independence, or young men waiting to come into their patrimony.
This perhaps was a feature of the Forest of Dean, where four holdings out of five could have been occupied by their owners (who lived in the same townships) and many belonged to men worth less than £2.
Conversely, in the Cotswolds not one property in five — big estates included — could have been owner-occupied.
Unless there had been a general exodus of small proprietors, a good deal of land had been acquired by outsiders, possibly with a view to letting it to graziers.
Also numerous parcels now belonged to the great religious foundations of the region as a result of pious donations; if many of these were tenanted in conjunction with other, larger holdings, they were unavailable for small men, while there were not enough of the big farmers, who did occupy them, to employ more than a very limited number of servants.
Looking beyond purely local peculiarities, if, as seems likely, the true strength formed by the two lowest groups in the Cotswolds was approximately 35 per cent, this is suggestively similar to Rutland's 37.6, and moreover, the general distribution of wealth was very much the same.
This was no mere coincidence, for the oolitic limestone of the Cotswold Hills continues north-eastwards across Northamptonshire and Rutland and into Lincolnshire, taking in, on the way, Towcester hundred, which shows similar characteristics, and skirting the three hundreds of Buckingham, where people were marginally more prosperous than in the rest of north Buckinghamshire.
In Rutland at least demand for wage labour was curtailed by restrictions on com growing imposed by the lack of means of shipment, as in Leicestershire, where labourers seem to have been even thinner on the ground; much effort went into stock rearing, many farmers kept above-average flocks of sheep, and there was abundant fatting pasture in the Vale of Catmose.
Great numbers of labouring poor were more characteristic of regions where the soil was chalk-based.
Neither in distribution of wealth nor in social structure was Rutland in any way anomalous.
At the same time the general level of wealth in  this unremarkable corner of the East Midlands, peopled entirely by peasant farmers, with a leavening of yeomen and only a handful of rich squires, was lower only than on the fertile cornlands of Norfolk and in the opulent Stour Valley manufacturing district — higher not only than in other, similar regions but also Berkshire, which the yield of the loans, 1522 — 3, placed fifth jointly with Suffolk, and Gloucestershire which shared fourteenth place with Rutland itself.
On other occasions Rutland ranked 22nd — 24th of English counties, well below not only Berkshire and Gloucestershire but even Buckinghamshire.
Evidently the unique thoroughness of its muster book was complemented by a more rigorous standard of assessment than in most shires, since in 1522 personal wealth there averaged £97 per thousand acres, compared with as little as £61.7 in 1515 and £64 in 1524, and, mostly having less than average wealth, the sixty-nine additional men roped in in 1522 cannot account for this difference.
The Buckinghamshire ratios were £71 per thousand in 1515, £68 in 1524 and £79 in 1522 when the average for just about half of Berkshire was only marginally higher than the £88 for the complete county in 1515.
The best explanation is that assessment was more realistic in Rutland than anywhere else.
The chronicler Hall emphasised the consternation produced by the government's success in establishing a basis for swingeing taxation, and although wealth can seldom or never have been overstated for fiscal purposes, the Rutland muster book could perhaps be the exception that bears out his claim that ‘some avaunced them selfes more than they were worth of pride, not remembryng [realising/ suspecting]what was coming’, naively succumbing to the blandishments of the commissioners, who ‘did what they could to set the people to the vttermoste’.
The reckoning came with a vengeance when ‘The kynge out of hand sent commissions to gather ye loane, this was called practisyng of the loane, which sore emptied men's purses.’
Improbable though it may sound, Rutland men found themselves having, with ‘much heauiness’, to fork out on the basis of the full value of their property which they had unguardedly divulged.
No doubt when the subsidy commissioners came on the scene they were prevailed on to restore assessments to approximately the levels of 1515.
The Buckinghamshire assessments seem, on the contrary, to illustrate the other side of the story, of commissioners having to be directed by the Council to commence their labours afresh, employing any and every ‘practice’ to ferret out the truth.
The signs are that some people there were more sophisticated and succeeded in bilking the revenue.
Five times the size of Rutland, Buckinghamshire shows every symptom of  several standards of assessment: numerous reductions in the Chiltern hundreds in 1524 reduced aggregate wealth from £97 to £67 per thousand acres, while in Buckingham hundreds it only dropped from £84 to £59, but throughout the northern half of the shire many of the 1522 assessments were retained substantially unaltered, conceivably because the people concerned deemed it prudent to keep their mouths shut and pay up; a significant number were actually uprated, perhaps penalised for having the gall to seek abatements, so attracting a further, more searching investigation of their means.
Overall the level of wealth was slightly raised in the subsidy, indeed by more than 25 per cent— from £57 to £71 — in the Newport hundreds where many more men were swept into the net.
The returns for Lothingland and Mutford hundreds, Suffolk, permit a rare glimpse of the mechanics by which many assessments were revalued, under the heading ‘The namys of those personys forgotyn and not charged at the last subsidie which are to be charged now’.
THE HIGHLAND ZONE
Far from the fertile cornfields and lush pastures of the southern counties, the poverty of North Country hill farmers had no parallel.
Up in the Pennines, nine out of ten people of Staincliffe wapentake in the West Riding of Yorkshire owned less than a pound's worth of moveables.
Arncliff folk were so poor — the meagre belongings of all twenty-seven totalling no more than £9. 7s. 4d. — that when the subsidy came to be levied, Robert Selson and William Prysche, with 20s. apiece, John Knolles (26s. 8d.), and Thomas and Leonard Atkynson (10s. each) were selected as if at random and assessed at £2 each; although the first two also enjoyed tiny incomes from land, it is to be hoped that some at least of their neighbours chipped in to make up the shilling due from each.
This was the regular practice in the North, especially in south Lancashire and on the barren North York Moors around Whitby where, typically, at Hutton Bonville only squire George Conyers was taxed — on lands worth £40 a year.
Fylingdales parish returned only ten taxpayers even though its biggest settlement was the lively village of Robin Hood's Bay, where Leland observed twenty fishing boats, each of which may be reckoned the livelihood of one family at the very least.
With wealth distributed so as to give a highly distinctive social  structure, the Craven District was quite unlike any other part of England.
The semi-occlusion of categories between £2 and £39 sharply divided society into two classes.
Upwards of £40 there were the landowners, or gentry, though a good many below this point might have been counted as gentlemen.
The remaining 90 per cent or more included the majority of the peasants.
In the absence of precise definition, 20s. might be taken as marking the dividing line between husbandmen and labourers, were it not that at Long Preston Edmund Clarke (nil) was stated to be servant to Thomas Squyer, who was worth only 6s. 8d.
Contrary to the usual practice elsewhere, ‘less than £1’ means a few shillings leavened by a sporadic nil assessment, rather than the opposite, for only one man in nine was actually given as nil, the majority ranging from 3s. 4d. to 18s.
In place of the even sums of pounds and marks of the bigger assessments, all those below £2 were precisely stated in shillings and pence, producing a finely graduated hierarchy of wealth (see Table 2.3).
With upwards of four-fifths of people here having less than 30s. in personal property, nobody at all was worth as much as 40s. in one township out of every three, especially upland ones like Arncliff, Hellifield and Kettlewell, though these were not the only ones.
So the man worth just under £2 might well have been a person of some consequence in the community.
In relation to the harsh physical environment holdings were small and (it was said) getting smaller, thanks to partible inheritance: few exceeded 20–25 acres.
This, coupled with spacious commons, encouraged a relatively dense population.
Although the soil of Craven was good loam, little corn was grown, even less up the dales; oats alone could withstand the damp climate and formed the staple food of the common people.
Most tillage was temporary, and some quite large farms had no implements.
The grazing of sheep and store cattle was the main occupation, although in the course of the sixteenth century dairying was to assume increasing importance.
At this time, however, the problem was almost certainly one of finding outlets, so far did the region lie from major markets, if indeed any great proportion of its products was marketed.
Values obtaining south of the Humber — at least 5s. for a cow or 4s. for a steer — can hardly have applied: even the smallest stock farm must have carried more than just one or two; sheep fetched 1s. apiece in other parts.
All added up to subsistence farming in its most rudimentary form, with minimal trading and scarcely any money circulating, so that the assessors' valuation of livestock — and household effects — may well have been frankly notional.
The alacrity with which northerners enlisted for military service whenever warfare flared up on the Border speaks for itself.
The pay was welcome and there might well be plunder to boot, not to mention the excitement.
While the Vale of York and the Wold country might have been reasonably fruitful, the province as a whole lived close to the margin of subsistence — so much so that periodic military activity on the Border was invariably handicapped by the need to import virtually all supplies, even of forage.
Not only were nearly three-fifths of the people here unable to scrape together sufficient personal property to reach the tax threshold of £2, but none got the alternative of 20s. wages in the year, as did many in the Midland and southern counties who were in the same position.
On the one hand, it is not easy to see who would have been in a position to pay them; on the other, the incidence of wage assessments fell away steadily as distance from the London region increased.
In Leicestershire only 22  per cent of taxpayers overall were classed as wage earners, compared with 37 per cent in Rutland next door.
In Staffordshire and Shropshire this was even more marked, and, unlike in Gloucestershire, the shortage is not readily explained.
Nonetheless, there are no grounds for imputing laxity to local officials operating at a safe distance from central supervision.
The qualifying 20s. was no arbitrary figure but the maximum (16s. + 4s. for livery) laid down for a common servant in husbandry by the wage-regulation act of 1515.
These maxima were subject to the proviso that ‘in such shires and countries that where it hath been and is now used to give less wages, that in those shires and countries they shall give and the taker of the wages be compelled according as they have been used to take.
If the published rates were basically those applicable to the Home Counties and tended to decline proportionately to the distance from the metropolis, many labourers and servants in the provinces may not have earned enough to be assessed.
At the same time there was no particular reason why rates in these two West Midland counties should have been materially lower than in the adjoining shires of Warwick and Worcester where wage assessments were not uncommon, while in Devon, which is actually farther from London than Staffordshire, they amounted to 36 per cent of the whole.
The ninety-one resident freeholders in Craven — about one man in twenty — were, as everywhere else, measurably better off than other people, almost half owning goods worth at least £2, and only sixteen having less than £1's worth.
Yet since, in contrast to that of personal property, the range of landed incomes bears comparison with what was recorded in other, wealthier counties, there were some curious exceptions.
John Clarke of Swinden, for one, must have been a gentleman, with his income of £10 a year, yet his moveables were valued at no more than 30s., with which he only just scraped into the top 20 per cent.
Lord Clifford, if not an eccentric peer, might almost have been the archetypal spendthrift one, for, despite a rental of £453 a year, his home in Skipton castle was appraised at a mere £60; similarly his son, Sir Henry Clifford, had £80 a year, but only £8 in personal estate.
Altogether, nearly half the gentry owned goods worth very much less than their net rentals.
In particular, Anthony Talbot of Alton was worth only one mark, though his income was ten.
A relative in the same village had goods valued at no more than 6s. 8d., though enjoying an income of £3. 6s. 8d. from land, which, in this poor region, may, rather than £5, have been the minimum for gentlemen, many of whom are only  identifiable by their landed incomes.
Such tiny personal estates owned by eminent persons underline the initial impression of a thoroughly spartan standard of living in the North Country.
THE CELTIC FRINGE
Beyond the Tamar lay a land where things were ordered differently (see Table 2.4).
Although Cornwall was not the only county where nothing less than 40s. was reckoned as substance, the making of an independent return by each hundred resulted in five sets of officials taking different views of the native poor, the complement of which tapered off from the modest (15 per cent) in the eastern parts to the negligible (0.4 per cent ) in the far west, balanced to some extent by aliens, who were classed as poor and accounted for one-eighth of this category, making Penwith the antithesis of East hundred, notwithstanding that many who were subsequently taxed in Kerrier hundred were passed over in 1522.
Here something of a special case, aliens were common in most maritime shires, chiefly in seaports, like Great Yarmouth and Rye, though here and there penetrating farther inland, to work, for example, at ironmaking in the Weald of Sussex, a county where they amounted to about 3 per cent of all taxpayers.
In Cornwall almost all were Bretons, who bore a close affinity to the indigenous population, speaking a related tongue, and as yet imperfectly assimilated into the kingdom of France: ‘ther use many Britons with smaul shippes to resorte to Padestowe with commodities of their countery and to by fische,’ Leland observed, adding that the port was also full of Irishmen, Most, however, must have come to work, especially if native labour was in short supply in the parts where they were most numerous.
Since little corn was grown in the county a big labour force was not needed.
Although in the end a good many men were taxed on wages, a number in Kerrier hundred initially had goods worth £2, making the true overall percentage of labouring people a fairly normal 36.6, almost the same as in Devonshire.
The wage earners of the central districts were largely concentrated in Bodmin borough, leaving about 14 per cent in the villages of Trigg and West hundreds where there were no other major towns.
Not only were most holdings too small to provide much work for hired labour, but the big villages that would have housed such a workforce did not exist.
Husbandry was so neglected the population could not feed itself from local resources.
Their staple diet was ‘whitsul’, compounded of sour milk, cheese, curds, butter and suchlike — yogurt, traditional Cornish style!— washed down with water rather than ale.
In addition the greatest single cause of a landless peasantry was missing: Carew contended that ‘In times past, and that not long ago, holdings were so plentiful and holders scarce, as well was the landlord who could get one to be his tenant’.
During the preceding century there had indeed been no pressure for subsistence, yet at the same time demand had been strong, especially in the east where the growth of a thriving cloth industry along the border, combined with the prosperity of the Devon stannaries, situated within a day's journey by cart, had created a market lively enough to make small-scale farming a practicable alternative to labouring for wages.
Very commonly two or more men shared a single assessment, mostly members of the same family, though the occasional bracketing of different surnames suggests cousins or, rather, in-laws — the husbands of co-heiresses who were commonplace among landowners locally; and maybe business partnerships of the kind often formed by miners to save expenses.
Here, though, the family was a larger, more cohesive unit than in the Saxon shires, keeping its property undivided.
Carew describes how  
Irrespective of any causal link, the additional personnel in joint assessments presumably comprised men who elsewhere would have been returned as wage earners or young and poor, but except in Kerrier, where it led to 880 native assessments comprehending as many as 1,179 individuals, it did not add greatly to the numbers of poorer men; and if it tends to raise the true proportion to a clear quarter in a couple of hundreds, it hardly made any difference in West and Trigg.
Of course it need not follow that separate assessment must have cast the younger members of every family as wage earners, any more than it did in other shires where traces of an emergent discrete labouring class were already manifest.
It is, for instance, improbable that, on a joint assessment of £133. 6s. 8d., any of the three Thomases of Lavale would have been mere labourers.
Nevertheless, as members of relatively poor peasant families, and so technically landless, most of these people can have owned little or no personal property in their own right.
If Cornwall was anything but a land of rich squires and yeomen, it may also have enjoyed some immunity from the scourge of absolute poverty.
Many symptoms point to a rude equality, and the average level of wealth was not significantly lower than in other shires.
In some respects Kerrier may have constituted an exception, yet although the mean of £4.4 per head may need scaling down to take account of the multitude of labourers discovered and roped in for the subsidy, upwards of seven-tenths of the assessments made in 1522 were at £2 — £4.
As the chief location of tin mining, conditions confirm that an abundance of cheap labour tended to stimulate industrial growth, although naturally mineral extraction has to be carried on where the workable reserves happen to be located, using imported labour if necessary, as, it would seem, was precisely what was done in Penwith.
All round the coast fishing provided the chief by-employment, outranking both clothing and tinning in the south-eastern quarter of the county.
THE URBAN DIMENSION
When John Leland was touring England, observing and recording, in the years 1534–43, he was not always certain how a town differed from a village, and so concluded a list of Staffordshire market towns with ‘Tetenhaul a village and a college about a myle from Wuluerhampton’, although there is no confirmation it had ever been anything more.
Little or nothing beyond the holding of a market distinguished the smallest towns from mere villages, for no small number contained not more than two or three hundred inhabitants.
Uppingham in Rutland, which just reached 300, was almost exactly the same size as the big villages Langham and Lyddington.
Consisting of ‘but one meane streete, and but a very meane chirche, it also resembled them in lying, like many another market town, amidst its own open fields.
Many of its people were farmers too, though several were merchants as well— two drapers, a mercer, a haberdasher and a wax-chandler, and in 1584 Archdeacon Robert Johnson chose it as the location of one of the two grammar schools with which he endowed the county.
Even at this size it completely outclassed most Rutland villages, quite two-thirds of which had populations of fewer than 150.
Oakham, the only other town, and easily the biggest place there, scarcely reached the 500 mark (see Table 2.9 below).
Although the range of its occupations was wider and more comprehensive, its mainstay was agriculture, with most of its tradesmen farming on the side — unless their crafts were the subsidiary pursuits.
Yet it had a castle, was the county town, and in due course would become another beneficiary of Archdeacon Johnson's munificence.
If Rutland was but a miniature county its towns were far from untypical.
Half the market centres of Sussex had populations below 500; indeed, places such as West Tarring, Broadwater, Hailsham and Storrington are best described as villages where markets happened to be held.
But there were also tiny towns that ranked as boroughs, like Steyning (population about 300) and East Grinstead, which, though much smaller, was privileged to assess its own taxes (see Table 2.5).
New Shoreham, now sadly decayed, had barely 100 inhabitants, while Bramber, the site of a ruined castle, was minute and had already lost its market.
From 500 to upwards of 1,000 in population, towns became much more recognisable as such, even those which, like High Wycombe, Bucks., or Battle, Eastbourne and Petworth in Sussex, formed part of extensive rural parishes (Tables 2.8 — 2.9).
At the same time, some remained in essence overgrown villages resulting from the establishment   of rural industry.
In the Stour Valley of West Suffolk these were thick on the ground in the heyday of the clothing trade, but they probably lacked a truly urban ethos, and consequently fell easy prey to the winds of economic change.
Lavenham, which must have had a population approaching 1,000 and ranked as one of the dozen or so richest towns in the kingdom, went into decline following the death of the great clothier Thomas Spring in 1523.
Dedicated solely to the pursuit of wealth, it evolved no institutions beyond the ubiquitous parish guilds, of which there were at least four.
Places as diverse as Petworth, Birmingham and Manchester remained manors.
Against the implacable opposition of its lord, Aylesbury failed utterly to hold on to the corporate status granted it in 1554.
Markets and fairs remained perquisites of the manor even at Lewes, the capital of East Sussex, where otherwise a rudimentary form of self-government was well established.
A fair number of towns of this rank were reputed to be boroughs, though incorporation was something of a rarity and might well depend on special circumstances: Rye, Winchelsea and Hastings, for example, were Cinque Ports.
In Buckinghamshire, High Wycombe (Table 2.9) was still the sole chartered borough at this date.
Sudbury in Suffolk (see Table 2.6), though comparable in size and much superior in wealth, did not achieve incorporation until 1553.
Fortifications were another variable.
There was not a single walled town in either Buckinghamshire or Rutland, while other counties might possess several; Sussex had   at least five, including the Cinque Ports and the two county towns.
In remote, less populous areas, urban development was inevitably minimal.
In the heart of the Pennines, Skipton (Table 2.9), traditionally the centre of Craven, was the only place for many a mile recognisable as a town in any real sense; its population cannot have reached 500.
The idiosyncrasies of the certificates make Cornish towns exceptionally difficult to characterise.
In any case most were tiny.
This was a region of hamlets and little towns which, in the Middle Ages at least, had been inhabited largely by aliens imported by borough patrons.
However, by early Tudor times this had changed, and strangers, though still a substantial element, were generally less in evidence than in rural parts, while natives show few signs of having flocked in to replace them.
With something like 1,000 people, Bodmin was the biggest town; Helston was barely half this size, and Launceston, its importance notwithstanding, was not much better.
Whilst the smallest kind of town can only have served as a market point, those with populations exceeding 500 usually provided more extensive services to their localities, and some had developed specialised manufactures even if on a modest scale.
Kerseys were made at Midhurst and Petworth and leather workers were prominent in Horsham, one of the most flourishing towns in the Weald of Sussex, as well as a prime example of a town which, despite an outstanding rate of economic   growth since the last general fiscal revaluation in 1334, remained unplaced in the national league table (see Table 2.7).
The market might be held several days a week, and if, like the great Cotswold wood marts at Cirencester, Tetbury and so forth, it was noted for some speciality, business might be attracted from well outside the five-mile radius considered reasonable for day-to-day requirements in the Middle Ages.
Seldom, however, was a market area a tidy territorial entity; rather it was the product of a complex of factors.
Not only might a town look much like any big village, but in some essentials its economy was inseparable from that of its rural hinterland.
As the market-centre of a district the town owed its existence to, and gained its livelihood from, handling the produce of the local agricultural community which, in turn, depended on the town for industrial goods and professional services.
The trade of Leicester centred on handling local wool and leather — its craftsmen, headed by tailors and shoemakers, were mainly occupied in making cloth, clothing and footwear for local consumption.
York served a wide area as the processing and distribution centre for foodstuffs.
It was no accident that a good many towns were sited on the borderline between arable farming and pastoral regions.
While each could be self-sufficient for food, neither could manage well without the products of the other: stockmen needed cereals to balance their diet, not to mention barley and malt for brewing; corn growers needed butter, cheese and meat to  alleviate the monotony of bread.
In Sussex both Lewes and Steyning lay at the foot of the South Downs on the edge of the Weald.
Norwich had grown up where the cornlands of Norfolk meet the wood-pasture country.
Near the foot of the Chilterns, Aylesbury was the natural point of exchange for the two regions of Buckinghamshire.
Also in every shire one town at least, like the two latter examples, served as the focus for community affairs and local administration.
In one way or another towns exerted an influence over the farming population.
The right of holding markets and fairs was a jealously guarded privilege and (needless to say) a source of profit to the lord, or the community of the freemen of an incorporated borough.
Corn and seed factors could regulate the conditions of small farmers by setting prices and extending credit:
A major development in rural industry often took the form of town based capitalists organising the labours of village artificers.
Nayland in Suffolk was obviously a centre of the clothing trade; a couple of miles away, Stoke, though equal in size, was completely different, having only a handful of clothiers whose businesses, by local standards were not large.
Cloth-finishing processes tended to be concentrated in towns and urbanised villages; Wiltshire fulling mills were nearly all controlled by the clothiers.
Contrasts between town and country (Tables 2.8 and 2.9) were less apparent than is implied by contemporary insistence on an antithesis between towns and their agricultural environment.
Townsmen in Cornwall, Carew supposed, ‘conceive themselves an estranged society from the upland dwellers and carry an emulation against them, as if one member of a body could continue this well without a beholdingness to the rest’.
In 1549 the citizens of Exeter believed the rebellious peasants to be intent on pillage; Norwich merchants concealed their valuables and fled.
In rich provincial capitals these apprehensions might have been well-founded, but the men of smaller towns made common cause with the country folk: Kett's rising actually began in Wymondham, the Prayer Book rebellion in Bodmin.
Recent work stresses rather the common attributes of village and town.
If the sort of town represented by East Grinstead was too insignificant to accumulate much wealth, even a burgeoning one like Petworth, which was primarily a big village in an extensive parish, was hardly differentiated from the Wealden parts of Arundel rape at large; in fact, its per capita wealth was marginally lower.
With a top assessment of only £30, Midhurst was distinctly poorer than the surrounding hundreds of Dumpford and Easebourne.
But there was no necessary correlation between population and wealth; Midhurst compares unfavourably with its neighbourhood only because village wealth was boosted by a handful of big landowners whose personalty accounted for most of it.
Skipton comprehended a broader spectrum of wealth than most villages in Craven, with only three-quarters of its inhabitants, instead of nine-tenths, valued at less than 40s.
At this point we must look at what the loan and muster books have to say, although the examples cover a more limited range.
Appreciably bigger than Skipton, High Wycombe, as the leading town of Buckinghamshire, contained a solid merchant class which made per capita wealth there half as high again as in the villages of the Chilterns where really rich men were thin on the ground.
Chichester, with a population approaching 2,000, also had its substantial merchants, yet its wealth was matched by that of the prosperous farming community of the coastal strip and the South Downs, despite £5,850 coming yearly into the city from all corners of Sussex as the income of the cathedral dignitaries; almost certainly the moveable wealth of the clerical establishment was proportionately every bit as high as in Exeter, where it equalled one-sixth of aggregate lay wealth.
Unless some merchants had withdrawn to the country, while continuing to manage their businesses there must have been significant investment in urban industry and commerce by the agricultural sector to maintain the balance between town and country in West Sussex.
Industry and tourism helped to make Newbury and Little Walsingham people, respectively, worth twice as much as the country folk of the vicinity.
Misconceptions can penalise too rigid definition of hinterlands.
Superficially the lack of any considerable contingent of men of undoubted substance in the Soke of Oakham and Alstoe hundred hints that the townsmen of Oakham's average of £5.8 apiece was achieved at the expense of the immediate market area.
The rest of Rutland, of which it was the administrative as well as commercial hub, was measurably richer at £6.5 per capita, the slight tendency to a   concentration of wealth at the top of the town community being offset by an exceptionally high proportion (for this shire) of labourers and poor men.
Even the smallest county town could become the Mecca of the surplus rural population.
Although yet greater extremes of poverty might be expected to exist in bigger towns, an outstanding feature of Chichester was the clearly higher level of wages effective there, with many artificers assessed at 40s. a year, though these were sure to have been balanced by an anonymous mass of recorded paupers.
Among the better-paid men were employees of the cathedral, some of whom were clerks in minor orders.
Not only were other Sussex towns strongly characterised by the number of £2 assessments, usually on goods, but Bury St Edmunds and Newbury, also county centres, had a smaller proportion of people at the bottom of the heap than their immediate neighbourhoods, though at the latter, the suburban hamlet of Speenhamland was crowded with poor.
Wycombe too returned more nil assessments than the surrounding countryside, but the overall proportion below £2 was slightly lower.
A strong bloc of townsmen worth £10 and upwards made the average wealth of Bodmin, Cornwall, a trifle higher than in the rest of Trigg hundred, even though the taxed wage earners, who formed a negligible element in the country parishes, exceeded 40 per cent in the borough itself, numbers which point to a concentration of men who had effectively severed kinship ties with the Celtic extended family that so influenced the social structure of many villages.
Helston was measurably poorer, and, except for just one £40 man, had no inhabitant worth more than 20 marks (£13. 6s. 8d.).
With half its population taxed on wages, this minute borough precisely reflected rural conditions in the far west.
In fact per capita wealth was marginally below average, notwithstanding the existence of municipal institutions which included a guild of cobblers whose rules were promulgated (or reissued) in 1517.
One of the members, who included seven householders, three servants (presumably journeymen) and a clerk, was Janyn Perowe, assessed at 40s.; another was John Richard, a £10 man, and presumably not the labourer of the same name.
What, more than anything else, distinguished towns of all sizes was a narrow £3 — £9 band which, with a relatively high proportion of assessments upwards of £10, left something of a gap between, on the one hand, the upper tradesmen, and, on the other, artificers and labourers at 40s. or less; the big £3 — £4 group at Bury suggests nonetheless either a strong contingent of master craftsmen or unusually well-to-do workmen.
On the land the position tended to be reversed, with considerable numbers of £5 — £9 men, representing the middling sort of peasant farmers, and far fewer of the more prosperous husbandmen and yeomen.
Yet if urban communities divided into well-defined upper and lower classes, the sharp edge of inequality was not infrequently blunted by a numerous £2 group, the diffusion of wealth amongst a solid bloc of merchants and master craftsmen worth upwards of £10, and, in most small towns, the absence of very rich people.
As the centre of a miniature shire, Oakham was neither populous nor wealthy.
Not only was Buckinghamshire small, its inadequate internal communications served to check the evolution of a true county town.
Also lacking through routes, as well as extending over seventy miles, Sussex has always been administered in two divisions with two county towns, of which the second, Lewes, was similar in size to Chichester, though less prosperous at this time in having far fewer affluent burgesses and no well-paid artificers.
Its central location probably terminated its influence well short of the eastern extremity of Sussex, where Rye was almost certainly its peer in size and superior in wealth.
More compact shires usually focused on a single centre of the order of two or three thousand inhabitants with wealth to match: Leicester had a good 2,000 or more, including a leading burgess worth £600; in a smaller, poorer county, Nottingham was both smaller and less prosperous.
Worcester was closer to 3,000.
Bury St Edmunds, hub of the ancient Liberty of St Edmund, with well in excess of 3,000 inhabitants, had fewer labourers and a higher proportion of middling and richer men than its immediate environs; but this apart, there was little to chose between town and country, except at the top of the scale, despite a Hawstead knight's £500 in the latter.
Only in per capita wealth did the town have a slight edge, and then perhaps less decisively than might be expected for so important a centre.
Comparisons, however, are tenuous, with information about many villages incomplete.
Babergh hundred and, to a lesser extent, Cosford, comprised the clothing district where conditions were fundamentally different, and towns such as Sudbury and Hadleigh were important in their own right.
Bury, in short, reflected the wealth of an ordinary country district and displayed no strong individual characteristics.
Some effects of the historical struggle against the domination of the abbey might arguably have persisted — the town was not incorporated until 1553 — though its evident prosperity shows that this no longer constituted a serious handicap.
Foremost among provincial towns were a handful of regional capitals with populations upwards of five or six thousand.
For these too the   experience was a varied one.
Rather more than half the wealth of Coventry belonged to men whose assessments reached three figures in 1522; in Exeter just under half.
In both cities men of £40-£99 accounted for a further 16–19 per cent.
The difference was that inequality was more pronounced in the Midland one, where the two top men had upwards of £1,000 apiece, in contrast to Exeter, where the highest was £300, and altogether there were twenty-nine three-figure fortunes compared with just twenty in Coventry (see Table 2.10).
At lower levels the proportion of wealth belonging to each group was smaller in Coventry.
The lowest ranks of society showed the most striking and significant contrasts.
The Coventry muster put 53½ per cent at nil, or a few shillings, with a further 9.6 per cent at 20s. or so.
The situation was almost the same at Exeter, but 48 per cent of the subsidy assessments were at £1, mostly on wages, while in Coventry these were only a handful out of a total of some 700 taxpayers, meaning that almost half the population literally ‘possessed absolutely nothing but the rags they stood up in, a few sticks and boards for ‘furniture’, and the tools of their trade, if any', Exeter clearly enjoyed full employment — as full, that is, as was attainable in the conditions of the time — while Coventry languished in the grip of severe unemployment, and indeed in the early 1520s was undergoing a series of acute economic crises.
Nor was its misfortune unique, for Norwich, the capital of East Anglia, returned a moderate 40 per cent under £2, far less than the adjoining countryside, yet within a dozen years the worsted manufacture commenced a decline that was to contribute largely to the total of more than 500 unemployed males, and altogether upwards of 2,500 destitute persons by 1570.
Except that it was nearly twice as large, its social structure closely resembled that of Coventry.
The biggest provincial cities and towns had reached a stage of urbanisation at which the scale of wealth far exceeded that of the countryside.
Conversely, the smallest market towns were scarcely distinguishable from populous villages.
Between these extremes conditions varied endlessly, with so many towns sharing the social structure of their rural environments that cases of exceptional wealth can only have been the outcome of special circumstances.
Great Yarmouth's lead over its hinterland may be attributed to maritime enterprise, its fisheries in particular.
Its considerable size — population about 2,500 — certainly cannot be the whole explanation, for a much smaller place could display a more distinctive social structure.
With barely 800 inhabitants, Little Walsingham comprised almost a quarter of the population and a clear two-fifths of the value of North Greenhoe hundred, Norfolk (Table 2.9): four men in the £100 class shared 30 per cent of the town's wealth, and ten at £40 — £99 owned a further 35 per cent.
In the remainder of the hundred these two groups accounted for just under 30 per cent.
For a town of this rank it seems almost incredible until we recall that Walsingham enjoyed a lucrative tourist trade as far and away the most popular resort of pilgrimage, the shrine alone deriving an income of £250 a year from the pious offerings of the faithful, compared with the meagre £36 to which that of St Thomas at Canterbury had by then shrunk.
The insignificant proportion of men in the £3 — £9 range would appear on the face of things to betoken no handicraft beyond what would suffice to satisfy demand in a small hundred, while the many nils, amounting to very nearly one-third of the total, strongly suggests that many of the inhabitants of Walsingham were mendicants subsisting on the alms of the faithful.
For towns of medium size a big stake in the woollen textile industry was the surest foundation of prosperity.
If Lavenham is the outstanding example, it is also of interest to look at Newbury, a borough of some 1,250 people, or about 1,600 including the  suburban hamlet Speenhamland.
Its per capita wealth was nearly double that of the four nearby rural hundreds, with almost four-fifths of the aggregate concentrated in the hands of twenty-nine rich, or very rich, men; no less than 41.6 per cent belonged to the top five, compared with the ‘normal’ 9.6 in villages and small towns.
A leading centre of kersey manufacture, Newbury had been the stamping ground of the celebrated John Winchcombe until his death as recently as 1519.
As in a good many other towns, the £3 — £9 category was smaller than in the local villages, but the most telling contrast is to be seen at the foot of the scale.
Not only were there more 40s. men and fewer at £1 or less, but in the borough itself the poorest class was much smaller than on the land, implying that the more skilled, more remunerative trades were carried out there, while poorly paid weavers and the like lived and worked in Speenhamland.
Neighbouring towns such as Hungerford, Lambourn and Wantage conformed to the usual run of little market centres, with populations of 500 — 600.
Three-figure assessments were altogether lacking, though a certain amount of cloth working did support reasonable groups of the second rank in Hungerford and Wantage.
Lambourn was never anything greater than a country market.
LONDON
The capital was distinguished from provincial cities and towns on three counts: it was at least five times the size of any other, almost ten times as rich, and possessed a vastly more complex social and occupational structure.
Its population at this time can hardly have been less than 50,000 and may easily have been well over 60,000.
The mass of the people were not recorded because the evidence is limited to the loan book, which of course excludes everyone with less than £5, a class which in Coventry amounted to as much as 80 per cent of the total, though in other provincial towns the proportion was not as high, that of sub-£2 assessments being lower than in the countryside.
At the same time much of London's growth resulted from the influx of the rural poor, so that it early acquired its reputation for slums and crowded tenements.
A great deal of growth was, however, in suburbs outside the limits of the city, which, until much later, was the preferred domicile of the affluent, and so the population of the City itself may not have exceeded 50 000.
The size of Norwich, the second city of the kingdom, is also problematical.
The population of little more than 7,000, indicated by the total of only 1,414 taxpayers in 1525, seems on the low side, and since it has been estimated at 10,625 (exclusive of aliens) in 1569, a figure closer to 10,000 would be more realistic for the 1520s.
The index of the   city's wealth is its contribution of £1,704 to the subsidy, which, although far ahead of that of any other provincial town, was only slightly more than a tenth of London's £16675.
The most telling comment on the wealth of the metropolis is that it had more men worth upwards of £100 than most other towns had taxpayers of all grades; indeed, the number of four-figure assessments equalled the total taxpayers of some tiny market towns.
In order adequately to represent these it is necessary to extend the classification (see Table 2.11).
In provincial towns we noticed the relatively small numbers of £3 — £9 assessments, corresponding to the main body of husbandmen in villages; similarly in London there was a shortage of £10 — £39 assessments, even of the £40. — £99 ones, which in other, smaller towns would have belonged to local merchants and leading master craftsmen.
The precise composition of the £0-£4 group can only be guessed at; nevertheless it is clear that the gulf between the merchant class and the artisan population was a very wide one indeed.
The contrast in wealth between merchants and the possessors of rare skills on the one hand and manual workers on the other is clearly demonstrated by their median assessments.
The twelve richest occupations were:
As the two fish trades came under the same livery company, they may be considered as one; grocers, bakers and haberdashers came next with a median of £26.13s. 4d., closely followed by the dyers on £25.
The median for upholsterers works out at £95, but the sample of four is too small to qualify for inclusion in the table.
Of the manual occupations, hosiers, cappers, founders, and barbers, to mention but a few, all had the minimum assessment of £5 for median; so also had the various building trades, with the exception of the marblers who averaged £50 on a small sample.
Only slightly better off at around £6 were tailors — probably the yeomanry of the Merchant Taylors — shoemakers and smiths, while everyone connected with transport, whether by land or water, showed a median of £5 — £7.
Rather more skilled crafts, such as fullers, shearmen, cutlers, painters and butchers, were around the £10 mark.
Figures of this kind cannot avoid concealing a great deal.
Goldsmiths, for example, included manual workers who tended to depress the average; the richest member of the Company had £2,000.
One painter was worth 2,500 marks, the richest grocer 4,000.
These examples can be multiplied.
The City differed from other towns in two major respects: first the division of the membership of most companies into the ‘livery’, who controlled them, and the ‘yeomanry’, and secondly the distinction between the great companies and the lesser ones.
The former, eleven in number — the Clothworkers being formed by amalgamation of the Fullers and Shearmen in 1536 — comprised most of the merchant class.
The loan book must contain virtually all the liverymen of the various companies, though not necessarily all the yeomen, nor indeed any but a fraction of the membership of the poorest crafts: only a single weaver is listed, though there was a livery of thirty and a full membership of seventy in 1546.
By the turn of the century their  numbers seem to have declined; they evidently tended to move out of the City, yielding place to wealthier residents.
At the top of the scale, business must have taken a number of leading men out of town at the time the assessment was made, including, for example, Robert Thorne, Merchant Taylor and a notable benefactor to the City; worth more than £20,000 at the time of his death in 1532, he must have been one of the very richest men in England.
It is instructive to compare the members of the eleven great companies taxed in 1522 — 3 with the statistics compiled by Professor Thrupp (see Table 2.12).
Here the tailors and Merchant Taylors are counted together, though distinguished in the loan book.
One man at least was wrongly classed as a tailor, namely Stephen Jenings, who had served as Mayor in 1508 — 9, and was now the highest assessed citizen at £3,000; the same must hold good for other rich tailors, since the craft itself was poorly remunerated.
As there was only the one company it is reasonable to infer that everyone roped in for the first loan was in fact a Merchant Taylor.
Further, it is noticeable that the grand total is very close to Professor Thrupp's estimate of the Company membership, while the numbers valued at £40 or better and £20 or more closely match the livery lists of 1501 and 1537 — 8, respectively.
This is the only company whose entire membership appears to have figured in the loan; in the case of such as the Goldsmiths and the Ironmongers it seems clear that only the livery was assessed.
Seventy-nine fullers and shearmen, later to form the Clothworkers, were assessed, compared with a combined livery of eighty-five in 1501.
Comparisons such as these must not be pressed too far.
Although it is not certain that property qualifications were required for liverymen, several companies are known to have imposed minima for admission to their freedom.
The Mercers fixed it at £100 in 1503; either it was not enforced or the assessments are thoroughly unsatisfactory.
The Goldsmiths settled on £40 in 1480, but did not stick to it for long.
whatever their rules, it is clear that they were exceptionally wealthy, no fewer than fifty-seven having £200 or more, much the same as the number of liverymen.
Although under-assessment was nowhere more flagrant than among rich Londoners, it was always possible for a fortune to be wiped out by an unsuccessful business venture, as in the case of Alderman Aylmer, draper, who was assessed at £40 net, his debts paid', when others of this rank were normally worth a thousand or more.
Lesser companies had smaller qualifications, if any.
Fullers and carpenters required 20 marks for admission to the livery in the late fifteenth century, but in each case the total number of assessments was much less than the number in the contemporary lists, twenty-six and twenty-four respectively, compared with between thirty and forty.
Of companies of this sort only the liverymen, if indeed all of them, were likely to find their way into the returns.
Below the exemption line there must have been many small masters.
The Founders had eighty-five members in 1522, with a livery ranging between twenty-two in 1501 and a possible sixty-five in 1537 — 8; yet only eight were assessed.
If their complaint to the Star Chamber in 1507 be credited, they were a weak group at the mercy of any sharp speculator.
Even in the great companies not all the leading members were rich.
In the Mercers an assessment of £100, or even £200, was appropriate for a liveryman; in the Merchant Taylors, Haberdashers and (perhaps) Grocers, £40; for Drapers, Fishmongers, Goldsmiths and Skinners, approximately £20; and as little as £5 in the remaining three.
Save for the obvious case of a handful of Staplers, the returns do not distinguish merchants.
There can be little room for doubt as to the status of wealthy citizens, but the lower limit is more problematical.
Thrupp estimated that the eleven great companies contained some 700 merchants towards the close of the Middle Ages.
The loan book identifies 926 members.
Presumably men of modest means would scarcely have qualified, but only 502 were worth £20 and upwards, and  406 had £40 or more, a figure that might be regarded as a reasonable minimum for a substantial businessman.
However, while these companies were by nature primarily mercantile, there was a varying proportion of merchants among the less eminent ones.
The return shows in all 849 persons of £40 and above, which should yield a net figure of something like 700 possible merchants, since a good many of the assessmented belonged to gentry, clergy, members of non-mercantile companies, or men of unstated occupation.
Unless the size of the class has been exaggerated, it is, nonetheless, clear that merchant status was not of necessity synonymous with large-scale activities and great fortunes.
The aspiration was 
Judging from the number of Londoners who ended by having to pay more than they were initially assessed for, this refrain could have been sung a bit too often to be convincing.
Whether or not there was substance in the belief that London's prosperity worked to the detriment of provincial cities, the contrast between them was little short of dramatic.
At a time when London's population can hardly have exceeded 2 per cent of the entire nation, it contributed more than one-ninth of the total subsidy.
It is no accident that Londoners were to be found financing enterprises in the shires — Henry Fyner, a goldsmith, had built the first English blast furnace at Hartfield, Sussex — and helping to create the country's stock of ‘social overhead capital’— roads and bridges, schools and colleges.
Hugh Clopton, a mercer, erected the bridge at Stratford-upon-Avon that still bears his name; Sir William Horne, salter, left 500 marks for repairing the road to Cambridge; Sir Thomas White, Merchant Taylor, founded St John's College, Oxford, and others endowed grammar schools at Holt, Macclesfield, Wolverhampton and many other places.
Much of the provision for the relief of the poor at this time was the benefactions of Londoners.
The charitable bequests of Robert Thorne, Merchant Taylor, who died in 1532, amounted to no less than £4,400, a sum that  was indeed higher than any assessment for the loan, levied when he was evidently abroad on business.
Many endowed almshouses.
One of the most evocative of early sixteenth — century legacies, was that of Henry Keble, grocer, which included 140 ploughshares and 140 iron coulters for poor husbandmen in Oxfordshire and Warwickshire.
Merchant princes did not forget their native towns and counties and the people there who might want for the means of providing themselves with even the most basic tools of their trade.
THE EFFECT OF INDUSTRY
Although craft activity in some form was carried on almost everywhere, whether it can properly be termed industry depends very much on the objective and scale of the undertaking.
A great deal of it amounted to little more than an adjunct to farming, typically by smallholders plying a trade on the side.
Commonly geared to the demands of a constricted local market, not all these crafts could provide continuous employment.
Many small town craftsmen worked on much the same plan.
The sale of sheep and barley made up 35 per cent of the estate of Richard Jerard, a Chepping Wycombe pewterer and brazier, the residue including a few more animals, a little grain and hay, and an iron harrow, although another metal worker there owned nothing but the tools of his trade.
On the other hand a Stony Stratford shoemaker's connexion with agriculture was limited to a cow and (possibly) a white horse; his sideline was petty capitalism, if not simply money-lending, for his assets, totalling more than £28, included £18. 1s. 8d. owed by seven different persons.
In sizeable towns the volume of trade offered wider scope for specialisation, but even there the connexion with agriculture remained intimate: in most the victualling and food-processing trades formed one of the principal groupings, as in Leicester or York; only if there was a manufacturing speciality would they take second place.
In some small towns, such as Sudbury or Oakham, just under one-fifth of the workforce was engaged in textiles and in victualling as well.
In villages, where people did their own cooking, baking and brewing, food handling was restricted to milling, malting and butchering, leaving clothing and footwear the commonest occupations — indeed, tailoring was one of the largest single crafts anywhere.
Industry, strictly defined, can be regarded as having established itself only where production so exceeded local demand as to be aimed at a  wider market, for a trade might flourish and yet remain no more than a subsidiary activity, like the leather trades of the Weald of Sussex.
It was observed: ‘In most villages of the realm there is some one dresser or worker of leather, and in most of the market towns iij or iiij or v, and many great towns and cities x or xx,’ and indeed, with cattle and timber its chief products, the Weald was a natural location, and local bark, of which colliers and ironmasters had plenty to spare, was much in demand by tanners.
A modest, though steady, export of hides reached its peak, for the reign of Henry VIII, with just over twenty lasts (each of twenty dickers) in 1528 — 29, tapering to a minimum of sixteen dickers ten years later.
Yet less than 4 per cent of wills, 1525–60, were made by leather workers, two-thirds of whom were tanners, manufacturing crafts being relatively inconspicuous.
The one or two well-to-do tanners identified in the subsidy rolls were so scattered, and formed so small a part of the population, that the contribution of leather working to the local economy can have been no more than marginal at best.
The effect of a dense concentration of the woollen textile industry is emphatically expressed by the manner in which the seventeen manufacturing villages and towns of Babergh hundred, Suffolk, differed from the purely agricultural ones (see Table 2.13).
The relatively small £3 — £9 element gives these a pronounced urban flavour but, in contrast   to the majority of little country towns, it was men worth upwards of £40 that were specially numerous, while for size and wealth the topmost class had no parallel outside London.
So, although the gap between rich and poor in Babergh may look wider than in most parts of the country, the distribution of wealth was complex.
Great as they were, the numbers of the labouring poor did not approach the level of the arable-farming areas of West Suffolk.
Even in the clothing district, wage earners reached almost 53 per cent in the villages of Cosford hundred, but since they fell short of a third in the rising manufacturing town of Hadleigh, it seems that vigorous industrial growth pushed up the level of earnings.
At the same time this trade was notoriously unstable.
Babergh starkly illustrates the brittleness of its prosperity at any given moment.
In 1522 an affluent society was depicted in which inequalities, albeit wide, were offset by an above-average overall standard: the profits from textiles were widely diffused.
Yet within two years the percentage of sub-£2 assessments jumped from a modest 39½ to more than 56.
In confirming the wealth of the district the subsidy exposed a scale of poverty that more closely approached what was to be found in the rest of Suffolk.
Almost certainly textiles had fallen into some disarray by early 1524.
Following the death, on 29 June 1523, of Thomas Spring of Lavenham, ‘the rich clothier’, his commercial empire had been dismantled, and his immense fortune, £3,200 net, dispersed among his heirs, most of it to his widow and daughter; his son had already chosen to live as a gentleman and was duly taxed on £20 from lands in 1524, and the firm ceased trading.
Something like £1,500 shared among the family, not to mention generous bequests, including £200 towards the completion of Lavenham steeple and cash distributed among the parishes where Spring owned property, virtually accounts for what was far and away the greatest personal estate owned by any commoner, or for that matter almost any peer: only the duke of Norfolk's £4,000 topped it.
Spring's actual goods, doubtless including his stock-in-trade, were appraised at precisely £1,800, a further £1,400 consisting of money owed to him, £800 having been written off as ‘desperate’ debts.
This netting of his assets doubtless conceals the fact that, like any businessman, he in turn had extensive liabilities, making him the centre of a complex web of credit, the effects of which had to be reckoned with.
Spring's vast fortune comprised upwards of 40 per cent of the combined assets of the Babergh clothiers.
The abrupt cessation of his trading cannot but have caused more or less severe dislocation until  others were ready to take up the slack, just as Bath became ‘somewhat decayed’ after the deaths of three of its clothiers.
A phase of acute unemployment is likely to have supervened; it was certainly alleged to be rife by 1525 when it was put forward as the precipitant of the riots against the levying of the Amicable Grant — the tax of one-sixth on the valuations of 1522 by which Wolsey sought to make good the disappointing yield of the subsidy — albeit attributed to the dislocation of business caused by the severity of taxation.
By this point the wealth of the local clothiers had in fact been reduced by more than half, though taxation, while extracting huge sums from the community at large, had taken little more than £1,100, far less than had been withdrawn from the industry by the Springs.
Sharp rises in the national export statistics in both 1523–4 and 152 rule out any general depression; any unemployment can only have been temporary and localised, as the disorders in the eastern counties were not repeated on the same scale anywhere.
Very likely there was a general cut in wages brought about by a combination of causes, not the least of which was the loss of an employer who may very well have paid premium rates in order to attract and retain labour; in any case the living standards of the cloth workers had fallen sharply by 1524, and with them those of the farm labourers of the other villages in the district.
With this episode commenced perhaps the decline of the Stour Valley woollen industry, the symptoms of which were all too obvious by the middle of the century.
In the end it was overtaken by the advent of the ‘New Draperies’, but the downward trend had set in well before the establishment of these in East Anglia; indeed, in the event they came to replace the contracting broadcloth manufacture which, even as early as 1523, had shown signs of instability: it was symptomatic of recession that no less than 35 per cent of Spring's liquid assets had to be written off as irrecoverable, and the winding up of his affairs cannot but have dealt its prosperity a mortal blow.
Lawenham was never the same without him; by 1568 it paid only half as much tax as Long Melford, compared with two-and-a-half times as much in 1524, and its place had been usurped by Hadleigh, which had paid only three-fifths of Lavenham's quota in 1524, yet now ranked as the third town in Suffolk after Bury St Edmunds and Ipswich.
This, however, lay still in the future, and for the time being the seventeen industrialised towns and villages (out of thirty-two) in Babergh hundred contained almost three-quarters of its population and 87 per cent of its wealth.
Cloth was also made in north-east Essex, in and around Colchester, though on a much smaller scale.
Outside this borough, however, only  Dedham counted for much.
Coggeshall was neither large nor particularly affluent; John Paycocke, nephew of Thomas and inheritor of the imposing Paycocke house, was assessed at no more than £53, though the richest man in Coggeshall, his son having £10 as well; to all appearances Thomas's munificent bequests had depleted the family fortune.
In the Middle Ages clothing had also flourished in the small towns westwards as far as Saffron Walden.
Halstead did have one man worth £300, but among the remaining 148 taxpayers there was only one worth £80 and one worth 40 marks.
Already, it seems, industry was coming to be concentrated on the north side of the Stour — Dedham lies opposite East Bergholt, a booming village — and that the gap was opening which forty-five years later was to be filled by the arrival of the Dutch bringing the techniques of the ‘New Draperies’.
Except in the colourful person of the legendary John Winchcombe, the Berkshire woollen industry had little in the way of glamour.
In addition to Newbury it centred on Reading and Abingdon, about which information is scanty, and had flourished at Wantage during the fifteenth century.
It was also carried on in some few villages: fulling mills operated at East Hendred, near Wantage, Brimpton and Colthorp, as well as one at Bagnor owned by no less than Jack of Newbury himself.
Generally, though, the manufacture was primarily an urban one, any slight activity in the villages of the Vale of the White Horse escaping Leland's notice; not only was it most unlikely to have spread to the Downs, but the social structure of the countryside north of Newbury was typical of corn-growing chalklands.
Already the trade showed signs of becoming restricted to the immediate neighbourhood of Reading, whose clothiers seem to have controlled most of the output of Berkshire.
By any standard the industry was not extensive: Berkshire was bracketed with Herefordshire at the bottom of a list of clothiers fined at Blackwell Hall in 1561 — 2 for marketing substandard cloth, with just one offender, a Reading man; unless Berkshire workmanship in general was above average, production was clearly small in volume.
The fact that Kent headed this unworthy league by an ample margin suggests that the industry there hastened its eventual downfall by inferior work.
By the early 1560s the Berkshire trade was unquestionably in the doldrums when the Privy Council admonished Reading clothiers against putting men off work by ceasing to trade.
Abingdon's trade had been waning for some time, with its fulling mills lying in ruins and unemployment rife by 1538.
New enterprise was urgently needed, and in 1558 Abingdon started manufacturing sailcloth for the Admiralty.
Newbury had attained its zenith in the reign of Henry VIII, traditionally  with Winchcombe.
An elusive figure, there is nothing to show that his wealth approached Thomas Spring's in scale, his wider tame owing more to a flair for the flamboyant gesture.
As a businessman the great William Stumpe of Malmsbury was no doubt Winchcombe's superior.
Together, nevertheless, these three men indicate that each district was apt to throw up one great entrepreneur at a time who stood head and shoulders above his contemporaries and competitors.
Besides John Winchcombe, junior, who was assessed at the unusually high figure of £630, Newbury in 1522 had three residents worth £100 or so and ten more in the £40 — £99 range, including William Dolman who had been the elder Winchcombe's works manager; now, at 100 marks, he might already have set up in business for himself.
The subsequent history of the town is confused; by 1564 its trade was said to be in decline, and it sustained a further blow when William's son retired to the fine house he had built at Shaw on the outskirts of the borough, leaving his men to sing ruefully:
The formation of a company of clothworkers in 1601 suggests not only something of a revival but equally a closing of ranks in the face of   adversity.
As things turned out, the seventeenth century saw a total collapse which left both Newbury and Reading only the remnants of their former trade.
Nonetheless, in the 1520s Newbury's position in south-west Berkshire remained unchallenged.
Wantage was a decent little town but had less than half the population of Newbury and no inhabitant worth more than £80, though four others had £40 — £60; average wealth of well under £6 compares poorly with almost £10 in Newbury and was not much higher than in most villages.
The Stroud district of Gloucestershire was well developed ‘Stroudwaters’ having been a household name for nearly a century.
Bisley hundred returned the large number of six three-figure assessments out of a total of 195, though only four at £40 — £99 (see Table 2.14); Lower Lipyatt parish, including Stroud town, had three worth £122 — £240.
Although places along the river Frome were as rich as, or richer than, any other part of the county, by Cotswold standards they were not outstandingly affluent.
For per capita wealth Bisley (£14.0) was rivalled by Bradley hundred (13.5) and outclassed by Brightwells Barrow (£15.4), which contained the market towns of Fairford and Lechlade; as representatives of the rural Cotswolds these make an interesting contrast (Table 2.15).
Also outclassed on an average of only 59.4 by most other hundreds of the region was Langtree hundred, which included Horsley and Munchinhampton.
The wealth of manufacturing Stroud looks modest beside that of trading Cirencester where, of eighty men listed, nine had upwards of £40 and four more than £100.
Nowhere was there a clothier of the stamp of Spring, or even Winchcombe, and comparatively few of major stature.
Away from Stroudwater the industry seems rather to have remained in the hands of independent craftsmen: in eight places where cloth was made, the structure of wealth resembled what was commonly found in parts where it had not taken root, with perhaps three of the four £100 men belonging to the gentry.
Although Tortworth had ‘some good clothiars’, £30 was as much as anyone there was worth.
Wotton-under-Edge also was ‘welle occupyed with clothiars having ane faire longe strete and welle buyldyd’, but nonetheless £60 was the top assessment, though three other men, out of seventy-six, had £40 — £50 each.
Nobody in Wickwar, ‘a hamlet’, admitted to more than £4, while the lord of the manor owned more than half the wealth of Alderley, where a man of £50 was the only one who looks a potential clothier.
‘A pretty’ manufacturing town, Dursley had several residents who look as though they operated the water trucking mills; unusually for the area, more than half the fifty-two persons listed were rated at less than 40s., some of   them probably millhands, though others must have laboured in the stone quarry which caught Leland's eye.
As yet, industry hereabouts may not fully have ‘taken off’, but at the same time the many £2 assessments downgraded for tax purposes in the Vale region indicate a degree of recession, the state of some towns hinting at an uneasy period of relocation.
Around 1540 Berkeley was ‘no great thinge’; quite small, it contained one potential big businessman worth 200 marks, and, other than Sir Thomas Berkeley, the local magnate, no one else of note.
Thornbury had known ‘good clothing’ but was no more prosperous than any other little country town, and ‘idelnes muche reynithe there’.
In the busiest centres clothing was a major source of employment, nearly half the Bisley hundred taxpayers being assessed on wages, as the working weavers, fullers, shearmen and so forth, a far higher proportion than in most villages.
If the record of those who organised and controlled production is anything like complete, they did not begin to compare with their peers in East Anglia.
Nor for that matter could Wiltshire clothiers, for, although a dozen or more were rated for the Anticipation at upwards of £100, the highest was only £250: for some reason the great William Stumpe of Malmesbury was not assessed.
Devizes, with one man worth £160, one £100, and six in the £40 — £99 class, compared poorly even with Newbury.
The wealth of Worcester, its size and eminence in the textile industry notwithstanding, showed similar characteristics.
Although also a shire town and centre of a big diocese, the absence of truly rich citizens made it hardly more impressive a place than Chichester, which was much smaller (Table 2.8).
Since work was not put out to rural artificers, clothmaking remained craft-based.
Kidderminster depended ‘most’ and Bromsgrove ‘somewhat’on clothing.
Hardly more than a village, the latter possessed no more wealth than any sizeable one and no distinctive characteristics; most of the population of the huge parish was scattered among hamlets, locally called ‘yelds’, which showed few signs of industrial growth.
Nearly twice the size of Bromsgrove, Kidderminster returned a handful of men of the second rank and many poor as well; the Forens, or out-parish, looks in part an artisan suburb.
An Act passed in 1534 granted a monopoly of clothmaking in the county to Worcester and four other boroughs including Droitwich and Evesham.
Designed to nip in the bud any incipient growth in villages, it was successful, so far as the city was concerned, probably because it did no more than sanction the existing situation, even though in the fifteenth century the trade had flourished at Hartlebury, which remained an important centre of the specialised craft of fulling.
Generally conditions in Worcestershire in 1522 add a sombre background to the apprehension that rural competition was injuring the towns; by the date of Leland's visit things were possibly looking up once more.
In Sussex the manufacture of cloth had never reached major proportions; what little there was of it was scattered, chiefly in the Weald.
In 1562 — 3 clothiers from East Grinstead, Petworth and, unexpectedly, Alfriston, in the heart of the Downs, even Chichester, were fined at Blackwell Hall; as well there are signs of a minor centre of activity near Steyning; and at least five clothiers of Midhurst controlled weavers in Bepton, Lodsworth and other villages nearby.
In the middle of a prime corn-growing district, Chichester is unlikely to have been a centre of putting out; high wages there probably showed the influence of a craft-based manufacture, though on too small a scale to have any marked effect on the level and distribution of wealth.
Midhurst and Petworth were actually less affluent than their respective market areas.
As £20 in goods was the most any of them owned, the business of the Gobles of Petworth, one of whom was fined in 1562, must have been quite modest; a namesake of Thomas Page, the Alfriston defaulter, had 20 marks, and a possible forebear of George Partrych of East Grinstead was a small landowner with £5 a year.
Mineral extraction and quarrying were the only other enterprises   producing for more than immediate local demand, though practical considerations must generally have limited the distances stone could be transported.
Leland regularly noted quarries on his-travels; doubtless the one at Dursley, Gloucs., was the reason for the great number of poor labourers there.
Seldom did extractive industry bring prosperity.
Salt burning, on the contrary, made Droitwich (Table 2.16) one of the poorest communities in Worcestershire, almost without parallel anywhere, the township itself being ‘somewhat foule and dirty when any reyne faullythe, with moche carriage throwghe the stretes, being over ill pavyd or not pavyd’.
Leland added:
Since nonetheless the gentry of the vicinity were anything but affluent, the profits may have been largely illusory.
Impoverishment is a recurrent theme in accounts of Cornish tin mining; very much later John Norden observed that  
Carew added that ‘as by abandoning this trade they amend, so by reviving the same they decay again'.
Towards 1540, when earnings were certainly much lower, it was mostly fishing villages lik Bodinick and St Germans that looked poverty-stricken to Lelan, though the jottings of a tourist, primarily on the look-out for antiquities, hardly stand comparison with systematic investigations of Carew, a professional surveyor and a life-long student of local matters.
Leland's gloomy view of Droitwich must have been prompted by visual symptoms — the foul streets and the sickly faces he encountered in them: ‘the people that be about the fornacis be very ille colorid’.
Around 1540 mining was most active in the far west of Cornwall, in particular between St Just in Penwith and Newlyn, and ‘from ther to Looe Pool’ and Helston, and there were ‘no greater tynne workes in Cornwall then be on Sir William Godalchan's ground’in and near Breage.
Penwith and Kerrier hundreds were obviously poorer than the eastern parts of the shire; a high proportion of men were taxed on wages who had not been thought worth mentioning in the earlier survey, many of them poor immigrants variously described as tinners or labourers.
Even though the ranks of labourers were thinner and the level of wealth higher than in the west, tinning was not unknown in eastern parts, though parishes containing tinners differed little from ones that did not: not only were the former only slightly poorer in East hundred, but in West and Trigg they were actually rather better off.
To Cornish people as a whole tin brought little tangible benefit; whether it was a social disaster is less certain.
Carew's bleak diagnosis can hardly have been uninfluenced by several decades of mounting concern at the impermanence of non-agricultural employment compared with the stability of farmers fully occupied tending their land, and men continuously employed as servants in husbandry engaged for a year at a time.
Of the handful of men who made real money out of tin, Godolphin, besides being a leading figure in the industry, was also the richest resident in the county, assessed at £200.
(Sir Piers Edgcumbe was indeed rated at £400 for the subsidy, but, equally a Devon man, was absent from Cornwall in 1522.)
In the long term, moreover, the profits were creamed off by London capitalists who kept a tight grip on the marketing of tin.
Iron was increasingly worked in the Forest of Dean and the high Weald in Sussex, which in wealth and social structure had much in common.
Wealden ironmasters, and even more so their men, are elusive figures, but a Wadhurst miller, taxed at £4 on land, looks much like John Barharn of Woodlands and Butts who in 1521 purchased Brooklands forge along with Bartley Mill.
Eight Barhams taxed there included his brothers Richard (£15 on goods) and William (£8); Henry, a wage earner, was probably the son, though listed as servant, of Thomas (£10 in goods).
At this time most of them were minor landowners, but they were of gentle descent, and although John of Faircross, son and heir of the ironmaster, styled himself yeoman all his life, his descendants eventually moved up into the gentry.
No great number of people need have been directly engaged in ironmaking, for the Wealden industry was still in the 1520s no more than poised on the threshold of greatness, with only three blast furnaces in operation, and indeed the original one at Newbridge standing idle without a tenant.
Not until around 1540 did undertakings begin to proliferate, and even then the work was never a whole-time occupation, production being organised in ‘campaigns’ lasting from two to six months, mainly in winter when the rains swelled the streamlets and filled the ponds which powered the furnace bellows and the tilt-hammers of the forges.
Only three of the twenty-six hands at the Sheffield works (commissioned c .
1540) were permanently employed: a manager ‘hired by the year to attend upon the works and workmen at all tyme, and wey the iron from the workman to the merchaunte’, and two waggoners for the slow, laborious process of collecting raw materials and delivering the forgings.
At Worth the supervisor was the sole full-timer.
Only one out of eight men employed to carry coals, mine and sows of iron at Robertsbridge worked all 140 days of the campaign in 1542 — 3, the remainder putting in anything from two to forty-eight.
Salt-burning at Droitwich was confined to the six months Midsummer — Christmas — to keep up the price, Leland was told, though he himself thought the real motive was to conserve wood, since the exhaustion of supplies nearby obliged the salters to buy it from as far away as Worcester, Bromsgrove, Alvechurch and Alcester.
Doubtless many iron workers put in a few days at a time on different sites; until quite recently putting out much of the work to contract in small stints on a ‘labour-only’ basis was a regular practice in mineral  extraction, so leading tax collectors to class earnings as profits rather than wages.
Alongside the new-fangled blast furnace the traditional bloom process must have continued to occupy many people for short periods every year.
Far-fetched as the notion of a forge in the yard of every sizeable farm must seem, it would in principle have been perfectly consistent with fragmented and seasonal production.
Most families prominent in the iron trade came from the yeomanry and lesser gentry, though there were a few bigger men.
Richard Sackville of Buckhurst, in the business of making shot, was a major landowner with 200 marks a year.
William Wybarn of Ticehurst (goods £1 10) took on Bayham forge in 1525, and Thomas Oxenbrege of Northiam (£52) demised the Darfold Wood furnace in Mountfield and a forge at Etchingham in 1535 to a Thomas Walsh, who was perhaps the man taxed on £5 per annum in Danehill Sheffield hundred.
John Levett, gentleman, of the same (goods £30) must have been the brother — also in iron — of William, the parson of Buxted, who in 1542 directed the casting of the first one-piece cannon.
John Warner of Hartfield (land £20) was probably the supplier of gunstones as well as a relative of Richard Warner who owned the Parrock works in 1518.
Men of this standing were mostly considerable landowners in the first place.
The Barhams were more typical.
John Bowley, or Bowyer, a shot maker who took on the Hartfield steel forge in 1525, might have been related to either Valentine or Nicholas Bowyer (land £2 and £3 respectively).
John Collins (Collen), who already owned Socknersh furnace in Burwash, had £28 in moveables.
William Spycer of Dallington might have cherished visions of instant fortune when he leased the site of the projected Panningridge furnace, but they soon faded, and, having assigned his interest to the wealthy Sir Henry Sidney, he carted stone, and lime for the constructors; if his personal property was limited to the £3 on which he was taxed, he was under capitalised.
The marginal impact on the local economy left few traces on the record.
The condition of the people of Hartfield, Hawksborough and Shoyswell hundreds differed from that of the rest of the region only in so far as the usual string of £1 assessments was balanced in each of them by one of the very few three-figure ones (see Table 2.17).
Jobs were certainly created, but generally as by-employments, and limited in number.
Big undertakings like Sheffield and Worth only required twenty or thirty men each, and of course for just a few weeks at a time.
Furnace construction naturally provided opportunities: a fair number of men, mainly of the smallholding and labouring type, fetched materials   and performed other services during the building of Panningridge in 1542 — 3.
As with Cornish tin the profits were creamed by the London capitalists who financed a good many undertakings.
Nonetheless, the workmen were not necessarily the hapless victims of exploitation.
Levels of earnings might well have been limited by their own work-psychology, as were those of lead miners in Derbyshire and the Mendip Hills, where the labour force consisted almost entirely of smallholders and cottagers.
The interdependence of farming and mining, added to technological constraints, restricted the number of days annually available for mining; the farmer-miner's smallholding had first claim on his time, and he went to the mine with the limited aim of satisfying, with a minimum of effort, the desire for a particular level of cash-income expectation determined by the need to pay the rent of his holding and purchase a given packet of ‘industrial’ goods.
The cottar, subsisting on an inadequate holding, had a greater need for cash earnings and more time to spare, but because he accepted the hierarchical consumption ethic of the village community his aspirations were lower, so that, although working longer, he did so at a lower intensity.
The professional miner seeking to achieve a higher standard of living through maximisation of earnings scarcely existed in the early sixteenth century.
Although on the whole wages in the iron industry were good, real earnings would not have been high enough to produce a tangible effect  on the structure of taxable wealth.
High wages at some undefined earlier date had very possibly induced many Cornishmen to abandon husbandry for tinning.
Then during the period 1410 — 50 the falling price of tin had necessitated increases in the number of work days and productivity to maintain the level of earnings, and more and more men, finding tinning an unrewarding way of satisfying their expectations, had turned to occupations such as cloth making and fishing.
Enough of them might also have left the county to reduce the population to a point which, by the 1520s, created a need for Breton workmen.
At first the native community of the Weald may have been little affected by the expansion of the iron industry.
Almost certainly the key positions, and perhaps many others, were filled by Frenchmen.
The new era having dawned with the introduction of the blast furnace from France in 1496, French experts were naturally recruited to install them.
By 1524, thirty-eight Frenchmen comprised almost a third of the taxpayers and well over half the labourers of Hartfield hundred.
This, the biggest single enclave in Sussex, not only demonstrates the continued dependence of the prototype works at Newbridge on immigrant workmen, but also implies that there had been no great pool of indigenous labour to draw on in the first place.
Although later works made more use of Englishmen, foreign technicians continued to be needed, and the several groups located in the Weald add up to a directory of the industry in 1524–5.
The traditional bloom process was still capable of meeting all needs, for a negligible outlay; the exotic indirect process had been introduced as an act of state policy simply in order to make cannons, the need for which had been proved by the effectiveness of French artillery — against the English themselves — in the wars of the fifteenth century; Newbridge, where the first successful gun had been cast in 1509, was Crown property.
Here for once a rural industry had been set up regardless of the availability of local labour or any need to create employment; at first people in the Weald lacked not merely skill but also, it would seem, sufficient incentive.
The number of sub-£2 assessments was primarily a function of the natural poverty of the region, most being returned by smallholders — some of them owner-occupiers — rather than labourers.
Viewed against the abnormally small numbers in High Suffolk, the many wage earners of the Stour Valley also give the impression that expanding industry sucked in labour from far and wide.
If a common phenomenon, this goes some way towards accounting for the ingrained belief that such growth engendered serious economic and social problems, not least Carew's conviction that the opening of tin workings impoverished a parish, whilst  their discontinuance restored prosperity.
In fact it might well have been that such developments generally attracted more labour than could be fully employed, which departed once the enterprise was terminated, leaving behind a sleepy farming community not unlike the fifteen undeveloped villages of Babergh hundred (Table 2.18).
If anything these somewhat stereotyped complaints sound not unlike the protest of agrarian society at the higher wages and extravagant consumption patterns of the industrial sector, at the dissolute habits of miners and the St Monday custom observed by many artificers.
Iron production in Sussex stimulated a variety of related activities, not least charcoal burning.
The Sidney works and others on great estates did their own coaling, though Ralph Hogge of Buxted purchased fuel from independent colliers and it formed one of the biggest items in his accounts.
Carriage of wood, coal and iron also created work for carters and watermen.
William Boys of Battle, worth £30 in goods, had inherited from his father a lucrative business employing several waggoners and assistants, plus a leading position in the town hierarch.
In many ways the most valuable product of the Weald at this time was timber, much of which was exported as sawn wood and fuel.
At Robertsbridge coaling was merely one branch of a complex operation which produced cordwood for fuel, as well as inch-board, ship board   and planking, which of course kept numerous sawyers busy.
Almost certainly most of it went to Rye, the chief centre of shipbuilding, where, as well as at Playden, ropemakers were working some years later.
The whole Robertsbridge undertaking was indeed a highly diversified one incorporating a large farm that sold corn and beer to the workmen, and hides to tanners and glovers.
Parrock furnace was similarly linked with a 40-acre farm.
These enterprises present an alternative aspect of the supposed conflict of interest between ironmasters and the rest of the community that ordinarily commanded attention.
The reality was less dramatic: far from exhausting stocks, the demands of the ironworks lay well within the capacity of the Sussex woods, and the landowners themselves led the development of the industry as the only way to exploit their timber resources profitably.
Therein also lay perhaps the supposed profits of the gentry in the neighbourhood of Droitwich, which also devoured timber, ‘for the makyng of salt is a great and notable destruction of wood’: 6,000 loads annually, mostly young growth, was the local estimate.
In North Worcestershire also industrial growth made little or no visible impact on the structure of wealth, possibly because a man's position in the rural hierarchy determined his choice of trade, In Yardley tile making had evolved as a major activity early in the fifteenth century; along with tanning, which may still have been the principal industry in nearby Birmingham, it was practised by farmer-craftsmen, who mostly had well under £20 in goods, the £3 — £9 range forming a good two-thirds of the list: Thomas Walton, whose £11 was the highest assessment, made tiles and practised cooperage in winter.
Metal, which became more prominent later in the sixteenth century, mainly attracted cottagers: Thomas Jeffereys, a wire drawer, had only 30s. in goods.
Already there were signs of the wide range of West Midlands trades: a weaver was recorded in Yardley in 1556, and there were several millers and brewers.
Birmingham of course was largely engaged in metal working.
It does not, however, say much for the Worcestershire industries that, apart from salt, cloth making was the only one noticed by Leland, although it was unimportant except in Worcester and towns like Kidderminster, where there were swarms of poor artificers, and Bromsgrove.
Droitwich was supposed to be a textile centre, but evidently not even the Act of 1534 had saved clothing from total eclipse by salt burning; the town's poverty being symptomatic of chronic unemployment which the hazards of the salt trade did little to alleviate.
So widely dispersed was industrial activity that there can have been few parts of the country that did not support it in one form or another.
Yet, significant as many of these developments were, the majority seem chiefly remarkable for the wealth they did not generate.
Too thinly spread to have much impact on the structure of wealth, so many were subsidiary to farming that, far from being divided into industrial and agrarian regions, England consisted of various farming regions of which certain pastoral ones had attained some degree of industrial development, in some few cases to the extent of substantially modifyng their fundamental characteristics.
At the same time it was doubtless the case that by-employments, which were probably the rule rather than the exception, were decisive in bringing the level of wealth in districts unfavourable to husbandry more or less into line with that of the more eligible farming regions.
Certainly there is no corroboration of the contemporary belief that mining engendered poverty.
What does emerge beyond dispute is the primacy of large-scale cloth making as the great national industry and by far the most important export, leaving the rest more or less nowhere, as attested by the massive wealth of many clothiers and the prosperity — albeit a brittle one — of the workers in the major textile districts: high earnings in Suffolk and Gloucestershire at least resulting in a disposable surplus of income which not infrequently enabled artificers to accumulate sufficient goods for assessment, in contrast to agricultural labourers, who seldom had anything but their wages to be taxed on.
THE CLERGY
Although incomes had to be given, assessment of the personal property of ‘spiritual men’ was not stipulated, and since the clergy were customarily taxed more heavily than the laity a good many of them may have been less than forthcoming.
In certain areas no figures were given for a good many parishes, even the values of some livings being omitted.
Some certificates tend to lapse into impersonal references to ‘the rectory’ or ‘the chaplain'.
Absenteeism will account for some gaps, and temporary vacancies for inability to state a clerk's name.
Individually, of course, monks and nuns were bound by their vow of poverty, but although their communities often possessed great wealth the moveables of some monasteries and other corporations were also ignored.
Friaries such as those at Aylesbury and Coventry could hardly have owned much anyway, but at the opposite end of the scale, the omission of rich abbeys like Cirencester and Tewkesbury leaves a serious gap.
Nor are all  assessments entirely reliable: Brooke Priory in Rutland owned goods valued at £52 and had no serious debts when it was dissolved in 1536 yet fourteen years earlier it had been assessed at a mere £13 6s 8d.
Coventry Cathedral Priory declared possessions worth £500, but its debts left it £52 in the red; similarly its net income was less than a quarter of the gross.
The Charterhouse, also deep in debt, was passed over in silence.
As the income of the much smaller Missenden Abbey was given as £160, compared with £262 net in 1535, its goods may have been worth much more than the £140 assessed.
£140 was perhaps a fair valuation of the chattels of Hickling Priory, Norfolk, yet the tally of the secular clergy of its locality is incomplete, and, conversely, the very areas where ecclesiastical wealth was consistently recorded were ones which contained no important monasteries.
Apart from Brooke, an obscure little house, all that survived of the medieval foundations of Rutland was the hospital, or almshouse, at Oakham, which only had goods worth 40s.: clearly its income of 20 marks only just sufficed to maintain the twelve poor inmates: Warden Gunby was no Septimus Harding.
Although chantries were not established everywhere, the recording of the priests who served them looks erratic, many being ignored, although the expression ‘singing at’ in some Norfolk parishes probably denotes one whose days were occupied saying masses and other prayers for the repose of the souls of the founders.
Here and there the line dividing them from the parish clergy may have become blurred, for some chantry certificates claimed, in 1545, that the cantarist was the only minister available, and generally give the impression that they regularly shared the parish duties.
Yet although in 1545 the chaplain at Barrowden received 40s. a year for the cure of souls, founders usually inhibited the holding of other benefices, and pluralism was rare save in cathedrals.
Pleas for the retention of cantarists are suspect as ploys aimed at keeping the endowments in the parish.
Such pluralism as did occur was excused on grounds of the poverty of one or both livings.
Barrowden had easily the poorest chantry in Rutland, valued at less than 50s. a year, while, although the curacy was assessed for taxation at £5. 6s. 8d., the parish priest's stipend in 1522 was a beggarly 26s 8d.
Typical of the late Middle Ages were secular funds created for religious purposes.
In most parishes the churchwardens held a stock in the church box; in some a guild or fraternity of lay people maintained a stock of its own.
Commonly not exceeding a couple of pounds, the church stock reached an exceptional £7. 6s. at Waddesdon, Bucks., though as often as not it was nil, or else no figure was given, some  certificates consistently omitting it.
At least one was lumped in with the guild stock.
The guild at Ketton had £10 and the Uppingham one ample funds, while both church boxes were empty.
It was easy to confuse the two.
Guilds were formed to supplement the slender resources of benefices by financing additional services and so forth; any friendly-society function was likely to be subsidiary, only a minority providing financial assistance for needy members.
In the normal way a fraternity held an annual social function, after its festival mass, to collect the stock which was forthwith paid over to the churchwardens, less any sum retained for guild purposes.
Some stocks, however, were permanent and might be invested in animals (for example) which were hired out to produce an income.
Distribution of guilds was uneven, many rural   parishes having none at all, while a town might contain several.
They were thickest on the ground in Norfolk and the clothing places of Suffolk.
Population, however, was not the determinant.
Coventry possessed two big ones with assets totalling £321, while the little village of Burnham Sutton, Norfolk, had no fewer than four, though they could scrape together only £11.
The few mentioned in Buckinghamshire included the rich guild of Our Lady at Aylesbury with a stock of £50 and £17 a year from real estate.
None at all were recorded in Worcestershire or Cornwall, although there had been forty or more in Bodmin alone which had been the most generous contributors to the rebuilding of the parish church.
Almost everyone there was a member of a guild, and since the population can hardly have exceeded 1,000 some people must have belonged to several.
These uncertainties need not inhibit a broad comparison of lay and clerical wealth (see Table 2.19).
Generally reliable, the Rutland figures make a useful yardstick.
Besides being not untypical, 3½ per cent was a fair enough share of the community's wealth for the fifty-two secular priests, who formed almost exactly the same proportion of the 1484 adult male inhabitants.
As a similar percentage of the population, Norfolk priests were very much more affluent.
In contrast, however, the omission of information for the Westwood nunnery leaves the Worcestershire aggregate defective, while data relating to secular clergy in the Aylesbury hundreds of Buckinghamshire are probably inadequate.
In regard to the wealth of individual secular priests we are on firmer ground.
Most fell neatly into one of two primary categories, beneficed and unbeneficed: rectors and vicars on the one hand, and parish priests, chaplains or curates on the other (see Table 2.20).
Materially the average incumbent approximated to the middling sort of tenant farmer; the unbeneficed, who lived on stipends, to smallholders, or even labourers.
In practice the range covered by the former was much narrower than the bare figures suggest, few of them having less than £2 or more than £25 — £30.
Being mostly confined to Buckinghamshire, the handful of parsons reported as having no personal property serve as much as anything to highlight doubts about the approach to clerical assessments there.
In this certificate ‘nil’ normally indicates an indigent inhabitant, though not consistently.
Wherever there was no chaplain the incumbent could very well have been truly poor, unable to afford the stipend.
Alternatively, such an entry might mean a temporary absence, on Church business if not a foray in quest of preferment.
But it is difficult to make anything of the sort of entry which assesses the rector at nil and omits the chaplain's name, implying that he was not in his post.
At the top of the scale only seven Buckinghamshire parsons were worth £40 or more, compared with a good fifth of the total in Norfolk, where no fewer than four reached three figures.
The top Buckinghamshire man, the prebendary of Buckingham, was an isolated figure, £71 being the second biggest assessment.
Predictably, vicars tended to conform to more modest standards; indeed, in Norfolk as many as twelve were rated at a mere £2.
In Cornwall the situation was reversed, with half having at least £20 and only five less than £10; similarly only two of the small Worcestershire sample had less than £10.
In principle parsons had the advantage, but in practice rectories with cure of souls tended to be the poorer ones, for many of the best were impropriate to their monastic patrons, which in almost every case had ordained a vicarage and endowed it adequately — rarely with less than £5 a year, more commonly £6 — while rectory incomes tended to vary widely.
Nonetheless, income differences were not commensurate with  some of these exceptional examples of personal wealth, and regional influences cannot be ignored.
In Cornwall and Worcestershire even the unbeneficed clergy were better off than the average, the overall position being that of an affluent clerical establishment alongside a relatively poor laity.
In addition, Cornwall was the only one that was without question adequately staffed, every parish having at least one priest, frequently several.
Whatever factors might have operated behind the scenes, the existence of an inverse proportion between economic development and ecclesiastical wealth cannot be discounted.
It appears implicit in the contrasts observable in a small county like Buckinghamshire.
In the Newport hundreds, where the level of lay assessments was low and left substantially unchanged by the subsidy, the proportion of wealth owned by the Church was much higher than in the more advanced Chilterns, not only in 1522 but also after the initial assessments had been scaled down for the subsidy.
The exception to this rule was Norfolk, but here clerical wealth must have reflected the yield of tithes in the leading cereal-producing region, momentarily augmented perhaps by the high grain prices of recent years.
by no means all priests were dependent on income from the Church.
Throughout the survey clerks occur as (generally) small landowners, and some were taxed in this capacity in the lay subsidy.
Antony Carswalle, vicar of Whitchurch, who died in 1521, owned land in Garsington, Oxon.
Much above the average in wealth for a Buckinghamshire incumbent, his estate totalling nearly £19 included £7. 1s. 4d. in ready money, a substantial amount for the times by any reckoning.
Doubtless it included rent from Garsington as well as from the Whitchurch glebe, which must have been let to farm seeing that his own agricultural interests were limited to a couple of dozen sheep and some poultry.
His lifestyle, in a word, was gentlemanly; his effects included a saddle and bridle, a riding hood of chamlet and another of sarcinet, although he no longer owned a mount.
His wardrobe was also unusually large and varied.
Although in no sense ‘a povre Persoun of a Toun’ this did not prevent him being ‘also a lerned man, a clerk’.
And not only was he a graduate, he had retained the habits of scholarship.
His books — not itemised — totalled £2 in value, there was a lectern to stand them on, a desk, and ‘a horn with ynk’ priced at a penny.
The income of the vicarage was an average £8 a year, and Carswalle's successor, who presumably did not enjoy private means, got the more or less average assessment of £6 13s 4d.
Most parish priests or chaplains were hardly distinguishable from smallholders, or even labourers; the standard stipend of £5 — £6 a year  was equivalent to the agricultural wage of 4d. a day and there was no job security.
The possessions of William Willesley of Leckhamstead, who died in 1521, amounted to 57s. 9d., of which a third represented the value of three mares, while the rest consisted of clothes and bedding.
The administration of his estate took 22s. 8d. of this, half of it going on fees, plus 2s. to the pardoner for letters of pardon and 5d. to the summoner.
Except in Cornwall, the fortunate few who enjoyed a measure of affluence were chiefly to be found in towns where lucrative guild appointments were available.
In Buckinghamshire four of the five wealthiest lived in Aylesbury, Amersham and Buckingham, and elsewhere they were to be found at places like Bromsgrove and Kidderminster, Worcs., and Blakeney, Little Walsingham and Great Yarmouth, Norfolk.
But these were exceptional.
Four-fifths of the chaplains in Buckinghamshire and Rutland owned personal estates of 5 marks or less, while if one out of three in Cornwall had £5 or more, a good 10 per cent were assessed at nil, and indeed at Gwinear and Towednack were described as ‘pauper’.
Almost certainly alternative sources of income played an important part.
William Willesley very possibly had one, for although his personal circumstances were slightly better than average his stipend was a wretched one, £3. 13s. 4d. a year.
One of the priests of Holy Trinity, Coventry, owned goods valued at no less than £100, nearly three times as much as his eleven colleagues put together; he was also vicar of Priors Hardwick.
Again, in St Michael's there was a chantry priest worth £40 and two more with £20 each; their incomes were normal — round about £6 a year — but they (and others) must have had opportunities to officiate on behalf of the wealthy fraternities in the city, of which the Trinity Guild had £209 a year.
Apart from infrequent exceptions such as these, chantry priests were indistinguishable from parish chaplains.
Half the nine cantarists in Coventry had £2 or less in goods, which, although numbers generally are hardly sufficient to average, was typical of their condition.
Very occasionally a priest is mentioned who appears not to have any official connexion with the parish.
Such a man was Sir John Sargent of Datchet, Bucks., who had no less than £50 a year and 100 marks in moveables quite possibly he was a fellow of Eton College or a canon of St George's Chapel, Windsor, both of which lay within walking distance.
If only because of the nature of the record, the wealth of the clergy is not readily assimilable to that of the laity.
Religious of course were withdrawn from the world.
Although secular clerks, especially at parish level, were fully integrated with the community, the structure of their personal property differed from that of the laity.
The richest ones, the  bishops, were remote from local communities, and, as lords spiritual, were as much ‘them’(as opposed to ‘us’) to ordinary parish priests as to their congregations.
At the opposite extreme of the scale, although the lists teem with wretchedly paid chaplains, assessments of less than 40s. were relatively few and far between, most lying in the middle ranges, between £3 and £20.
A pair of spectacles and 40s. worth of books set the late (graduate) vicar of Whitchurch somewhat apart from his parishioners, who probably did not appreciate his erudition, yet his private collection was certain to be innocent of both profound and frivolous titles, limited to practical works such as collections of sermons, primers of divinity and apologetics, plus, naturally, his Breviary, perhaps too a copy of the Vulgate, or Latin scriptures.
Lords temporal were not mustered as members of the county community: it would never have done for ‘my lord’ to be paraded on the village green by some Dogberry and Verges, even a Justice Shallow, made to line up with Mouldy, Shadow, Wart and the rest, to be handed over to a red-nosed, pot-bellied mercenary captain, to be abused and maybe put on a charge by his blustering subordinates, and finally 
If the greatest and richest in the land were exempted from the indignity of assessment, so many of the poorest were simply overlooked that every list ended up short of about one-third of the men it should have included, and since almost all of these were worth less than £2 the general level of wealth is made to look higher than it really was.
LANDOWNING
ALTHOUGH the outlines of the structure of landed wealth are clearly delineated, the piecemeal execution of the survey creates a number of problems.
The unit of registration was the township, and the instructions called for certification of the owner of each piece of land there, not for a statement of the property of each inhabitant.
Complication is introduced by the fact that while most constables followed their orders to the letter, others tried by means of a global sum to represent the value of anything an inhabitant might own in another place.
This, added to the inevitable errors and omissions, results in a picture in which some of the details are blurred, even at times distorted.
Further, the neat division of society into a minority of freeholders sharply contrasted with the mass of tenant farmers and landless men stops far short of the whole truth in its failure to acknowledge the interest of copyholders whose security of tenure made them freeholders in all but name, or to distinguish leaseholders with long terms from mere tenants at will.
The assessment in some places of the incomes head tenants received from subletting, while a valuable addition in itself, serves also to confuse the issue, as also do sporadic attempts to assign a value to the unexpired term of a lease.
THE VILLAGE LANDOWNERS
In order to form an estimate of both the range and the limitations of the record of landholding we cannot do better than commence by examining the section devoted to a single parish, Empingham in Rutland.
The first feature to note is that only a small minority of the listed inhabitants — five persons out of forty-seven — owned any land at all.
As one of these was the lord of the manor and another the vicar, only one in fifteen of the ‘ordinary’ folk was returned as a freeholder: two husbandmen and a woman who looks like the widow of a yeoman or maybe a minor gentleman.
In Rutland this was a normal proportion; elsewhere freeholders might form a clear majority, and in many a Norfolk village embrace virtually everyone above the condition of labourer.
Only in the case of two men at Fleet Marston, Bucks., is any hint given of what else they owned, and its utility is minimal.
Mr Colte, who ‘hathe landes ther and in Quainton, Doddersell, Hartewell and Stonne’, is not mentioned under any of these headings.
Sir Robert Lee, who was also stated to have property in the selfsame places was a prominent local figure.
He owned Little Marston and farmed the rest of Fleet Marston, a moiety of which belonged to Colte.
It is a reasonable inference that a 7s. parcel formed but an insignificant fraction of the estates of a nobleman like Lord Zouche, whose goods alone totalled 500 marks.
Inclusive of the manor of Clipsham his Rutland property alone exceeded £12 in value, and from Buckinghamshire he drew a further £43.2 As a gentleman, the absentee William Dall (or Dale) could also be expected to have other property, and was in fact lord of the neighbouring manor of Tickencote, where he resided.
Squire Mackworth was similarly likely to possess more than this one estate, and sure enough land worth £5 a year is found in Normanton.
A subsidy assessment of £40 suggests that this completes the account of his lands; any there might have been in other counties cannot be deduced from the available evidence.
Inquisitions post mortem can sometimes fill such a gap, but because a separate one had to be taken in every county involved we can never be certain that the record  has survived in its entirety.
Only a feodary survey, made in the event of a minority, gives a complete account of a man's lands.
None of the remaining small proprietors of Empingham had other holdings in Rutland, and on the whole it seems unlikely that their interests extended beyond its boundary.
The vicar also held the chaplaincy of the deserted hamlet of Horn in plurality, but it yielded only a trifling 13s. 4d., and he seems to have had no other benefice.
If Empingham people were representative the outlines of a typology can be detected.
A single township would contain no more than a fraction of the estates of a nobleman or other great landowner.
The lands of the middling sort of squire were usually confined to a handful of parishes, often in the form of a main property, on which he probably resided, with smaller outlying holdings.
Even an estate worth upwards of £100 a year might well consist of no more than a couple of manors plus an assortment of lesser parcels, all located in a single county.
Persons of inferior degree rarely owned more than a single parcel, irrespective of whether they lived on it themselves or let it to a tenant.
So far as resident proprietors went this rough yardstick makes a useful indicator as to the probability of their owning land in other places.
For non-residents, other than the nobly born and well connected, it is less informative.
Most are difficult to trace; their names are apt to be commonplace and we do not know where to commence looking for them.
The return for North Marston in Buckinghamshire is unique in giving the ‘addresses’ of nearly half the absentee landowners; a few more are supplied in half a dozen other villages there, but in general examples are rare and isolated.
A piece of land at Yardley (Worcs.) was owned by a certain John Arden of Castle Bromwich; absentee proprietors at Windrush included citizens of Bristol and Gloucester.
There is a scattering in Berkshire, especially in Wantage hundred; most resided within the county, in the towns of Abingdon and Newbury in particular, though a few lived as far away as, for instance , Salisbury.
Two somewhat indefinite entries under Letcombe Basset specify only Hampshire.
The broad conclusion must be that the majority of owners of small parcels lived within a radius of a very few miles.
Coming back to Empingham, yeomen called John Parker resided in Belton and Clipsham, both in Rutland, though there is no clue as to which, if either, was the man listed under Empingham; if he was the Belton man he could also have been the owner of a piece of land there — the MS is faded at this point.
William Dall illustrates a further complication — inconsistent spelling.
Here the style ‘gentleman’ identifies him as Dale of Tickencote: the  name of Richard Collyn's landlord is spelt the same way.
In the absence of these rare pointers guesswork may be the only recourse.
The christian name of ‘Shallowe of Hollendon’, owner of a small property in Singleborough, Bucks., is illegible, and since this is the sole reference to him one is almost tempted to dismiss him as a fictional character!
When, as not infrequently, an owner proves untraceable, yet another obstacle has to be negotiated — a wrong name.
Now so far as we are in a position to judge, the information was reliable.
When the owner was resident there was no problem; if he was not, the occupier would be able to tell the constable how much rent he paid and to whom.
Inevitably, however, cases would occur when the information was out of date, if the owner had recently died or disposed of the property or, if a woman, had changed her name by marrying.
Nor was it just the humble and obscure whose exits went unnoticed.
At Caldecott, Liddington and Stoke Dry no less a personage than the bishop of Lincoln, lord of all three towns, was erroneously named as William Atwater, who had died and been succeeded by John Longland the previous year.
If a flagrant oversight like this could occur it says little for the prospects of men of lowly status being correctly recorded.
Land might also be vested in a feoffee to uses (i.e. trustee) or managed by an attorney.
A parcel worth £2. 6s. 8d. at Stony Stratford was held by the executors of the late Sir Edward Belknap.
In Grendon Underwood we read: ‘The rente of Grendon to ye executors of Thos.
Pigott to fulfill his will.’
Whether these should be equated with his ‘heirs’, who held land worth £4. 6s. 8d. in Elesborough, his widow, who lived at Whaddon and was a prominent landowner, or someone quite different, is not clear.
The formula ‘the heir of’(e.g. John Cordwan of Shepley Yeld in Bromsgrove) is not uncommon.
More often it takes the plural form, indicating partition of the property between co-heiresses, like Agnes Chaplayne and Beatrix Salesbury at Gayhurst, Bucks.
Three Stourbridge men shared a rent of £2, while in Chadswith Yeld, Bromsgrove, Edmund Harwell divided 2 marks yearly with ‘his co-parcenor’.
Generally, though, the heirs are not identified; in any case such entries are sporadic except in Cornwall, where the Celtic custom of partible inheritance caused them to be widespread, and incidentally obliterates the trail of the persons concerned in a great many cases.
With trifling exceptions the record is restricted to monetary values.
When for once it is stated that Sir Raynold, the chaplain of Ridlington, Norfolk, owned a house and three acres, the reason must have been some difficulty over determining the value, which in this case is omitted.
One Cawston man was credited with £1 per annum in respect of a mill, another with the same amount for ‘a house and land’.
Some properties can be identified with little difficulty: Dale's holding in Empingham was the manor of Hardwick, once a flourishing hamlet, which by 1522 had evidently shrunk to the single farm it has long been; there was just one tenant.
Similarly, ‘Vernand's Lands’ are named at Adstock, Bucks.
In the Midlands and south of England values average out at roughly £20-£30 per thousand acres, but although this represents an average of about 6d. an acre — which was near enough the going rate for rent — it cannot be employed as a general conversion factor, for while it may be applicable to a county or other major division, the ratios for individual parishes and hamlets are subject to extreme variations.
Feasible explanations of this phenomenon can be grouped loosely in two main classes.
On the one hand, assuming the assessments to have been broadly accurate, the level of exploitation might have varied widely: it was, for instance, regarded as axiomatic that enclosed ground was worth substantially more than common, while manorial custom and estate policy could exercise a profound effect on rents.
On the other hand there are problems inherent in the composition of the certificates.
Lacunae, which must always be reckoned with, are both overt and latent.
In certain cases the value is left out, perhaps pending further enquiry.
A high proportion of these relate to lordships, the Crown's especially, doubtless in the belief that these particular details would not be required.
Many deficiencies can be made good from alternative sources: time and again the Valor Ecclesiasticus , compiled barely a decade later, gives virtually the same values as the survey for Church properties.
But even the most painstaking officials could overlook some estates.
The probability is that casual omissions tended to be unimportant, but occasionally evidence of a more serious oversight can be detected.
The feodary survey of the lands of the infant daughter of Thomas Ramsay in 1527 shows that the family had substantial holdings in Buckinghamshire including the manors of Hitcham, worth £20. 3s. 7d. a year, and Losemere in Little Marlow, which was valued, along with other parcels there, at £20. 12s. 6d.
Of all this only 40s. was recorded, at Marlow, in 1522, in the name of Thomas, who was then a ward himself.
His status may go some way towards clearing up the misunderstanding which must have arisen, for in Gloucestershire manors belonging to another royal ward were also left unassessed.
Hitcham, furthermore, which contained only seven taxpayers, was so insignificant a place it was surveyed jointly with Dorney, and we can readily imagine the constable becoming confused and forgetting to insert the name of the juvenile lord of the smaller township; anyone subsequently checking the certificate could be  forgiven for failing to realise that the first line referred to the lord of Dorney only.
Fortunately errors of this magnitude are rare.
Equally troublesome, if not more so, is the domiciliary assessment which turns out to express total income from all sources.
As the manor of Whitwell was valued by a feodary survey at £3. 13s. 9d., it is virtually certain that the £80 assessment of Richard Flower, the resident owner, must be interpreted as meaning his whole income scaled down by 20 per cent.
Further examples can be deduced in Rutland, notably the £46 credited to David Cecil at Tinwell, a small parish from which the abbot of Peterborough received £21 as lord; Cecil was his bailiff and lived in the manor house.
All big assessments that are not accompanied by an explanatory gloss have to be approached warily.
The tiny hamlet of Dixton, near Winchcombe, contained not only William Hygford, who was worth £66. 13s. 4d. a year, but also a second man with £50.
Fortunately (for us) the commissioners of depopulation in 1517 discovered that Hygford's father had enclosed 190 acres of arable land a few years earlier; estimated to be worth £6 a year, this was probably all, or most, of what he owned there.
Smaller assessments could also be global ones.
The most explicit was that of John Goodwin of Over Winchendon, ‘landes in this shere vijli viijs and in all other shires of England xijli’.
Even assessments as tiny as the £4 of Robert Fonten of Burcott in Wing and the 20s. of William Taylor of Soulbury were both annotated ‘in all England’.
What finally got recorded may have depended on how much the individual chose to reveal to the constable, though in Coventry — thanks no doubt to the existence of a highly organised local administration — the citizens' circumstances were thoroughly investigated.
The prior of the cathedral produced his accounts and was duly assessed at £483. 7s. 6d. in ‘clere yerlie Revenues and Possessions’ after sundry deductions from a gross £1,004. 4s. 8d. ‘as appereth by Rentalles and Bookes of Accompte’.
In every case, so far as can be judged, property located inside the city was carefully distinguished from what was owned elsewhere, and so here alone there is no ambiguity.
Many assessments do not represent ownership as such.
Much of the income of rectories and vicarages consisted of tithes.
Usually there was a glebe as well, but the proportion attributable to it was far from consistent.
Overall it would appear to have accounted for less than a tenth of the income of spiritualities; in seven Norfolk parishes in 1658 the glebe varied from one-eighth to two-thirds of the living, though the average scarcely exceeded a quarter; acreages ranged from one to fifty-two with a median of twenty-four in these and three other parishes.
Glebes could be anything from large farms to little or nothing.
At Frocester, Gloucs., it was restricted to a single close of five acres; the priest of Saul chapel had 5¼ acres in the common fields of Fretherne, the mother parish.
The rich vicarage of Churcham, valued at £20. 4s. 5½d., had no glebe at all, while not only was there none at Tirley, the vicar's income of £9. 6s. 8d. came wholly from the farm of the tithes.
In Buckinghamshire nineteen parishes, or more than 9 per cent, had no glebe by the seventeenth century, several had also been depopulated, and in a further half-dozen the living was impropriate.
Glebes here could be anything from 20 to 100 acres.
The abbot of Halesowen received £1 a year from the tithes of Dudley, Worcs., and the vicar of Hailes 10s.
The certificates provide numerous examples of these ‘pensions to religious or spirituall men’.
At Little Brickhill, Bucks., ‘Robertus Crofton clericus habet pencionem extra dictam ecclesiam sursum et desuper predictam summam de vjli xiijs ivd’, which formed the vicar's portion: the pensioner enjoyed the handsome share of £8.
Pensions originated in various ways.
Some were imposed by monasteries on benefices of which they were the patrons, sometimes as a halfway stage to appropriation.
Evesham drew them from several Cotswold parishes; the abbot of Owston received 2 marks a year from Tickencote.
There was an unusually complex situation at East Hendred, with three pensioners in addition to the parson all taking their cut: the abbot of Abingdon and the archdeacon of Berkshire each had ‘a portion out of the rectory’ of two marks and one, respectively, while a clerk named William Jones was entitled to ‘a portion of tithes’to the value of 8s., leaving £16. 1s. 4d. for the incumbent.
The fact that the prior of Shene was lord and two other monasteries as well as the bishop of Salisbury all had interests there may have exercised some influence.
Pensions were also assigned to parish churches; Cirencester got 8s. from Througham rectory and Rodborough chapel 20s. from Upper Lyppiatt.
Pensions were peculiar to clerks: £4 a year paid out of the parsonage of Wendover to layman Richard Byrch was described as an annuity.
As the majority seem to have been charges on benefices, the two enjoyed by the rector of Marsh Gibbon were additional to his living and presumably from a different source.
Annuities generally issued from lay land, and a technical distinction was evidently maintained at Water Stratford, Bucks., where the abbot had a pension of 6s. 8d. as well as an annuity of 4s.
At the same time allowance must be made for local preferences in the matter of terminology: annuities were not specified in Gloucestershire, nor were pensions in Worcestershire where, for example can be found payments of £5 from Kidderminster to John  Rooke, serjeant at law of Bristol, £4 from Droitwich to another layman, and £1. 6s. 8d. from Cradley to the vicar of Halesowen.
Occasionally precise definition was evaded, as in the case of the 22s. which Lord Bergavenny received ‘out of the chantry’ at Kidderminster, or the pound which formed the ‘portion’of Mr Gregson (presumably a clerk) at Inkberrow.
Kidderminster also yields an isolated reference to an obit of 4s. per annum.
Thomas Blunt, the bailiff of Chaddesley Corbett's annuity of 20 marks looks very much like a salary, similar to Thomas Solley of Hindlip's ‘fee of one mark for the bailiwick of Abbotsey’.
All sorts of people got fees for services of many types, not all of which found their way into the survey.
Not only was John Barnesley's remuneration as bailiff of Hartlebury omitted, he was credited with no landed income at all.
The most frequently stated office was the stewardship of a manor, as specified in the instructions; it too was frequently omitted.
The fees covered a wide range.
William Overton held the courts of Empingham for as little as 40d., compared with 40s. for the same duty at Burley.
Ten shillings or less was the usual rate in Rutland, and the amount was seldom large anywhere.
However, the bishop of Worcester normally paid £10, while at Feckenham the fee was given as no less than £14. 16s. 10½d., but this perhaps included services in connexion with the forest administration.
As charges against the profits of manors these payments were naturally classed as income from land.
Similarly the stipend of a parish priest or chaplain formed a charge on the living paid by an incumbent, who was, more often than not, an absentee.
Fees in general were listed under land, in some cases perhaps for no better reason than that they were annual income.
However, although there is no indication of the source of 10 marks payable to Roger Blomfeld of Buxton, Norfolk (where he also owned land worth 13s. 4d.), the £1. 9s. 8d. assigned to Thomas Parker, a servant of the king at Elmley Lovett, Worcs., could well have been a payment from the manor, which was a royal estate, and Parker himself did not live there.
Finally there was a complex miscellany comprising the endowments of chantries, guilds, lights, obits and so forth, the recording of which was far from perfect.
The Empingham return fails to mention the annual rent charged on a tenement of Mackworth's for the finding of a torch at the second mass of Christmas Day, together with 5s. in ready money, which by 1545, and with the consent of all interested parties, had been converted to a rent of 2s.
The income of the chantry at Clipsham was assessed at £7, which further enquiry reveals to have included a pension  of 7s. issuing from certain lands in Lincolnshire.
Chantries and their possession in Worcestershire are also recorded fitfully.
Even those entries — unquestionably the majority — which represent profits accruing from physical possession of land cannot be assumed to hold a uniform significance.
If the freeholder was an absentee the natural inference is that the property was tenanted and that the value shown represents the net rent, as indeed is made clear in several entries at Langley Marish, and implied by the uniform addition of the phrase ‘per annum’ throughout the three hundreds of Newport.
Rent is also specified in the case of John Swyft at Hene, Worcs., as well as the three co-owners of a property at Stourbridge; even more circumstantially the prior of Worcester was assigned £5. 13s. 4d. a year ‘for rente of ye farm of ye manor’ of Bredicote.
Conversely, the Coventry volume enters the rent paid by nearly every householder.
Two entries at Aylesbury, nevertheless, warn against rigid categorisation, viz. Sir Thomas Boleyn as ‘lord ther in land by ye yere xli’, and ‘My Ladye of Salisburye in Rente, xl li ’.
This latter was in fact the fee farm of the borough, which had come to be permanently assigned to the earls of Salisbury, whose titles and possessions had been conferred on Margaret Pole, daughter of the duke of Clarence.
If an owner dwelt in the township where his land was situated the logical inference is that he occupied it himself, although there was nothing to prevent him letting off part or all of it: the Langley Marish man Richard Collis features as ‘tenaunt to ye Queene, in landes the yerely rente, vs’.
A resident's assessment could also take the form of an attempt to quantify the pecuniary benefit of owner-occupation.
This was the practice in Coventry, where Henry Pysford, for example, was described as ‘dwellyng apon hys owne Frehold to the yerly value of iiijli’.
Nowhere else, however, are the meanings of residents' assessments explained.
In Rutland the tenant to a small proprietor is mentioned here and there, while larger landowners would in any case have been landlords.
The incomes of the resident incumbents of Dorney and Taplow were expressed as rents, possibly to draw attention to something out of the ordinary: leases granted by previous absentee parsons had not yet expired.
Rectories were often leased by absentee incumbents; several were so leased in Rutland, mostly by gentlemen like John Digby, who farmed Preston.
In spite of a host of imponderables it is possible to speculate on the composition of some of the smaller properties.
A few shillings might represent a messuage or cottage with, perhaps, a little land attached; alternatively it could be a small close or a croft.
At an average of 6d. per acre the fairly common assessment of 20s. might well indicate a more or  less standard yardland of some 30 — 40 (customary) acres, depending on what buildings were included, if any.
In mid-Buckinghamshire the average of 6d. or 7d. looks to have been inclusive of house and outbuildings for, according to an Aylesbury rental dated 1532, land without buildings commanded not more than 4d., examples being 3 acres for 1s., three roods for 3d., and 55 acres for £1. 2s. 10d.
Cottages — even one described as decayed — rented for 3s. 4d., houses and tenements for 6s. 8d. and 11s. 8d.
As prime business premises the Bull inn ‘with a lyttyll pyttyll’ was let for 13s. 4d., and the garden attached to it for 1s. 2d.
Land presented as having been imparked at Thornbury affords an interesting comparison: with buildings it was valued at 6d. per acre, without at 4d.
At the same time it is not altogether clear how much weight to attach to figures quoted in the charged atmosphere of a hearing by the Royal Commission in 1517.
Elsewhere in Gloucestershire they varied between 5d. and 1s. or more per acre.
In the Vale of Evesham, around Broad Marston and Weston-on-Avon, high values come as no surprise, but the variations indicated at Meon in Quinton seem instructive.
Seven farms had been enclosed in 1512 in a move that must effectively have crippled this tiny hamlet.
Four of these, all of 30–40 acres, had been allowed to go out of cultivation and the houses left desolate; owned by four different people, they were valued at from 8d. to 1s. per acre.
The remaining three farms, all owned by Sir Edward Greville, the local lord, amounted to 70 acres worth £7 a year, or 2s. per acre.
The difference was that although the three ploughs were alleged to have been laid up, ‘the houses are up to now standing and occupied’; precisely what Greville had done is obscure, but whatever it was it had undoubtedly achieved a dramatic increase in productivity without uprooting the tenants.
Very seldom can an actual assessment be translated into spatial terms.
William Baten of Long Crendon had an assessment of 3s., and bequeathed his wife 5¼ acres of arable ground.
A Cold Brayfield husbandman, William Bateman, who was assessed at 10s., left his wife ‘half my crop of 5 acres of corn this year [1526]growing on the ground’.
This does not tell us a great deal.
Assuming a three-course rotation, it implies 7 — 8 acres arable plus meadow and grazing (or common rights), making a farm of perhaps a dozen acres — bigger if ‘corn’ meant only the cereal crop.
As, however, he directed his son-in-law to apply 2s. of the yearly rent to the keeping of an obit for six years, it sounds as though his tenement was larger and that part at least of the assessment represented income from letting.
With John Ingram we are on firmer ground.
His father had left him 20 acres called ‘Margarettes Stacyes land’ in North  Marston which, with common rights added, must have been equivalent to something like 30.
Assessed at 26s. 6d., it must have been tenanted, since John did not reside there.
His younger brother Thomas, who had stayed in Marston, was assessed on goods only in spite of having inherited 3 acres called ‘Dauers’.
As a small owner-occupied parcel it could have been missed; alternatively he might have preferred to sell it, possibly to John, whose own assessment could therefore have embraced this as well.
We can only speculate.
A manor, it now seems unnecessary to reiterate, might be worth much or little, depending on a combination of factors: the size of the demensne and the efficiency of its management, whether the customary fines were certain or arbitrary, and if the latter, the vigour with which they were exploited.
Empingham netted its owner £40 a year, and up and down the kingdom could be found a good many manors worth at least as much.
In contrast, while few were quite as poor as Whitwell at a mere 22s. — not to mention the virtually notional 4s. produced by Buscot in Berkshire — a considerable number yielded no more than about £5 a year.
Certainly by the end of the sixteenth century some had been broken up; in wooded districts they might not only be small, but also bear scant resemblance to the ‘classic’ manor of arable farming areas.
Rolfehedges in the Sussex Weald ‘hath no demesnes but consisteth onely of a fewe copiholdes’— in fact four, containing 91 acres and paying a total of 15s. 8d. annually; tenure was hereditary and fines limited.
While some landowners such as the Staffords, Herberts and Seymours might have been conspicuously successful in exploiting their estates, others, including the king and many monasteries, were far less so.
Where the demesnes had been alienated and the customary dues (if any) were negligible, the lordship might be no more than nominal, as at Great Linford, Bucks., where the profits totalled only 15s. divided between the king and the earl of Shrewsbury, with 1s. payable to the honour of Berkhamsted.
In contrast the absentee landowners alone were worth £33, of which two-thirds belonged to a single leading proprietor, Lady St Leger; the inhabitants totalled nearly £8 more.
To complicate matters, figures quoted on different occasions often disagreed.
A valor of Crown lands put the rents of Great Woolstone at £6. 13s. 4d., or ten times what the survey states; at North Crawley rents were £11. 12s. 9d. compared with 2s.
Another valor gives £22. 10s. 9d. net for Buckland, compared with £42, and Olney as £72. 14s. 2½d. (£53. 0s. 6½d.) as against £67 in 1522.
Revenues were diverse and variable.
While demesne rents and, in some cases, customary fines were related to acreage and profit, copyhold rents had long ceased to reflect market  conditions, and freehold ones were notional.
Tending to follow market values, heriots might form realistic death duties, but other seigneurial perquisites, such as profits of the court, rarely added much to the total income.
COPYHOLDERS AND FARMERS
The exclusion from the survey of land held by customary tenures not only restricts attention to a minority, but seriously distorts the profile of effective ownership, for not infrequently the lord of the manor's control was more apparent than real:
And he was fain to acknowledge the tenant's insistence that the bargain was sacrosanct: ‘I cannot much saie against that; but yet I perceaue I shalbe a losser still by this bargaine, thowghe I cannot tell the reason why’ More prosaically, landownership was hedged about by varying degrees of limitation resulting from the security of customary tenures, accompanied as often as not by inelasticity of rents.
As a result, many men who in law ranked as tenants were for most practical purposes the de facio owners.
The central problem of the agrarian history of Tudor England has been the nature of the security enjoyed by copyholders.
As long ago as 1893, I.S. Leadam demonstrated that they did in fact enjoy the protection of the courts.
Rejected by Tawney (1912), this has now been fully vindicated by Dr Kerridge, who has shown that the security conferred on the copyholder by the law was not inferior to that enjoyed by the freeholder, and that it was not a subject for dispute in the courts during the sixteenth century ‘for the simple reason that the question had been settled long before’.
There was, of course, a diversity of tenures — so much so that it can never be assumed that the customs of any two manors were identical, or even similar, unless perhaps they formed part of the same feudal honour, for example the barony of Lewes in Sussex, which had evolved a set of common customs.
Nonetheless, a clear regional pattern divided eastern England, where copyhold by inheritance  prevailed, from the west, where copyholds were usually granted for three lives, occasionally fewer; grants for term of years were rare.
In most practical aspects heritable copyhold differed little from socage.
With rents normally frozen at an obsolete level, entry fines were either certain, or, if technically arbitrary at the will of the lord, required by custom to be reasonable, which amounted to much the same thing.
There was little to prevent tenants disposing of their land as though it was freehold.
In the barony of Lewes it was not unknown for heritable copyholds to be entailed, to such an extent indeed that even though the common law harboured reservations as to its legality, the judges ‘haue bene sparinge to deliuer their opinions because it concerned very many of the kinges subjectes’.
Here is clear evidence that the judiciary could and did temper the law with common sense, and did not habitually turn a blind eye to social and economic realities.
The entry for Slapton in the Buckinghamshire muster book contains the almost unique line, ‘Eliz.
Turney her copye landes in all England, xl’.
If this was anything more than a straightforward clerical error — the only parallel case being Robert Harold of Hungerford, who was stated to own a copyhold worth 8s. — it poses the question, was customary land ever assessed, whether by accident or design?
At Slapton, as on not a few other manors, a degree of confusion is understandable, for tenures were complex, embracing not only freeholds and copyholds — mostly heritable, though including a few for lives — but also what were described in a survey made in 1548 as ‘The Farme Landes’, which were probably parcels of the demesne that were let by copy of court roll, the larger ones for fifteen years, the rest at will.
In addition the manor and the mill were demised for twenty-one-year terms.
From the point of view of the lord of the manor there were five freeholders, all of whom had earlier featured in the musters, two as inhabitants of the village.
However, in addition to the lord (Barking Abbey), and the king, who received 12s. ‘in Certentye’, the muster lists a total of ten absentee and sixteen resident landholders, i.e. more than five times as many as in 1548.
Now it is not beyond the bounds of possibility that during the intervening twenty-five years the lord had bought out most of the freeholds, which, with few exceptions, must have been very small, and might just be identified with the sixteen ‘Farme Landes’.
The five surviving freeholders included the dean of Windsor, Robert Dormer of Wing, who was one of the richest landowners in the county, and a lady who was principal proprietor of the hamlet of Horton in Ivinghoe, not the kind of tenants to yield to pressure to sell out, if pressure there was: most of the small landed families of 1522 were still there as customary  tenants at the later date.
But were they really freeholders in the first place?
The Turney family provides a few clues.
Elizabeth was much the wealthiest inhabitant of Slapton, her goods being appraised at £66. 13s. 4d.
There was also a Thomas, mustered as an archer, and Malyn, who was described as a ‘mayde’.
Neither owned any property, but from the fact that Elizabeth's assessment was reduced to £30 for the second instalment of the subsidy in 1525, while Thomas and Malyn were now taxed on 20 marks apiece, it is logical to deduce that they were her children, lately come of age.
A guardian would be assessed on the stock he was holding on behalf of his wards, as was Francis Brown of Little Casterton, Rutland, in respect of his four brothers and sisters.
Land worth £2. 1s. 4d. per annum was owned by Bernard Turney, who lived at Hudnall in Edlesborough and had goods valued at 40 marks.
Until recently he must have lived at Horton in Ivinghoe, where he had £2 a year in land, for the entry there concerning him was cancelled with the gloss ‘quia in Edlesboro non computetor?’
One called John lived at Cheddington, owning land worth £1 with goods of £20, another at Linslade, assessed at £2. 6s. 8d. and £6. 13s. 4d. respectively; either could have been the owner of £1. 6s. 8d. in land at Soulbury, where William Turney also had the same income from land, together with £5 in moveables.
Taken as a whole the Turneys formed a not unimportant family of landed peasants and yeomen all living in the neighbourhood of Leighton Buzzard.
In 1548 two held land at Slapton.
William was a small farmer occupying a messuage and yardland as a copyholder in inheritance, together with half an acre of meadow and another piece of the ‘Farme Landes’ of unstated dimensions, as a tenant at will, for a total rent of 11s.
Bernard had been farming the manor on a 21-year lease since at least 1536, and paying £9. 10s. a year for it.
He was probably not the Bernard listed in 1522, for one of the copyholders, occupying half a virgate, was Joan Pace, who is described as the widow of Bernard Turney, while the lease of the manor was renewed without a break until the eighteenth century.
Thus the importance of the family's position at Slapton was growing.
Bernard was at the least reckoning an ambitious yeoman, the kind we expect to find purchasing land, like the Chibnalls of Sherington, not selling — unless, of course, he had done so in order to finance the purchase of his lease, or to stock the new and very much bigger farm; but this is pure speculation.
It would seem strange for the lord to have pursued a policy of buying up freeholds while leaving undisturbed copyholders who for the most part were virtually owners too.
The alternative solution is that the  structure of ownership had changed little since 1522, and that most land values recorded at that date represented the profits from subletting customary holdings — mostly in small parcels since the sums involved did not generally exceed ten or twelve shillings.
Exclusive of absent freeholders there were twenty-six tenants at Slapton in 1548, who are matched by thirty resident laymen in 1522, four of whom owned no property of any description.
The solitary subsidy list adds a dozen more, including two of some substance.
It is an established fact that copyholders regularly sublet their tenements either whole or in part; the manor of Rodley, Gloucs., evolved a complex framework of rules to govern it.
The extent of the practice is, however, obscured by the widespread custom that permitted tenants to make demises for up to a year — in some places as much as three — without licence from the lord of the manor.
At Wigston, as at Stoke Gifford, information derives largely from remarks made in the course of lawsuits.
Its economic importance is attested by the provision in the subsidy act for the assessment of income from customary land, conceivably in the light of knowledge gleaned from the preceding survey.
Slapton was no isolated case.
Haddenham returned forty-five landholders in 1522, of whom thirty-five were resident, yet the survey of 1555 lists only eleven freeholders.
One or two holdings were probably outside the manor.
‘Grenville's manor belonged to Edward Grenville of Wotton Underwood, and was worth £10 to him; in 1606 it may have comprised a house and 89 acres.
Another holding could have been the obscure Bigstrupp Farm, or hamlet, of which there is no record between 1346 and 1797.
Haddenham copyholders held in inheritance.
The 1555 survey contains forty-six (exclusive of men who were also freeholders), and it is reasonable to assume that something like thirty held land that was sublet in 1522, an estimate that finds a measure of confirmation in the subsidy schedule which, perhaps in deference to the provision for the taxing of income from customary holdings, mentions the landed wealth of twenty-six men who were assessed on goods.
At Cuddington, an adjacent manor belonging to the same lord, there were thirteen land assessments in 1522 compared with only two freeholders a generation later.
At Datchet and Stoke Hammond freeholders formed a majority of the tenants, but even so the number of men assessed on land was greater.
At Steeple Claydon, on the other hand, where nine land assessments compare with only three actual freeholders, there were some fifty inhabitants all told, of whom only four drew income from land.l Either custom or convention hereabouts militated against subletting, or officials in the Buckingham  hundreds ignored land that was not freehold, for far fewer owners were recorded there than in the remainder of the county.
The paucity of property-owning residents in Rutland suggests that attention there was confined strictly to freeholders, yet the situation delineated by two surveys taken in 1537 appears much more complex.
At Stretton, where there were two freeholders, most tenants held at will, and only six out eighteen can be identified in 1522.
At Woodhead (Great Casterton) all held by lease or at will, and again only seven out of twenty-six can be traced in 1522; the two non-resident freeholders were disregarded.
Clearly a high turnover in the course of fifteen years cannot be ruled out, but nonetheless subletting looks probable unless tenurial conditions discouraged long occupancies: the lease of the manor farm was dated 1534.
The situation varied greatly from manor to manor and region to region.
Most tenants at Ravenstone, Bucks.
(which overlapped into Stoke Goldington and Weston Underwood), were freeholders, a numerous class in this district, the remainder lessees for term of years or at will.
Copyhold was by inheritance in thirteen out of twenty-five Buckinghamshire manors surveyed in the reigns of Edward VI and Mary; on two there were lifeholds only, and at three either a term of years or tenure at will; six had a medley of all modes.
Around Newbury from one to three lives was the rule, while at Faringdon tenure was hereditary, reflecting perhaps the mainly pastoral economy of the district.
How far these variations affected the ability of tenants to sublet is difficult to determine in the absence of objective criteria.
That subletting was widely practised cannot be doubted, for not only in the cases examined was the number of proven freeholds relatively small, but, even in regions where they were most numerous they still formed a minority of all holdings.
The evidence is undeniably circumstantial; the rare examples of actual letting usually come in the form of licences to demise.
In West Sussex in 1547 Richard Stygant of Yapton got leave to sublet three crofts containing 9 acres for five years, as did John Standen of Nutbourne in respect of a messuage, garden and 3 acres.
At Nutbourne also Thomas Croft, upon being admitted, applied for licence to demise a cottage and 3 acres because, as a minor, he was unable to manage them personally.
Though too few to be presented as typical, examples such as these confirm that letting was apt to be of small parcels — commonly portions of tenements — for short terms.
Five licences were granted at one session at Singleton; three related to tiny parcels, while a whole virgate was let by a recently admitted tenant to his brother, presumably  the elder, the younger having inherited under the custom of borough English, and probably under age.
The fifth case belonged to a different category: a gentleman named Thomas Arundell was given leave to demise a tenement and three yardlands which he presumably treated as an investment.
The fines for these licences were uniformly trifling, implying that they were obtainable without difficulty.
Frequently it is necessary to read between the lines.
Fulco, son and heir of William Michell, surrendered by attorney his copyhold at Cradley, Worcs., to the use of Richard Smith; both were non-resident, as was William Bere, who surrendered in the same way at the next court.
Exactly half the families who took up or vacated tenements at Hagley in 1521 — 9 were absentees.
Alice and John Underwood lived thirty miles away at Stratford-on-Avon; the former was one of three co-heiresses of John Dauncer, senior, sometime bailiff of Hagley, who had all espoused men from other villages.
In 1528 Underwood, as life tenant in right of his wife, transferred the property to another non-resident, again by attorney.
All but two of the jurors attending the courts in 1522 featured in the muster book, while seven of the ten essoins were absentee tenants.
One man, John Wright, is a bit of a mystery.
In October 1522 he conveyed two freehold houses and 1 ½ virgates to a certain Thomas Hyll, but subsequently seems to have taken up residence at Hagley, for in October 1526 he was presented for operating a brothel in which his own daughter was the star attraction: prostitution, it has been suggested, was a concomitant of deferred marriage, widespread among the peasantry of the West Midlands.
This mis-demeanour did not debar Wright from election as ale-taster at the same court, and constable the following year.
Not only had most manorial demesnes been let to farm well before the beginning of the Tudor epoch, small freeholds and customary tenements were also regularly managed in the same fashion — indeed, they must frequently have been treated as investments.
The copyholder, often equated with the poor peasant farmer, might well have been every bit as much a rentier as the lord of the manor, especially if a gentleman or wealthy townsman, earning thereby the disapprobation of Robert Crowley:
Conversely, the husbandmen who bulked so large in the assessments of the 1520s, and formed the majority in later subsidies when the experiment of taxing wage earners was abandoned, were far from being exclusively freeholders and copyholders on advantageous terms.
Not only were customary tenants in the West Country, for instance, powerless to resist rising fines, it is quite feasible that everywhere the land was, to a great extent, actually cultivated by leaseholders or tenants from year to year paying an economic rent.
In 1605 at least forty out of seventy-five holdings of less than 60 acres in Arden were sublet.
It was not uncommon for one man to hold land in several different tenures and to combine the roles of tenant and landlord.
Some conception of the resultant complexity may be gained from a survey of the freeholders of Bedfont, Middx., in 1546, which records a wealth of detail that was more often than not disregarded.
There were 140 parcels, of which only forty-seven were occupied by the head tenants, the remainder being in the hands of subtenants.
In all there were thirty-eight occupiers, of whom twenty were owners as well.
Three of these had let off part of their land, and five others had rented some themselves.
One man occupied 14 acres of his own, sublet the same quantity, and rented 8½ acres from an absentee.
Two more had let all their own property, while leasing other land; one of these styled himself gentleman and was perhaps an example of a counterfeit landlord.
For Cannock, Staffs., the fortuitous provenance of the requisite documentation, notably a field book drawn up in 1554, has enabled C.J. Harrison to compute the scale of subletting.
While the number of tenements held of the manor came to fifty-two, the number of separate farms totalled seventy-three, resulting of course in an increase in the number of smaller units, both absolutely and relatively; in particular the number below 10 acres amounted to forty-five (62 per cent) compared with twenty-eight (54 per cent ) head tenancies.
Sixteen head tenants were absentees who let all their land, while thirty-seven (or half) of the cultivators occupied their entire holdings as undertenants.
Some leased part of their own tenements while renting additional land.
All told two-thirds of the land was cultivated by subtenants.
The identification of these petty landlords, though at times a tortuous process, is not impossible; their tenants are another matter.
Manorial records in general concerned themselves solely with the head tenants; the name of an undertenant might occur only incidentally, as at Long Crendon in 1535 when the vicar of Thame was presented for letting two tenements by indenture for ten years to William Byrte, from whom, in fact, he had purchased them a few years previously.
At Cannock, for once, they are on record, and here many of the smallest subtenants were entered as ‘landless’ in a survey of the manor.
The military survey of 1522, in theory at least, confined itself to ownership strictly defined.
However, a characteristic of the Worcestershire record is the attempt in some cases to estimate the value of a lease to the tenant.
Thus at Inkberrow Richard Russell's ‘lease by year’ is valued at £1. 3s. 8d., and Henry Woodwar's ‘lease for years’at £1 — clearly distinguished from his own property, which was valued separately at £1. 10s.
The precise significance of such entries is not explained.
Totalling fewer than twenty and confined to a minority of townships, they can hardly have represented more than a fraction of the real number of demises, most of which were likely to have been annual tenancies anyway.
At Warley the abbot of Halesowen's rent for the farm of the manor is entered as a separate item, but the identity of the farmer is not revealed; we may hazard the guess that he was William Hardeley, whose personal estate, amounting to £30, made him much the wealthiest man in the village.
All the same not every lessee was enumerated as a resident of the parish where the land was situated: in Kidderminster Foreign only one out of the five named was.
Could the others have been examples of the ‘leasemongers’ on whom so much opprobrium was heaped?
These entries are reminiscent of the leases mentioned in some probate inventories, the wording of which occasionally implies that they were valued on the basis of the number of years they still had to run, calculated perhaps as a proportion of the original fines.
One couched in the form of an account of the sale of the deceased's effects says, ‘Of Mr Marshall for the fine of the yeares to come of the lease of the house’
Rigid adherence to the letter of their instructions by commissioners can only have served to obscure important aspects of the structure of landholding.
The meticulously executed Rutland survey does not go beyond naming a handful of rectory farmers.
In 1517 David Cecil took a 21-year lease of land in Essendine at a rent of £18. 3s. 3d.; not being the freeholder he was not mentioned in the muster, and there is no means of telling whether his global assessment of £46 at Tinwell embodied the profit of this farm which he very possibly sublet.
On the same date the crown lordships of Preston and Uppingham were let for £49. 17s. 8d. a year to a certain Robert Symmys, who also had a lease for £10. 3s. 8½d. at Ridlington.
By 1522 there is no trace of him; the only person of that  name was a widow living at Ridlington, where she owned property assessed at 4 marks, with £10 in goods.
She could have been his mother, for he was the son of John Symmys of that parish, or even his relict, for he himself must have been dead by 1525, when the Ridlington lease was granted to the duke of Richmond.
Although the Rutland book does give everyone's landlord, for information regarding terms of tenure we are dependent on the chance provenance of supplementary evidence.
Only very occasionally is it possible to read between the lines, as in one instance at South Luffenham, where Henry Bonytt, as the sole tenant of freeholder Edward Sapcote, presumably held a lease; he also had 10s. a year in land and a subtenant called William Clark, who must mutatis mutandis have held from him by lease, if not from year to year.