

WHAT PERSONAL COMPUTER APRIL 1993
CONTACT POINTS
UPSETTING THE APPLE CART
Is there a fundamental difference between an Apple Mac user and a PC user?
It's a question that's been bothering me.
Here at What Personal Computer all the production work is done on Apple Macs, using Quark Xpress, while the writers stick to PCs.
The MACs are tightly guarded and seem to engender fierce loyalty in their users.
My idea of networking the PCs to the Apples prompted screams of horror from the Mac side —‘You're not tainting our Macs by plugging in those PCs’, they howled.
But if you really want to rub a Mac user up the wrong way, hit them will the argument that now Quark is available for the PC, the only real reason for using a Mac has disappeared.
The hardware investment needed to get a Mac capable of running Quark is phenomenal.
A 33MHz Mac QMacMac Quadra 950, for example, has an RRP of around £5,000.
On the other hand, if you wanted to buy a clone PC capable of handling Quark — say a Dell 66MHz 486 with 8Mb of RAM and a 200Mb hard disk — you're looking at just over £2,000!
I admit that, on the surface, Macs are easier to use.
But they can be incredibly frustrating when something goes wrong because it's so hard to get down to a nitty gritty level to sort out your problems.
I feel much better now I've vented my spleen on this subject.
I'm going to nip over and try to persuade our production team that it's time to move over to PCs.
Do you have any suggestions on how I can get them to budge?
I just know it won't be easy…
HOW WHAT PERSONAL COMPUTER CAN HELP YOU
What Personal Computer is divided into two sections, BUYER and USER.
So whatever your needs — whether you're looking to buy, or want to make the most out of what you've got — we have it all.
To give you useful comparisons, every machine is tested according to the same criteria:
How well it's made
How easy it is to use
Performance
Value for money
The need for expansion
After sales support
PC hardware is also put through the What Personal Computer Power Tests which assess the performance of the processor, display and hard disk.
We also test the Windows performance of the PC by using a program called WinTach, developed by Texas Instruments.
What Personal Computer is here to help you.
If you've got any problems or advice for other readers, please get in touch with us, we'd love to hear from you.
Write to F1 for Help if you've got a problem with your software, hardware or peripherals that you want sorting out.
Write to the Letters page if something about the industry really winds you up.
If you've got any programming tips or problems then first write to Fine Tuning .
Any problems running Windows write to Cracking Windows .
WHAT THE STAR RATINGS MEAN
You'll see the coveted Five Star logo on reviews of those products that we believe are stunning — the absolute best in their field.
**** Impressive —This one's tasty
*** Reasonable —Does the job
** Not so hot —Expensive for what you get
* Worthless —Major faults or way too expensive
The What Personal Computer Seal of Approval is given to the best piece of hardware or software tested in each month's Bench Test.
NEWS
FRONT END
A SAFER WAY TO BUY
Plans have gone ahead for a regulatory body for the direct sales channel.
The PC Direct Marketers' Association (PCDMA) will be officially launched by the time you read this, and consists of Dan, Mesh, Viglen, Kamco, Evesham Micros, Hi-Grade, Centerprise International and the Granville Group, which owns Time Computers and Colussus.
The PCDMA will reassure buyers that companies are financially stable, and meet high standards of service.
Companies wishing to join will have to abide by a code of conduct.
Not all have welcomed the new body.
David Bridson, marketing director of Elonex, is accusing the PCDMA of anti-competitive behaviour.
‘We're not clear about its purpose.
We reckon that they're thinking of having a component-buying cartel as well.
Elonex has no interest in it because we don't see the need for it.’
His allegations were hotly rebutted by Keith Warburton, the sales and marketing consultant who got the scheme off the ground.
‘As I understand it, a cartel is illegal because it's trying to impose a monopoly on the market.
We're attempting to give the customer some guidelines as to the quality of companies.’
His view was supported by Diran Kazandijan, Viglen's technical and marketing director.
‘This isn't a cartel.
We're in competition with one another, but we're all attempting to give our customers top quality service.’
Although the exact nature of the code of conduct is undecided, ideas being mooted include getting companies who wish to join to sign an agreement letting the Association audit their customer support lines and manufacturing processes.
Warburton is currently approaching 30 other companies, including Dell and Ambra, to see if they'd be interested in joining.
His hope is that eventually, if a member company goes into liquidation, the other members will fulfil its existing warranties, and refund money to those who've lost out.
For more information call Keith Warburton on .
The new regulatory body for the direct sales channel should cut down on the risks involved in buying a computer direct
PRICES TAKE A TUMBLE
Price cuts galore this month…
Microsoft will let you trade in your old DOS-based software for Word, Excel, PowerPoint, FoxPro or Project for £129 each.
The company has also agreed to pay for half a day's training at its own centre.
Finally, you can upgrade any of your existing Microsoft applications for just £99.
The company's plans could be scotched by WordStar, which has cut the price for WordStar 1.5 for Windows from £399 to £199.
WordStar claims this move reflects changing attitudes in the industry towards Windows software pricing.
But Microsoft insists that list prices will remain high to emphasize the value of their products.
Finally, Gold Disk has slashed the price of Professional Draw from £395 to £99.
Microsoft on 
WordStar on 
Gold Disk on  
Now's the time to snap up some bargain software
MICROSOFT'S MONEY MEETS ITS MATCH
Microsoft's attempts to take control of the US Windows-based home finance and small business accounts market has so far failed to unseat Intuit's top selling package, Quicken 6 for DOS.
And now it may have the same problem over here.
Following the launch of Microsoft's Money package in the UK, Intuit has launched Quicken for Windows.
Ian Yarlott, business unit manager for Intuit's UK arm, claims that the company spent two and a half years making sure it would be a genuine British product rather than a hastily localized version of the US product.
The program, which will cost £59.95, has been designed to make accounts easy for the non-specialist user.
Microsoft on 
Intuit on  
Quicken for Windows — a thorn in Microsoft's side
Dixons has bought the PC World chain of computer superstores after an £8.5 million takeover of Vision Technology Group.
There are currently four PC Worlds in existence.
Dixons' corporate finance director, Robert Shrager, said the company eventually hopes to have 50 PC Worlds.
But it will start slowly, with initial plans for only four new superstores this year.
Dixons on 
Microsoft has been forced to pull a data compression add-on from DOS 6 in the face of a patent infringement lawsuit from Stac, the manufacturer of Stacker 2.
While adamant that the guts of DOS 6'6 compression utility, Double Space, doesn't infringe Stac's patents, Microsoft says it's removed the MAXCompress add-on as a precautionary measure.
Microsoft on 
NEC has launched two machines to rival IBM's ValuePoint and Compaq's ProLinea ranges — the PowerMate 25MHz 486SX and 33MHz 486DX — but the prices are a bit steep.
The 25MHz model costs £1,220, and the 33MHz model will go for £1,600.
NEC on  
CANON'S NEW CROSSBREED
Canon has entered the PC arena with a machine that's half printer, half notebook.
The BN22 Bubble Jet Notebook is designed to give you portable printing without the need for cables or a power supply.
The computer has a 25MHz TI 486SLC processor, mono screen, full-size keyboard and trackball mouse.
Hard disks range from 85Mb to 180Mb and base RAM is 4Mb — expandable to 12Mb.
The real innovation is the bubble jet printer in the notebook's casing.
To print, you feed the paper through one side of the machine and the document goes under the keyboard and appears on the other side.
Print quality isn't bad either, with a respectable resolution of 360dpi at 116cps.
And the automatic sheet feeder holds up to 10 sheets of paper.
If you use the printer a lot, you'll find the battery runs down rapidly.
Claimed battery life is 4 hours, or enough for just 60 sheets of paper.
Notebooks regularly weight under 6lbs, so at 7.7lbs, the BN22 isn't the lightest portable around.
But the Canon may be a smart idea if you need to use your notebook and print on the move.
At least you won't have to cram a printer in your briefcase as well as lug a portable over your shoulder.
Canon has yet to confirm details on price (it should be around £2,000) and availability, but it has announced that the machine will only be sold through high street retailers and computer superstores.
Canon on  
The BN22.
Is it a notebook?
Is it a printer?
Yes, it's both!
TOP TEN BUZZWORDS AND ACRONYMS
Computer spods have problems with the English language.
They seem intent on confusing you as much as possible — largely because they don't what they're talking about themselves.
Here's a guide to nerd-speak:
1
OOP:Oh dear.
My hard disk has blown up and I've lost that 5,000 word report.
Real meaning: Object Orientated Programming.
2
UPS:Lassie's come home!
I've won the pools!
What was that strange pill you just gave me?
Real meaning: Uninterruptible Power Supply.
3
ODBC:How drug addicts used to die before Jesus came on the scene.
Real meaning: Open Data-base Connectivity.
4
OLE:What Spanish farmers say to their hens.
Real meaning: Object Linking and Embedding.
5
Get current:Have a Michael Bolton hairdo by sticking your finger in a socket.
Real meaning: Get up to date.
6
VIM:What mum used to clean the kitchen sink with.
Or Vendors Ignoring Microsoft.
Real meaning: Vendor Independent Messaging.
7
Non-trivial:Nelson Mandela, Ben Elton, Germaine Greer.
Real meaning: Hey, this is a heavy-duty business application we're talking about here.
8
Intelligent Cut and Paste:What happens to a toilet roll on Blue Peter.
Real meaning: Who knows?
9
Client Server:A technical support person.
Real meaning: A large computer linked to several others.
10
Networking:A group of computer experts-swapping business cards in the hope of future promotion.
Real meaning: See page 68…
AMERICAN GRAFFITI
Snippets of news and gossip from across the pond…
What springs to mind when the phrase ‘push button voting’ is idly mentioned in conversation?
No doubt instant referendums and the audience on You've Been Framed.
Still, it's set to become reality in Colorado.
State governor Romer is setting up pre-programmed computers in kiosks throughout towns in the state to poll taxpayers on how think their money should be spent.
The software works on a multiple choice basis.
The computer asks you a question via a sound card and gives you a choice of options on screen, and you respond by pressing the relevant button.
Novell, Lotus and WordPerfect are working together to offer software to computer companies in an attempt to stem the flow of cash heading Microsoft's way.
The scheme — the Software Integration Partners Program (SIPP)— aims to let computer manufacturers bundle software even more cheaply than Microsoft.
Bundled applications are pretty much what you'd expect — the usual ad-hod mix of word processors, graphics programs, E-mail software, spreadsheets and databases.
Novell will be offering NetWare Lite, DR DOS 6 and Personal NetWare free to manufacturers; Lotus will offer cc:Mail; and Word Perfect will be giving away its suite of Office applications.
Apparently, DEC, Hewlett-Packard and IBM are among the manufacturers involved in negotiations.
Unfortunately, there are no plans to bring out a similar bundle in the UK in the near future.
I guess we'll just have to wait to see how it works out in the US.
‘The box took longer to design than the board.’
Uli Seng, founder and CEO of Spea, on the company's Mirage 7 graphics board
‘If the pound falls to £1.40, I'll put £50 on our PCs.’
Michael Spiro, financial director, Elonex
‘If I was Intel and I looked at how many processors I was able to sell and the limited market for the Pentium, initially, I would probably focus on the 486 this year as well.’
Dean McCarron, US analyst.
‘Customers seem to be willing to buy as many flavours of Windows as Microsoft wants to sell, but are balking at buying more than one flavour of network.’
Jerry Tarter, publisher of US newsletter SoftLetter, on why Windows for Workgroups isn't selling like hotcakes.
‘IBM needs to make something happen with OS/2 2.1, or it's facing the possibility of being a niche product for a very long time.’
Anonymous software developer.
ICL'S NEW MACHINES TARGET BUDGET MARKET
ICL is a big company with a big ambition — to become one of the largest computer manufacturers in the world.
There's always been something missing from ICL's product lineup — a decent range of low-end machines to compete with the boxshifters and the cheaper ranges from the likes of IBM, Compaq, Elonex, Viglen and Dell.
But ICL is determined to break into this market, and with the introduction of its Zeno range, it looks likely to succeed.
The range consists of two models — a 25MHz 486SX and a 33MHz 486DX, which will be followed by more cheap machines.
Both come with 4Mb of RAM and an 85Mb hard disk.
And they're keenly priced, too, at £849 and £999 respectively.
Although the new PCs will appear under the Technology name, they'll be made in ICL's factory in Manchester.
They'll be available direct or through larger dealers.
ICL also plans to sell the machines to other manufacturers, but is won't say who.
‘We're at a very early stage of exploring this avenue,’ said a spokesperson.
The company claims the machines are aimed at the bulk-buy corporate market, schools and home buyers.
A second range of machines — TechnICL — will be pitched at small to medium size businesses wanting to set up LANs.
The range will include three slimline desktops, a subnotebook and printers.
ICL like IBM, made its money from mainframes and minicomputers.
With the decline of these markets, the company has been forced to look elsewhere or face the same fate as IBM.
Technology on 
WINDOWS SHOW SPECIAL
Over 42,000 visitors perused the 150 stands at the Windows Show held at Olympia, London, in February.
The organizer, IT Events, said audiences were almost double last year's.
At one stage, the exhibition hall got so crowded the doors had to be closed.
Major launches were thin on the ground.
But the show did give UK users a first chance to see Borland's Paradox for Windows, Lotus's Freelance Graphics 2 and its revolutionary new Windows spreadsheet, Improv (see page 97 for a full review).
There was also a chance to have a play around with Windows NT.
Launches and announcements:
•Microsoft's Windows Printing System.
This is the printer driver of the future and consists of software and a cartridge you plug into your laser printer.
Microsoft claims it speeds up printing and helps users understand the printing process.
You can even track the course of paper through your printer, thanks to an animated picture on-screen.
However, the WPS only works with the HP LaserJet II or IIIs.
It costs £129.
Microsoft on 
•The DEC AXP chip.
This is Digital Equipment's attempt to take on the Intel Pentium chip.
The company is claiming it offers five to six times the performance of a 66MHz 486DX, and is fully PC-compatible, meaning you can run your shareware utilities on it.
Microsoft has given it the thumbs up for Windows NT.
Machines using it will be in the £4,000 region, but so will Pentium-based machines to begin with.
DEC on 
•Computer Associates announced new versions of Compete, its Windows spreadsheet, the UpToDate information manager and Super-Project project management software.
The company is touting Compete 5 as its answer to Improv, but it didn't look a patch on the Lotus product.
Computer Associates on 
•Micrografx announced a bargain bundle of graphics packages.
The deal consists of Windows Draw, PhotoMagic, WIN Chart, Windows Org-Chart, 10,000 pieces of clipart and 1,000 photo images for your entertainment.
A snip at £295.
Micrografx on 
•Compaq has announced it will be pre-loading the software from the Windows Sound System onto its high-level Deskpro/i and Deskpro/m systems.
Anyone who buys one of these machines will be able to get it to read out loud the numbers on their spreadsheets.
Compaq on      
Microsoft's Windows Printing System is the printer driver of the future and it's available today
Improv for Windows, Lotus's revolutionary new spreadsheet really grabs the GUI by the throat
Micrografx is offering a bargain bundle of graphics goodies including Windows Draw
SOAPBOX
BEATTIE'S ABOUT
LIGHTWEIGHT CHAMPS
For all those who scoffed at the idea of my mastering anything complex like Excel, I'm pleased to say that I've bought my first copy, and it's nothing like as hard as I thought.
Oddly though, mine appears to be made by Fairy rather than Microsoft…
In the continuing pursuit of all things portable, I'm writing this on a Macintosh PowerBook 160.
This is the weird machine with the keyboard set back from the front to give you a place to rest your hands.
It's nice to use on the move, because of the way it's weighted (DOS notebooks tend to tip away from you) but slightly harder to use on the desktop because you have to adopt a Phantom Of The Opera keyboard technique to type properly.
Anyway, where's the PCMCIA slot?
Duck everyone — it's the year of Unix again.
Except maybe this time it really is.
Now that Novell has bought Unix from AT&T, all the incompatible versions of Unix will have to stop fighting each other and start fighting their rivals, because this version carries with it the best argument yet — a box with the word Novell on it.
For all its faults, the company knows a lot about making PCs talk to each other, and this is the best news yet for Unix wannabees.
How not to make an impression.
Turn up at the editor's office (not her Gailness, I assure you), demonstrate a new Windows software package to do with health and safety, go away.
Phone back a couple of hours later to report that ooh-er, there seems to have been a copy of the Forms virus on the disk you were using, thus leaving said Editor's hard disk neither healthy nor safe.
File under ‘Watch Out, there's a plonker about.’
Remember when IBM allowed people to purchase beta versions of OS/2 in order to evaluate it?
In the US Microsoft and NEC have followed suit and bundled a beta version of Windows NT.
At least their customers don't have to pay for it.
Well, not directly that is.
Following on from last month, It seems that GeoWorks has been talking to Casio and Tandy about putting its graphical front-end on hand-held computers, slated to compete with the so-far non-existent Apple Newton.
I expect these so-called personal digital assistants to dribble slowly out this year.
I also expect the companies selling them to finally give up and start calling them computers — which, of course, is what they are.
By the time you read this, the IBM PC's 10th birthday will have been and gone.
Back then I used a 256Kb PC with twin floppy disk drives, mono display and a 10Mb Western Digital FileCard.
That same machine is now my nephew's home computer.
I now use a Dan 486/50 with 16Mb of memory, a 420Mb hard disk drive, and a 17-inch colour monitor.
As writer back then, I used my IBM PC for word processing, the same as I do now.
It's just that the software I think I need to use has grown — as it always will — to fill the available space.
Bravo Toshiba for finally introducing a sensible notebook mouse.
It looks like the Microsoft Ballpoint, but under the skin it's different.
For example, it solves one of the remaining headaches of using a mouse on a notebook — that is , if you need to stop temporarily, perhaps to switch trains, then carry on walking.
Problem: you can put the notebook into Suspend mode, but it won't fit in the carrying case unless you take the mouse off, the notebook won't recognise the mouse when you plug it back in.
Toshiba has solved this problem by introducing a mouse and software that's clever enough to handle this and other demands as well.
For instance, if you load Windows, but forget to take the mouse out of the bag, you can just clip the Toshiba mouse on and, as if by magic, a cursor appears.
And note also that it clips on; there's no cable.
Clever stuff.
Watch out for the Zenith Z-Lite.
When this 3 or 4lb skinny machine finally ships, it'll bring a new meaning to the term ‘sub-notebook’.
It's stuffed with innovative features, and has a screen that will be hard to beat.
And its design is so far ahead of the others (Dell, Gateway, Zeos et al ) that the style-conscious should be beating a path to Zenith's door.
All that remains is for Zenith to make a stuff of this one as well.
Despite the avalanche of PIM products on the market, I still haven't found one that makes printing decent calendars easy, not even the great Lotus Organiser.
Enter Calendar Creator from Power Up!
Software.
This produces beautiful, presentation-quality calendars by day, week, month or year.
It's a bit slow printing out, but the results are outstanding.
What a fag though, to have to use one program to keep your diary and then another to print it out…
Rob Beattie Rob Beattie had the great vision and foresight to launch What Personal Computer back in 1989.
And, despite numerous subtle hints — like transferring the entire What Personal Computer offices to another building without telling him — he still won't leave us alone.
If you'd like to communicate with Rob, send your letters to the What Personal Computer office — you'll find our new address at the front of the magazine.
HOW CAN IT BE A MOUSE IF IT AIN'T GOT A TAIL?
BEYOND OUR KEN
TAKE NOTE
You can't hear me gnashing my teeth, but that's what I'm doing.
Why?
Because I'm writing this column on my Texas TravelMate notebook computer.
What?
Has KK gone off his TT?
Uh, no, not exactly.
Indeed, I worship the little devil, but only as a travelling companion.
You see, at the moment I have no desktop machine and not full-sized keyboard to hammer.
In the February issue I warned you that I was going to bite the bullet and buy a real computer.
At the moment, my new machine is being assembled and my old Hyundai is being dismantled for recyclable parts.
So all I have is the TI 3000 WinSX, driving my ole monitor.
This is itself not a bad thing.
Texas's on-board video circuitry is excellent for vanilla VGA and for all my eyes tell me, I could be hacking away at the Hyundai.
But don't let anyone tell you that a notebook PC, however powerful, is any substitute for a desktop machine, unless you own a docking station and a full-sized keyboard.
As I can't afford a docking station and the notebook won't accept an external keyboard, I'm left with the A4-sized platform as my only writing tool.
This just isn't the same as using a notebook in transit.
For example, I just returned from an exhibition and wrote a 6,000 word report in one burst in my hotel room.
No sweat.
The Texas was ideal.
But now I'm looking at 15 articles totalling 20,000 words which I must deliver within the next six days.
And my speed on the TI's little keys isn't the same as when I use my beloved Cherry keyboard.
So, here are my tips: if you're buying a notebook computer to use as you sole system, make sure that there's a docking station available for it and that either the machine or the docking station accepts a real keyboard.
Otherwise you'll grow to hate your notebook, which would be unfortunate because portable computing may be the most effective way yet to exploit time spent away from the office.
When I went to ADM (the dealer) to drop off my old computer, Gary, one of the guys there, waved a leaflet under my nose.
His grin suggested that he thought I'd trade in my TI notebook for some new whizz-bang offering.
So I scanned the leaflet.
Whoa — it's British!
It's powerful!
It's A4-sized!
It's bargain-priced!
My pulse started racing.
The machine had upgradeable this ‘n’ that and it was under £1,500.
But it weighed 8oz more than the Texas, it had a battery life roughly the same length as a Madonna video and it had no inverted T for the cursors.
Shock, horror!
I pointed this out to Gary, a normal human being who has no reason to think like a journalist.
Then I mention that the only people who really use notebooks to the full, who worry about weight and battery life, are journalists because most other notebook users tend to take them from the car to an office or home, often using the mains and probably doing little more than running a spreadsheet.
If they take their work home with them, maybe they'll do a few hours' work off the mains.
But scribblers like me and Rob on the page before this?
We spend loads of time each day tapping keys.
And cursors are used too often to be compromised by a daft layout.
So who's telling the designing what to include and what to configure?
What banana brain thinks that a curved edge to the lid is more important than removing an excess 200g?
Who says that a removable hard drive deserves as much attention as battery life?
And I so wanted to buy British…
I've got a new toy — it's wonderful.
It wastes time and serves no useful purpose, but I love it.
Called Wired For Sound Pro, it contains hundreds of silly noises.
My computer can now sound like a flushing toilet, call me ‘big boy’, break wind, burst into laughter, tell me what program I've entered, giggle like my two-year-old and more.
Trouble is, my current computer has less in the way of sound reproduction capabilities than your average telephone, so I won't get to exploit all of WFSP's tricks until I take delivery of the Stonker with the Soundblaster.
And then there's the freebie which came with WFSP…
Is frustration a normal part of computerdom, when you have a shiny new program and no way to use it?
Must be.
I feel lousy when I have some terrific game to review and there's no space on my hard drive for it.
Anyway, I don't have sufficient video muscle to run Mini Matinee, which is described as a ‘full-motion video screen saver’.
I only wish the box's artwork didn't make it seem like such a hoot.
Aah, the torture.
The disk just sitting there, its mysteries yet to be unravelled…
Watch the screen, er…space.
Alternatively, turn to the mini review on page 108.
Ken Kessler is an ordinary person trying to get by in the information age.
He's a writer by trade, specializing in hi-fi and music journalism.
Like so many of us, he thought computers would make his job much easier, and — like so many of us — he found that it just wasn't that simple…
This month Ken is feeling rather cramped, due to his temporary computer set-up.
Anybody who wants to communicate with Ken should send their letters to the What Personal Computer office — you'll find our new address at the front of the magazine.
‘THE LOVE THAT TRIUMPHED BY NEK SEKSLER CHAPTER 1 ‘AS THE GAME OF POLO FINISHED…
LETTERS…
IF YOU FEEL STRONGLY ABOUT WHAT'S GOING ON IN THE COMPUTER INDUSTRY, DON'T BOTTLE IT UP, LET EVERYONE KNOW!
WRITE TO US AT OUR NEW ADDRESS, AT THE FRONT OF THE MAGAZINE.
NO SUPPORT FROM OLYMPIC
I'd like to draw you attention to the thoroughly unacceptable behaviour of Olympic Technology.
Their advertising was persuasive and their prices attractive, on the surface, so I fell for it like so many others.
I bought a 33MHz 486 last July and although there were small variations in the specification and the supporting documentation was scrappy, the machine worked OK.
My problems began some days later when I wanted to change the video mode.
I noticed that the drivers supplied weren't compatible with Windows 3.1.
It took five months of telephone calls, letters and faxes to Dr Neil Sontag, before a replacement set arrived, only to find that they were the same, unusable version.
I can assure you that there is no significant after sales support provided by Olympic Technology, neither is there any on-site maintenance; their much-trumpeted service is a myth.
Anyone considering a purchase from this company should make sure they get cast-iron guarantees concerning specification and after sales support or, like me and many others to my knowledge, they will wish that they had not been taken in by misleading advertising and had paid a little more money to an established British company.
STAR LETTER
I bought an Amstrad PCW when they first came on the market, and sterling service it has given me.
However, the time came when I wanted something bigger and better.
Unfortunately, I hadn't really kept up with technology and Windows, as far as I was concerned, was something behind the curtains.
Nevertheless, one Saturday morning, I went into the locals Dixon store.
‘Can you come back during the week when it's less busy?’ asked the assistant.
But because I work during the week, Saturday is the only time I have, apart from my lunch hour.
I didn't go back.
Instead, I bought a number of computer magazines which I read into the small hours each night.
However, these only served to intensify the feeling that I was out of my depth.
So I began to ask questions, lots of them.
Answers ranged from ‘Buy the best’ to ‘Why do you want a machine with such a large memory?’or ‘Whatever are you going to do with your PC when you've bought it?’
Justifying my needs was difficult, but with retirement looming up it seemed like a good idea.
Buying the best was more difficult — I just couldn't afford it.
Armed with the knowledge gleaned from reading matter and known computer buffs I travelled far and wide.
Very few people seemed to take me seriously.
One shop assistant approached my very bored husband rather than me.
Are women not expected to be interested in computing?
In one store the manager tried to sell me what I thought was obsolete software.
In yet another shop, a lad told me that he hoped to obtain a more powerful model in about a month but he didn't have any literature I could look at.
In a third shop I was moderately interested in one particular model until the assistant gave me a global price for a computer, printer and so on.
When I asked him to itemize the price, so I could add it up for myself, the total came to over £100 less than he'd quoted for the bundle.
This gave me no confidence and I left.
Perhaps I'd be better buying mail order, I thought!
Then I read about firms which had folded, locking up their customers' money.
I did phone one company whose machine had a good write-up but the purchase price had increased by £50 and there was a five week delay.
Yet another dilemma was that a number of firms bundled software packages with their computers.
Unfortunately, the right software was never sold with the right computer.
The I saw an advert for the machine I wanted, with the software I wanted, but it cost too much.
In the end, I bought an Ambra Hurdla 386SX fro the office supplies firm, Wildings — and I'm wrestling with Microsoft Works — simply because the assistants in the shop were so helpful.
This may not be the right criteria to apply when buying a computer, but what else is an illiterate to do?
You've sure had a hard time, Yvonne; let's hope a copy of PowerPoint will cheer you up.
Buying a PC by mail order can be traumatic, especially at a time when companies are going bust with alarming regularity.
But there are some reputable firms out there; Dell and Elonex immediately spring to mind.
It sounds like you've ended up with a reasonable machine in the end, though, and Works is a good integrated software package.
MICROSOFT POWERPOINT FOR WINDOWS
Yvonne wins a copy of PowerPoint For Windows, Microsoft's excellent business graphics program.
PowerPoint combines a word processor and spell checker with drawing and presentation tools, so you can easily combine text, graphics and charts.
Yvonne finally plumped for an Ambra Hurdla
HAVE FAITH IN AMSTRAD
I note with some disappointment the fall from grace of Amstrad, the once mighty and now increasingly humble British electronics company.
Now I realize that Amstrad in general and Alan Sugar in particular isn't everybody's hero, but their realistically priced 1512 pulled me, and doubtless thousands of others, into the previously elitist and prohibitively expensive world of computing.
Unfortunately, the company seems to have lost its way of late — even Mr Sugar is on record as saying he has little idea of where the next 1512 is going to come from.
Personally, I find that hard to believe, but if it is truly the case then perhaps he might consider the following:
1
A light, portable, dedicated word processor with a good keyboard, readable 10-line screen and simple file transfer facility.
Output must be fully compatible with all the major word processors and battery life should be measured in days rather than hours.
Price must be less than £200.
2
A desktop computer capable of running Windows and its associated software for less than £450.
3
An easily upgradeable desktop computer that will still be on technology's front like in three years time.
Must cost less than £1,000.
4
A simple 286-based notebook with mono VGA screen and a 20Mb hard disk for less than £350.
An over-ambitious wish list?
For the sake of Amstrad and the British computing industry I sincerely hope not.
Go for it Mr Sugar.
We're sure Alan Sugar will be pleased to know he still has one fan left, and we have to admit that he did play a great part in bringing PCs to the masses.
But we reckon Mr Sugar must have read your mind already — hasn't he already produced one of the machines on your wish list?
The Amstrad NC100 notepad — pictured below with Christopher Biggins, don't ask us why — bears a distinct resemblance to the first item on your list.
Christopher Biggins, master of subtlety, and an equally tasteful Amstrad NC100.
If it's good enough for CB, it's good enough for us!
DEAR DENNIS…
I'm very cross at the way you dismissed PagePlus as ‘extraordinarily unbalanced, primitive and even quirky’(February issue).
You include it in a review with two other products, both of which are almost three times the price.
Then you evaluate it against your own particular conception of what makes a DTP package.
Presumably your past experience has been mainly with the heavyweights; the Venturas and CorelDRAWs of this world.
PagePlus makes no pretension of addressing this market nor, I suspect, are its users vaguely interested in paying upwards of £600 to produce a church flyer, instruction manual, letterhead or newssheet.
You failed miserably to mention the excellent selection of scalable fonts that come with PagePlus.
You also overlooked the ability of PagePlus to utilize any other fonts already in use in Windows.
You criticized the 150dpi clip-art and missed the import filters which allow you to use almost any other artwork of your choice in a wide variety of formats.
I don't suppose you even called Serif in order to assess the telephone support available, always enthusiastic and knowledgeable, even on Saturdays.
Altogether a very naff and jaundiced review which was misleading, unhelpful and totally unrepresentative of PagePlus and What Personal Computer.
Dennis Jarrett replies: A somewhat splenetic reaction, Mr Francis, to be sure.
But did you actually read the whole review?
It could well be that I have prejudices about what makes a decent DTP system, but I tried to outline and then to justify them as part of the review.
For instance, I admit freely that I would expect my desktop publisher to be able to flow and reflow copy from one column to another automatically; that seems a basic requirement for general-purpose DTP and PagePlus can't do it.
What's wrong with ‘quirky’ as a judgement?
We're talking about a low-end package that includes full Pantone colour support.
Not many users of PageMaker or Ventura or Quark need or get that much sophistication.
And what about the second toolbar which floats about the screen, cluttering things up without actually removing the need to go to the command menu for many functions?
You don't call that idiosyncratic?
Your own prejudices are summarized in your letter — low price, scalable fonts, low-resolution clip-art, telephone support.
Well, it was a comparative review: there's better clip-art and more capable font handling among PagePlus's competitors.
I grant you the low price and the willing telephone support, but then I was impressed by the mix of good points and bad in this package.
PagePlus is cheap, and for single-page work like flyers, headed stationary and ads it represents good value — in my judgement, which is based on my experience as well as my prejudices.
The Bench Test covered a much wider range of work, though, not just the newsletter design we explained in the article.
If you care to try building that newsletter with PagePlus, however, you might see why I came to those conclusions.
Incidentally, I've been using a better copy of PagePlus 2 (due to be launched in March) and I have to say I'm very impressed.
It addresses all my criticisms notably the text reflow problem.
You get better graphics editing, style sheets, and professional DTP features like baseline shifting, kerning and tracking.
The ChangeBar is improved, and so amazingly is the colour output.
And the thing is still dead easy to use — and cheap.
If Serif had shared your opinion about PagePlus 1.2, you might wonder why they bothered to produce a version 2 at all.
PS: CorelDRAW isn't a DTP package and there were five other products covered in the review.
We picked £200 as a price that could be regarded as low; it's hardly our fault that some vendors chose to compete with PagePlus on factors others than price.
MEGAdisk
FREE!
WHAT PERSONAL COMPUTER
BEAT THE BUDGET WITH MONEY SMITH FOR WINDOWS
3D MENU — Get your hard disk organised
PHANTASM — Great virtual reality game
TO START, TYPE WHATPC AND PRESS ENTER
Issue 45
CHECKED FOR KNOWN VIRUSES
This month's Mega Disk features a trio of top programs for you to enjoy.
Organize your accounts in time for the Budget and Money Smith For Windows — ideal for both business and home use; create your own friendly front-end with the easy to use 3D Menu, and then step into Phantasm for a slice of virtual reality!
Tony Hetherington, Disk Editor
GETTING STARTED
Insert the Mega Disk into your floppy drive, log on to your floppy drive and type in WHATPC.
This will load up the main menu, as created by 3DMenu.
From here you can choose from the three program options.
Just highlight the program you want, press Enter and follow the on-screen instructions.
5.25-INCH DISKS
If you want to get hold of the Mega Disk in 5.25-inch format, all you have to do is send a cheque or postal order for £1 (made payable to PC Wise Ltd) to: PC Wise Ltd, Dowlais Top Business Park, Dowlais, Merthyr Tydfil, Mid Glamorgan CF48 2YY.
Disk one contains Phantasm and 3DMenu.
To get details on how to install the programs, type in WHATPC at your floppy drive prompt.
Disk two contains Money Smith.
To run MoneySmith run the SETUP.EXE file from Windows File Manager.
IMPORTANT!
The disk has been checked for viruses by the UK Computer Virus Certification Centre, based at the University of Bradford.
But if your machine is already infected, it can infect any disk you put into it,unless you copy protect the disk first.
You should always put a copy protect tab (or slide the lock on 3.5-inch disks) on the Mega Disk.
Make sure you have recent copies of all vital data on your PC.
If your disk is physically damaged, send it to PC Wise for a replacement: PC Wise Ltd, Dowlais Top Business Park, Dowlais,.
What Personal Computer cannot take any responsibility for money sent to authors whose programs appear on the Mega Disk.
SHAREWARE
Although many of the programs on the Mega Disk are free, some are shareware.
So please register the shareware software if you find it useful.
Registration brings many benefits to users, including full instructions, upgrades and helpline support.
You'll find all the details about how to register each program in its document files.
MONEY SMITH — HOME & BUSINESS ACCOUNTING FOR WINDOWS
Money Smith is ideal for those who want more than cheque book program but who don't want to foot the bill for a multi-module accounting system.
It's great for keeping tabs on where your money is coming from and going to and for tracking investments.
Money Smith is packed with features, including an integrated financial calculator, investment tracking, budgeting, cheque printing, account category grouping, international currency support and automatic recurring transactions.
Most of the functions you need are easy to get at via the toolbar at the top of the screen, including Open, Save and Print commands.
Pull-down menus and point-and-click icons ensure that you can get to where you want to in a hurry and the unique help icon means there's always help at hand.
Click on the ‘?’ icon and the cursor is replaced by a question mark.
Move this to  the screen or window that you need help with and the program automatically loads the Windows help file at the appropriate place!
So set up your accounts now, graph that overdraft and calculate those mortgage repayments.
THE NITTY GRITTY
To run Money Smith you'll need Windows 3 or 3.1, a mouse and 1Mb of free hard disk space.
To install the program simply load Windows File Manager and open up the SMITH directory.
Double click on the SET.EXE file.
This set-up program will prompt you for the directory and hard disk where you want to install Money Smith, then sit back while the program does the rest.
REGISTRATION
Money Smith comes from ,.
For a registration fee of just £19.97 you get a professionally printed manual, 90-day user support, a 90-day money-back guarantee and news of future releases and discounts.
3DMENU — ORGANIZE YOUR DISKS
3DMENU is a simply but effective menuing system that's ideal for organizing your disk collection as well as forming a friendly front-end to access all your programs.
Typing WHATPC to load the Mega Disk boots up 3DMenu.
From here you can look at the menu that has been set up and the vast flexibility that 3DMenu offers.
Each menu can have up to nine selections and each selection can lead to a sub-menu of another nine options.
For each option you can allocate a small help comment that you view by pressing the ‘?’ key, and set up the commands to load a program.
When you've entered the drive, directory and load command, this is converted into a batch file that can be saved and edited using any text editor.
This is what makes 3DMenu so useful and simple to operate.
Some menu programs can suffer from memory clashes when they use memory that an application needs to run.
However, 3DMenu gets round this problem by exiting the 3DMenu program, running the batch file that loads in the application program and then loading 3DMenu back in again.
THE NITTY GRITTY
The best way to learn how to use 3DMenu is to use it!
Try creating a 3DMenu on your hard disk, copy all the 3DMenu files over to it and then start adding and altering options to customize it for your system.
The following commands give you an example of how to copy the 3DMenu files into a directory called 3DMenu on your hard  disk.
Starting from the DOS prompt, type in the following three commands:
MD 3DMENU (creates a 3DMenu directory on your hard disk!)
CD 3DMENU (moves you into the 3DMenu directory)
COPY A: \3DMENU \*.; * (copies the files from the 3DMenu directory on the floppy disk to the 3DMenu directory on your hard disk).
3DMENU FILES:
MNU — This is the file that contains all of the menu options.
If this file is missing, a new file and menu is created.
HLP — These are help files and are numbered to correspond to the menu options.
Press the? key to bring up the help file for a currently selected menu option.
BAT — If a menu option is to load a program (such as Phantasm on the Mega Disk) then the file details that you input are turned into a batch file.
These are numbered to correspond to the menu options and can be edited by a text editor or word processor.
3DMENU COMMANDS:
Press Ctrl to pop-up the help menu
Press? to call up the help file
Press F10 to change menu
Press Esc+X or Ctrl+X to quit.
REGISTRATION
3DMenu is part of Eurosoft, so please send your registration fee of £20 to Hillsfoots Data Services, Mains House .
PHANTASM — A VIRTUAL REALITY ADVENTURE
Virtual reality has made the headlines in the video arcades as the entertainment medium of the future.
By wearing a special headset and a pair of sensor gloves you can enter and explore a computer-generated universe.
Now, with the help of the month's Mega Disk, you can enter this universe from the comfort of your armchair.
Phantasm is a virtual reality adventure game.
The reality you have to recreate is an underground network of caverns and caves that you must delve into in order to complete your quest.
Check out a parchment that you'll find near the cavern entrance — this contains the aim of your quest, which changes every time you play.
You've got to complete the quest before you can escape from the cavern and fight off the legions of monsters that are determined to gobble you up.
The keyboard controls can take a little time to get used to — here's a list of the main commands:
Use the arrow keys on the numeric keypad to move around
Use the down arrow to kneel to pick up objects
Press F1 to throw objects in your left hand
Press F2 to use the object in your left hand (or to throw a punch)
Press F3 to use the object in your right hand
Press F4 to throw the object in your right hand
Press F10 to pop-up the on-line help
If you want to speak, type a message into the screen display and then press Enter
Press Esc to view the Options menu.
THE NITTY GRITTY
Phantasm will play direct from the Mega Disk and should run on most PCs.
Just start the program from 3DMenu or type in PHANTD once you're in the PHANT directory.
To install the program onto your hard disk simply copy all the files from the PHANT directory.
Here's an example of how to copy the Phantasm files into a directory called Phantasm on your hard disk, starting from the DOS prompt, type in the following three commands:
MD PHANTASM (this creates a directory called Phantasm on your hard disk)
CD PHANTASM (this moves you into the Phantasm directory)
COPY A: \PHANT \*.; * (this will copy the files from the Phant directory on the Mega Disk to the Phantasm directory on your hard disk).
REGISTRATION
Registration is available from  .
For £25 you get the full version of the game, featuring full mouse support; intelligent, communicating, non-playing characters; more perplexing puzzles; brutish monsters and a vital Save and Restore feature.
EARN UP TO £800
That's right.
We'll pay anything from £25 for a small utility, to £800 for a fully featured program if we include it on our disk.
It doesn't matter what you send us, as long as it's your own work, it's an original idea (or an enhancement of an old one) and you've tested it thoroughly.
It may take up to eight weeks to evaluate your program, so please be patient.
You'll only hear from us if we want your program, or if you've enclosed return postage and a suitable mailer for returning disks we're unable to use.
Send your entries to the following address:.
BUYER
REVIEWS
DELL 320SLi NOTEBOOK
DELLightful
DELL HAS COME UP TRUMPS AGAIN, THIS TIME WITH A NOTEBOOK COMPUTER THAT'S CHOC-A-BLOC WITH USEFUL FEATURES.
AND WHAT'S MORE, AS PHIL EVANSDISCOVERED, IT WON'T LEAVE YOU WITH ARMS LIKE A GORILLA'S.
The latest notebook computer from Dell, the 320SLi, is small, compact and light, weighing just 3.6lb.
It's smaller than a sheet of A4 paper, and is only 1.25 inches thick, so it's an ideal travelling companion.
I've just completed a 16,000 mile trip around the US, carrying a Dell notebook that weighed about 7lb, and believe me, the difference is impressive.
The 320SLi is based on the low-power 20MHz Intel 386SL processor.
This is similar to the 386SX, but with the added benefit of built-in power-saving features.
The review model came with 4Mb of RAM and an 80Mb hard disk.
However, the machine has 2Mb of RAM as standard — which can be expanded to 10Mb — and versions with 60Mb and 120Mb hard drives are available.
ON THE CARDS
One of the most notable features of the 320SLi is it PCMCIA (Personal Computer Memory Card International Association) slot.
PCMCIA is a standard, agreed between a large number of companies, which allows a range of devices to be built onto a card about the size of a credit card.
Three PCMCIA cards came with the loan machine: a data and fax modem, an Ethernet network interface card and a 5Mb Flash RAM card.
The flash RAM card can be used as a type of electronic hard disk, consisting of non-volatile RAM chips which retain their memory when you turn the power off.
In use, the card acts just like a disk drive but it responds instantaneously.
Some believe that Flash RAM will replace hard disks in years to come, but at the moment it's far too expensive.
Cards containing up to 20Mb of Flash RAM are available, but their price is likely to top £1,000.
The most useful of the PCMCIA cards is the fax and data modem.
The card I had was a 2,400bps (bits per second) data modem, and a 9,600bps Class 2 fax modem.
Some of the latest cards on the market combine 14,400bps fax, data and cellular modems.
PCMCIA cards add fantastic versatility to a machine and have virtually no weight penalty.
The three cards which came with the review machine weigh just 1oz in total.
Another nice touch is that you can swop from one PCMCIA card to another by simply sliding them in and out of the slot.
The machine doesn't even need to be switched off; it monitors the card slot and adjusts to the new card automatically.
In theory, it takes a few seconds for the machine to recognize a new card, but in practice it worked so fast that when I inserted the Flash RAM card and typed ‘dir A’, the machine responded instantly with a list of the card's contents.
The floppy drive supplied with the 320SLi is an external unit, which weighs about 10oz.
The obvious advantage of this is that you only need to lug it around if you're going to use it, so there's another saving on weight.
As most notebook users transfer data to and from their desktop machines using a serial cable and a file transfer package such as LapLink, this isn't likely to cause much inconvenience.
When you do want to use the floppy drive it connects to the printer port via a cable which is about 10 inches long.
The machine uses a previously unused pin on the parallel port to detect whether the connected device is a floppy drive or a printer, and automatically configures the port accordingly.
POWER MANAGEMENT
One of the most important features of any portable computer is battery life.
The 320SLi is powered by a small nickel metal hydroxide rechargeable battery; a mains adaptor and battery charger unit is also supplied.
Dell claims that the battery will last for three hours in normal use, without taking advantage of any of the power-saving features.
During the three weeks I used the machine I had no cause to doubt this.
Some Dell notebooks let you change the battery with the machine still switched on, by making sure there's enough standby power to run the machine for about a minute.
In the interests of reducing weight, this feature has been omitted from the 320SLi, so you have to power the machine down before changing the battery.
I found that the power-management features could more than double the battery life.
Bear in mind, however, that most of the work I was doing was word processing, which allows the hard disk to be powered down for most of the time.
Actual battery life will vary quite a lot according to what the machine is used for.
The 320SLi's power-management features include the ability to configure the BIOS to automatically shut parts of the machine down after specified internals of inactivity.
This includes the serial and parallel ports, the hard drive, the screen and finally, the whole machine.
There's also a Smart CPU mode, which turns the processor speed down from 20MHz to 2.5MHz after 12 seconds of inactivity, and turns it back up when you begin to use it.
It's also possible to manually lock the speed down to 10MHz, 5MHz or 2.5MHz in the BIOS.
The weakest point of the 320SLi is its screen.
This is a 9.5inch LCD panel which is lit solely by reflected light, and is therefore better in stronger light conditions.
Despite the 12:1 contrast ratio claimed for the screen, my initial impression was that it was poor.
Careful adjustment of the screen angle and contrast to suit the prevailing light is critical.
Once I got used to the screen, I found that it was OK to use, but I suspect that it wouldn't suit everybody.
The screen is capable of 64 shades of grey, and resolutions of up to 640 by 480 pixels.
A port is provided on the back of the machine to drive an external VGA monitor.
The Dell 320SLi Notebook is generally an excellent machine, but if you're thinking of buying one, check out the screen first to make sure you can live with it.
THE VERDICT
The only fault I could find with this machine was that the indicator lights for Caps, Num and Scroll Lock didn't work.
The review machine was, however, a prototype.
It's always difficult to come to a conclusion about portable computers because people buy them for different reasons.
To some, a portable is a machine that only gets moved between the office and home, and is used with a proper external monitor and keyboard in both locations.
Others use the machine while travelling, and some people even see their portable as a status symbol, along with their cellular phone and a well-worn Filofax.
In my opinion, the Dell 320SLi is a very skilful compromise machine, aimed firmly at travellers.
It's perfectly adequate for most purposes, and is incredibly small and light.
Anyone who wants a portable to carry around and use for hours at a time on batteries, will love the 320SLi as much as I did.
INTEGRATED PACKAGES
3 OF A KIND
INTEGRATED PACKAGES COMBINE MOST PEOPLE'S BASIC NEEDS — A SPREADSHEET, DATABASE AND WORD PROCESSOR — AND OFTEN CHUCK IN SOME EXTRA GIZMOS FOR A KNOCKDOWN PRICE.
ANDREW JOHNSON CHECKS OUT THREE PACKAGES TO SEE IF THEY OFFER QUALITY AS WELL AS QUANTITY.
Hands up those who want a spreadsheet, word processor and database on their computer.
Most of us, I guess.
Sadly, unless you're lucky enough to have a machine with a powerful processor and a large hard disk and you've got wads of cash for each of these £300-plus packages, then it seems your dreams will come to nothing.
Never mind; there is an alternative.
Integrated packages cobble several applications into one program.
The staple fare of such packages is a spreadsheet, word processor and database, but many offer other titbits, like communications or graphics software.
Of course, these applications aren't the fully-featured, everything-but-the-kitchen-sink affairs you get with something like Word for Windows or Quattro Pro.
Don't expect masses of templates, fonts and DTP pretensions from the word processor in PFS:WindowWorks, for example.
The databases these packages sport are the simple flat-file kind, with none of the relational gizmos found in Access or Paradox for Windows.
That said, an integrated package will fulfil the basic needs of most people, except for the most demanding power user, and hog only a minuscule fraction of your hard disk compared to the 15Mb monsters now in fashion.
They're cheaper and easier to learn because they have fewer features.
Well, that's the theory, anyway.
WHAT TO LOOK OUT FOR?
A good integrated package need to meet the main criteria.
First, and most obviously, it must be well integrated.
All the modules must fit together and complement each other.
It's nice if you can stick a table into your word processor from your  spreadsheet.
It's nicer still if the table changes in the word processor when you make an alteration to your original spreadsheet.
Want a chart based on spreadsheet date in the same document?
All the better if that changes when you alter the date in your spreadsheet.
Another point to look out for is how easy it is to merge names and addresses from the database into a document.
Second, each application in the package should have enough features.
Just because you're buying a collection of cut-down versions of more powerful applications, there's no reason why you shouldn't expect it ti meet most of your basic needs.
It's a pain if you can't add a graphic to a document because your word processor can't deal with a bitmap picture, or if your spreadsheet is incapable of handling simple formulae.
Often people will move up to a better word processor or spreadsheet, but will want to carry on using the other applications in their integrated package.
Integrated packages tend to be bought by newcomers to computing who want to carry out some basic tasks.
So the third factor I'll be considering in this review is ease of use.
THE TRIO
The three integrated packages under the microscope are: a beta copy of ClarisWorks from Apple Mac specialist Claris; PFS:WindowWorks from Spinnaker Software; and Complete Works from a small British company called Top Level.
All these packages have the three core applications, plus a handful of additional features.
ClarisWorks also includes a vector graphics and a communications package.
PFS:WindowWorks gives you communication software, an address book and a label program.
Complete Works has a novel forms designer as well as a communications package.
THE TEST
I've decided to test our valiant trio by trying to set up a; circular to plastic surgeons.
What inspired this?
Well, seeing my mugshot plastered all over February's scanner review didn't help!
The aim is to tell the surgeons about a survey which shows the most popular forms of cosmetic surgery.
To illustrate this I want to put a bar chart and a table from the spreadsheet in my word-processed document.
The table and chart should change as I alter the data in my spreadsheet (the firm that did the survey keeps changing its mind over the results) and I'd like to import or draw a graphic to make the page as eye-catching as possible.
In this imaginary scenario, I've been lucky enough to get a mailing list of some of the country's top plastic surgeons.
I'd like to import this list into a database, and then mailmerge the names and addresses at the top of my document.
On the spreadsheet front, I want to calculate how much money was spent by respondents to the survey and how it breaks down, in percentage terms, into each category of surgery.
This calls for setting up some simple formulae.
OK, the test is artificial, but it's a good way to have a look at the main things an integrated package should do, and it answers some of the questions you should ask before you buy.
CLARISWORKS
This is the most frustrating package of the three, not because it's bad — it's choc-a-bloc with good ideas — but because it's a beta version, and, of course, many of the features are incomplete.
If Claris makes a good job of finishing the program, it could be a real contender for Microsoft's crown in the integrated package stakes.
What gives the program the potential to be so good is its unique approach to integration.
Want to set up a table in document?
There's no need to go through the usual rigmarole of minimizing your word processor application, opening a spreadsheet, typing in the data and then copying and pasting it back into the word processor.
Instead, ClarisWorks has a toolbar running down the side of the screen, containing special icons which allow you to call up a worksheet or a graphic.
Simply drag to define the area where you'd like your table to go, tap in the numbers, and voila , there's your table.
If, later on, you want to change the data in the table, you can do it in your document without having to go near the original spreadsheet.
You can also change the way it looks by removing the grids, for example.
Click on the spreadsheet icon in the toolbar, and the menu bar at the top changes to let you use the spreadsheet features.
Then, to add a chart linked to the table into your document, just choose Add Chart from the Options menu, tell the package where you want it, and away you go.
The same principles apply to the graphics package.
You can spice up a document by drawing straight onto it.
And there's a neat feature that Claris has taken from its Apple software — you can tear off the colour and pattern palettes from the drawing icons and put them anywhere on-screen.
The main toolbar is consistent in all Claris's applications.
so you can type text or add a spreadsheet to a picture, or stick a silly cartoon into a spreadsheet.
The table and chart in this picture have been created using the toolbar on the left-hand side of the screen
One idea Claris has taken from its Apple Mac software is the tear-off sheets, which cut down on mouse movement
There are some limitations with this approach, which may be resolved by the time the final product hits the streets.
When you add a table or graphic to your document, the text doesn't run around it, but goes underneath.
This means you have to do a lot of shuffling to achieve a respectable-looking document.
Claris's state of unreadiness manifests itself when it comes to the selection of features.
Many of the   features you'd find in other packages simply aren't there.
For example, I couldn't past data from an existing spreadsheet into a document and maintain the link; the toolbar across the top of the word processor has no buttons for bold or italic text; and it was impossible to run a banner headline across the top of a page divided into columns.
The graphics program was only capable of importing graphics in Claris's own PC-based CWK and Apple Mac formats.
But the company says the final copy will cater for most major graphics formats, including BMP, PIF and TIFF.
The database is also obviously incomplete, being little more than a list of fields for you to fill in.
However, it was capable of importing the test date in DIF files, and the mailmerge was fine.
The most complete application was the spreadsheet.
So concerned is Claris in making this easy to use that it has included 100 pre-programmed formulae.
There was no manual with the beta version, but the package as a whole is a cinch to use.
As it's a beta version, it's tricky to give ClarisWorks a star rating.
It could be outstanding; it contains some brilliant ideas and promises to be one of the most intuitive packages to appear this year.
But a lot depends on how good a job Claris does when it comes to adding the final gloss.
COMPLETE WORKS
Complete Works is a British product from Top Level software, based in Bath.
And, perhaps to keep in line with the rest of British technology, it's a bit of mixed bag — some of the ideas and features it contains are really good, but the implementation isn't so hot.
It's also the only package in this review being pitched directly at small businesses.
The first thing that strikes you about this program is Top Level's evident desire to make it as friendly as possible.
Open up one of the applications and you're greeted with the usual menu bar at the top of the screen, beneath which is a nice toolbar, complete with colourful icons.
This really helps you get to grips with the program, which is vital, given that it's aimed at first timers and the documentation isn't the best in the world.
The big difference between Complete Works and the other packages reviewed here is the appearance of entry forms and form designer icons when you first load up.
These are designed to make database entry easy.
You don't need to mess around with defining fields in this program — you can customize one of the pre-programmed default forms and print it out.
Alternatively, you can use the form designer to create your own form from scratch.
This is easy to use — all the boxes and fields are assigned simply by dragging the cursor over the screen — a good idea.
Complete Works also scores well in terms of the range of features each application has to offer.
All the basics you need from a word processor, spreadsheet and database are there.
In the word processor, for example, you can bold and italicise text simply by using the button bar at the top of the screen.
Unfortunately there's no way to arrange text into columns without fiddling around with the tab settings.
The word processor also has a couple of bonus features — a thesaurus and spell checker based on the concise versions from Harper Collins.
The spreadsheet and simple flat-file database also have all the usual functions you'd expect.
One of the problems with Complete Works is that it doesn't integrate very well with other applications.
For example, the database only supports Top Level's own format and comma-separated data.
The company claims this is because it's designed for first-time users, but it's a nuisance if you want to import a mailing list from another package.
Bizarrely, the word processor only supports WordStar and ASCII formats.
Still, for plonking a graphic into your document, Complete Works supports a good range of formats, including BMP, TIF, TGA and PCX.
Sadly, you can't create charts from within the spreadsheet, as you can with ClarisWorks.
Instead, you have to open the separate chart-making program and paste, or link, data from your spreadsheet into this program — time-consuming to say the least.
In theory, you should be able to stick the chart into a document, while maintaining links to the original spreadsheet, but I couldn't make it work.
The table test for Complete Works: on the right, the original spreadsheet; on the left, the WP document
I also had a few problems trying to create a link between a table in a document and the spreadsheet the data came from.
Complete Works has some unique features; a form designer on the left, and form entry on the right
Complete Works is designed to make life easy for those who want to integrate.
The word processing toolbar, for example, includes icons to link a table from a spreadsheet or merge a few names and addresses from the database.
Despite the problems with linking the various  applications together, a great deal of thought has gone into making Complete Works an easy to use, fully-featured package.
It's well worth considering, especially if the links — which still need a bit of tweaking — aren't your primary concern, and the idea of the form designer appeals to you.
PFS:WINDOWWORKS
If ClarisWorks is in the process of being born and Complete Works shows signs of coming out of a difficult adolescence, then PFS:WindowWorks is the old timer of the three.
Version 2 is the latest upgrade to this long-standing package.
Setting up links between spreadsheet, chart and database presented few problems, and it's the only package of the trio that fully supports Object Linking and Embedding (OLE).
It lacks the friendly toolbar icons of Complete Works, and charts appear in boring shades of grey, but unless you've got a colour printer, who cares?
The package has some neat additional features too, not least of which is the customizable toolbar.
Linking items in WindowWorks is convoluted compared to ClarisWorks.
For example, to link a table into a document, you have to copy data from your spreadsheet, and then choose the Paste Link option from the word processor's Edit menu.
The changes only take effect once you move back into the word processor.
It's a bit longwinded, but no more so than Complete Works and it works well.
The applications in WindowWorks have plenty of features.
The word processor is the best one reviewed here; the only one which lets you divide a page into columns and run text around an imported table, chart or graphic.
The spreadsheet is fine, including a range of pre-programmed formulae, covering most of what you'll need.
Unfortunately, the database is disappointing.
Like Top Level, Spinnaker obviously feels that importing data isn't that important for first-time users, so the only alternative format supported is comma-separated data.
But its interface was easy to use; it had clear ways of defining fields.
WindowWorks follows the most roundabout route for merging data from the database into a document.
Still, it sorted data out quickly enough.
A nice touch is that when you make a new entry in the database, it's saved automatically.
In addition to the main three applications the package has an address book, a labelling program and a comms program.
The address book is an odd addition, given that the database is perfectly adequate for  fulfilling this need.
You can't merge addresses from the address book into a document, nor can you input data from the database into it.
And the labelling software, although well thought out, isn't exactly unique.
The big advantage WindowWorks has over the competition is that it supports OLE.
This means if you get a specialist word processor or spreadsheet later on, you'll be able to create links between WindowWorks and your new application — provided, of course, it supports OLE.
This gives you far more flexibility.
The best word processor of the group; a table is linked to the spreadsheet with text flowing smoothly around it
Tiled windows, all linked to each other.
Change data in the spreadsheet and the WP table and chart change too
THE VERDICT
First over the line is WindowWorks, but only by a nose.
Complete Works is, in some ways, easier to use and incorporates some nice ideas, but the problems I had trying to link charts, table and spreadsheets together let it down in the end.
The beta copy of ClarisWorks is very promising but it's too early to award it a best buy rosette.
If Claris finishes off the program properly, then it'll certainly give WindowWorks a run for its money.
But WindowWorks comes out on top.
It has the best links between applications, and Spinnaker has obviously given some thought to the future needs of users by including OLE support.
BUDGET FAX MODEMS
fax PACKS
EVERYONE LOVES THE FRIENDLY FAX — DESPITE HAVING COMPLEX INNARDS IT'S EASY TO USE.
BUT FAX MACHINES HAVE PLENTY OF SHORTCOMINGS, AS ANYONE WHO'S RECEIVED AN INDECIPHERABLE SCRAP OF PAPER WILL TELL YOU.
ROGER GANNTAKES A LOOK AT FOUR FAX MODEMS, WHICH OVERCOME SOME OF THESE NIGGLES.
The technology that underlies the humble fax — scanning, high speed comms, sophisticated error correction and printing — is fairly complex.
Yet most people would agree that the fax machine has got to be one of life's easier contraptions to master.
I guess it's the combination of those two essential everyday objects, the phone and the photocopier, that makes fax machines so user-friendly.
You dial the destination, feed the paper in, press the Start button and, hey presto, a facsimile copy comes out the other end.
What could be simpler?
Compare that with sending, say, a one-page E-mail message on CIX.
You've got to load your word processor, prepare your message, save it in plain text, load your comms package, dial your E-mail service, log on, go the mail section, upload your prepared text and mail it to your recipient.
And that's if there are no hitches.
This method is cumbersome, slow and there are far too many opportunities for gremlins to interfere.
It's little wonder that the fax machine is so popular and that dial-up E-mail is such a rare species.
But is the fax perfect?
Hands up all those who've received an indecipherable fax, where the print quality is appalling, where a staple has scratched the scanner, where the original document got stuck as it passed through the sending machine.
I certainly have.
But this just shouldn't happen.
Most modern faxes are Group III compliant (see the Jargon Busters on page 56) and are able to print out at 200dpi, which isn't too far off laser printer quality.
While the fax machine is easy to use, it's less attractive when it comes to mass faxing, as someone has to feed each document in and dial the destination.
You can get programmable fax machines, but they're very expensive, so it's not easy to take advantage of cheap phone rates either.
NO MORE MESS!
The fax modem offers an affordable solution to many of the conventional fax machine's shortcomings.
The problem of poor image quality can be tracked down to the scanning stage.
Eliminate this and quality rockets.
Enter the fax modem — it has no scanning stage; instead it generates the fax image electronically from data that an application thinks it is printing.
This results in a clean, undistorted image which looks like it's come out of a laser printer rather than a fax machine.
Mass faxing is also a doddle, as is scheduling.
Most fax software lets you define a group of names in the fax phone book, and send them the same fax at the click of a button.
You could tell the system to delay sending the faxes until, say midnight, when fax lines are likely to be quiet as well as cheap.
You could even send personalized faxes by doing a mailmerge — this is quite possible if you use Windows and programs like Word for Windows, Packrat, a PIM and WinFax Pro, which can share a common name and address book.
You don't need to use expensive paper with a fax modem either; just print out your faxes from your normal printer.
And you can cut down on waste by viewing your faxes on-screen first, and skipping over junk faxes and cover sheets.
Omitting the scanning side means you can only fax things you can produce on a PC's screen — you couldn't easily add your signature to a letter, for instance.
But you could fax yourself a copy of your signature or letterhead, save the incoming fax to disk, and incorporate it into outgoing faxes without too much hassle.
In any event, most decent fax software supports proper scanners for these tasks.
Fitting a fax modem means leaving your PC on all the time.
This isn't as bad as it seems; switching a PC on and off does it more harm than leaving it powered up.
If you're worried about electricity bills, turn the monitor off at the end of the day.
Another irritation with the current crop of fax modems is that the two parts of the modem don't cooperate with one another.
If you leave the fax software running, waiting to answer incoming calls, you can't use the data modem as well.
You have to close the fax software and reinitialize the modem, and vice versa.
It would be nice if you could leave the fax modem in Auto-answer mode and it could distinguish between a fax machine or another modem that was calling it, and act appropriately.
THE STATE OF PLAY
The first dedicated fax card I used was the JTFax, which was purely a fax card and lacked a data modem.
It operated at 4,800bps and only came with DOS software, including a huge TSR program, over 200Kb in size.
Such a TSR is necessary so that incoming faxes can be received while you're using your computer.
It could capture plain text (ASCII) output but it also came with a WordPerfect 5 ‘printer’ driver.
You'd select the JTFax when you wanted to print something; the document would be sent to it, then it would prompt you for a name and phone number.
Modern fax technology has made rapid progress.
The software is now considerably more sophisticated.
Life is a little easier under DOS, the TSRs have shrunk in size but are still pretty big, and while it does work under DOS, elegance isn't a word that springs to mind.
Under Windows, things are completely different.
All windows fax software makes use of a special printer driver.
No matter what 's on-screen — a Paintbrush BMP file, an Ami Pro 3 document or a Quattro Pro worksheet — if you can print it, you can fax it.
Once again, having selected the fax as the print device, you ‘print’ to it and it asks you for the address details.
Unlike DOS, Windows lets you get on with something else while sending or receiving a fax.
The success of Windows has legitimized faxing from a PC — it's cheap, it's easy and has many advantages over the conventional fax machine.
THE CONTENDERS
The four fax modems on test are:
UltraFAX software plus Ascom AM2496F modem WordStar on  Price: £248 until April, £299 thereafter.
Dataflex Design Pocket Gem with Fax plus Transend Professional software Dataflex Design on  Price: £199
Pace MicroLin fx plus WinFax Lite and DosFax Lite software Pace Micro Communications on  Price: £299
SmartLink Pocket Faxmodem 24 plus FaxNow!
Lite software Smartlink Communications on  Price £249
ULTRAFAX PLUS ASCOM
WordStar's contribution to the fax modem market is a rather topsy-turvy bundle.
Until the end of April, it's binding an Ascom AM2496F modem with its UltraFAX software for a bargain £248.
The Ascom is a plain box with no LEDs, not even a power indicator.
It has a 25-pin serial port at one end and a captive phone lead plus power inlet socket at the other.
Unlike the other modems I looked at, the Ascom isn't battery-powered and must be run off a mains transformer.
UltraFAX was by far the best bundled fax software of the packages reviewed
It has a reasonable specification.
It's a Group 3 fax machine, supporting the Class 2 interface protocol, so it'll work with any decent fax software.
On the data side it's a run-of-the-mill 2,400bps modem which supports the following standards: V21 (300bps), V22 (1,200bps), V22bis (2,400bps) and V23 (1200/75bps).
On the fax side it adheres to V27ter and V29.
It also has MNP4/-V42 error correction and MNP5/V42bis data compression, so it could, in theory, give 9,600 bps throughput.
I used the Ascom with a variety of comms packages and it behaved OK.
One minor niggle; the modem has a REN (Ringer Equivalence Number) value of 3 while many rivals have a REN value of 1.
Most phone lines can only take a total REN of 4, so a phone plus the Ascom would be the limit.
What sets this bundle aside from the herd is the software used to drive it.
Zsoft's UltraFAX is a fully featured Windows faxing package.
Like WinFax Pro 3, it can perform OCR on incoming faxes, enhance ‘dirty’ faxes, annotate faxes with drawing utility and support scanners.
It can also do one or two things that WinFax Pro can't.
If the    fax at the other end is a fax modem running UntraFAX, you can send files to the remote machine.
UltraFAX was the best of the bundled packages I looked at, by a long way, and made using the Ascom AM2496F a joy.
DATAFLEX DESIGN POCKET GEM WITH FAX
The Gem range is Dataflex's latest array of low-cost modems, designed to compete with cheap non-BABT approved modems (all the ones I looked at were BABT approved).
It's available in card form and as an external portable version.
Both versions cost the same, and the fax option adds just £40 to the price.
It has to be the smallest modem I've seen, measuring just 81 by 60 by 25mm.
At one end there's a DB-25 serial port, on one side an RJ-11 American phone socket and on the other a power inlet.
A PP-3 9-volt long life battery is included but there's no mains transformer; the only other accessory is a 9 to 25-pin serial adaptor.
No serial lead is included as the Pocket is small and light enough to be attached directly to a PC's serial port.
Some modems, such as the US Robotics Worldport range, can draw power from the serial port itself, and so can this, drawing 9 volts down pin 9.
On my 486 clone it wouldn't work without the battery, so I guess my cheapo serial port wasn't up to scratch.
Battery life is stated is stated to be around 9 hours but I found to be less than this.
The modem has no on/off switch and relies on detecting the state of the DTR line (pin 20) to see if it's required.
It has a REN of 1, which is good.
The modem supports V21, V22 and V22bis, that is 300bps, 1,200bps and 2,400bps.
It also has V42 error correction and V42bis/MNP5 data compression, so it's possible to get a 2,400 bps modem handling data at four times that rate.
On the fax side, it can handle V27ter and V29 — while it can send at 9,600bps, it can only receive faxes at 4,800bps.
For software purposes it is a Group III fax modem with a Class 1 protocol interface.
For several years Dataflex Design has bundled Transend comms software with its modems.
This has evolved into Transend Professional which now has fax support.
This is a DOS-based application but while the comms side is very capable, the fax side is a bit of a let-down.
Transend Pro is getting a bit long in the tooth and is easily eclipsed on the fax side by the ‘lite’ versions of fax software bundled with the other modems I looked at.
I found it bewildering to use.
I liked the Pocket Gem, it worked flawlessly, but I preferred using it with WinFax Pro, which even lists the relatively new Gem in its list of supported modems.
Also, at £199, it was the cheapest package reviewed.
I'd be tempted to spend a little more and buy the Delrina package or UltraFAX.
Transend Professional is a solid comms program but it's no match for the latest Window-based fax software
PACE MICROLIN FX
The Microlin fx, like the Gem, is available as an internal card modem (at £249) and as a small external modem (at £299).
This impressive-looking pocket modem most resembles a Walkman.
The business end has a hinged flap which conceals all the sockets, a DB-25 serial port, an RJ-11 phone socket and a power inlet.
Unusually, this modem has three LEDs: power/DTR active; transmit/receive; and low battery warning.
It's truly portable, and can be run from a PP-3 9-volt battery, but for longer sessions ti would be wise to hook up the supplied mains transformer.
Claimed battery life is a minimum of three hours, which is fairly accurate.
It can't draw power from the serial port, however.
The modem has the usual quad speed support — V21, V22, V22bis and V23 — not forgetting the usual data compression and error correction.
In fax mode it behaves like a Group III fax machine, with, unusually, a Class 1 and Class 2 protocol interface.
Another novelty is the secure access feature, which prompts you for a password when it auto-answers an incoming data.
Call.
It can then call you back at a specified number.
On the software scene, this was the only one that came with both DOS and Windows fax software — WinFax Lite and DOSFax Lite.
These are cut-down versions of their full-blown siblings but still have lots to offer.
DOSFax Lite relies on two TSRs to give you the fax functions, but these consume a huge 63Kb and 10Kb of RAM each.
You then configure your DOS app to print to an Epson dot-matrix printer, turn Fax Capture on, start printing and turn Fax Capture off.
You can now send the captured file as a fax.
The full-blown version of DOSFax also offers an HP LaserJet printer option, which widens the choice of fonts.
DOSFax Lite won't let you export received faxes to other file formats but it does operate in the background and runs a scheduler.
The two programs have similar interfaces and can share common files, like phone books.
All in all, more than adequate for simple faxing needs.
The Microfilm fx's documentation must be singled out for praise, it was the clearest and most comprehensive.
At £299, the Microfilm fx is the dearest of the four modems I looked at.
It worked as well as the others, the 9,600bps Fax Receive mode offering a useful speed boost over the Pocket Gem.
I liked the software bundle and the modem is well constructed and well specified.
If the price had been £50 lower it would have earned a fourth star.
DOSFax Lite is a close copy of its Windows counterpart, but it's not quite as easy to use
FaxNow!
Lite is rather too ‘lite’— many of the features have been stripped out and it has a very plain interface
SMARTLINK POCKET FAXMODEM 24
Hailing from the Antipodes, the SmartLink Pocket Faxmodem 24 is the baby of the range which spans from an internal card fax modem up to a desktop modem.
Its casing measures just 107 by 75 by 32mm, with a DB-25 serial port at one    end and an RJ-11 and a power inlet at the other.
This modem can be battery-powered — a slide-off cover hides a PP-3 battery.
Unusually, it had a rechargeable NiCad battery fitted.
This modem also supports the V22 and V22bis speeds plus the V27ter and V29 fax standards.
It behaved like a Group III fax machine.
It doesn't have error correction or data compression and for £249, I'd expect these features to be standard.
The bundled software is FaxNow!
Lite from Iconographic Systems.
This Windows program is a cut-down version of FaxNow! and is specifically tailored for SmartLink modems.
It's my least favourite Windows fax program, trailing behind WinFax Lite and UltraFAX.
It works along the same lines, using a printer driver to control the sending and a fax manager to look after the receiving.
FaxNow! makes poor use of the Windows graphical environment and it's awkward to use as there's no phone book — all phone numbers have to be entered manually.
Neither is there any group broadcasting facility.
However, using any Windows fax software is easy and straightforward.
FaxNow!
Lite works OK, given its limitations.
(You can upgrade to the full version for £79, but I'd go for WinFax Pro 3 for another £20.)
It was also accompanied by Autosoft, a DOS comms package specializing in accessing videotex services, such as Prestel.
However, I didn't look at this piece of software.
This package retails for a pound more than the Ascom/UltraFAX bundle, yet both modem and software are inferior.
Given the choice, I'd pocket the pound and buy the better bundle.
THE VERDICT
All four modems delivered great-looking faxes as well as doubling as useful data modems.
The most expensive, the Pace Microlin fx, had the best spec.
The cheapest, the Pocket Gem, worked well but was let down by the software.
The SmartLink Pocket Modem 24 was fine, but at £249 I'd expect better software than FaxNow!
I wasn't particularly enamoured of the Ascom but the UltraFAX software is excellent, it's easy to use and wins my seal of approval.
A caveat though — if all the modems had been bundled with UltraFAX or WinFax Pro, I'd have chosen the cheapest.
WINFAX PRO 3
WHAT PERSONAL COMPUTER FIVE STAR REVIEW
It became apparent at a very early stage of this review that the fax software was as important (if not more so) as the fax modem itself.
For some time now a Canadian company, Delrina Technology, has been producing without doubt the best fax software, for both DOS and Windows.
Late last year it released version 3 of WinFax Pro, which improved on an already good package.
It has few serious rivals, the closest being ZSoft's UltraFAX, which has a feature list as long and impressive as WinFax Pro 3.
Not only is WinFax Pro the bee's knees, it isn't expensive — you can get it for under £99.
The DOS version is even cheaper — it goes for a very reasonable £59.
Running as a Windows app, WinFax Pro operates in the same way as all other Windows fax packages.
It has a fax manager loaded, to answer incoming faxes, and a fax printer driver to handle faxes you want to send.
It has been much improved over the previous version and humanized, to boot.
When you send a fax, a dialogue box pops up telling you in plain English just what is going on, while an animated fax machine, complete with a document feeding through it, shows you how far things have got.
Some of the new features are really rather special.
The most interesting new facility is Optical Character Recognition (OCR), which means that a fax can be converted from what is essentially a picture into text, which can then be read into your word processor.
It's a memory-hungry process and I found it worked best on machines with more than 4Mb of RAM.
But on clean faxes, using typefaces such as Courier or Times Roman, its ‘hit’ rate was pretty good.
Fax quality can be tuned — if someone sends you a grotty fax you can apply the ‘fax vacuum’ to suck up all the specks and marks.
You can also mark up received faxes with special annotation and drawing tools.
This is handy for, say, approving artwork, so that when you return the fax with comments and corrections, no loss of quality is experienced.
The phone book has abandoned its proprietary format and is now in industry-standard dBase format, which makes it a doddle to get data in and out of.
Document management is also very comprehensive, letting you apply billing codes to clients, for example, or compress received faxes in archives, to save disk space.
Another neat idea is the library of cover pages.
These range from the staid and formal to the humorous.
WinFax Lite is a popular bundling choice with modem makers — the Pace Microlin fx modem comes with both DOS and Windows versions.
Naturally, it lacks some of the features found in the Pro version, but remains one of the better freebie fax packages around.
It supports background working, scheduled fax sending and group faxing options.
And you can upgrade to the full-blown version through Delrina. ***** 
On the right: the OCR in action, having a stab at an ‘odd’ font, with some success
JARGON BUSTERS
V24:The CCITT specification for the humble serial port, aka the RS-232 port.
All modems hook up to a serial port.
While PCs can have 9-pin and/or 25-pin serial ports, you should only find 25-pin ports on external modems — internal modems fit into an expansion slot and don't require a physical serial port socket.
V22bis:This CCITT specification defines a line speed on the PSTN (Public Switched Telephone Network).
Most fax modems run no faster than this (2400bps)
V42 and MNP4:Error correction protocols, used to ensure that what is received is exactly the same as what was transmitted
V42bis:Not a line speed, but data compression.
When used it can quadruple data throughput, making a 2,400bps modem look like a 9,600bps one, making it faster and cheaper in terms of phone time.
Some comms packages incorporate it in software but usually it's found in the modem itself.
V42bis can't compress something that has already been compressed.
If you send a compressed ZIP file down the wire, V42bis will actually slow things down as it struggles to compress the incompressible
MNP5:A form of data compression.
It preceded V42 and became incorporated in V42bis
V21 Channel 2:This is 300bps fax operation.
It's rare, as most modern faxes operate at 9,600bps
V27ter:Another CCITT standard, this time defining fax send operation at 9,600bps or 7,200bps
V17:The ultimate in fax speeds, running at 14,400bps.
You'll need a V17 fax at the other end, but these are pretty rare.
V29:Yet another CCITT standard for faxing, controlling fax send and receive at 4,800bps/2,400bps
Class 1:Also known as EIA 578, it defines a class of fax modem and the software control interface.
It extends the basic Hayes-compatible ‘AT’ command set to control a fax modem at a primitive level.
As a result the fax protocol, which is rather like a file transfer protocol, such as ZMODEM, has to be implemented the comms software driving the modem.
Class II:Class 2 modems are a little smarter and have much the fax protocol implemented in hardware inside the modem thus relieving the comms software of some of the chores.
This is more of an aid to the software developer; the end user won't notice any difference.
Fax modems are sill a bit finicky and despite these standards, a small question mark always hangs over whether your fax modem will work with a given package.
For instance, the Worldport 2496 is a Class 2 fax modem yet several packages give it special treatment
Group I/II/III:A trio of classifications applicable to all fax machines, not just fax modems.
Groups I and II were analogue transmissions and were very slow.
Group III is a digital standard running at 9,600bps at a resolution of 200dpi.
The future will bring very high speed faxing in the shape of Group IV, which will use ISDN (Integrated Services Digital Network) lines to blast faxes out at 64,000bps
CAS:The Communicating Software Specification standard isn't confined to fax modems — it's mostly used to network a single fax card.
It isn't widely supported among modem makers, one example is the pricey Intel SatisFAXtion card.
BUYING with Confidence
FIRST THINGS FIRST
Before you even think about spending money on a PC, printer, or software, you should be clear about what you want the product to do.
If you just want to do some basic word processing, for example, you really don't need a 50MHz 486DX with 8Mb or RAM and a 200Mb hard disk.
But if you want to run Windows, then the minimum specification we'd recommend is a 20MHz 386SX with 4Mb of RAM and a 50Mb hard disk.
It's difficult to work out the exact specification you'll need, so check our software reviews, where we recommend the hardware you'll need to run each package.
Here are a few additional pointers:
Windows applications love memory.
The more you can afford, the better, but look for a realistic minimum of 4Mb.
Windows also puts heavy demands on the video and the processor because of all those complex screen redraws.
Database applications are heavy on the hard disk, so a fast cached hard disk will really make a difference when you're sorting and searching for files.
Spreadsheet calculations really test the processor.
If you do a lot of decimal point calculations, you'll certainly feel the benefit of having a maths coprocessor installed.
Once you've decided on a specification, create a shortlist of machines and check out the reviews.
Use our Best Buys tables, starting on page 150, to compare the products we've reviewed over the past year.
The next step is to read the ads.
Our mock ad on page 67 shows you what to look for.
IF THINGS GO HORRIBLY WRONG
Any purchase of goods involves a contract.
It doesn't have to be written down; if you agree to buy something over the phone you've still formed a contract with the supplier.
The goods you buy are covered by the Sale of Goods Act (1979) which boils down to three important points:
The goods should be of merchantable quality
The goods should be fit for the purpose they were bought for
The goods should be as described by the retailer
If any of these conditions is broken, then so is the contract between you and the supplier.
IF THE GOODS ARE FAULTY
If the goods have a serious fault — for example, if the hard disk is dead — make your complaint immediately by phone and then in writing.
You're entitled to a full refund because the goods aren't of merchantable quality.
But remember — if you accept a repair you may lose your right to a full refund later.
IF YOUR SUPPLIER GOES BUST
If your dealer goes under and you have maintenance insurance on your warranty, the insurance company will pass the contract to a third party maintenance company.
If the supplier goes bust and you have a third party maintenance contract, the maintenance company should still honour your warranty, as the agreement is between you and the maintenance company and not with the supplier.
If the company has cashed your cheque and not dispatched the goods, but has gone into liquidation, then your best bet is to call the official liquidators and get yourself on the list of creditors.
Unfortunately, the company's bank, the tax man and employees come first; you will be an unsecured creditor.
If you bought the goods in response to an advertisement in this magazine you may be eligible for compensation under the Mail Order Protection Scheme.
THE SAFEST WAY TO PAY
By far the safest way to pay for mail order goods is by credit card.
Under the Consumer Credit Act the credit card company is also liable for any breach of contract.
But there are certain conditions to this — provided the credit card belongs to an individual rather than a company and the mount involved is between £100 and £30,000 (including VAT) then you should be covered.
If you can't use a credit card the next best options are a crossed cheque, a postal order, or try to persuade the company to take cash on delivery, once you've had time to inspect the goods, of course.
USEFUL CONTACTS
For complaints about an advertisement contact:
For complaints about a specific company contact:
Trading Standards Department
Consumer Advice Centre
Citizens Advice Bureaux
Local contact details for these should be available from your town hall.
Consumers Association:
Office of Fair Trading: Field House,
THE MAIL ORDER PROTECTION SCHEME
If you order goods as a private individual from mail order advertisements in this magazine and pay by post in advance of delivery, What Personal Computer will consider you for compensation if the advertiser should become subject to bankruptcy or go into liquidation.
These conditions only hold as long as You have not received the goods or had your money returned
You write to the publisher of What Personal Computer, summarizing the situation not later than three months from the official on sale date of the publication (please retain proof of payment).
Please do not wait until the last moment to inform us.
When you write, we'll tell you how to claim and what evidence is required.
We guarantee to meet claims from readers made in accordance with the above procedure as soon as possible after the advertiser has become subject to bankruptcy proceedings, or has gone into liquidation, up to a limit of £16,000 per annum for any one advertiser so affected, and up to £48,000 in respect of all advertisers.
This guarantee covers only advance payment sent in direct response to an advertisement in this magazine (not, for example, payment in response to catalogues and so on , received as a result of answering such advertisements).
All display advertisements are covered but only boxed trader classified advertisements are included.
Advertisements as loose inserts are not covered.
READING THE ADS
Advertising is governed by a self-regulating system overseen by the Advertising Standards Authority (ASA).
The BCAP is the code by which all advertisers must comply — they don't, you can complain to the ASA, which will assess the case.
There were 850 complaints about computer and software advertising in 1992, so it pays to be able to read between the lines of an advert.
Here's what to look out for:
Software should state the minimum specification needed to run it.
Make sure that the software is compatible with the other applications you want to run and that it's the genuine UK version, not a grey import.
Carefully examine any photographs, especially those of PCs.
Ads shouldn't show machines performing beyond their capabilities.
Prices should refer to the pictures in the ad — so if the monitor has a colour screen, a colour screen is what you should get.
Some companies advertise kit, knowing that stocks are low and may not last for the full life of the ad.
This can result in buyers waiting months for the goods to arrive or being fobbed off with a different machine.
All refunds under money-back guarantees should be made within the time stated on the ad.
You should be able to get hold of the full terms of any guarantee the supplier is offering.
If maintenance is mentioned, details of terms and limitations should also be provided by the supplier.
According to the ASA, any goods requested by mail order should be delivered within 28 days of the order being received.
If the goods don't arrive within 28 days or by a specified delivery date, you have the right to cancel the order.
Look for details on delivery charges, they should be clearly marked on all ads.
Unless it's a special offer, companies aren't obliged to stick to the prices they display in their ads.
Also, the VAT component of any price should be clearly marked.
Look for the full name and address on the ad, so you can trace the company, especially if it asks for money in advance.
Be wary of PO Box numbers.
Read the small print; you never know what you may find.
For example, it may say 72-hour delivery guaranteed but only if you pay an extra £25.
A common inclusion is E&OE (Errors and Omissions Excepted).
This means that if there's a mistake in the ad, the advertiser isn't obliged to sell at the mistaken price.
A FEW MORE USEFUL TIPS
When ordering goods be specific.
For example, if it's a PC, state details, like the hard disk and RAM size you want.
Get hold of all the information about after sales service and warranty deals.
Make it clear what you want the hardware or software to do and get an assurance, preferably in writing, that it will fulfil your needs.
Check if the product can be expanded or upgraded in the future.
If you do any of this work yourself, will it void your warranty?
Make sure that the advertised price includes all the bits you need to make it work.
Make sure you confirm the price of each item, and that the goods are in stock.
Confirm delivery date and make sure you send written confirmation of all the details.
Try to make it part of the contract that the supplier shouldn't cash the cheque or debit your credit card account until the goods are sent.
Keep copies of all correspondence, the original ad, and document any word of mouth agreements.
Once you're ready to place your order, use the What Personal Computer Order Form on the tear-out card.
Using the card brings many benefits.
First, it means you've got everything in writing in case things get nasty.
Second, if the worst comes to the worst and your supplier goes into liquidation or becomes subject to bankruptcy proceedings you may get compensation through the Mail Order Protection Scheme (MOPS).
The order form will help us to trace your purchase and link it on to an ad in What Personal Computer.
Make sure that you confirm the price of each item and the delivery date on the order form.
Keep copies of all correspondence.
BENCH TEST
NETWORK READY
the NET effect
NETWORKS CAN BE SCARIER THAN HANNIBAL LECTER.
BUT, AS DENNIS JARRETT EXPLAINS, THE BENEFITS OUTWEIGH THE FEARS THEY INSPIRE.
There are many good reasons for putting in a network, but a couple are compelling: resource sharing and specific functionality.
Sorry about the jargon, but you'll see what I mean.
Not every user needs, or can afford, all the peripherals and software that they might find useful.
A LAN (Local Area Network) means that a single printer, modem, or application can be available to all network users.
For many users this is what starts them thinking about LANs.
But once you're up and running it soon becomes clear that networks let you do a whole host of other things.
You can do things (functionality) for which you really need a network (specific).
Go on, you come up with something better than ‘specific functionality’…
Examples include E-mail, where one user can send a message over the network to another.
Depending on the system you're using, the sender can be told when (and if) the message was received.
Group scheduling is also LAN-specific.
It's hard enough trying to find a mutually convenient time for two people to meet; comparing diaries for a group can be nearly impossible.
But if you keep your on-line appointments diary up to date, a calendar on the network can compare everyone's schedules.
Or say there's more than one person working on a project.
Typically, a project takes concrete form as a document or suchlike.
Users provide different sections and annotate each other 's work.
Maintaining control over which is the most up-to-date version of the document can be a problem unless there's centralized organization, logging who's done what and making sure that everyone's working on the right version.
And then there're the classic multi-user applications, like sales order processing, where different users have to work on the same file at the same time.
If you have a few people taking orders for the same goods, you must be sure that one doesn't commit the firm to a big shipment when another has just sold the last of the stock.
OK, so you're convinced you need a network.
You've read the reviews and decided which software you want.
You see ads for PCs promoting themselves as ‘network-ready’ and you wonder just how ready a PC needs to be before it can be used on a LAN.
Now read on…
NETWORKS Workstations
TURNING A HUMBLE PC INTO A NETWORKED BEASTIE INVOLVES MORE THAN JUST BUNGING IN AN ETHERNET CARD.
DENNIS JARRETTOUTLINES THE FEATURES A TRUE NETWORK-READY PC SHOULD HAVE AND TAKES A LOOK AT A PRE-CONFIGURED MACHINE FROM APRICOT.
Any fool can turn a PC into a networked machine.
All you need is the PC itself, a network to connect it to, access to the network cable, some info about logging on, a network adaptor card plus a screwdriver (or an external connector gizmo that plugs into the parallel port), the right software drivers, a chequebook and a reason for doing it.
Phew!
The drivers come with the card or the gizmo, screwdrivers aren't hard to find, and I'll just have to assume that your bank balance can cope.
So what's all the fuss about?
Bung in a card, plug in to the LAN, and your humble workaday PC has become a sexy, hi-tech LANstation.
Well, yes and no.
The following four issues should help you to distinguish a ‘network ready’ machine from your average PC with an Ethernet card inside.
Dimensions.
Size isn't imperative, but it is worth considering, especially if you're putting in a networked PC for a novice, or if you're short of desk space.
But most PC's are built big because some buyers may want to expand the system…
Performance and upgradeability.
Most network applications aren't that different from those you use on a standard PC.
But because applications will probably be pooled, you may well end up with more of them on your machine; and you may find yourself running more advanced software than you would on a standalone PC.
Then there's the overhead of participating in the network.
The drivers won't take a huge amount of memory and they won't slow things down too much, but it all adds up.
There's also the network-specific apps, like the E-mail TSR and scheduling utilities permanently awake in the background.
And you may have new and more advanced software, perhaps with a new environment installed, like Windows or OS/2, plus the LAN software…
Your modest PC could well be overstretched, and even if it isn't, there's a danger that the resource question will become more pressing as you become involved in the network.
The ideal LAN workstation starts off with a worthwhile degree of poke (fast 386 with 4Mb of RAM) and is upgradeable (OverDrive socket or daughterboard, spare SIMM slots, easily uprated video).
Security.
The ideal network station comes with a variety of access controls to prevent other network users blundering around the files on your local hard disk and to prevent unauthorized users getting at the network.
At the very least you should look out for password protection and virus checkers; a more serious network station would include them as built-in hardware rather than merely as loadable utilities.
Plug-in-and-play.
Take it from me; the average network station will not be up and running five minutes after you've taken it out of the box.
It's difficult enough to persuade a PC to do what you want normally, and the added complications of network access only compound the problem, particularly if you're assembling it yourself.
But it ought to be easier.
The standard PC can be used for anything, which is why the manufacturers leave so much of the configuration and customization to the user (that's their story, anyway).
But everyone knows what a network station will be used for, so a lot of the installation and set-up could be done before it's shipped.
For instance, a LAN operating system like NetWare or an appropriate environment like Windows for Workgroups can be largely pre-installed at the factory, with the remaining configuration being done via a fill-in-the-blanks, sign-on display when the thing's switched on for the first time.
With that lot in mind, let's see what Apricot means by the term ‘network ready’.
APRICOT LS PRO
Apricot really stole a march on the competition last September with a couple of new PCs it described as optimized for workgroup operation.
They both featured lots of on-board goodies at very comparative prices to appeal to LAN users.
The LS Pro is a neat design — 14 by 13 inches and less than 2 inches high — which is dwarfed by a rather good monitor.
There's built-in Ethernet and around the back you'll find three ways of getting at it — BNC for thin co-ax, a 15-way D-type socket, and a phone jack for twisted-pair cables.
(Cabling is dealt with in more detail on page 128.)
There's also lots of built-in security — you need to point a credit card-style infra-red sender at the  PC and press a button before it lets you enter your name and password; only then does it load DOS.
The infra-red remote control is unique to this machine, and the only other way to get into it is via a master key held by the system supervisor.
The pointer also serves as an instant screen blanker.
If you have to leave your desk, pressing the button turns the screen off and locks the keyboard but leaves the PC running.
Only the same user (or the supervisor) can ‘unlock’ the system.
Inside is yet more up-to-date technology.
You get the 33MHz Cyrix 486SLC processor (optionally a 33MHz AMD 386SX plus high-speed local bus operation and fast high-resolution graphics (via a Cirrus Logic controller running 1Mb of video RAM — a pretty potent combination).
4Mb of RAM is standard on the 486 models, using fast 60ns SIMMs.
IDE drives available range from 80 to 515Mb, along with diskless and floppy-only variants.
If you want to make more of the networking, there are two rows of sockets on the motherboard for an optional Token Ring adaptor, and a socket for a network boot ROM.
On the other hand, the LS Pro is conspicuously short of any other internal expansion.
With up to 8Mb on the motherboard there probably isn't any need for expansion if the machine is used solely as a network station, but it would've been nice to find a PCMCIA slot for something like a modem.
Performance from the integrated network controller is good.
So is support for network operating systems — Apricot pre-installs Windows for Workgroups and DOS 5.
Also supplied as standard are drivers for a whole range of networks including LAN Manager, Vines, DECnet, Novell NetWare and TCP/IP-based Unix networks.
But it's the security features that impress serious LAN users.
Apart from the infra-red pointing device (uniquely coded to each machine) and the sign-on password, there are several layers of access rights that can be assigned to any or all of the machine's users.
For instance, a particular user ID could be prohibited from getting at the disk drives or the network, or from using the PC at all during certain hours.
Users can be forced to change their passwords at set intervals, and you can examine an audit trail of a user's previous passwords, and set up temporary accounts.
On top of that there's a data encryption facility so data can be saved to disk in encoded form.
Also, you can specify that uncoded data can't be loaded — a good inoculation against viruses.
Of course, you don't have to be this security-conscious to use the LS Pro.
All these controls can be turned off, but they do form a comforting security blanket.
Prices start at £1,100 for a 386 with an 80Mb hard disk and 2Mb of RAM.
The price quoted below is for the review machine, a 16Mb 486 with a 200Mb hard disk.
THE ALTERNATIVES
THE ELONEX LAN WORKSTATION
ELONEX ON 
AS workstations go, this one's tiny, and is completely dwarfed by the 14-inch monitor.
On the networking side there's a built-in Ethernet module which sits on a daughterboard and uses AMD's new PCNet/ISA chip.
This supports both 10base-T (twisted pair) and 10Base-2 (thin coaxial) cables.
Token Ring is also available as an optional module.
Windows for Workgroups 3.1 comes pre-loaded, and Novell NetWare and UNIX are options.
Inside the tiny system box Elonex has squashed in a 450Mb hard disk and local bus video with 1Mb of video RAM.
The processor options range from a 25MHz 486SX to a 66MHz DX2 chip.
The Elonex is similar to the Apricot in many ways and even has the optional stereo sound input and output but it doesn't have as many security features.
Prices start at £730 for the diskless workstation with 2Mb of memory and a mono VGA screen.
THE MITAC UPSTATION
MITAC ON 
Mitac's range of upgradeable PCs all have built-in Ethernet cards as an option, both 8-bit and 16-bit versions.
Also bundled is an on-board Windows accelerator to boost performance.
All the machines have securities features, including password control for boot-up, read and write control for floppy and hard drives, serial and parallel port access rights and virus protection.
•There's a mass of companies out there selling PCs which you can simply plug a network card into.
These machines tend to be cheaper than purpose-built network PCs.
Colossus is a good example.
Prices for the Colossus Netstation start at £999; for this you get a 33MHz 486SX, 4Mb of RAM, SuperVGA screen, and a 16-bit Novell compatible Ethernet card, but no hard disk.
Colossus on     
NETWORKS File Server
FILE SERVERS MAY LEAD DULL LIVES, BUT THEY'RE A CRUCIAL PART OF ANY NETWORK.
ROGER GANNEXPLAINS WHAT MAKES A GOOD FILE SERVER AND PUTS THREE DEDICATED MACHINES THROUGH THEIR PACES.
File servers lead hard lives.
They're left on day and night, and their one purpose in life is to handle data requested by and sent from workstations.
While you can bung a network card into any PC and call it a server, proper file servers are a different kettle of fish and are designed with one main performance criterion: to maximize data throughput.
The things that make a modern killer PC, such as swift video performance, are irrelevant for network servers — so mundane is their existence that they can do without a screen or a keyboard.
A fast processor helps, but it isn't the secret of great file server performance — for long periods of time, a file server's processor will be idle, waiting for the hard disk to do its work.
So, what makes a good file server?
Fast components are a plus, but the most advanced servers feature an optimized hard disk sub-system, where each component complements the others.
This usually means a big, fast hard disk, a fast disk controller (preferably cached) a fast expansion bus and a network operating system.
You have to make a distinction between what are termed dedicated and non-dedicated servers.
A dedicated server is one that has no other function but to act as a servant to the workstations.
A non-dedicated server doubles both as server and as a workstation.
I looked at three dedicated file servers, from Dan Technology, RSC and Kamco.
DAN TECHNOLOGY 486DX/50
They say that first impressions count and the first thing you notice about the new Dan 486DX/50 is that it's heavy.
There's a lot of metal in this desktop beast, which has little in common with the run-of-the-mill OEM machines that pass through the What Personal Computer office.
The secret of this machine is Intel.
In the same way that Elonex once rebadged bare Copam machines, so Dan Technology has turned an Intel case and motherboard into a Dan machine.
The review mode came with a colour VGA display, which is a luxury if the machine is to be used as a dedicated file server.
The desktop casing just about qualifies as a server box.
It only has three 5.25-inch drive bays and one 3.5-inch bay.
One is mounted on top of the power supply, and two are spoken for by the floppy and hard disk drives, so you'd be in trouble if you wanted to fit more than two peripherals.
A tower version is also available, which has eight internal bays plus three externally accessible bays.
Physical security isn't too hot — a key lock prevents the lid being removed but doesn't secure the keyboard.
The Intel motherboard is an interesting piece of hardware — quite big compared to the latest postage stamp-sized samples.
It's a highly integrated design with IDE, video and I/O located on board.
More importantly, from the file server aspect, it's an EISA design, with six 32-bit slots.
This means you could fit bus-mastering hard disk controller and network interface cards to improve data throughput — the name of the game in networking.
One slot is occupied by an EISA SCSI host card and another by an ISA network interface card.
There are also two proprietary slots — one for a full-length processor card, the other for a 256Mb memory card that can take the system total to a whopping 384Mb.
It comes with 4Mb of RAM as standard, which in my books ought to be bumped up to 8Mb for a server.
The design of the motherboard (featuring Intel Xpress architecture) means that system RAM is decoupled from the processor, which lets you fit any speed of upgrade processor.
You know they mean it, too: a huge second cooling fan sits at one end of the processor card.
This is an Intel design, so you can be pretty sure that the forthcoming Pentium processor — or rather the P24T OverDrive version — will work in this machine.
All in all, some pretty advanced hardware, but it doesn't come cheap: Pentium readiness counts for about a grand of the price.
A server wouldn't be a server without a big hard drive and Dan has chosen to fit a Seagate ST1401, a 320Mb SCSI hard disk.
It's driven by an Adaptec 1740 bus master SCSI controller, permitting 32-bit data transfers at speeds of up to 10Mb/sec, using its own processor chip, which is perfect for heavy-duty server work.
It made mincemeat of CoreTest, returning data transfer rates in excess of 1.5Mb/sec.
Interestingly, this didn't translate into a great database benchmark in the What Personal Computer Power Tests, although it still returned an overall score of around 14,500.
It performed quite well in my network benchmarks, nosing ahead of the RSC by around 10 per cent.
I suspect that this margin could have been improved if you fitted a 32-bit EISA network card.
This would add around £600 to the price, but it would be worth it.
At over £3,200, with a mono VGA display, the Dan is impressive but pricey.
A similarly specified Dan ISA machine with a cached IDE drive would go for around half that price.
But the cutting edge doesn't come cheap.
Curiously, Dan offers a 1Gb (gigabyte) hard disk drive for another £95; a bargain compared to the 320Mb version.
If you can make do with a 200Mb IDE drive, the price drops to £1,940.
If you're looking for future-proofed, quality technology, the Dan machine isn't expensive.
But if your needs are more modest, it's probably a case of techno-overkill.
RSC 486DX/50
This is basically a normal 486 PC with a larger than normal hard disk and a cheap network interface card.
The review model came with a colour SuperVGA display, a low-radiation CTX monitor, plus a 1Mb Trident VGA card which all adds up to a fine non-dedicated server.
As a dedicated server it's available with a much simpler 256Kb VGA card with mono display.
Going for this option will save you £150.
This is a cheap and cheerful set-up — you don't get any fancy documentation and it's really aimed at the experienced PC buyer.
It comes in a slimline ‘mini’ tower casing, which is common among file server designs as it should allow for maximum expandability.
The RSC has three spare 5.25-inch drive bays, so you could fit a tape streamer or CD ROM, for example.
It also has two 3.5-inch bays, so you could add a second hard disk, to expand your server or to add extra protection.
A normal 220W power supply unit (PSU) was fitted, which is a little light in my view.
Yes, power-hungry peripherals are becoming rarer by the minute, but as expandability is an important criterion for file servers, it's important that you have a PSU that can dish out enough juice.
Another important aspect of expandability is free expansion slots and the RSC isn't well endowed is this respect — after you've fitted the network interface card, I/O card, video card and IDE cached host adaptor, you're left with two 8-bit short slots and two 16-bit slots.
And one of the 8-bit slots is unusable because its blanking plate carries the extra serial and games port.
This is a shame, as the tower casing is peppered with knock-out mountings for serial ports and it's no big deal to relocate the ports there.
The motherboard was a masterpiece of miniaturization and contained only one large surface-mounted chip after the 486DX/50.
All the rest were sockets and slots.
It came with a generous  8Mb of RAM, backed by a full complement of 256Kb secondary cache RAM.
The heart of any file server is the hard disk, and price of place in the RSC goes to a 320Mb Maxtor drive.
This was hooked up to a DC-2031 cached IDE host adaptor with 2Mb of RAM.
According to CoreTest, this shifted data at nearly 1.2Mb/sec, but bear in mind the distortion caused by the cache.
The normal WPC Power Benchmarks revealed nothing special; it scored just under 12,000, unremarkable for a 486/50.
When set up as a Novell 3.11 file server the DC-2031 cached IDE host card only really made its presence felt on the 128Kb Sequential Read Test, improving performance by about 15 per cent.
By and large, the cached IDE host adaptor made only a marginal difference to my benchmarks.
KAMCO KC486/66
Now this is what a file server should look like — a proper tower casing with acres of room inside.
This machine reads more like a wish list than a specification: it's a 66MHz DX2 with 16Mb of RAM, a 200Mb hard disk, a cached IDE local bus host adaptor, local bus video, topped off with Jumbo 250Mb internal streamer.
And all for £2,325, though if you replace the luxury of a VL-bus super-fast VGA card plus SuperVGA colour display (that came with the review model) with a more suitable mono VGA system, you'd knock around £250 off that price.
If you want to fit lots of peripherals to your server then this is the sort of casing you'll want — it has no less than four free 5.25-inch drive bays plus a pair of 3.5-inch bays.
Things are interesting on the slot front, too.
While the Kamco only has four free slots (one 8-bit and three 16-bit) it does have the real McCoy local bus, VL-bus.
In fact it has three of the blighters, two of which are occupied by a VL-bus ET4000 Super VGA card and a cached IDE host adaptor, the first I've seen.
The fast video card is superfluous on a file server but the VL-bus cached IDE host card is ideal.
The machine was fitted with a generous 16Mb of RAM and 256Kb of secondary cache RAM, which is necessary on a 66MHz DX2.
The motherboard has a tell-tale row of extra solder holes surrounding the CPU, signifying that it can take a socket for the Pentium OverDrive processor.
The mark of a good network is excellent data throughput, and a fast cached local bus IDE card should knock everything else into a cocked hat, even giving that speed demon, SCSI, a run for its money.
Connected to a 200Mb WD Caviar 2200 drive, this potent combo made a mockery of CoreTest and produced the highest What Personal Computer Power benchmark on record, over 25,000.
But oddly enough, this failed to translate into a blistering network performance.
Using it as a NetWare 3.11 server, its performance was actually slightly worse than the RSC which lacked the bonus of local bus, according to my own multiple file read/write tests.
Things get even worse using the simpler network benchmarks found in both the Norton and PC Tools 8 Sys Info programs: the Kamco lagged even further behind the other two servers we looked at.
This peculiar state of affairs mystified me, as I had expected the presence of a local bus IDE host card to make itself felt in a big way.
Maybe fitting a VL-bus network interface card would restore its network performance.
This machine would make a great non-dedicated server but fails to shine as a dedicated one.
As a standalone machine I would've given it a fourth star.
Despite all this, I still liked the Kamco — it's well specified, incorporates the latest technology, and offers very reasonable value for the money.
NETWORKS DIY
DON'T WORRY IF YOUR WALLET ISN'T FAT ENOUGH FOR A READY-MADE LAN STATION.
IF YOU'VE GOT THE TIME AND PATIENCE, WHY NOT GO FOR A SPOT OF DIY!
DENNIS JARRETTCHECKS OUT SOME ADD-ONS, ADD-INS AND PLUG-INS.
So that's what the major players think goes into a network user's PC.
But who needs 'em?
After all, most PCs on networks aren't supplied as LAN stations; they're just assembled by you and me — the punter on the Clapham omnibus.
So how much can you really do yourself?
The short answer is that turning a PC into a network-ready machine is simple.
It'll take more time than buying an off-the-shelf solution, it won't be so neatly packaged, and there are a few ‘gotchas’ for the unwary.
But it isn't impossible.
We assume you can load and configure your own LAN software.
On the hardware side, we reckon that a decent network should feature:
LAN adaptors, which are essential for connecting PCs to the network
Tape back-up units, because if everyone is working on the same set of master files you can't afford to lose them
Uninterruptible power supplies, because if the set of master files is sitting on a single server machine you can't afford to lose that either.
So what's available?
ADAPTORS — ALL YOU NEED TO KNOW
The network protocol basically decides what kind of adaptor your PC must have to connect to a LAN.
And when you talk about PC networks, you're almost certainly talking about Ethernet.
The only other candidate, Token Ring, allows faster and more secure traffic around a network; but it's more expensive to implement.
None of the other LAN protocols is even worth considering.
Ethernet wasn't the first LAN standard, but it was the first that could claim to be non-proprietary (many vendors sell Ethernet-compatible adaptors), cheap (thanks to its use of readily available, low-cost cabling — telephone-wire twisted pair or TV-aerial co-ax), and flexible (Ethernet is equally at home with small starter systems and huge network layouts).
It's also a doddle to lay; Ethernet uses a linear bus, which means that network stations are connected to a single cable a bit like electric sockets hanging off a mains cable.
IBM's Token Ring needs to be arranged in what's called a star topology, with a central hub controlling things.
And while the original Ethernet spec was a lowest-common-denominator approach, using the crudest cable and a distinctly modest data rate, things have come a long way since then.
The original Ethernet cabling is now known as 10base5 (a US standards body called IEEE came up with these names).
This is a heavily shielded coaxial cable, like TV aerial.
Thin coax (10Base2) is sometimes called ThinNet or CheaperNet.
It's more susceptible to electrical interference than thick coax, so chances of data error are higher.
Users tend not to see the errors because they're corrected by the network software, but the need for retries slows things down.
Unshielded twisted-pair (10BaseT) is basically simple telephone wire.
Again it's cheap, and offers the least resistance to outside interference.
Fibre-optic cable is pricey but can carry more simultaneous signals for longer distances.
Another factor in Ethernet's favour is that different types of cable can be mixed on the one Ethernet network, so you could lay cheap cable in most areas and higher-performance stuff in critical sections.
Most Ethernet adaptors support both thin and thick coax; in fact they both tend to take a twist-on BNC connector.
10BaseT adaptors usually have a telephone-style connector, and some boards have both BNCs and phone-jack sockets.
For the DIY approach to building a network station I looked at two contrasting approaches to installing a network interface adaptor: the Xircom Pocket Adaptor and the Inter EtherExpress card.
INTEL ETHEREXPRESS 16
Once upon a time it could take several hours to install a network interface card.
They came with fiddly switches and jumpers which had to be set by hand, arcane rituals of interrupt conflict avoidance, instructions written in terse technobabble.
But that's all changing now, thanks primarily to switchless interface cards that you configure from the keyboard by running an accompanying set-up utility.
So ladies and gents, let's have a big hand for the switchless network adaptor; and let's hear it for Intel's EtherExpress 16, one of the pioneers of this approach.
Basically, you just plug in the board — a long, 16-bit card with a LAN cable connector on the end that pokes out from the back of your computer — and run the SoftSet set-up program.
This menu-driven utility is dead easy to use (you don't really need the manual) and it helpfully performs some basic diagnostic tests as well.
SoftSet reads the current configuration of your PC and will automatically change the NIC's (Network Interface Card) setting to avoid any I/O (input/output) conflicts with other devices on the system (memory addresses, port usage, interrupt numbers).
SoftSet can be run automatically, but there's also a manual mode if you need to control the configuration parameters explicitly.
Better still, once a card is configures, the network drivers install as usual(there's a decent selection of LAN drivers).
But the NIC drivers will automatically read the card's configuration to determine their own settings at run time.
In the bad old days you could go crazy trying to match a driver's configuration to the switch settings on a LAN card.
So installation is easy, and so is reconfiguration.
The EtherEXpress card seems to run pretty well, it's slightly faster that the trusty old 3Com EtherLink II boards we've been using — but then Intel gives you a 32Kb internal buffer which speeds things up.
What problems there are tend to be a mite esoteric.
For instance, you can't check out the card's configuration just by looking at it, and you can't change the configuration if you don't have the set-up utility.
There is some merit in twiddling switches, but probably not much.
You have to return the registration card, but EtherExpress buyers also get a copy of LANSight Express.
This is a good remote-node management program for NetWare which provides quite detailed performance and configuration information on LAN connections.
It's probably of most use in managing large networks, but it's handy and it's free.
XIRCOM POCKET ETHERNET ADAPTOR II
For occasional, easy access to a network you need some kind of LAN adaptor that just plugs into your computer.
No problem: all computers have a few unoccupied sockets on the back panel, and at least one of these sockets — the parallel port — can move data fast enough to match the performance of the average LAN.
Xircom specializes in making network thingies that plug into printer sockets.
They're about the size of a cigarette packet and come with a connector for one of the standard low-cost LAN cable types (which usually means thin co-an and BNC connections).
Oh, and they're brilliant.
For a start, they're a doddle to attach — plug one into the parallel port, connect the cable, find a 13A socket (the Pocket Ethernet Adaptor needs a mains converter), load the drivers provided on the accompanying disk, and that's it.
And of course these things are extraordinarily flexible.
Virtually no portable has space for a standard-size internal network card.
Desktop PCs may be full or their owners may be unwilling or unable to lift the lid.
It might not be worth adding a card to a machine which needs only occasional access to the network.
Or you might only need occasional access when you can't guarantee being near a PC with a LAN card.
The Xircom is the solution to all of these.
The drawbacks?
Performance is one.
All pocket adaptors are slow compared to internal cards.
The best parallel-port adaptor will move data at roughly half the speed of the average bus-connected card.
But the Xircom Pocket Ethernet regularly outperforms its competitors in tests.
Pocket adaptors can't take as much strain as internal cards, either.
Mind you, we're talking about levels of activity which are rare on PC LANs.
More immediately irritating is the need for that external power supply.
This removes some of the flexibility (you need a mains socket), the portability (the LAN adaptor itself may fit into your pocket, but you wouldn't want to carry a mains adaptor too), and the tidiness (the power lead means yet another bit of wire at the back of your PC).
Xircom doesn't do any kind of battery pack and the adaptors can't draw power from the port itself — so you're stuffed.
But that's a small price to pay for the flexibility and ease of use that the Pocket Ethernet provides.
UNINTERRUPTIBLE POWER SUPPLIES — ALL YOU NEED TO KNOW
An interruptible power supply (UPS) monitors power to your PC.
If it detects any sudden absence of juice, it automatically kicks in with its battery, allowing you to shut down gracefully with no loss of data.
UPSs come in two styles.
The traditional unit is a box that sits between the mains and the AC-in socket on your computer.
The alternative is a UPS on a circuit board.
The card carries a (physically) flat battery and fits a standard expansion slot, rather like a hardcard disk-on-a-card.
Internal UPSs have a lot going for them — modest price, easy installation, fix-and-forget security.
And they're technically simple, since batteries produce DC current just like your PC's power supply.
That current can be used by computer circuits without any further treatment.
External UPSs, on the other hand, have to convert their battery-generated DC into AC before feeding it to the computer, which then has to convert the AC back into DC before it can be used.
Then there's the Auto-save software facility supplied with most card UPSs.
This saves your work to disk, logs off before letting things die, and automatically reloads memory when power is restored.
External UPSs can't do that because they aren't connected to the PC's system bus.
You won't get complete protection from a UPS-on-a-card.
Your screen and external devices, like modems, may take their power from the PC, but it will come directly from the PC's power supply unit.
AccuCard and its ilk sit between the power supply and the motherboard. so they're too far downstream to help.
Sudden surges or dips in the mains supply are more common than blackouts, and you might not notice what's causing the glitches in your work.
Part of the function of an external UPS is to smooth out the incoming power, but that can only be done before it reaches the PC's power supply.
You do get some relief from failure of the PC's own power converter.
An external UPS can't do much about that.
We looked at a couple of classy UPSs at budget prices: the AccuCard and the Ondyne Expert.
ACCUCARD 386
Battery back-up units tend to be on the big side, but Emerson Computer Power also makes an internal version which comes with autosaving.
When the AccuCard detects an interruption in power, it warbles, gives you the ‘brownout!’ message, and if the condition continues for longer than a second it'll save the disk.
There's a ‘reassurance hotkey’ which you can press to make sure AccuCard's watchdog TSR is alive and well.
This ‘bookmark’ save-and-restore feature is helpful whether or not you're having a power failure.
The UPS-on-a-card operates on any power interruption.
So in theory, you don't have to save your work, and exit properly before you switch off; the AccuCard will remember where you were and return you there next time you switch on.
Incidentally, there's another hotkey that disables this for 10 seconds, long enough for you to shut things down before the UPS leaps into action.
This helps save the AccuCard's battery.
The AccuCard needs only a short, 8-bit slot; and it doesn't take up any of the BIOS.
Some of its competitors come in full-length cards and need a free address range in the BIOS firmware.
You do need some space to work, though; the AccuCard needs clearance of around two inches, which may take up the adjacent slot.
You don't get much cable, either — about 6 inches.
So if your PC is already jam-packed with boards, you might need to do some creative rearrangement.
Installation isn't difficult — screwing the battery onto the board takes a few seconds.
There probably won't be any support for the rear and you might be worried about the weight being taken by the connector; for vertically-mounted cards you'll find that the AccuCard's design puts its centre of gravity right over the connector, but horizontal mounting could be more troublesome.
There's a menu-driven install or a custom-configuration alternative for the AccuCard driver utility.
The software lets you choose the type and amount of memory that will be backed up automatically, whether it will be password-protected and whether audible warnings will be given.
You need at least as much space disk capacity as there is RAM to save.
If you're tight on disk space you might lose some of the current ‘context’.
What's more, while the AccuCard can handle standard DOS Extended and Expanded memory it makes no attempt to save XMS or VCPI Extended memory.
Emerson's documentation tells you to make sure that caching software is loaded after the AccuCard driver.
Operationally, the practical limit is time — can you save all memory before the AccuCard battery fades out?
The answer is probably yes; we didn't have any problems on a fast 8Mb 486 or on a more modest 386SX with 4Mb of RAM.
As UPSs go, the AccuCard is a modest example — there's not enough battery for you to carry on computing without mains power.
But it's a neat insurance policy against loss data, disk head crashes, and hair-tearing rages which can only shorten your natural life.
ONDYNE EXPERT 500
Ondyne makes more conventional UPSs in the sense that they're cable-connected boxes sited next to, rather than inside, your PC.
But these are pretty clever boxes.
For instance, the Expert can observe regular patterns of irregularities in the mains supply and anticipate them in future.
So when everyone arrives at work first thing in the morning and switches on their PCs, kettles and desk lamps, the    sudden drain can cause a noticeable fluctuation in the power supply; the UPS can remember that.
And despite being stuffed full of capability and battery, they're light enough (8kg) to sit on the desktop and compact enough (15 by 10 by 27mm) not to look like a Bulgarian chip fryer.
Indeed, Ondyne claims the Expert range comprises the smallest UPSs in the world for their power.
There are three models, with output ratings of 250, 500 and 1,000va — aimed respectively at 286s or smaller, 386 and 486 PCs, and workstations like the SPARCs and IBM RS/6000.
The 500 is obviously the unit for the mass market, so that's the one I looked at.
Installation is simple.
Disconnect the mains lead to your PC and plug it into the Expert; there are two sockets for power leads leaving the UPS, so I checked it out with two PCs.
Thereafter it monitors the quality of the incoming electrical supply, smoothing out peaks and troughs and cutting in for real if the power cuts out completely.
This is signalled by a brief bleep, which turns into a frantic beeping when the Expert's battery is about to run dry.
Depending on what you have attached, it should be good for up to 20 minutes.
There's an extra level of capability, though.
Expert comes with an RS232 lead and a disk of utilities, so you can connect the box to your PC's serial port and run a variety of configuration and diagnostic tools.
There are also three levels of menu-driven diagnostics, including one for the non-technical and a very fancy oscilloscope-style graphical display for the techies.
I was very impressed, and all this technology is surprisingly inexpensive.
TS4525 PORTABLE SERIES II
Cristie Electronics makes a whole family of tape drives; the TS4000 series is the main branch, a line aimed at the PC user and providing between 60Mb and 4Gb (Gigabytes) of storage space.
I looked at the TS4525 Portable, which comes as a metal box with a carry handle and a parallel cable.
You don't lose the use of your PC's printer port because it's duplicated on the back of the tape unit, though obviously you can't use both printer and tape at the same time.
As an alternative there's also a standard 50-way SCSI socket on the TS4525.
The thing actually works as a SCSI device, but because so few PCs come with a SCSI port most people use the built-in SCSI-to-parallel converter.
In general, SCSI is a better bet than relying on the parallel connection.
The Portable takes a DC6525 data tape cartridge which stores 525Mb.
You get one in the box, and additional tapes cost between £16 and £25 depending on which brand you buy.
Most back-up packages are American, so as Cristie is British, so you won't find it listed as an option on things like DS-Backup and Central Point Backup.
Cristie supplies its own software, and there seems no reason to use anything else.
It lets you back up (and restore) whole disks or selected files and/or directories — including the option to back up only files that have modified since the last run.
It's menu-driven, easy to use, comes on a single floppy and gives a clear indication of what's going on.
You also get full support for a Novell NetWare file server.
There's also a ‘back-up supervisor’ which can be set to prompt you to start a present back-up routine.
These scheduled back-ups, which can be quite complex, are able to automate all the hand-selected options of the manual back-up utility.
The TS4525 isn't the fastest tape unit around, but you'll be hard put to find a better compromise between performance and convenience.
This is a no-fuss back-up system for a few individual users or for smallish networks.
TAPE STREAMERS — ALL YOU NEED TO KNOW
Consider this: it can take 50 hours to re-key one megabyte's worth of data.
Now tell me there's no real point in paying for a tape back-up system to enforce some security on your key network machines.
Tape isn't the only option, but overall it's the cheapest, the most efficient, the best-understood and the best-supported one.
Optical disks and DAT cartridges get more data off your file server and move it faster, but they cost more.
You could use floppy disks, but a current maximum of 1.44Mb per disk means an awful lot of disk shuffling.
Tape back-up systems run from as low as 20Mb per tape to 8Gb.
Budget systems range between £250 to over £1,000, storing around half a gigabyte on standard data cartridges.
The tape unit might be fixed into one of the standard drive bays in your PC.
More commonly these days it will be a separate cable-connected box which can be moved around to service several PCs.
Tape drives don't work in isolation.
Generally, it's the back-up software that determines how versatile the process is — and your willingness to follow rigid back-up routines that decides how effective it will be.
Tape units usually come with a back-up utility of their own; presumably one that takes the fullest advantage of the functions of the hardware.
But there are several proprietary packages which will run with most tape decks.
The traditional role of the tape back-up unit has been to take a complete copy of your hard disk.
This is called ‘image’ back-up, and it takes a while.
More practical is a back-up scheme that saves individual files, backing up only those that have changed since the last run.
This kind of intelligent selection if the function of the accompanying software rather than the tape unit.
We looked at an offering from Cristie Electronics.
REVIEWS
WINDOWS SPREADSHEETS
THE GOOD THE BAD THE UGLY
MICROSOFT'S EXCEL HAS FACED FEW CHALLENGERS IN THE WINDOWS SPREADSHEET MARKET.
BUT MARK WHITEHORNDISCOVERS RIVAL PRODUCTS FROM BORLAND AND LOTUS ARE UNDER STARTERS ORDERS.
IT'S GOING TO BE A VERY INTERESTING RACE, AND IT LOOKS as if IMPROV FROM LOTUS — WHICH REALLY GRABS WINDOWS BY THE THROAT — IS GOING TO GET OFF TO A FLYING START.
The Windows spreadsheet market has destabilized over the last couple of years and is currently reminiscent of a cabinet minister on a pogo-stick.
It was much simpler four years ago.
Then, the most up-to-date release of Windows was version 2.
But it ate so much procession power that most PCs couldn't drive it fast enough, so hardly anyone bought it.
As a result, very few software companies developed Windows spreadsheets and the field was left clear for Microsoft's Excel.
Microsoft could (and did) claim to have the lion's share of the Windows spreadsheet market.
and nobody disputed it.
Then Windows 3 arrived and bang!— suddenly there was a huge Windows spreadsheet market and Microsoft began to look very smart.
It already had a well-developed product on the market, whilst its rivals were struggling to get one onto the drawing board.
Now those other products are finally in production and for the first time Excel is going to be judged upon its merits rather than its laurels.
Microsoft will tell you that Excel has benefited from those long years of development and is now a stable, mature product to be relied upon.
The competition will tell you that their product is fresh, takes advantage of advances in program writing and has a long development life ahead of it.
They'll tell you that Excel has been around for too long and its days are numbered.
There is truth in both views.
So who are these fresh-faced competitors, all keen to snatch the crown?
The obvious contender ought to be Lotus 1-2-3; the DOS version was one of the most successful software programs ever.
But the first version of 1-2-3 for Windows was late, slow and buggy and since then it's been slow to gain acceptance.
However, it isn't all bad news for Lotus which should be releasing Improv for Windows any day now.
Improv is unlike any other spreadsheet (apart from Improv on the NeXT machine, from which it is derived) as you'll see from the review on page 97.
From the Borland stables we've seen Quattro Pro for Windows break into the market.
This too was slow to arrive, but it has bags of extra features and because it's bundled with the DOS version for a mere £299, it has to be a bargain.
You can expect each of these products to have all the basic functions, so they're pretty similar in those terms.
What differentiates them are all the extra functions that have been bolted on, and this is what I'll be concentrating on in this review.
MICROSOFT EXCEL 4
Excel from Microsoft has reached release 4, and it remains an outstandingly good spreadsheet.
A great deal is made of its ease of use.
During development, Microsoft put a lot of effort into researching how people actually use their spreadsheets, and concentrated on making the common tasks easier.
Take the AutoFill feature as an example.
Each time a new worksheet is opened, you usually spend time setting up the row and column headings.
These are often in sequences which are useful and logical (Monday, Tuesday; or week 1, week 2, and so on).
Excel is clever enough to complete a sequence for you; type in the first heading, mark the cells into which the sequence is to be extended, and Excel does the rest.
It can also do numerical progressions.
If, for example, your rows are labelled with numbers which ascend in steps of five, you just show Excel the first few (5, 10, 15) and it will continue the labels (20, 25, 30, and so on ) for as many rows as you wish.
Data movement within the worksheet is now entirely under mouse control, using a process called drag ‘n’ drop.
Click on the edge of a cell and you can drag it to its new position.
You can also move a range of cells in this way once it has been blocked.
If you press the Control key whilst performing the drag ‘n’ drop, the selected cells will be copied, and pressing the Shift key inserts extra cells.
Copying, moving and inserting numbers is a straightforward process, and formulae are updated to reflect their new positions automatically.
Absolute references in formulae ($C$12, for instance) are either left as absolutes or are updated, depending on the precise conditions of the operation, but this rarely leads to confusion.
Toolbars are a helpful addition; each one provides access to the tools you need to do a specific job.
Some appear automatically when you begin a certain task (the Chart toolbar appears when you start work on a graph) and others live under the Options toolbar in the menu.
Apart from Chart, there are also Drawing, Utility and Format toolbars, and three for devising macros.
Toolbars are also customizable; you can construct your own by dragging tools from existing bars and attaching them to your own.
Graph types are comprehensive and include contour graphs.
Rotating your graph to obtain exactly the right view is a delightfully simple mouse-controlled process; just grab a corner of a    3-dimensional box which represents your graph, and swing it around until it looks right.
It's easy and quick too,(the speed is a consequence of using a wireframe cube instead of the entire graph).
Microsoft's attempts to increase usability have worked well, producing a package which is easy to get to grips with and fun to use.
It has little that's revolutionary in terms of innovative spreadsheet design, and working with multiple worksheets could be made easier, but as a Windows spreadsheet, Excel excels.
EXCEL 4 — The Highlights
If I press the Control key whilst picking up this range of cells using the mouse, this tells Excel to copy the cells instead of simply moving them
I've drawn this graph using the friendly Graph Wizard, a built-in step-by-step guide to graph drawing
Double-clicking on a graph makes it appear full-screen, where it can be embellished to your heart's content using the menu system
Excel has a wide variety of optional toolbars which can be reached via the menu system.
The dialogue box on the left lists those available
QUATTRO PRO FOR WINDOWS
Quattro Pro for Windows is Borland's answer to Microsoft's Excel, and is also an excellent Windows spreadsheet with many clever functions.
Borland has succeeded in making Quattro Pro for Windows easy to use when creating multiple worksheets and 3D data structures.
This feat is achieved visually by using tabs along the bottom of the worksheets which mimic the tabs in an address book.
These are used to access other sheets, to move them around and also to name them.
For instance, a formula which reads
SUM (MON…
FRI:B1…
D4) is both easier to write accurately and understand than its Lotus or Excel equivalent.
The worksheets themselves are organized into Notebooks which contain 257 pages each (which should be enough for most mortals).
Moving cells around the sheet is done by a similar drag ‘n’ drop process, but it's less well implemented than Excel's.
Single cells can't be moved with the mouse, and ranges which are in the process of being copied or moved look identical, so you're more likely to lose track of what you're doing.
On the plus side, charting capabilities are excellent — there's a vast range of graph types.
There's also an enhancing tool which lets you embellish the charts and you can even paste bitmapped images (such as a picture of your favourite car) onto parts of the graphs.
The only place where the charting section is weak is in the rotation of 3D graphs, where you have to use scroll bars.
The tools for designing slide show presentations are outstanding, and centre round the Light Table.
This is an area where you set out the charts and graphics to be used in the show and shuffle them into the required order, adding different types of transition effects between ‘slides’.
The representation of a Light Table, a ‘real-world’ tool which some readers may already be familiar with, shows an imaginative use of a graphical user interface.
Other strong points of Quattro Pro for Windows are its Database Desktop and interface Builder.
The former is an interface to existing database tables, allowing the information contained to be queried and used in your worksheets.
Using its Dynamic Data Exchange (DDE) client and server capabilities, complex applications can be built to run locally (or even over a network).
The Interface Builder gives you all the tools you need to create a professional Windows interface for your Quattro Pro for Windows application.
Design is almost entirely mouse controlled, and is more fun than its name suggests.
In Quattro Pro for Windows, the right mouse button is in the hands of the Object Inspector, and the implementation is considerably slicker than that used for Excel's short-cut menus.
When you right-click on an object (Borland's interface treats most items, including cells, blocks of cells, graphs and buttons, as objects) a dialogue box appears; from this box, you can edit the properties of the object.
All in all, some of the common manipulations are more unwieldy in Quattro Pro for Windows than in Excel, but in the areas of slide show production and database links, Quattro Pro for Windows offers a spreadsheet which makes much more use of the Windows environment.
QUATTRO PRO — The Highlights
Here I've embedded a button which is attached to a macro on the macro worksheet.
Just press the button to activate the macro
The 257th worksheet is called Graphs.
Here you can store all the graphs and dialogue boxes that you create within one Notebook
Presentations can be constructed by laying out graphs and images as if they were slides.
There's also a range of transition effects
As well as an impressive range of graph types, Quattro Pro has an Annotator which lets you embellish your graphs
LOTUS 1-2-3
1-2-3 for Windows is a direct descendant of Lotus 1-2-3 for DOS — the most famous, and the best-selling spreadsheet the world has ever seen.
So what makes the Windows version worthy of your consideration?
For a start, 1-2-3 for Windows has a more Lotus-compatible interface than any of the other Windows spreadsheets.
The menu along the top of the screen is, of course, a pop-down, mouse-driven affair, but the shades of the DOS version still linger in its layout.
And if you press the /key, 1-2-3 for Windows will obligingly open up a special window called 1-2-3 Classic, which contains a complete model of the menu found in the DOS version.
The real advantage of all this is that if your fingers are trained to type /FS in order to save a file, the same command will still work in 1-2-3 for Windows.
No other Windows product dares to offer this level of compatibility because of Lotus's reputation for litigation.
Under DOS, this obsessive defence of a menu system may have been worthwhile, but Windows is a foreign country where things benefit from being done differently and where, in consequence, the words ‘Lotus compatibility’ have a rather hollow ring.
Spreadsheet publishing is another area where Lotus scores a partial victory over the opposition.
1-2-3 for Windows is supplied with the Adobe Type Manager.
This adds a range of new fonts to the whole of Windows (not just to 1-2-3) and these certainly enhance its publishing capabilities.
The BrushScript and DomCasual fonts are both supercool.
When Adobe's fonts are added to those already available in 3.1, they make an impressive list.
It is then all the more strange that 1-2-3 for Windows limits you to using only eight fonts per worksheet.
True, only very talented people can use more than about six fonts on any one worksheet without making it look seriously overdressed, but it's still an odd limitation.
One further feature offered by 1-2-3 is cross-platform compatibility.
Versions are available on a huge range of hardware, and the file formats are interchangeable.
But, in the end, 1-2-3 for Windows is one of those perfectly competent programs which totally fails to stir the imagination.
The first version had a few interface bugs, but Lotus has fixed them with updates and the current version is as bug-free as software can be.
In addition, 1-2-3 for Windows contains all that you can reasonably ask of a spreadsheet — lots of
functions, a good set of graph types, oodles of pretty buttons (which Lotus calls SmartIcons) and so on.
What it lacks is anything else; any really useful and unique features.
LOTUS 1-2-3 — The Highlights
Lotus 1-2-3 for Windows allows you to use eight fonts per worksheet.
Just choose your fonts from the list stored in the Style Font box
It's only when you choose the eight fonts to use on a particular worksheet that the impressive range of fonts available becomes apparent
The range of SmartIcons available changes depending on what you're doing, and they can be positioned wherever you want on-screen
For those whose fingers can't forget 1-2-3 for DOS, pressing the /key pops up this imitation of the original Lotus menu system
LOTUS IMPROV
If Lotus has shown a total lack of imagination in developing 1-2-3 for Windows, maybe it's because all its innovative effort has been poured into Improv.
This product grabs Windows by the lapels and uses it in a whole new way.
The most obvious difference is apparent as soon as you open a worksheet.
Improv doesn't have columns called A, B, C and rows called 1,2,3.
Instead, the worksheet consists of a single column and row.
Suppose you want to record the achievements of your sales team for each month of the past year.
You can write ‘Jan’ in the row label on the left, then drag it downwards with the mouse.
As you do so, the rows which appear are magically labelled Feb, Mar, Apr and so on.
Just like Excel, Improv can use any reasonable starting value (Monday, Week 1 and so on) and produce a set of extrapolated values.
You can drag it down to produce 14 rows and hand edit the last two to read Average and Total.
Dragging the Column label to the right lets you generate five columns which can be labelled as Sarah, Jane, Brian, Tom and Total.
The worksheet is now big enough to hold a year's data.
Formulae aren't stored in cells on the worksheet, but in a separate window below.
This is good because as all rows and columns have meaningful names, formulae become more readable.
TOTAL=SUM (JAN…
DEC) is a valid formula; you don't have to refer back to cells on the worksheet to understand it.
Improv's InfoBoxes are stylish, sculpted dialogue boxes, much more elegant than Borland's Property Inspector boxes.
InfoBoxes are useful as well as stylish; if an object is highlighted, the box shows its properties and remains on-screen until you've finished editing that object.
Charting abilities are impressive.
Selecting the graph type from the 20 available is easy, using an InfoBox which shows graphical representations of each one.
Lines, circles, text and bitmaps can be superimposed on your chart, and can be manipulated as objects.
Although it doesn't have the sophistication of Quattro Pro for Windows, good quality presentation material can be produced.
My only criticism of Improv is that importing data from conventional spreadsheets an be a pain, and its hooks into databases are poor.
There's little that can be done about the former (it's a consequence of Improv's structure) but the latter will be addressed in a future release.
Improv is easy to learn.
Those who come to it fresh, without preconceived ideas of how a spreadsheet works, will find it a dream.
Lotus has re-thought the spreadsheet and is showing us how this type of application will look in the future.
IMPROV — The Highlights
Improv can extrapolate from a single label to provide a sensible list.
These labels all belong to one category.
The formulae that produce the totals and averages are kept off the worksheet and manipulate only the ‘labels’ of the categories
By simply picking up and moving the categories' names with the mouse I can reverse their positions and totally rebuild the worksheet…
…and when I add a third category called Years, Improv automatically generates extra cells, complete with relevant formulae
THE VERDICT
You must have guessed by now that 1-2-3 for Windows isn't the best Windows spreadsheet on the market.
I can't fault it in performing the basic functions that you can reasonably expect from a spreadsheet, but I do feel that Lotus has tried to sell 1-2-3 for Windows on the back of the original DOS version, which misses the point of an Windows spreadsheet entirely.
Excel, on the other hand, is a well-developed product which has stood the test of time.
I like using it, as do many other people, and it seems to be becoming the new industry standard.
But the winners have to be Improv and Quattro Pro (yes, two winners).
Improv is unbeatable for handling multi-dimensional data; if you need that capability, there's no other choice.
It's also the first major re-design of the spreadsheet in 10 years and it's a vast improvement.
That said, its very innovation will make it a poor choice in some cases, and it lacks good database links.
Quattro Pro for Windows wins the award for the best ‘conventional’ spreadsheet to run under Windows.
It has good 3-dimensional powers, excellent database links and glorious charting and presentation abilities.
It has finally won me over from Excel.
BUYER'S GUIDE
better SAFE than SORRY
IN THE THIRD PART OF OUR MONTHLY GUIDE TO STAYING SANE WHILE BUYING A COMPUTER,ANDREW JOHNSON EXPLAINS HOW TO ENSURE A GOOD LEVEL OF AFTER SALES SUPPORT AND WHAT MAINTENANCE OPTIONS YOU SHOULD CONSIDER.
Over the past two months I've dealt with what you need to look out for when buying a computer and how to tell if the machine you intend to buy is well built.
This month I'm tackling where to buy a computer and the questions you need to ask in order to guarantee a good level of after sales support.
What are the pitfalls to avoid?
Is it worthwhile considering an independent contract with a third party maintenance company or an insurance firm?
What are your statutory rights under law, and how are these affected by what you decide to do with your PC?
In short, I'll be looking at how you can best protect yourself in the event of your computer going wrong.
THE DEALER'S CLOSE SHAVE
Anyone opening a computer magazine will find themselves confronted with a bewildering array of advertisements, all of them promising the greatest deals known to mankind.
For the ordinary user there are two main channels to buy a computer through — either direct or from a dealer.
Buying direct from a manufacturer often seems the most attractive option at first glance.
The list prices are nearly always cheaper because the middleman — the dealer — is missing.
Support is provided directly by the company itself and is usually included in the price.
Also, in theory, it should be provided by reasonably competent technicians.
The first direct manufacturer was Dell, which appeared on the scene in 1987.
Many people thought the scheme wouldn't work, but since then the company has gone from strength to strength.
According to UK market researcher Romtec, the number of units being sold direct as a percentage of the total market has increased from 12 per cent in 1990 to 39 per cent in 1992.
There's now a huge range of companies selling direct, from large, well-run outfits like Dell, Viglen and Elonex, to smaller operations competing solely on price.
It seemed at one stage that the dealer was dead — even some of the larger, more old-fashioned companies announced plans to introduce a direct sales scheme at the start of 1993, although this has yet to happen.
But dealers are striking back.
Although the list prices of machines sold direct are cheaper, many dealers are able to offer large discounts on their stock.
And there are some advantages in buying from a local dealer; if something goes wrong with your machine, you can take it straight back tot he shop and express your rage directly to the person you bought it from.
Many dealers, realizing they need to offer the best possible service to their customers to compete with the bigger mail-order firms and direct sellers, are also keen to offer good standards of back-up and support.
And don't forget the newer entrants into the market.
PC superstores account for nearly a quarter of the total market in the US, and they're beginning to make inroads into the UK market as well with the likes of PC World and the Business Superstore.
The PC is also beginning to establish itself as a consumer item, as demonstrated by its appearance in high street retail chains like Dixons, Wildings and John Lewis.
They can afford to buy in large quantities and pass the price benefits on to the customer.
SUPPORT IS A SERIOUS BUSINESS
The most important choice facing today's buyer isn't whether to buy direct or from a dealer, but whether it's worth paying extra for really good quality support and service.
There are plenty of dealers who can offer you a computer for less than the price of a Dell, Elonex or a Dan; but will the support be as good?
As will so many things, you get what you pay for.
True, the credibility of the direct sales channel has been undermined by some spectacular bankruptcies, most notably those of Olympic Technology — which sunk with debts of over £4 million — and Ti'ko, which went down owing close to £2 million.
But dealers can get flushed down the pan too.
Between October 1991 and March 1992, according to Romtec, 416 of the UK's 3,568 dealers went into liquidation.
In these times of uncertainly, how can you best protect yourself?
And how can you guarantee a reasonable level of support in case something does go horribly wrong?
Is it worth insuring your computer or taking out a separate contract with a third-party maintenance company?
Is it worth paying the extra money to a company in order to guarantee good quality support and back-up?
It depends on your circumstances.
If you work for a large company, with plenty of in-house techies to repair a computer if it goes wrong, or you are competent — and confident — enough to fix it yourself, then you could be justified in buying cheap and taking a risk.
But if you're an individual or small business buyer, then you'll probably be better off taking the following steps to make sure purchasing your computer is a painless as possible.
KNOW YOUR RIGHTS
Check your statutory rights.
No matter what happens, under the Sale of Goods Act 1979, computer suppliers have to meet the following conditions, otherwise they're legally obliged to sort out the problem for you.
The goods they supply must fit the description used in any advertisement or packaging.
According to the Consumer Association, the year, make, colours and size must be accurately described.
The computer must be of merchantable quality.
It must work properly, and if you bought it as new, it has to look new and be in good condition.
The computer must be fit for the purpose you specify.
So, for example, if you go to a supplier and ask for a machine to run Windows quickly, and you end up with an elderly 8086 PC, you'll be entirely within your rights to ask for your money back.
But it's important to remember that if you do have a grievance, you can only claim the money back from the company you bought the machine from, not the manufacturer.
Fix a definite date for the delivery of your computer, and make sure the supplier agrees to it.
Ideally, you should put it in writing, stating you need the machine by a specific date.
In that way, you're tying the supplier to a legally binding contract.
If it doesn't arrive by the date agreed, then you're within your rights to ask for your money back.
What's more, if you have to buy the same machine for more money elsewhere, you can also claim the difference in price from the original supplier.
But do be careful.
If you're going to complain, you have to do it within a reasonable time and in writing.
Unfortunately, what constitutes reasonable time isn't clearly defined under British law, and if a court thinks you've taken too long to register your complaint, you may not have a case.
But you'll still be legally entitled to some compensation if the machine is faulty, so it may be worth thinking about accepting a free repair or a replacement.
It's also wise to be aware of the differences of buying as an individual and buying as a business.
Manufacturers sometimes introduce changes to the terms and conditions of sale to make their lives easier.
Usually, these are insignificant, and can often speed things up for the customer as well.
But so long as these terms and conditions are reasonable, you'll have to stick to them if you're buying for a business; as an individual buyer you can ignore such distractions and fall back on your statutory rights.
TAKING THE WORRY OUT OF WARRANTIES
As Claire Holland, of the corporate affairs department of Dixons, points out, suppliers aren't legally obliged to provide a warranty.
But, as you'll discover, they nearly all do — it's a good way of giving customers added value.
A warranty agreement is legally enforceable because it's an essential part of the contract between you and the supplier.
A warranty becomes legally binding once you've paid for your machine.
But be warned, if you buy your machine from a retailer the manufacturer doesn't have to fix it under law — this is the responsibility of the dealer you bought it from.
And although most manufacturers will honour their warranties, even if you did buy the machine from a dealer, this is purely a philanthropic gesture on their part.
You must read the warranty carefully before you buy a computer.
Before ordering a machine from a supplier, make sure you get a copy of the company's terms and conditions and read the small print.
Many manufacturers won't allow you to remove the machine's case without automatically voiding your warranty: some go so far as to put seals over the case so they can tell if you've opened it.
Needless to say, they have sound commercial reasons for putting this clause in their warranties — if you damage the machine trying to install some extra SIMMs, for example, it's expensive for them to fix it.
On the other hand, fitting the SIMMs themselves is a lucrative sideline.
But it's a bit grim if all you want to do is fit an upgrade board.
The Consumer Association says that such a clause in the warranty could be considered unreasonable, and doesn't invalidate your statutory rights, as long as you're an individual buyer.
The other thing to note is the cost of parts in deals which offer free labour.
Sometimes companies will make up what they lose in terms of labour by charging more for the parts.
This is fair enough, but do check before you buy.
Many companies offer a 30-day money back guarantee.
This is fine, but clarify whether it's you or the manufacturer that has to foot the bill for sending the machine back.
And is there any other small print?
One final point — sometimes you have to return a card to the manufacturer before the warranty becomes valid.
Make sure you do this.
MAINTENANCE MATTERS
Before you buy a computer, have a look at what sort of maintenance the company is offering.
Ask the manufacturer which company is supplying the maintenance — is it provided by the manufacturer itself, or does it have a third party maintenance contract?
Is this a nationwide company, or a one-man outfit?
Is there a guaranteed response time?
If so, does the company have enough resources to meet these requirements?
Be a bit wary of companies making wonderful promises in their ads which they don't look capable of fulfiling.
For example, if you order a customized machine, be suspicious if you're offered next-day delivery; most manufacturers feel it's necessary to keep machines running for at least 24 hours — a process known as burning in — to check for any possible faults before sending them out.
And be careful about smaller companies which promise to get an engineer to your computer by the next day of something goes wrong.
This is fine if they have an agreement with a large maintenance company, but it's less likely to happen if the service is provided by the company itself.
Ideally, you should also plump for a company that offers a free technical support hotline.
But remember to check it out before you buy anything from the manufacturer.
Find out how easy it is to get through to the number, the quality of the answers, and the hours during which it operates.
PREDICTING THE UNPREDICTABLE
Of course, warranties and maintenance contracts are all very well, but — as customers of Ti'ko and Olympic Technology know to their cost — agreements with manufacturers are of precious little use if the company goes bust.If you buy from a retailer you may get some joy out of the manufacturer of the machine — but don't count on it.
Sadly, there are few steps you can take to guard against the possibility of a company going bankrupt.
But there are a few general pointers to look out for.
Firstly, have a look at how long the company has been trading.
If it's well established and secure, then it's in a better position to survive the rigours of recession than some fly-by-night box shifter.
If possible, try and do a company search.
Although this may be a couple of years out of date, it only costs £3 and it may give some clues as to the strength of the company.
A search will reveal if a company is carrying a heavy burden of debt, for example, but remember, this doesn't mean it's about to go into liquidation.
And if a company hasn't filed accounts at all when it's supposed to have done, that should tell you something about the organization of the company.
Just for the record, a limited company is meant to have filed accounts with Company's House in London — or Edinburgh if it's registered in Scotland — within 10 months of its financial year end.
Ask friends and business colleagues about computers they've bought.
Has the service been any good?
Did the machine arrive on time?
Have they had any problems with it?
A THIRD STRING TO YOUR BOX
In some cases it could be worth making out a third party support agreement with a specialist maintenance company.
This offers several advantages over the standard maintenance support from your supplier.
First, it can cover more than just your PC.
Micro Systems Maintenance, one of the country's larger maintenance companies, says it will cover all your peripherals as well as just the bog-standard PC.
It also means you'll be pretty safe if your supplier goes into liquidation.
Taking out a separate maintenance contract can also bring you peace of mind if you're running mission-critical applications — those vital programs you need to have running if your business is going to survive.
Where most manufacturers promise to get an engineer on-site within a couple of days, Micro Systems Maintenance guarantees to have an engineer on-site within eight hours.
Heron Granges, a specialist computer insurance company, also guarantees response times within eight hours, thanks to agreements with no fewer than three maintenance companies.
The costs charged by both these companies are high.
They were unable to give any firm details because costs and premiums vary according to the kind of system you have and what add-ons you also want insuring.
Taking out a separate maintenance contract or insurance is only really worth it if you might need back-up urgently.
For more details on these services call  
NEXT MONTH
Next month I'll be looking at technical support hotlines, and where you can get independent advice if you've got problems with your software.
Until then, our Buying With Confidence section on page 66 explains how to protect yourself when you take the plunge.
BUYER REVIEWS
MINI REVIEWS
This month's selection of the latest hardware and software includes more screen-saving madness; a desktop publishing program with a difference; British Rail's answer to timetable misery; a fax modem that isn't a fax modem; and a security package to keep the contents of your portable computer safe.
***** Stunning — The very best of its kind **** Impressive — This one's tasty *** Reasonable — Does the job ** Not so hot — Expensive for what you get * Worthless — Major faults or way too expensive
VENTURA ADPRO
VENTURA ON 
FAX:
Price: £595
Is it a desktop publishing program?
Yep.
Is it a general purpose graphics/drawing tool?
Nope.
Ventura says its AdPro package is the first in a new category of software, called (take a deep breath for this one) Advertising, Layout and Designers' Productivity Tools.
The company says AdPro is a graphics-based layout and design program aimed specifically at people who need to produce single and double-page display ads and flyers.
In effect, it's a cut-down version of a DTP program with some unique features thrown in.
If you're familiar with Ventura Publisher, the first thing you'll notice when you load up is the absence of an icon-based toolbar.
Instead, all the drawing and text tools are arranged down the side of the screen in the form of a written list, called a tag file.
The drawing elements of the program are vector-based, and concentrate on shapes, including boxes, polygons and ellipses.
The text tools aren't of the usual bold and italic — they affect how you put text onto the page.
For example, to run text into columns, you pick one of the column tools.
To create a heading, select the heading tool, draw a line and write your text directly onto the screen.
Once you've stuck your shapes and text on the page you can rotate and repeat they to your heart's content.
To change their properties you click on the right mouse button.
This brings up a dialogue box, where you type in the necessary alterations.
However, this process is a bit clumsy.
When you created an object you can save it for later use and even add to your tag file, so it can be selected instantly from the menu.
You can put virtually anything in your tag file, including completed pages, mastheads and logos.
This is a really good idea, and it's well implemented.
AdPro supports a wide range of graphics formats, including BMP, TIFF and PCX files which can also be saved on your tag file.
AdPro is simple to use and has good documentation.
It's also flexible; anyone who wants to produce a newsletter, brochure or advertisement will find it meets their needs.
Be warned, though — AdPro needs a minimum of 4Mb of RAM to run properly, although it's quite gentle on the hard disk space (it only takes up 4Mb).
But the mouse support could be improved, and at £595, it's way too expensive.
AJ *** 
Ventura's AdPro marks the arrival of another new category of software: Advertising, Layout and Designers' Productivity Tools
MATINEE
THE RODERICK MANHATTAN GROUP ON 
FAX:
Price: £29
You may already have a flying toaster screen saver and animated cursors, but I bet you haven't got a screen save that displays full motion video.
As long as you've got Windows 3.1, 2Mb of RAM, and a monitor and VGA card capable of displaying 256 colours, you can become Michael Winner for a day!
Matinee gives you over 30 clips of video to edit and view.
Three's a B-movie actor being attacked by a giant lobster and a man landing on the moon.
There's even a clip of a piece of toast being launched from a toaster — a none too-subtle dig at Berkeley Systems' flying toasters, methinks.
The clips are short — no more than a couple of seconds each — but you can run them together using the editing program.
You can also buy additional video clips on topics ranging from sci-fi to nostalgia.
On the sensible side, you can set up password protection to prevent unauthorized people from tinkering with your data.
Matinee is a screen saver with a difference, but be warned — I had problems getting it to work with the VGA card in some machines.
Frivolous, but fun.
GR *** 
Fed-up with flying toasters?
Matinee is a screen saver that gives you movie mayhem you can edit yourself
PERSONAL FINANCE PLANNER
INVEST-TECH on 
FAX:
PRICE: £35 (INC VAT)
If you're anything like me, you'll be hopeless at budgeting money for any length of time.
Where does it all go?
Is it a case for Inspector Morse?
Maybe the DOS-based Personal Finance Planner will help us keep a closer eye on those disappearing thousands.
The package is designed to help you work out the best way of controlling your finances over the period of a year.
It's basically a pre-programmed spreadsheet  with over 1,600 formulae, so you don't have to set up your own.
It will automatically calculate, for example, what proportion of your income goes on things like the car and household items.
The program works on the basis of assumptions.
You type in what you think your annual income and expenditure will be, your credit card and bank overdraft limits, and the program will tell you if your budget is viable.
This requires a fair amount of work on your part.
For example, you have to account for money spent on holidays, and it's wise to set a certain amount aside for emergencies, like the boiler breaking down.
Personal Finance Manager is fairly flexible.
Information can be presented in several ways, the most useful being graphs.
You can also call up tables listing your expenditure on various items, and the program shows it as a percentage of your total income.
This is very useful, if you really want to shock yourself.
You can also alter assumptions as your circumstances change.
So if the Chancellor is rotten enough to raise taxes, or your boss is foolish enough to give you a pay rise, you can type the details in, and see how it will affect your budget.
The program isn't perfect by any stretch of the imagination.
It won't recalculate automatically as you enter new data.
And bizarrely, there's no function for opening up an empty budget planner; you have to save the example planner under a different name and delete all the data from it.
The documentation is straightforward enough, but is badly laid out and awkward to read.
That said, Personal Finance Manager will help you keep track of where your money is going to go over the course of the year.
And because it's a DOS-based program, it won't take up masses of hard disk space.
AJ *** 
Personal Finance Manager is a quirky program, but it will help you to trace your missing millions
BRITISH RAIL JOURNEY PLANNER
NETWORK SOUTH EAST MARKETING
Price: £19.99 (PLUS 1.40 P&P
This is the electronic version of British Rail's timetable and it comes as no surprise to find that it's subject to BR's usual get-out clauses.
For instance, the manual states that ‘BR cannot accept responsibility for inaccuracies or errors contained in the program.’
And when you eventually decide what time to travel, you can safely assume that BR isn't responsible for your train being late — blame the leaves on the track — or for the lack of pickle in your sandwiches — write to Clement Freud.
But for just under twenty quid you effectively get hold of the complete BR timetable (for the whole of Great Britain), effective until 16th May 1993.
From here it's a doddle to sort out train times and connections — it's probably cheaper than trying to ring up and get through to BR's phone lines and definitely easier to use than wading through the paper version.
BR also throws in a map of its lines which could be interesting, as long as your idea of a fun-packed weekend is to spend it hovering around draughty platforms with a notebook and a flask.
What's surprising is the kind of machine you need to run the Journey Planner: a 386 or 486 processor, a hard disk and a massive 4Mb of RAM.
And this isn't even a Windows program; in fact, the interface is best described as basic.
There's no installation program; instead you have to create a directory on your hard disk and manually copy over the files.
So how does it work?
Type in your destination, your leaving point and the time you either want to arrive or depart, and the program goes away and calculates the best route.
It defaults to give the shortest route, although this may well be the most expensive.
But it does tell you where you have to change trains, the time of the connections and the overall travelling time.
You can also set up options to go via a certain station.
Once you've got your journey sussed, you can print out the details.
It doesn't cover the tubes, but it does inform you if you have to go via the Underground to get to your destination.
And it doesn't give you pricing information, which would have been useful, but difficult to keep up-to-date.
But the Journey Planner is good value for money, and for anyone who needs to coordinate rail journeys it could be a real time-saver.
GR **** 
BR's journey planner tells you the quickest way from A to B. Shame it can't tell you which trains will run on time…
PORTKNOX
PORTABLE COMPUTERS ON 
FAX:
Price: £149
If you store incredibly important and confidential data on a portable or laptop computer, you'll want a heavy-duty security system — especially if you're prone to leaving your car boot open with the machine inside.
PortKnox, or LapSecure, as it's known in the States, gives you a very high level of protection.
The kit is a mixture of hardware and software.
The hardware dongle plugs into your parallel printer port (your printer can remain attached) and is attached to a piece of wire leading to a small silver sensor.
You also get a key which holds the other half of the sensor; pressing the key against the sensor gives you access to your machine.
The sensor is quite foolproof — it contains a unique serial number stored in ROM, which has been laser-programmed.
The bundled software controls the sensor and the key.
It reads the Touch key when it's placed on the sensor and uses it as an encryption key to decode data as it's read and to encode it as it's written.
Install the program on your hard disk, plug in the dongle, boot up, and you're asked to place the key on the sensor and set up a password.
You can then choose from two levels of security; low level, which scrambles your file  allocation table; and level two, which encrypts your entire hard drive.
Backing up your data is vital, so book a lunch date if you choose level two, because it takes about one minute per megabyte of hard disk space to set up.
The software also includes ViruSTOP which looks for virus-like behaviour.
But setting up ViruSTOP takes time.
The aim is to store your unchanging program files on drive C, which can then be write-protected, and partition your hard disk so that your changing data is stored on a second drive.
Viruses attach themselves to EXE files, so if anything untoward happens and a file tries to illegally write itself onto drive C, ViruSTOP will give a warning message.
Other utilities allow you to support up to four other users on the same system, each of which has a different key, allowing different levels of access to the system.
Also vital is the ability to create a key disk, which you can use to boot from should you lose the real key.
The level of security PortKnox gives is high, but you pay a price.
Setting up the program can be time-consuming — you have to back up your entire hard disk, repartition it and encrypt it — so you'd have to have some really important data on your machine to make it worthwhile.
GR *** 
PortKnox gives you a high level of security, but setting up the program can be extremely time-consuming
TRUEEFFECTS FOR WINDOWS
THE CONSUMER CENTRE ON 
FAX:
Price: £49.95
The arrival of Windows 3.1, with its embedded True-Type font support, heralded a revolution in the number and quality of typefaces you could slap all over boring statements of accounts.
It also guaranteed hours of wasted time as users struggled to choose between Bodini Extra Bold and Franklin Gothic.
TrueEffects for Windows allows you to go several steps further in the effort to jazz up your documents.
This package lets you add different patterns, shades and backgrounds to all TrueType fonts, thus making sure your productivity will slide further down the tubes.
The program is thankfully easy to use.
It even comes with its own collection of TrueType fonts to get you started.
These are basic, but enough to meet most people's needs.
They include Times New Roman, a motley mixture of Courier styles, Arial and a couple of novelty fonts.
There's a large range of patterns for you to choose from, including a starburst, sunset, sunrise and a rattan weave effect.
The same sets of patterns are used for backgrounds and for filling in the fonts themselves.
This gives you a chance to arrive at some horrible, eye-torturing combinations, like plaid for the font and stripes for the background.
For greater emphasis, you can also add different styles of outlines and shadows to characters.
Every time you make a change, it's instantly applied to a letter ‘M’ in one corner of the Window.
When you've finished faffing around with the fonts, you can choose to either axe your disastrous experiment, or install it as a TrueType font itself.
You can then use it in all your favourite Windows applications.
So if your Excel spreadsheet is looking a mite dull, then this could be the package for you.
All the fonts you create can be sized according to what you want.
TrueEffects is a compact package — all it needs is a mere 500Kb of hard disk space — and it works really well.
My main objection is this: is it worth buying a program like this when experts say all you need is plain, bold and italic versions of one serif face and one sans serif face for effective letters and documents?
Oh, what the heck — TrueEffects is great fun.
AJ **** 
TrueEffects for Windows lets you create some deliciously hideous fonts, using a variety of patterns and backgrounds
ARCOM FAX TELEPROCESSOR
INCAA DATACOM ON 
FAX:
Price: £1,314
Question: When is a fax modem not a fax modem?
Answer: When it's an Arcom Fax Teleprocessor.
This machine can send and receive faxes, but it's unlike any other fax modem I've ever seen.
It's quite large as external modems go, and has two serial ports and parallel printer cable at the rear.
Conventional tax modems fall into two categories.
The old ones were DOS-based and used a limited range of WP print drivers and a TSR to send faxes.
The latest breed run under Windows and just need a special Windows printer driver to operate.
The Teleprocessor needs no special software; you could probably run it from a palmtop machine.
It's so smart it can convert any ASCII text into fax format and store up to 200Kb's worth.
It interprets commands inserted at the beginning of document (such as: AT FAX0716083283) before it interprets the ‘Dear John’ bit, so you can send faxes from any program on any PC, as long as it has a serial port.
You can also attach the modem to a laser printer to form a receive-only fax.
This is fine in principle, but I found it awkward in practice.
A previous user of the review machine had tried to send some faxes which never made it down the wire.
They were retained in the fax modem's memory and as soon as I plugged it in, tried to send them.
I found it difficult to regain control of the beast.
Configuring is easy; any simple comms program will do, but none is supplied, which is extraordinary, given the price of the Teleprocessor.
The fax side as many features; you can store your signature and incorporate it in faxes, for example.
The manual is well written and explains how the device works, but it doesn't explain how to use it with, say, WordPerfect.
The teleprocessor also doubles as a 14.4Kbps V32bis modem, a device which can cost up to £900.
This partially revived me after the £1,314 price tag made me feel faint.
All in all, the Teleprocessor isn't very attractive; for less money you could buy a 386DX, a fax modem card and WinFax Pro, and have an easier life.
RG ** 
Reviewers this issue: Andrew Johnson, Roger Gann and Gail Robinson  
BUYER BEST BUYS
top ten UTILITIES
This month's Top Ten features the best utilities we're reviewed over the past 18 months.
Each entry includes a mini review and all the details you need to get hold of these products.
1
This version of Central Point Backup has been specially designed for Windows users.
It supports drag ‘n’ drop file selection, backups can be run in the background and it includes all the other facilities of version 7.1, except for the complementary DOS version.
Backup 7.2 supports QIC-40 and QIC-80 tape drives and it detects more than twice as many viruses as the previous version.
Good looking.
Good value.
Good stuff.
2
This file transfer program lets you make remote connections via a modem and access drives on a remote computer as it they were on your own machine.
Also, remote users can dial in over a modem and access a network's drives — this is really useful if you have people on the road who need access to office files.
Laplink Pro 4 is the best way to move files without moving to throw floppy disks around the office.
3
This toolbox of useful utilities is perhaps the best disk utility software around.
Although MS-DOS 5 has Undelete and Unformat facilities, Norton can recover files that DOS 5 can't.
The programs include Disk Doctor, which cures hard disk problems; and Disk Editor, one of the best sector editors around.
Norton can also tag its own help files onto the DOS 5 help system.
For disk recovery and editing, it's hard to beat.
4
PrintCache is a spooler which accelerates printing and accommodates both DOS and Windows.
It works especially well with HP LaserJets, where it uses data compression and print optimization to increase the speed.
A 12Kb TSR program is loaded into memory.
The buffer where the print output is spooled can either be a hard disk or in Extended (not with Windows) or Expanded memory.
It takes the pain out of printing.
5
QEMM is a memory manager that's not only efficient, it automatically installs itself with the minimum of effort and gives you huge extra chunks of available memory.
It really comes into its own, however, when you need to squeeze that last drop of memory out in order to run a stack of network drivers on top of a hose of TSRs.
It uses state-of-the-art techniques to make available every last byte of Upper DOS memory.
A techie's delight.
6
SuperStar Pro claims to roughly double the capacity of your hard disk.
It creates a hidden file on your hard disk which fools DOS into thinking it's a real disk drive.
The device driver then compresses any data saved to the disk and decompresses data read from it on the fly.
The Optibase JPEG image compressor can reduce huge image files to more manageable sizes.
A Recompress feature allows you to further squash already compressed drives.
7
This diagnostics program includes a module which lets you test individual components or the entire machine.
System Sleuth will identify your processor, BIOS, how much RAM you've got and so on.
One thing it can't spot is the amount of video RAM on your VGA card.
A useful feature is the unique Installation Assistant which lets you input the settings for a card you intend to fit in your PC.
It can save a lot of time and frustration.
8
XTree Gold tells you everything you want to know about your files quickly and easily.
It also moves them, searches for them and copies directory structures from one drive to another.
It has an apps launcher and a file viewer, can compress, decompress and recover files, and display two different directory lists on a split screen for comparison.
By focussing on disk and file management, XTree Gold does it better than all the rest.
9
WinMaster is a collection of four utilities designed to manage your hard disk.
It lets you copy and run files and search for and rename programs.
You can call up general information about your hard disk and how Windows 3.1 is handling your memory.
It tells you which files belonging to which programs are on your hard disk and it can also compress files.
Although it's confusing to get to grips with, WinMaster is a well thought out, useful program.
10
This is the utility package to beat when it comes to value for money.
Features include the ability to remote control your office PC from home or vice versa, virus detection, comms, disk defragging, data recovery, a desktop manager, back-up software and a menu system to launch applications.
Basically, PC Tools has it all; you'd have to buy several Norton packages (as well as Norton Utilities) to amass this impressive horde.
ISSUE 40 Central Point Backup 7.2 Central Point Software Phone  Fax  Price: £99 UPS: Can detect oodles of viruses DOWNS: No matching DOS version *****
ISSUE 40 LapLink Pro 4 Travelling Software Phone  Fax  Price: £125 UPS: Lets you access a remote PC DOWNS: The price *****
ISSUE 40 Norton Utilities 6.01 Symantec Phone  Fax  Price: £139 UPS: Excellent for recovering files DOWNS: No backup features *****
ISSUE 40 PrintCache Riva Phone  Fax  Price: £99 UPS: Makes printing much less painful DOWNS: Works best with HP LaserJets *****
ISSUE 44 QEMM 6.02 Quarterdeck Phone  Fax  Price: £79.95 UPS: Gives you huge chunks of memory DOWNS: Can be tricky to install *****
ISSUE 40 Super Star Pro Elite Software Phone  Fax  Price: £74 UPS: Effective file squasher DOWNS: DOS 6 has data compression *****
ISSUE 40 System Sleuth Pro Software Paradise Phone  Fax  Price: £89 UPS: Installation Assistant DOWNS: Can't identify with RAM *****
ISSUE 44 XTree Gold 2.5 Merisel Phone  Fax  Price: £112 UPS: Does everything except make tea DOWNS: Old-fashioned interface *****
ISSUE 41 WinMaster The Consumer Centre Phone  Fax  Price: £69 UPS: Well thought out, very useful DOWNS: A bit tricky to learn ****
ISSUE 44 PC Tools 8 Central Point Software Phone  Fax  Price: £139 UPS: Excellent value for money DOWNS: Takes up to 9Mb of hard disk ****
SPREADSHEETS
WORKSHOP
Rent or Buy?
IN THE SECOND PART OF OUR SERIES ON PRACTICAL USES FOR YOUR SPREADSHEET,DENNIS JENKIN EXPLAINS HOW TO WORK OUT THE FINANCIAL PROS AND CONS OF RENTING OR BUYING A PROPERTY.
Should you buy or should you rent?
If you put down that crystal ball, I'll show you how your spreadsheet can help you with this dilemma.
The graph below shows how long it takes for the present value of £1,000 per year to reach £15,000.
(I'm simplifying the calculation by taking the value of each regular payment as £1 and reducing the lump sum proportionally.
So when comparing £15,000 in cash with £1,000 per year, I insert the payment as £1 per year and the lump sum as £15.)
If you want a building or equipment for less than that number of years, it's best to rent.
Renting is always cheaper when the required rate of return exceeds 7 per cent.
If your spreadsheet doesn't have a formula to work out this calculation directly, you can base one on the textbook formula for the sum of a geometric progression:
where A is the payment in the first year; R is 1/ (1+I), where I is the interest rate; and N is the number of years.
We know the sum (the principal), so we can rearrange the formula to calculate the number of years (N) in the table.
Use upper case letters when working in years and lower case with months, to avoid mistakes when switching from one calculation to another.
Although the graph refers to the full amounts of £1,000/year and £15,000, it was based on this table.
As the formula includes R at least twice, it's worth creating a column for R and using that in your formula.
You might need to insert interest rates as decimals (1 per cent = 0.01) and them reformat the block as a percentage.
Start by inserting a few rates, then decide what others are needed.
Remember to insert a tiny value, such as 0.0001, instead of 0 per cent in cells B10 and H10.
The cells holding the interest rates were reformatted to get rid of unnecessary zeros.
As the term increases rapidly at the higher interest rates, you need to insert extra values of the interest rate to produce a smooth curve.
The formula for start-year payments in cell F11 is:
and the formula for end-year payments (L11) is:
Each cell reference can be entered by moving the cursor to the appropriate cell and typing the symbol that follows it.
Hit the F3 key before * when the cursor is in cell H5, to convert the reference into an absolute one.
The /COPY command can then be used to copy the formula to the remaining rows of its column.
The term for start-year payments at 0 per cent interest rate is only 14, as the 15th payment is made on day 1 of the 15th year.
The accuracy of the result can be checked in a column showing the present value for that term.
The formula for start-year payments is: and the formula for end-year payments is:
The payment is 1 but don't press F when marking cells in these formulae.
If the result doesn't equal the principal/ payment ratio, look for typographical errors in one of the formulae.
WORKSHOP
DRAWING SOFTWARE
DRAWING Attention
CONTINUING HIS LOOK AT HOW TO USE IMAGES IN YOUR DOCUMENTS,JOHN BENNETT CHECKS OUT SONE OF THE BEST PC DRAWING PACKAGES AND EXPLAINS WHY YOU DON'T HAVE TO BE MICHELANGELO TO USE THE.
The drawing packages I'm looking at this month have more widespread practical use than the painting packages I reviewed last month.
In general, hardware requirements are lower, print quality is more consistent and with the plentiful availability of clip-art, it's relatively easy to create an attractive image, even if you're lacking in artistic talent.
Drawing software takes a mathematical approach to lines and shapes, and deals with objects rather than individual pixels.
Everything that's drawn on the page is made up of ‘vectors’, with mathematically defined start and finish points, and allocated line, colour and fill styles.
Although the drawing program's technique is trickier to get to grips with than the painting program's, it has two main advantages.
First, the quality of the printed image depends purely on the capabilities of your printer; it doesn't matter what screen resolution you use.
Second, everything you draw is an object that can be selected, moved, reshaped or deleted independently of the rest.
Each object has handles attached to corner points, curves, and so on, so that you can tweak the lines into the right shape very easily; whereas with a paint program you'd undo the line and try again.
There are plenty of packages around for under £150 and they shouldn't take more than a couple of days to master.
Use them to create images for brightening up your newsletters, reports, simple diagrams and suchlike.
You'd probably spend no more than 30 minutes on each image.
To achieve this you need simple drawing tools that allow you to reshape something once you've drawn it, and a good selection of relevant clip-art.
The package should be very visual; for example, when you rotate an object you should be able to do this by dragging it, not by going through umpteen dialogue boxes.
Special effects are a bonus because most DTP packages can't handle them.
However, they're less important than intuitive drawing and good clip-art.
High-end drawing packages (which cost hundreds of pounds) are worth the expense if you work regularly with images and need to create complex or technical drawings.
The same applies if you do creative work where you need to be sure you have the tools to accomplish dramatic effects.
Most importantly, you need a high-end package if you want to be able to print and control colour separations to have your image printed professionally.
Since a single run of 1,000 full-colour A4 posters will cost you several hundred pounds to print, for example, there's no point working with low-end software, unless you're an artistic genius.
All of the current high-end drawing packages are packed with features and are capable of the highest quality output.
But they also have a steep learning curve for the uninitiated, which is something to consider before taking the plunge.
Quite often, they'll sit idle if people find them too complex to use properly.
Look for comprehensive bezier drawing tools, precise selection and alignment tools, colour and wireframe editing and the ability to specify dimensions mathematically, as well as by eye.
Layer management, good documentation, on-line help, colour separation and registration capabilities are also important and special effects should go way beyond simple rotate and reflect features.
Some of these packages include excellent typographic extras, like a spell checker or thesaurus.
But these aren't word processors, no matter how much they'd like you to think so.
The text handling is relatively slow and any major keying-in is best done is a suitable application and them imported.
LOW/MID-RANGE DRAWING PACKAGES
GST DESIGNWORKS
GST on 
Price: £149
GST DesignWorks 4 has more sophisticated features than most of its sub-£150 rivals, but it's still very easy to learn.
Its interface isn't the prettiest and there are some other niggles, like the lack of moveable guides, average clip-art and a poor Autotrace  feature.
But, it's probably a good long-term bet because of its more professional drawing tools, and extra features like converting text to outlines, 50 levels of undo, 200 named layers and locking objects in place to avoid moving them by mistake.
And, most welcome of all, DesignWorks support CMYK and Pantone colour, with both spot and separated PostScript output, for professional printing.
Although it's a bit crude round the edges, DesignWorks offers inexperienced users a good balance of ease of use and powerful drawing tools
ALDUS INTELLIDRAW
Aldus on 
Price: £149
IntelliDraw is hardly a low-end application, but it's difficult to place because it's the result of some brave lateral thinking about how people use images in practical circumstances.
The program has tools for symmetrical drawing, dimension lines with changing measurements, master objects and clones for quick-editing, animation, and ‘connectigons’ for maintaining links in the drawing of a complex shape (like a spiral staircase, for example) which allow you to edit the shape easily as a whole.
The idea behind IntelliDraw is that people's needs change, and it should be possible to adjust the drawing process to take that into account, rather than start from scratch.
Unfortunately, the program tries to be too many different things at once, and as a result it isn't easy to use as it claims and performs quite slowly.
That said, future releases promise to be very interesting.
IntelliDraw takes a fresh look at the way people work with images.
It lets you reshape complex objects quickly and link text and graphics automatically
ARTS AND LETTERS APPRENTICE 3.1
Roderick Manhattan on 
Price: £145
Arts and Letters Apprentice has one of the best quality selections of editable clip-art, and a very good range of fonts.
Although its drawing and selection tools are slightly more convoluted than they need be, the program is easy to get to grips with and has some nice touches that make it more usable than most.
The best example of this is the symbol icon, which lets you call up rectangles, circles and other ready-made shapes for each one.
Just scroll along and drag the one you want onto the page.
There's also a useful charting feature, so you can put together jazzy pie charts or bar graphs without having to leave the program.
HIGH-END DRAWING PACKAGES
ADOBE ILLUSTRATOR 4
Adobe on 
Price: £565
Adobe Illustrator 4 is arguably the most powerful package of the bunch, but it's also software-from-hell to learn.
This is largely because of the subtle differences between its superb selection tools, which often baffle newcomers.
It's also because many   standard features on other packages which make repetitive jobs easier — like palettes, layer management and gradient fills — would be welcomed with open arms by Illustrator users.
But the program really comes into its own with complicated drawings involving hundreds of paths and objects.
As well as its unparalleled accuracy, Illustrator handles type exceptionally well, has a built-in graphing function, and comes with Adobe TypeAlign, Type Manager, Separator and Streamline utilities.
But at over £600, this one's for graphics professionals only.
Adobe Illustrator is capable of handling the most complex vector illustrations.
Its strengths are power and precision, but its not for the faint-hearted
PROFESSIONAL DRAW 1
Gold Disk on 
Price: £99.95
Brand new from the US, Professional Draw is a bold attempt to combine the best elements from other top-end packages (such as CorelDRAW's envelope editing) with new features normally associated with paint packages (colour balancing and greyscale conversion) and an innovative approach to existing effects like 3D extrusion and gradient fills.
Professional Draw is equally at home with creative or technical illustration and the interface shows that a great deal of thought about usability has gone into it, although the sheer weight of features and refinements for precision illustration make it a complex package to master at first.
My only criticism of what is a remarkable first release concerns the proprietary fonts it comes with, although it does support all the major font formats.
Professional Draw combines top-level creative features and accuracy at a price which puts the low-end packages to shame
INTEGRATED PACKAGES
CORELDRAW
XITAN on 
PRICE: £395
CorelDRAW has been the best-selling PC drawing package for the past couple of years.
The latest version really upset the applecart by including slideshow, painting, charting, file organization and autoracing applications, turning plain CorelDRAW into The Corel Graphics Toolkit.
The idea behind it is to cover practically every graphics eventually in one integrated bundle, with loads of fonts and clip-art to boot.
CorelDRAW's drawing capabilities are improved, with full colour editing, more standard fonts and innovations, including the best roll-up palettes around.
The package is great value and is quite easy to learn.
Its weaknesses.
Its weaknesses are slow text handling and screen redrawing in the drawing application, lack of scanner support in the painting application, and a weak slideshow feature.
GRAPHICS WORKS
MICROGRAFX on 
PRICE: £295
Micrografx has replied to CorelDRAW with a similar suite of programs, called Graphics Works, which will appeal to more casual graphics users.
Again, there are drawing, image editing, charting and slideshow applications and a lorry-load of fonts and clip-art.
The applications are a doddle to learn — most Windows users will be able to get stuck in straight away without a second glance at the manual — and they include a flowcharting module as well as Twain scanning support.
Although the drawing and charting applications aren't as sophisticated as Corel's, the package is consistent, cheerful, and very easy to use.
PUBLISHER'S TREASURE CHEST
RODERICK MANHATTAN ON 
PRICE: £199
This is aimed at much the same audience as Graphics Works, but takes a difference approach by including Microsoft Publisher, along with Arts & Letters Apprentice 3.1 and Halo Desktop Imager (for image capture conversion and improvement).
Although it doesn't have the breadth of applications that CorelDRAW and Graphics Works offer, Halo supports Twain scanning, and includes effects filters as well as sound colour correction tools, and Publisher is an extremely polished low-end DTP package for page layout.
LAST WORDS
Whether you want a printing or drawing package, if you intend to spend around £150 or more, your first port of call should be the big integrated graphics bundles, quite simply because of their outstanding value for money.
Of these CorelDRAW is a good bet if your drawing needs are (or may become) fairly sophisticated; Graphics Works is ideal for first time users, because they can pick it up and get on with the job from scratch with the minimum of fuss; and if you want good page layout software to support your images, The Publisher's Treasure Chest is a good choice.
Otherwise, the first thing to do is to decide whether you need a drawing package or a painting package and how elaborate you want it to be.
So provided you get something at the right level of sophistication, you shouldn't go far wrong with any of the mainstream graphics software currently available.
DRAWING — A GLOSSARY
CONVERT TO CURVES:Turn text into a graphic to be reshaped.
Ideal for logos.
ENVELOPE EDITING:Select objects and twist, stretch and reshape them by dragging.
BEZIER CURVES:Professional line-editing standard for vector drawing.
GRADIENT HILLS:Blend from one colour to another from a palette.
EXTRUSION:Use this technique for creating 3D effects.
TEXT TO PATH:Run text along a path or around a shape.
USER
WORKSHOPS
INSTALLING A NETWORK
DIARY OF A Network
PART THREE
THINKING OF INSTALLING A NETWORK?
DON'T PANIC?
IN THE THIRD PART OF OUR STEP BY STEP SERIES,ROGER GANN EXPLAINS HOW TO PHYSICALLY CONNECT THE MACHINES TOGETHER, WHAT YOU NEED TO CONSIDER BEFORE YOU REACH FOR THE CABLES AND HOW TO AVOID CREATING A MINIATURE SPAGHETTI JUNCTION IN THE OFFICE.
The story so far…
In previous instalments we took our faltering first steps into the world of connectivity, that buzzword of the nineties.
We looked at reasons for installing a network, fitting and configuring the network interface card (NIC), managing precious memory, and testing the installation.
This time round we're going to cover the potentially fraught matter of cabling.
You're probably thinking that a cable is a cable is a cable.
In fact, cabling is a critical element in a network and if the cabling is sub-standard, you can be plagued with irritating random ‘breaks’ in the network.
Not only can this play hell with the smooth operation of a network, it can be a nightmare to troubleshoot, especially where you have long cable runs between machines.
So, it ought to be clear by the end of this instalment that you should devote some thought to cabling, ideally before the network goes in.
Precisely what sort of cable will be used depends on the network architecture you've chosen.
There are basically three types of network cable: thick Ethernet, thin Ethernet and twisted pair.
These also masquerade under the techie names of 10Base-5, 10Base-2 and 10Base-T respectively.
Ethernet networking comes from Xerox, a company which is famous for developing significant advances in personal computing, but then failing to take commercial advantage of them.
Both types of Ethernet cable have a similar construction.
They consist of a copper core, which carries the signal, surrounded by a braided mesh of fine copper wire.
This ‘screens’ the conductor from interference.
A final outer plastic sheath completes the wire.
Ethernet cables are very similar to television aerial coaxial cable.
You may think that thick and thin Ethernet differ in size, but the main difference between them is the ranges they can cover: a thick Ethernet cable can be 500m long, whereas its skinny relative can only manage 150m.
Both are capable of transmitting data at up to 10Mbits per second.
The other kind of cabling — unshielded twisted pair (UTP)— is a lot simpler.
It's much thinner than thin Ethernet, resembling telephone cabling.
As the name implies, it uses a pair of unscreened cables that are twisted, another technique to reduce the influence of interference.
The three types of cable use three different types of connector.
Thick Ethernet uses a DB-15 connector with 15 pins, rather like a games port.
Thin Ethernet uses a coaxial BNC connector with a rotating sleeve lock, to prevent it from coming adrift from the network interface card.
Twisted pair cable uses a special plastic plug, called an RJ-45, which looks like a US telephone plug.
Your choice of network interface card will determine the cabling system you'll use.
Most Ethernet cards have both thick and thin connectors, but some also have an RJ-45 plug for UTP cabling.
My own Lantastic AE-3 cards have all three options covered.
CHOOSING THE CORRECT TOPOLOGY
as if all this wasn't enough, you have another factor to contend with: topology.
Nothing to do with the study of Mediterranean entertainers, the topology of a network refers to the layout of the cable between PCs.
Ethernet uses a ‘bus’ topology, bus in this case referring to an electrical bus or common supply, rather than an omnibus.
So, it's essentially a straight wire with workstations at intervals along its length, and terminators at either end.
A token ring network, on the other hand, uses a circular ring layout like the Ethernet, but with both ends joined together.
A variation on the ring topology is the ‘star’ topology, where either the file server or a special network ‘exchange’box sits in the middle and cable radiates from it to each workstation.
The MainLan cards in the What Personal Computer system had both types of Ethernet sockets, but came with thin Ethernet  cables, so that's what we used.
Fitting them to the NIC is a doddle.
First of all, you fit a T-shaped two-way adaptor to the card.
This lets you connect two workstations to the card, and essential feature in a bus topology.
You then push the cable connector onto one side of the T-connector and give the lock ring a twist.
You do this to every machine, daisychaining them together.
The PCs at each end of the run have a 50Ohm terminator plug fitted to the spare plug on the T-connector.
This resistor absorbs the network signals and stops them bouncing back down the wire.
The cables and accessories that came with MainLan were of the cheap and cheerful variety.
They worked OK, but I felt happier replacing them with better quality versions.
For example, T-connectors come in for a lot of punishment and have to put up with all sorts of strains, such as people inadvertently standing on the cable.
The best quality T-connectors, which cost around £4 each, have a reinforced centre section, to strengthen the join between the vertical and horizontal bits.
The T-connectors from Sage weren't reinforced and the cabling was cheap.
You don't have to use ready-made cable lengths;; you can buy a drum of thin Ethernet cable (RG-58/50Ohm) at about 50p per metre, and make up your own cable lengths.
All you need is a crimping tool (about £20) and some BNC crimp connectors (about £1 each).
Outer Sheath Copper Braid Insulator Copper Conductor Ethernet cable is very similar to television coaxial cable.
It contains a braided mesh of fine copper wire, which screens the conductor from interference
LAYING TO REST
Plugging the cables in is the easy bit; the hard bit is choosing a good route for them to follow.
Most small networks don't need a particularly sophisticated cabling regime — if you have your desks facing a wall, you can simply drape the cable down the back of each desk and run it along the top of the skirting board.
Cable shouldn't be run under a carpet unless it's suitably protected — it only takes one stiletto heel to bring your network down!
Loose-laid cables have the advantage of quick installation and flexibility, not to mention price, but exposed cables are vulnerable.
An ideal solution would be to install plastic mini-trunking around your office, with connector boxes located, say, every two metres.
This is costly, but it's also the safest option.
Whichever choice you plump for, there are a number of things to consider when routing cables.
All networking cables are susceptible to electrical interference and should be located away from sources of this electrical ‘pollution’.
It might be tempting to run a network cable inside an existing duct or trunking system that contains other cables, but make sure you check it out first.
Similarly, if your office has a suspended ceiling, you may think of running the cable up there, rather than under the carpet.
Again, you should beware: some light fittings — such as  fluorescent lights or low voltage transformers — generate a fair amount of ‘noise’.
Another simple rule to observe is to be careful not to crimp or squeeze the cable.
This impairs the efficiency of the braided shield and renders the cable open to interference.
This can be a particular problem if you run the cable sharply around a corner — you should always use gentle radius bends.
In the old What Personal Computer office, prior to the move, things were a little, er…informal, and I was worried about the cable taking a pounding.
Luckily, central heating radiators ran around the room, so I was able to position the cable off the floor.
I ran it behind each radiator and draped it over the pair of mounting brackets on each radiator.
The new office, which we've just moved into, is a rather different kettle of fish.
During fitting out, provision was made for the whole floor (which includes What Personal Computer's sister titles — PC User and Which Computer?) to be properly cabled up, ready to be networked.
But, horror of horrors, it looks like unshielded twisted pair cabling has been installed and there are RJ-45 sockets everywhere!
Not a BNC socket in sight!
Ah well, back to the drawing board…
BUS TOPOLOGY
A bus topology is basically a straight wire with workstations situated at intervals along its length and terminators at either end
STAR TOPOLOGY
A star topology is where the file server (or a special network ‘exchange’ box) sits in the middle and cable radiates from it to each workstation
F1 for Help
TROUBLE SHOOTING
GOT A PROBLEM?
DON'T PANIC, OUR EXPERTS ARE ON HAND TO SOLVE ALL YOUR COMPUTING PREDICAMENTS, WHETHER THEY CONCERN HARDWARE, SOFTWARE OR PERIPHERALS.
KEEP SENDING IN ANY HANDY TIPS AND THE BEST ONES, PUBLISHED EACH MONTH, WILL WIN A PRIZE.
BACK-UPS FROM HELL
Q: As an avid reader of What Personal Computer, I'm writing in desperation regarding a serious problem which you or one of your readers may be able to help me with.
Due to a crowded hard disk on my Compaq LTE 286/40, I decided to back up some of my files (using the switch/S for subdirectories) onto 3.5-inch floppies, and delete the directories to create more space.
I backed up lots of my directories and then restored one or two and everything seemed OK.
Then, disaster!
I tried to restore my word processor program and the hundred or so files, but after restoring the first disk, the program stopped, giving the error message, ‘Unable to find path’.
I tried several times but the same thing happened.
So I got out the original word processor program disks and loaded them into the directory.
But when I restored the data again, the same thing happened.
I didn't get the error message, but the program just stopped a second or two after commenting ‘Disk 2 restoring’ and the screen displayed the DOS prompt.
Now I find that I can't get all the data held in those hundreds of files.
I've tried to view and recover these files using PC Tools, XTree Gold, Actaeon and other programs, and although I can view some of the text files (the rest are encrypted), I just can't get them out into a working environment and recover them.
Can you please advise me how to recover these files!
Is there any other program which can help, or can you offer any other suggestions?
A: It's difficult to pin down precisely where you've gone wrong without knowing what you typed in at the command line to begin restoring.
But I'd hazard a guess that if you restore the directory structure that was there before, your Restore might proceed to completion.
All things being equal, just typing:
RESTORE A: C: \ /S ENTER
should have restored all your backed-up files, including those where the subdirectories have been removed.
It may well be that the second disk is defective.
You can start the restore at disk 3 or you can try copying that disk, using the DOS XCOPY command instead of DISKCOPY, onto a disk that you know is OK.
Another possible fix is to use the /P switch which prompts you (Y/N) for each file about to be restored.
You could then skip the files on the troublesome disk until you hit a good patch.
BACKUP puts files into a special format.
They're not encrypted, they're simply strung together into one file per disk (BACKUP.001) while a small file, CONTROL.001, keeps a record of where the files came from — which directory and so on.
Sadly, this file format isn't used by other back-up utilities such as FastBack or Norton Backup, which means you have to persist with the DOS utilities you've got if you want to get your files back.
At a push, you could use a disk editor, such as the one included with Norton Utilities, to recover files — just hunt down the file you want and copy it to a new file.
Being let down by the program that£s supposed to save your bacon is a disturbing experience — an expensive way to be reminded that you should never again rely on just one back-up.
You could consider the wide variety of third-party alternatives or kill two birds with one stone and wait for MS-DOS 6.
This will include disk compression, which will ease the space problem on your Compaq portable.
It also comes with a stripped-down version of Norton Backup, which is as good as any back-up software I've come across.
Look out for the new version of MS-DOS which comes with a stripped-down version of Norton Backup
GIVE US A CLUE
Q: I am writing to you after reading the article ‘Upgrading your Hard Disk’ in the June 1992 issue.
My computer is a modest Dolan XT PC with twin 1.44Mb floppy drives and two 105.
Mb MFM-type hard drives.
I was recently offered a second-hand hard drive — apparently it has a capacity of 33Mb, but I don't know much else about it.
The drive is a 5.25-inch half-height Tandon TM262, bearing the number 186262–011B.
As a result of reading your article, I know that it is either an MFM or RLL type, but is there any way of finding out which one?
I have access to a low-level formatting program, were the drive to be on of the MFM type, but the information on the outside of the casing doesn't include the numbers of heads and cylinders.
Is there any of finding out this information?
A: I've consulted my source of reference, the ever handy SpinRite, and this tells me that the Tandon TM262 was a 3.5-inch drive, not a 5.25-inch one.
This makes me wonder whether your drive is fitted on a 5.25-inch mounting frame.
Firstly, the TM262 has four heads and 615 cylinders and the Reduced Write Current and Write Precomp should both be set to cylinder 615, if your low-level format program wants to know.
Secondly, this drive isn't a 33Mb drive, it's a 20Mb one.
A quick bit of maths will prove this.
One sector is 512 bytes, or half a kilobyte, and an MFM drive has 17 sectors per track, which makes 8.5Kb per track.
There are four heads and 615 cylinders, so your TM262 has 4 × 615 or 2,460 tracks.
Phew! 2,460 × 8.5 = 20,910Kb or 20.42Mb.
If it were formatted as an RLL drive, then you'd get 31.2Mb out of it.
You can pull this stunt on an MFM drive but it isn't to be recommended.
Matching drives to an XT isn't as easy as it is with an AT, because the range of drive sizes it supports will probably be quite narrow.
However, I'd be surprised if you have any trouble with this particular drive.
SpinRite is a great source of information about drive types, including details on heads and cylinders
SLOW COACH
Q: I recently bought a Packard Bell 80386SX, running at 20MHz, with a 20Mb hard drive.
I use my PC for business and games, but I'm becoming increasingly frustrated by the slow speed of some games.
I don't know whether this is due to the way I've set up my AUTOEXEC.BAT and CONFIG.SYS files (I've allowed some memory for Expanded and Extended memory) or the machine itself.
Games run slower than ‘slow motion’ and at least five times slower than on my friend's PC.
Would adding a 25MHz motherboard solve the problem or should I redesign my AUTOEXEC.BAT or CONFIG.SYS files?
I've also heard that adding RAM or booster/turbo cards may help.
I'd be grateful for any advice, including hardware suggestions suitable for my Packard Bell.
A: Interesting…
The Packard Bell range isn't a family of screamers — the one we looked at in our Bundles Bench Test in the February issue had a particularly slow video performance.
However, I doubt whether this is the cause of your problem.
This may sound a bit obvious, but some machines come with a turbo button which can slow the PC right down.
If you haven't activated the turbo facility, the machine might not be running at 20MHz, which would account for its lousy games performance.
It might be also be worth using a CPU performance-measuring utility, such as the SPEED.COM program that was included on the cover disk with our October 1992 issue.
Run a program of this type on both your machine and your friend's and compare results — your friend's PC should be about 20 per cent faster, all other things being equal.
If anything, modern games slow down when they're run on fast PCs.
It used to be the case that games written for an 8086 processor were unplayable on a 286 machine, so developers included special code in their programs which would slow the game down to make sure that, as far as possible, the game played at the same speed on every class of machine.
The contents of your AUTOEXEC.BAT and CONFIG.SYS files can influence PC performance but not to the degree you complain of.
Certainly, you should try to use as ‘clean’ a system as you can whenever you're running your games.
Why not boot from a lean ‘n’ mean floppy system disk whenever you want to play a game on your PC?
Modern games make more demands on the humble PC and need acres of hard disk   space, plus as much as 610Kb of free system memory.
Check through the documentation of Wing Commander II and see if it really needs Expanded memory.
Expanded memory is much slower than Extended memory, so if it can make do with the latter (and you don't need Expanded memory for an old DOS program), delete it from your CONFIG.SYS.
Make sure you're using MS-DOS 5 or DR DOS 6 to maximize free memory.
You may need some extra RAM, but before laying out any dosh on new add-ons, don your PC deerstalker and investigate further!
NOW YOU SEE IT, NOW YOU DON'T
Q: Just like Neil Sperrings in Issue 40 (November 1992) I too appear to have mysteriously lost 6Mb from my hard disk.
My system is a 33MHz 386DX with 8Mb of RAM and a 47Mb hard disk, Superstor-ed and running under DR DOS 6 (with the Windows 3.1 update).
As you can see from my enclosed XTree, DIR AND CHKDSK/F printouts, there's a significant difference in free space which is not dynamic, that is, the figure remains reasonably constant whether the disk space is reduced or increased above its current size by adding/deleting files.
As I use Taskmax and Windows 3, both of which use SWAP designations, these would have been primary candidates for missing disk space, except in both cases the swap areas are allocated to E: \WIN — a subdirectory on a 3Mb RAM drive.
I'll concede that the use of Superstor complicates the issue with its compressed and non-compressed sections on the same physical drive and its swapping designations between drives C and D.
Can you explain why the total of 1,416 files is different between the determining routines?
And if this 6Mb does exist, would it be possible to recover it for general use?
A: The quick answer is, it probably isn't usable.
I wouldn't trust any of the figures you quote because Superstore, like Stacker, doesn't actually double your hard disk space.
I've been using both for over a year now and the best I've been able to get is a ratio of 1.8 to 1.
The reason for this discrepancy is easy — some files compress better than others.
A database or spreadsheet will compress maybe 16 times, whereas program files don't compress very well at all.
On a typical PC, you're doing to get a mixture of files, but the precise mix will vary, as will the precise compression ratio achieved.
The problem is that in order to reassure you that the product has doubled the size of a hard disk, it lies when asked how much free space is left!
It doesn't know for certain, so it simply doubles whatever free space it thinks is left — after all the software isn't psychic and can't know what files are going to wind up on the hard disk.
In fact the only way to find out just how much space you're going to get is to fill up the hard disk, but because disk compressors need some room to work, this isn't a particularly healthy idea.
If you use the SSTOR utility that comes with DR DOS 6 and SuperStor, it will give you statistics that include a current compression ratio plus Actual Free, the real uncompressed free space.
If you multiply the two together you'll get a better indication of how much space you've got left.
So your missing 6Mb probably isn't missing at all; it has simply disappeared between the projected compression ratio and the actual!
THE AMAZING HANGING PC
Q: I have a Corona Data Systems XT with two 360Kb floppy drives, a 10Mb Tandon TM502 hard disk and 512Kb of RAM.
It has worked well until recently, when it failed to boot to drive C and this message came up on the screen:
System ROM Version 4.29C Testing complete 512K Memory installed 496K Memory available to DOS
The drive A light remained on and the keyboard was locked.
DOS 3.3 had been installed on the hard disk but I was using a DOS 2.11 floppy (supplied with the machine) in drive A. Ctrl+Alt+Delete wouldn't work and the reset button booted the machine into drive A.
Changing to drive C revealed that the hard disk works satisfactorily with a DIR and that some of the software I use requires DOS 3 or higher.
When I re-installed MS DOS 3.3 it altered the original CONFIG.SYS and AUTOEXEC.BAT files to the ones I've included with this letter.
Trying to boot off the hard disk loads to the same screen and I'm locked out.
I've checked that 10.
SYS, MSDOS.SYS and COMMAND.COM are in place on the hard disk.
I've also swapped the leads over on the two floppy drives to check that drive A isn't faulty, but the problem remains.
Since it's not getting past the ROM stage when I boot up, is this a fault in the ROM, or could I have contracted a virus?
A: I'd be surprised if you do have a virus, but the only way to find out for sure is to use some reputable anti-virus software to examine your hard disk — F-PROT is very good and is public domain to individual, non-corporate users.
You don't appear to have a problem with your boot ROMs, which can't be altered anyway.
As your hard disk seems to work OK once you boot from a floppy I'd hazard a guess that the MS-DOS system tracks have been corrupted.
Try booting from a system floppy and use the SYS command to transfer the system tracks to the hard disk by typing:
SYS C: ENTER
I'd urge you to buy the MS-DOS 5 upgrade rather than rely on MS-DOS 2.11 or 3.3.
If this doesn't work, it might mean that your hard disk is starting to fail.
Corona was one of the first IBM PC clone makers, so this machine probably hails from 1981/82.
The TM502 is a venerable design and is probably about 10 years old.
Hard disks last a long time but they don't last for ever.
That said, you can add a new lease of life to old hard disks by giving them the once-over with Norton Disk Doctor or SpinRite.
NB: Whenever you see this symbol press Enter.
Disk compressors tend to tell a few fibs when assessing how much hard disk space you've got, hence the spurious figures
INTERNATIONAL RESCUE SERVICE FOR ERICSSON USERS
I was reading an article in issue 39 (October 1992) about a lucky person (Martin Lugg of London) who had bought an Ericsson 286 IBM-compatible PC.
What made this interesting is that the company I work for has considerable knowledge in this area.
Most of the staff were responsible for making these monsters and since I'm such a nice person, I might be able to help.
Ericsson has made a number of 286-compatible PCs, so it's difficult to say which way you get into the setup, but here are a few possibilities:
Press Ctrl+Alt+Insert during boot-up
Press Insert during boot-up
With some of the early models you press Ctrl+Alt+Break.
(This one caused a problem when IBM distributed a demo program using the same combination.)
Once upon a time when Intel released the 80286, everyone wanted to make a 286-compatible PC, including Ericsson.
When IBM released their 80286 AT, the fastest available memory was 150ns, so the IBM ran at 6MHz.
But when Ericsson came onto the market, the new ‘lightning fast’ 120ns memory had just been launched, which made their Ericsson WS286 the fastest AT in the world, at 8MHz.
(It was only a matter of a few days before a faster one appeared.)
The WS286 was a nice machine that served me until September last year when, sadly, I had to replace it to make more room on my desk.
So here I am, the ‘generous’ reader who might have a manual available, or at least a photocopy.
And if your readers have got any more questions about these wonderful machines, we might be able to help you out.
A: Many thanks, Thomas.
If any readers have problems with their Ericsson machines and would like to take advantage of this generous offer, drop us a line and we'll forward your problems on to Sweden.
Starting Block
KNOW your files
OUR MONTHLY BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO COMPUTING CONTINUES ITS LOOK AT DIFFERENT FILE TYPES.
MARK WHITEHORN EXAMINES THE SIMILARITIES BETWEEN PROGRAMS AND DOS COMMANDS AND EXPLAINS HOW YOU CAN STUFF PROGRAM DATA INTO FILES TO BE PERUSED AT LEISURE.
Over the last few months I've been looking at the different types of files you'll find on a PC — here's a quick recap to refresh your memory.
At batch file (issues 42 and 43) is a store of DOS commands which can all be run by simply typing the name of the file.
Data files (issue 44) contain information which is sometimes used by a program.
For example, when you use a flight simulator, the map of the world over which you fly is often stored as a separate data file.
Other programs like word processors, produce data files such as the letters you write.
A program (issue 44) is a file containing a series of instructions for the computer which cause it to do a particular job (such as behave like a word processor or a flight simulator).
DOS COMMANDS AND PROGRAMS
When you want to run a program (such as WORD.COM), all you have to do is type the first part of the filename (WORD).
I'm sure it won't have escaped your notice that you do the same thing when you want to run a DOS command, like DIR, COPY, CLS and so on.
You type in the name and DOS carries out the command.
This similarity in the way DOS commands and programs are invoked can lead you to question if there is much functional difference between a DOS command and a program.
The answer is best illustrated by explaining the steps which DOS follows after you type in a program or command name at the DOS prompt.
When you press the Enter key, DOS looks at the first word in the string of characters you've typed in and compares it to a list of command names stored in the file called COMMAND.COM.
This list includes DIR, COPY, RENAME and DEL and these commands are known as the internal DOS commands, because they're built into COMMAND.COM.
If DOS finds a match in its COMMAND.COM file, it knows that you want to run one of its internal commands and it will try to carry out that command.
In practice, this command might fail to execute for some other reason.
For example, typing in the command:
COPY F:PENGUIN C: ENTER
won't work if your machine doesn't have a drive called F. However, DOS's search for a match to the word COPY will have been satisfied.
If DOS fails to match the first word of your input to its list of internal commands, it will start looking on the hard disk for a COM, EXE or BAT file with that name.
Hard disks can be huge, so DOS doesn't search the whole thing for a matching name; instead it looks first in the current directory and then in the subdirectories which are specified in the PATH command.
We covered this command earlier in the series; it's usually placed in the AUTOEXEC.BAT file and reads something like this:
PATH = C: \DOS; C: \WINDOWS; D: \NORT6\; D: \UTIL
This command tells DOS to look for a match in C: \DOS, then in C: \WINDOWS and so on.
Quite a few of the DOS commands are supplied as separate COM and EXE files, for example, DOSKEY.COM and PRINT.EXE These files are usually stored in a subdirectory called DOS on the C drive.
Thus, given the path above, if you type the command:
PRINT PENGUIN.TXT ENTER
DOS will try (and fail) to find PRINT as an internal command, it will try (and again fail) to find a file called wither PRINT.COM, PRINT.EXE or PRINT.BAT in the current directory.
Then it will start looking in C: \DOS, where it will find PRINT.EXE.
Satisfied that all is well, DOS will start the program called PRINT, and pass to it the rest of the command you typed (which is the name of the file you want to print — PENGUIN.TXT).
From then on, PRINT.EXE takes over and prints the file for you.
So returning to the original question about the functional difference between a DOS command and a program file, the answer is that there's no difference.
When I was young and foolish, I wrote a tiny program called PENGUIN.COM.
When it's run, it simply clears the screen and writes the words ‘Got any fish?’ in the middle of the screen.
It has stayed with me and currently resides in my DOS directory.
Is it a program or a DOS command?
Well, since it wasn't supplied by Microsoft it isn't a DOS command, but that's the only real difference.
If I could convince Bill Gates to include it with DOS (no chance!) it would suddenly become a DOS command.
PROGRAM FILES AND DATA FILES
Once you get the general idea that programs and data files can be made to interact, you can have fun with them and you can also be more productive (which is the excuse to use if your boss finds you doing this).
In issue 39 we looked at directories and subdirectories.
There's a small program called TREE which is supplied with DOS.
When you run this program, by typing:
TREE ENTER
at the DOS prompt, it draws on-screen a schematic diagram of the directories and subdirectories.
It has a couple of switches which can be used to modify the output, one of which is /F.
This lists all the files as well as the subdirectories, and the sheer volume of information guarantees that the files you want to see will have scrolled off the top of your screen before you can read them.
So here we have a program which generates data.
It would be very useful if we could trap all this data and stuff it into a file, then we could study it at our leisure.
DOS allows us to do just this.
If you type:
TREE /F > PENGUIN ENTER
then all the data from the TREE command, which normally goes straight to the screen, is redirected to a file called PENGUIN.
I chose the filename PENGUIN because it's unlikely that you will have a file of that name on your hard disk.
But if you do have such a file, be warned — this command will overwrite it without asking you first!
You can substitute any name you like in place of PENGUIN, as long as it has eight letters or less, but do choose something safe.
This process of taking information which is normally destined for the screen and sending it somewhere else is called redirection and is usually done with the > symbol.
You can redirect information from most programs which generate information (such as DIR and TYPE) and send it to file.
You can also redirect information to a printer by using the name PRN in place of the filename, as follows:
TREE > PRN
This gives me a printed list of subdirectories on my hard disk.
It usually works, but I can't guarantee it will work on your machine because it depends on how your PC is set up.
(And if you use this method to send information to a laser printer, you may need to put the printer off-line and press the Form Feed button before it will produce the output).
Trapping data into files in this way can be extremely useful because it changes ephemeral data into a permanent list.
This means that you can perform operations on it, such as scanning it for the particular information you want.
Suppose you have a file on your hard disk, called HALIBUT.TXT.
You know it's there somewhere, but there are over 50 subdirectories where it could be hiding.
Simply dumping a TREE/F to a file will make a list of all your files.
You can then use the editor supplied with DOS 5, called EDIT, to examine that list.
If you're using an earlier version of DOS, EDIT alone is worth the cost of updating to version 5.
So if you type:
EDIT PENGUIN ENTER
you can use the Search option to look for HALIBUT.TXT.
This process is very fast; on my 386 it finds the file in way under one second, and there are well over 1,000 files in the list.
You can also use the Search facility to look for bits of names.
So if, for example, you only know that your files starts with FRED, you can still find it.
Before I get hundreds of letters, I should point out that there is actually an easier way of locating files on a hard disk.
With DOS 5 you can use the DIR command to examine subdirectories as well, so the command:
DIR HALIBUT.TXT /S ENTER
will find it even faster.
But the basic point is that data can be stuffed into files whenever you need it in that format.
You can use the DIR command to find a file called HALIBUT.TXT.
Adding the /S switch makes the machine look in all the subdirectories as well 
DEFINITIONS TO CHANGE YOUR LIFE
Switches:A switch is an addition to a program name which modifies the behaviour of that program.
The most important switch is /?, because it means Help.
For example, if you type:
TREE /?
ENTER
it produces a brief description of the TREE command and the switches it understands, like the following, which graphically display the directory structure of a drive or path:
TREE [drive:][path][/F][/A]ENTER
The /F switch displays the names of the files in each directory.
The /A switch uses ASCII instead of extended characters.
Editor:A tool for examining files, almost always data files.
An editor is like a simple word processor.
NB: Whenever you see this symbol press Enter.
You can use Edit — the editor supplied with DOS 5 — to search through data produced using the TREE command
Cracking Windows
WINDOWS Wizardry
OUR WINDOWS EXPERT,ROGER GANN,TACKLES YOUR GUI PROBLEMS AND OFFERS LOADS OF USEFUL TIPS, AND HINTS.
IF YOU'VE GOT ANY PROBLEMS WITH WINDOWS OR WITH ANY MAJOR WINDOWS APPLICATION, WRITE TO HIM AT THE USUAL ADDRESS.
Q I'm writing to you about one of the programs on your November Mega Disk.
I'm referring to the WinTach program which gives four Windows benchmarks for your own system and compares the results with a base 386 machine.
I ran the tests on my system and was very disappointed with the results.
It occurred to me that there might be other readers who also ran the program and were confused with the results they obtained.
I run Windows 3.1 on my unbadged 486SX-20, which has 32Mb of memory and a 110Mb hard drive, but no secondary cache.
Because of the additional memory I've decided not to use a permanent swap file.
I've been told that a 486SX machine is faster than a corresponding 386DX machine.
But if you compare the results I obtained with the two examples shown, you'll understand my confusion.
1
My 486SX-20 machine fitted with a 32Mb or memory running VGA at 640 by 480 in 16 colours
2
WinTach's example of 386DX-20 TIGA card 34020–32 (TIGA.DRV)
3
WinTach's example of 386DX,(VGA, DRV).
The results were as follows:
You can see from the results that my 486SX machine falls far short of the results achieved by the standard 386DX.
Why?
WinTach should give you more accurate performance figures.
If your machine has a turbo button — make sure you use it!
A You're right to be disappointed with the results of your machine.
These scores are pretty low, more reminiscent of a slow 286 rather than a modern 486SX.
I agree that your machine certainly ought to do better than this.
Back in October 1992 we reviewed twenty-five 486SXs.
The TriGem machine we looked at ran at 20MHz, had an average VGA card (based on the Tseng Labs ET4000 chipset) and produced an overall WinTach index of 2.11.
So this is the kind of figure I'd expect machines of this class to equal or better.
You should bear in mind that WinTach only measures Windows graphics performance and not overall system performance.
It merely tests how long certain ‘typical’ graphics tasks take to execute.
Some VGA cards are quicker than others, especially those with fixed function graphics accelerator chips.
If your machine has a VGA card with a Trident, Oak or even a Tseng Labs chipset, then its performance won't be fantastic.
You don't say what video card is fitted to your machine so it's difficult to speculate any further.
The more than generous amount of RAM you have fitted with not influence graphics performance.
Indeed, it might have been better to divert funds away from RAM and put them towards a superior video card.
OK, it sounds decidedly dumb, but one glaringly obvious thing you should check is whether your machine's ‘turbo’ button has been pressed.
I've come a cropper over this before, bemoaning the appalling performance of a 386/40 until I noticed that the tiny turbo light was off and, instead of running at 40MHz, the machine was running at 8MHz!
This kind of elementary boo-boo would certainly impact video speed.
If all else fails, ask your dealer what sort of Win Tach index your type of machine should return, and if necessary, wheel your machine back to be sorted out.
Q Firstly, can I thank you for always answering my computing problems and secondly, is there any chance of getting more coverage of networks?
This time I'm writing on behalf of a friend who has a problem.
My friend uses Pagemaker 4 and Windows Write and wants to know if it's possible to get hold of Portuguese and German spell checkers to use with letters and documents created using Write.
Pagemaker 4 just comes with a basic English spell checker.
If these are available, I'd be grateful if you could tell me where to get hold of them, and how much they'd cost?
I told my friend ‘I can't help you, but I know a man who can…’
A You're in luck on two counts, Mr Howlett.
First, because we're doing a network special this month, and secondly because the ‘man who can’, can!
While a shareware Windows spell checker is available, you can only get hold of it in English.
However, a dictionary pack for PageMaker is available which contains PageMaker spell checker modules for 20 different languages.
It costs £49 plus £7 postage and packing and, because it's going abroad, it won't carry VAT.
Call  
Q I'd be truly grateful if you could solve a problem which is beginning to drive me nuts.
It happens when I try to use the Blend command in CorelDRAW 2.1.
Everything goes fine until, having chosen the number of blend steps (or leaving it at the default number), I click on OK.
Then a box appears on-screen containing the following message:
WALDO
An error has occurred in your application If you choose Ignore, you should save your work in a new file.
If you choose Close, your application will close.
Clicking on the Ignore button has no effect, and clicking on the Close button produces another box, as follows:
Application Error WALDO caused a General Protection Fault in module CORELDRAW.EXE at 0005:062E Close
Each time this happens, a file is left in the TEMP directory: –WAL1970.TMP (the number varies each time).
A friend of mine has also installed the same application recently, yet experiences no such problem.
My computer is a brand new Dan Technology 386/40, with 4Mb of RAM and a 100Mb hard disk with cache controller.
Can you tell me what on earth is going on?
I've deleted everything and re-installed DOS 5 and Windows 3.1 from scratch, all to no avail.
A Alas poor Waldo, I knew him well.
I guess Waldo must have been the codename for CorelDRAW 2 during development and it got stuck in the code.
This is a known problem with CorelDRAW 2 and Windows 3.1 which should have been fixed in the version you have.
It happens whenever you try to perform a bland or an extrude.
The only solution is for registered users to contact one of Corel's UK distributors for an upgrade.
CorelDRAW can still bring up those strange Waldo error messages when you're using the Blend option.
Q Is there any way to correct the aspect ratio with Windows applications using CGA capability only?
The problem is that when I try to play games under Windows, such as the Winchess program on November's Mega Disk, I can only see half of the screen.
This is also the case with the welcome/menu page when I try to install the disk.
I only get the first two options — everything else disappears off the bottom of the screen and reappears at the top, corrupted and unaffected by the mouse, even though CGA appears to be supported.
I have a Zenith SupersPORT 286 laptop with CGA graphics and 2Mb of RAM.
It appears that a display upgrade is no longer possible with this machine.
So will I have to upgrade by replacement in order to make use of the software I have at the moment?
Or do I have a fault?
A I'm afraid it's bad news as far as Windows is concerned.
Support for CGA is being phased out with Windows 3.1 in favour of displays that can handle colour.
Windows needs a minimum screen resolution of 640 by 200.
At that resolution, the CGA card provides only one colour on a black background (which in Windows is white on black).
Where are problems with running Windows under CGA anyway: it can't accommodate the size of specific dialogue boxes, such as the About dialogue box from the Help menu, and the Desktop dialogue box from the Control Panel.
A second problem is that the SupersPORT has a bastardized type of CGA, known as double-scan CGA.
Normally, CGA can resolve 640 by 200 but on the Zenith it runs at 640 by 400, which gives nice looking text in Text mode.
This is why you're only seeing half the Winchess program.
Unless you get a special SupersPORT video driver from Zenith, you're scuppered.
WHAT PERSONAL COMPUTER READERS HOT TIP
THIS MONTHS HOT TIP COMES FROM GUY BREWSTER WHO'S WORKED OUT HOW TO PRINT WORD FOR WINDOWS DOCUMENTS ON A PANASONIC PRINTER.
I was very interested to read the letter from William Echlin in the November issue.
William was having difficulty getting his Panasonic printer to print multi-page Word For Windows documents.
Specifically, the printer would not accept the next sheet of paper, issuing a form feed instead, and ejecting the new sheet.
I experienced exactly the same difficulty with my Panasonic printer when, like William, I upgraded to Windows 3.1 and Word 2.
I suspect that the driver thinks he's using a sheet feeder.
The solution I've found is to use the Epson LQ850 driver instead of the recommended Panasonic or LQ2500 drivers.
This gives better print quality and seems to give more reliable paper control.
Use the printer set-up menu to set the printer at a resolution of 180 by 180, A4, manual feed.
When inserting the new sheet of paper, don't press the function button.
Instead, pull the bail arm forward.
This will automatically draw the new sheet into the printer.
Then simply press the on-line button.
You will find that the paper is positioned correctly and will print without problems.
I hope that this tip might help anyone else who is having Panasonic v Windows problems.
Step by Step
WINDOW BASICS
IN THIS MONTH'S STEP BY STEP GUIDE TO RUNNING WINDOWS,MARK WHITEHORN LOOKS AT INITIALIZATION (INI) FILES AND EXPLAINS WHAT THEY CONTROL AND HOW TO REMOVE AN APPLICATION FROM WINDOWS.
Last month I tried to convince you that it's worth knowing more about the Windows INI (initialization) files.
These files store configuration information about Windows and its applications.
If you make any alterations to Windows, like changing the wallpaper, these new settings are stored in one of the INI files.
And when you install a new Windows application, the INI files are usually altered and a new one is created.
What the manuals don't tell you is that when the application is removed, the responsibility for removing or reversing changes made to the INI files falls upon you.
Unfortunately, Windows applications don't tidy up after themselves when removed, so in this month's Steps, I'll be explaining the cleanest way to remove an application from Windows.
Windows itself has six INI files — before you install any apps.
WIN.INI is the more important one because applications often made changes here.
SYSTEM.INI contains the hardware settings.
The other four INI files are usually not worth playing around with, but it's useful to at least know what the control:
PROGRAM.INI controls the Program Manager
WINFILE.INI controls the File Manager
CONTROL.INI controls the Control Panel
DOSAPPS.INI controls any windowed DOS applications.
You can look at both WIN.INI and SYSTEM.INI with a utility called Sysedit which is supplied with Windows.
Here's a quick summary on how to use it: from the Program Manager pop down the File menu and choose New, Program Item, Browse.
Select Sysedit from C: \Windows\System and click on OK.
An icon should appear in the current program group.
You can also use the Notepad utility provided with Windows to edit the INI files.
You can even use a word processor, as long as it will let you save the files as plain text.
However, don't play around with these INI files unless you make copies of them first.
WIN.INI and SYSTEM.INI have a common format.
The text which appears in them is usually in lower case, but this doesn't matter.
It's divided up into sections; each section is marked by a title in square brackets, like this:[Keyboard].
Any comments (which are there for our benefit and are ignored by Windows) are preceded by a semicolon as follows:
; Hi, I'm a comment.
This bit controls Excel.
If you want to temporarily remove a line from an INI file, just place a semicolon in front of it.
Windows will then ignore the line, treating it as if it were a comment.
The INI files are mostly made up of lines like this:
Keyname=value
where keyname is something that can be altered in Windows, and the value is the value to which it is set.
For example:Beep=yes
Some of the keynames (like Beep) can only be set to one of two values, so Beep=yes means that Windows will beep every time there's an error.
When something can have only one of two values, it's known as having a Boolean value, but Windows doesn't specify these consistently.
Some keynames expect you to use ‘yes’ or ‘no’, others want ‘true’or ‘false’, ‘on’or ‘off’and even ‘1’or ‘0’.
This is made worse by the fact that using the wrong one (such as‘no’ when the keyname is expecting ‘false’) may be mistaken for ‘true’.
Annoying, isn't it?
The good news is that you can usually tell which type of value a keyname experts by looking at the value that is already there before you start.
Other keynames can have more than two possible values — often simply numbers like 438 or 623.
Finally, don't make any line in an INI file more than 127 characters long.
Also, remember that Windows only looks at its INI files when it starts up, so it won't see any changes that you make to them until Windows is restarted.
So, let's look at some of the settings in Windows 3.1 and what they mean.
I've shown the keynames set to their default values.
Time settings are in milliseconds unless otherwise stated.
VETTING THE SETTINGS
Look on the section of WIN.INI called [windows]and you'll find…
Spooler=yes:When set to ‘yes’ it allows you to use the Print Manager.
Setting it to ‘no’ is therefore usually a silly thing to do.
Beep=yes:Sounds a warning beep when there is an error.
NullPort=None:Tells Windows to use the word ‘None’ when a printer is assigned to ‘no port’in the Control Panel.
BorderWidth=3:The border width of a window in pixels.
KeyboardSpeed=31:Time delay between auto key-repeats.
CursorBlinkRate=530:Pause between cursor blinks.
No I don't know why the default isn't 500 (which would be exactly half a second) either.
DoubleClickSpeed=452:Longest time allowed between two mouse clicks for them still to be counted as a double click.
Programs=COM EXE BAT PIF:Windows will try to run files with these extensions when you double click on them.
Documents=:File extensions that the File Manager will associate with a document.
There is no default value.
DeviceNotSelectedTimeout=15:Time (in seconds) Windows will wait for a device (such as a modem) to respond.
TransmissionRetryTimeout=45:Time (in seconds) Windows will wait for a busy device (such as a modem) to reply.
swapdisk=:Replaced by swapdisk=in SYSTEM.INI
REMOVING WINDOWS APPLICATIONS
Once you decide to get rid of a Windows application, it's vital to make copies of any important data you've created with it to make copies of any important data you've created with it before embarking on a ‘slash and burn’ policy.
These copies should then be put in a safe place, well out of harm's way.
It's also a good idea to make a back-up copy of WIN.INI as well, because you'll probably need to change that.
Sorry to go on and on about this backing up business, but it's much better to do it than to end up losing information (and I write as someone who has done just that in the past; of course I'm perfect now).
Thereafter, you simply need to:
locate the directory where the application is stored
delete the directory and its contents
remove any INI files which are specific to the application
scan WIN.INI for references to the app and delete them
remove the icon from the Program Group
write a rude letter the developer of the application and demand that they provide an easier way of doing all this.
I'm going to be deleting an application called Legato; not because I hate it, but just as a demonstration.
Legato doesn't have its own INI file, but a lot of applications do have their own, so I've created one in C: \WINDOWS (the usual place) so that we can enjoy deleting it.
Step 1
But first!
Last month I showed you how to set up an application so that it could be launched from within Windows.
Windows 3.1 comes with a program group called Start Up.
You can move icons into this group simply by dragging them in with the mouse.
If you want to leave a copy of the icon in the original group as well, just use Ctrl=click when you pick up the icon.
Step 2
All of the programs in Start Up are run as soon as Windows starts.
This can be useful; the only thing to bear in mind is that too many icons in here will increase the time taken for Windows to get going, so it's best to keep Start Up for the real essentials.
And now, on with the considerably more destructive process of deleting applications from Windows.
Step 3
We'll use the File Manager to manipulate the files.
If you select View and Sort by Type from the menu, the File Manager will list all of the files by their extensions.
This makes it easier to find WIN.INI and you can also check to see if Legato has its own INI file.
As mentioned in the introduction, the LEGATO.INI that you see here is one I made earlier from sticky-backed plastic.
Step 4
Now make a copy of WIN.INI as WIN.BAK (or some such name).
Click on the filename to highlight it, pop down the File menu, select Copy and enter the new name into the dialogue box.
Click on OK and Windows will do the job for you, and the new filename will appear in the list.
(I've enlarged the File Manager font using Options, Font, to make it easier to read).
Step 5
Although I installed Legato, it was some time ago, so I may not remember the name of the directory where it was installed; but Windows can provide this information.
From the Program Manager, highlight the Legato icon, pop down the File menu and select Properties.
This lists the directory in which Legato lurks.
You can flip back to the File Manager using Alt+Esc, or Alt+Tab, which is neater…
Step 6
…and change into that subdirectory.
You can then move the data files that you want to keep (having selected them with Ctrl+click) onto a disk in drive A. Alternatively you could move them to a different subdirectory on the hard disk.
It doesn't really matter, as long as you end up with copies other than in the subdirectory which is about to be burned.
Step 7
Click on the subdirectory name in the Tree view (left-hand side of the screen) and press the Delete key.
Windows will ask you a series of questions about the directory (and the files) that you want to delete.
Read the questions (in case you made a mistake selecting the directory) and, when you're sure, select Yes.
The ‘Yes to All’ button stops Windows from asking you about every file.
Step 8
Now move around in the File Manager until you're looking at C: \WINDOWS.
Delete LEGATO.INI by highlighting the filename in the directory window, pressing Delete and clicking on OK.
Now you need to edit the WIN.INI file.
If you've associated *.
INI files with Notepad, just double click on the filename in File Manager.
Step 9
If not, go to Program Manager, open Notepad and load WIN.INI.
To find out whether Legato made an entry in WIN.INI while being installed, make sure your cursor is at the top of the file, select Find from the Search menu and enter Legato.
Ensure that Match Case isn't selected and that Notepad will search downwards.
Step 10
Click on Find Next.
Repeat the search until you've found all occurrences of the word ‘Legato’.
Legato has made multiple entries in three sections of WIN.INI, under [Extensions],[Embedding]and [Legato].
After reading these you can delete the relevant lines, or if you want to be more careful, exclude them with a semi-colon.
Step 11
And now to get rid of the Legato icon.
Move back to the Program Manager, highlight the Legato icon with a single mouse click, and press the Delete key.
Answer Yes when you're sure it's the correct icon to zap, and lo and behold, the icon is gone.
Nothing remains of Legato but fond memories…
Fine Tuning
TIPS & TWEAKS
WE SHOW YOU HOW TO GET THE MOST OUT OF YOUR SOFTWARE APPLICATIONS.
THIS MONTH MARK WHITEHORN HANDS OVER THE CONTROLS AND LETS OUR READERS STEER YOU THROUGH MACRO CREATION IN WORDPERFECT FOR WINDOWS AND A SOLUTION TO AN OLD PARADOS PROBLEM.
Michael Fereday from London has a tip for anyone wanting to customize their machine using WordPerfect for Windows macros…
WordPerfect for has many powerful macro commands, including the ability to read and make use of system information.
The following macro reads the path and filename of a previously saved document and then inserts the information into a footer:
The GetWPData lines get the path and the document name.
Then Footer A is created, centre justified, and the font is selected.
The word ‘Page’ starts the footer text, followed by the page number; ‘of’is added to the text before the path name and the document name.
WordPerfect's ability to edit macros can be used for any customization.
The MacroVariable names can be changed as long as you remember to change them in the Type statements at the end of the macro.
FooterA! can be changed to FooterB!
The justification and font can be changed.
To check the correct font name, refer to the font list from the menu bar or press F9.
Any of the text can be changed, but don't forget to leave spaces wherever they will be needed.
Whilst most of this macro was created using the Macro Record facility, the sections which deal with the path and document name were added by loading the macro as a file and then typing them in.
WordPerfect for Windows 5.2 now has on-line macro help.
This includes usable samples of the various macro commands.
Using Windows' Clipboard, these can be copied and customized by the end-user.
In February we explained how to overcome a problem when importing files into Parados from a mainframe Jonathan Oakley from Sevenoaks goes one step further…
You can reduce the amount of work needed by cutting out the need to manually identify afflicted records, using the following script:
You can rid of the ‘DO—IT!’ at the end of you'd rather check it manually.
Of course, this won't work for all cases if any of the last three fields are sometimes blank, although the WHILE condition could be amended to ‘NOT (ISBLANK ([Field13]) AND ISBLANK ([Field14]) AND ISBLANK ([Field15]) to trap some of these.
Further checks may be usable, depending on the format of the table data.
As you're importing the file from a mainframe, backing up shouldn't be a problem, but it may be worth copying the DB files at least before running any script like this, which can make some fairly major changes to your data!
A: Thanks for the tips.
Jonathan's method looks at Field 13 and if it contains an entry, Fields 6 and 7 are amalgamated and the contents of Fields 13 to 8 are shuffled to fill the gap.
The WHILE-WEND loop repeats this process until Field 13 is empty.
The SCAN-ENDSCAN loop ensures that Paradox performs this operation on every record in the database, as long as there's and entry in Field 13.
To use this script safely, you must be confident that all the damaged records are defective in the same way and will all be cured by this process.
Some say that when data is damaged, its integrity is compromised, so you must look at each record before you automatically recover it.
But this is tedious; the above solution is much faster.
A compromise is to filter out the damaged records (any with an entry in Field 13) to a separate table, to be scanned visually, corrected with the script, inspected and returned to the original table.
fatal dos error
The What Personal Computer postbag has been stuffed to the brim with letters of praise, following the appearance of the freebie screen wipes on the cover of our February issue.
‘Dear Fatal,’ writes Philip Saunders from North Devon, ‘I'm writing to thank you for the excellent screen wipes.
I have to say that I was a little disappointed at first when mine failed to absorb all the rain from a really wet windscreen, but I found that when held edge-on, this handy, blue tool proved most effective at scraping the snow and ice from my car.
I am now left with only two questions: What is that little metal sliding bit for?
Oh, and what were those funny tissue things?’
•Details of the latest whacky software have been flooding into the office.
One particularly eye-catching new package is version 2 of Dr Solomon's Home Medical Adviser.
This fascinating program is broken up into several parts.
You start by working your way through a yes/no questionnaire in the symptoms database in order to reach a diagnosis.
When Dr Solomon is happy that he's got your ailment sussed, you're whisked off to the diseases database.
This contains information on 475 diseases.
and there's an injuries database containing extra info on everything from ankle sprains to bee stings to gunshot wounds and snake bites.
There's even a poisons database.
Just the thing for thinking up excuses for sick days and an ideal gift for the hypochondriac in your life.
Call Different Angle on 
•The recent Windows Show at Olympia produced its usual crop of promotional ballyhoo.
Once again multimedia was to the fore as the computing industry tried to persuade punters that it's the up and coming technology.
WordPerfect has given up on the Wild West theme in favour of giving away peagreen baseball hats.
Micrografx staff drew attention to themselves by wandering around in gear stolen from the Mexican extras in a spaghetti western.
Which ones were the good, the bad and the ugly?
And, of course, there were the usual people demonstrating their company's latest products with the aid of a public address system and a microphone.
‘It's a bit noisy,’ said someone from Lotus as the booming voices from Microsoft and Borland reverberated around the hall.
But, strange to say, Lotus's PA system sounded just as loud.
By the middle of the afternoon, the racket was terrible.
Several people voiced the suspicion that a frantic battle of the sound systems was taking place as companies vied to attract more customers.
Of course, there was no evidence for this.
‘I think it's the acoustics of the hall,’ said a Microsoft spokesperson, as people staggered around with their hands over their ears.
WILD AND WONDERFUL COMPETITION ENTRIES
There sure are a lot of people out there who'll go to any lengths to get their hands on a laser printer, judging by the fantastic response to our February competition.
The prize?
A splendid Oki OL410 page printer.
•With Valentine's day so near to the closing date, we were expecting hundreds of soppy cards, bouquets of flowers, bottles of champagne and heart-shaped chocolates to come flooding into the office — there must have been a postal strike.
And so the special Valentine's balloon and hand-drawn card (see below) from Mark Woodward of Worcester, was initially greeted with sighs of rapture.
‘Somebody loves us!’ we cried.
Sadly, the poem inside the card showed the real object of his affections:
Feb 14th once more draws near
Which means it's nearly the end for Winter
One of the signs of spring to come
Is the sound of an Oki printer.
Thanks to Pamela Crooks of Hertfordshire, who also sent us a Valentine's card.
‘Valentine, you're a real winner,’ proclaimed the front of the card, followed with ‘…and you'll be pleased to know that I'm your prize!’as the message inside.
To this, Ms Crooks added: ‘Talking of prizes, how about it?’
Thanks for the offer, but no chocolates, no prize.
Ah well…better luck next year.
Readers with  humorous computing tales or handy hints are welcome to write to Fatal Dos Error, at the usual address.
We'd love to hear from you and there are some rich rewards.
MAN LOGIC I HEARD THAT YOU'VE HURT YOUR PROGRAMMING ARM, MAN LOGIC — HAS IT CAUSED YOU ANY PROBLEMS?
NO, ONLY WHEN IT…
AUURGH!
AAGH!
OUCH!
OUCH!
OUCH!
OOOH!…
ITCHES!