

TWA may take on Chicago route
ANOTHER United States airline is considering stepping into the breach to take the place of American Airlines at Stansted.
American, based in Forth Worth, Texas, announced earlier this week it was pulling the plug on the Stansted to Chicago daily route, because of losses mounting to $10 million.
Yesterday TWA signalled its intention to step into the gap.
It has had a long-standing application with the American Department of Transportation to fly from New York to Stansted.
It intends to fly from Chicago's O'Hare airport to Stansted, via JFK Airport, New York.
This mean that as it has already applied to run that route it only now needs clearance from the British government.
A spokesman at TWA headquarters in New York said the application was a logical first step towards the commitment by the new American administration and the British government to balance air travel transportation between the two countries.
It would not involve added services into severely congested Heathrow.
TWA's marketing senior vice president, Bob Cozzi, said: ‘TWA has served Great Britain for more than 40 years and looks forward to providing the only service by a major U.S. carrier to Stansted.
With a new terminal Stansted is the least congested of London's three major airports.’
He added: ‘We are ready to start services immediately upon receipt of government approval.’
The airport's external marketing manager, John Williams, said the airport welcomed the news.
He said it was believed that Aeroflot, the Russian airline was also interested in starting a Transatlantic service from Stansted and was considering taking over the American Airlines route.
Meanwhile, Essex Euro MP Anne McIntosh said she was trying to get American Airlines to change its mind about withdrawing from Stansted.
She said: ‘The fact that American Airlines started a new route in the middle of the economic recession meant it was slow to take off.
Nevertheless the load factors have consistently increased until most days now the flights are full.’
Added Miss McIntosh: ‘It is a very sad day for Stansted Airport, for Essex and for all of the country if American Airlines do indeed pull out.’
Military air show awaits Pentagon approval
ORGANISERS of the world's largest military air show are still waiting to get the go-ahead for this year's event.
The American base of RAF Mildenhall has not yet been told by the Pentagon that it can spend the necessary cash on the show, which last year attracted 406,000 people.
Spokeswoman Captain Marcella Adams said the base, which planned to hold the event on May 29 and 30, would normally have heard by now.
‘It is getting a little bit critical as far as actually knowing,’ she added.
‘Right now it is at Pentagon level.
Budget restrictions and requirements are being looked at more closely.
Normally we go to our headquarters in Germany.
They had to forward it up to the Pentagon.
‘I wish we could move them along, but it is very difficult.
They don't know the impact it has on the British public.’
Capt Adams said some people at the base were confident the event could go ahead as planned.
‘That is what the rest of us are hoping.
It would be terrible disappointment to the public.
Some people plan their holidays around it,’ she said.
‘The wheels are in motion, but probably a little bit slower.’
This year's air show would be the 18th to be staged at Mildenhall.
Last year, the show, which featured 150 aircraft, was so popular police had to turn people away.
All fired up for a marathon effort
THREE relatives hope to prove firefighting, jogging and fund-raising runs in the family later this month when they all take part in the London Marathon.
Andy Andrews, 70, a former part-time fireman and safety security officer from Walton on the Naze, will be taking part in the race on April 18.
He will be joined by his son-in-law Andy Fearn, 39, who is a fireman in Colchester.
Making up the trio will be Mr Andrews' 18-year-old grandson Daniel Fearn, whose ambition is to become a fireman.
The three hope to raise £2,000 for charity to be shared between the Colchester Hospice and the British Heart Foundation.
They have been in training since January at the Busy Bodies Fitness Gym, Lawford, where sponsor forms are available.
They have applied to take part in the race several times in previous years but without success.
Mr Andrews believes they have been accepted this year because they are running as a family team.
Three generations of the same family set for the London Marathon: Andy Andrews, Andy Fearn and Daniel Fearn
Airport is bullish in spite of losses
A FREIGHT firm is considering pulling out of Stansted Airport and using East Midlands Airport, at Castle Donington, instead.
The firm is UPS, which operates a weekly flight with a DC8 cargo plane from America, rivaling Federal Express at Stansted.
A final decision has not yet been taken on the possible move.
Russian airline Aeroflot, which started its Stansted to St Petersburg twice-weekly flights on March 28, has had to lay on extra flights for tomorrow.
The airline will use four aircraft to take people back to Russia to be with their families over the Easter holiday.
Despite the loss of American Airlines, the airport is bullish, announcing more new routes.
AirUK's Newcastle services has started, Finnair is due to start twice-weekly flights to Helsinki and commuter airline Westair is flying to Blackpool.
On April 5 Manx Airlines, based on the Isle of Man, starts up a Stansted to Waterford daily link.
The Irish Republic link is the first in a number of new routes planned by Manx, using new British Aerospace Jetstream 41 aircraft.
Fares cost from £99 to £159.
The airline's commercial director, Mike Bathgate, said: ‘This is a leisure and business link and we have enjoyed a high level of enquiries since we announced our intention to launch services from Stansted.’
Manx is planning to launch a three-flights-a-day service from Stansted to Manchester on April 19 and also has a licence to fly to Belfast.
Stansted is sponsoring one of its firemen's rally driving activities.
Leading fireman Trevor Stretch has been given a £150 cheque to help rally his specially equipped Lada 1300, supplied by Lifestyle Garages of Braintree.
The car, with modified suspension and a new engine, will display Stansted Airport stickers this season.
Helping people with arthritis
A PILOT education campaign to help sufferers of arthritis and rheumatism is being targeted on north Essex.
The massive publicity onslaught is being mounted by the Arthritis and Rheumatism Council, and aims to inform sufferers of what help is available and even what they can do to help themselves.
If the scheme is successful it could be used as a model for a nationwide campaign.
‘We know that people suffering from arthritis are often left in the dark about the disease,’ ARC's regional organising secretary Debbie Enright said.
‘Often knowledge about what drugs and other treatments are available can affect the outcome of the disease.
We want to research whether this campaign over a short period of time can improve this situation.’
Starting next week ARC will be putting posters on buses, mounting an advertising campaign and pushing thousands of leaflets through doors inviting sufferers to take up their offer of information about the conditions.
More than 1,000,000 people in Britain suffer from rheumatoid arthritis and a further five million have osteoarthritis.
Cricket
Aussie star Jones is axed from Ashes tour
DEAN Jones, ever-present during an era of Australian domination and English humiliation, has been dumped for this summer's Ashes battle.
Jones, out of form and out of favour, does not figure in a 17-strong party under the captaincy of the world's leading Test run-maker, Allan Border.
And while Jones's omission has not sent shock waves around Australia, it is sure to surprise many English fans.
The tall 32-year-old was a big hit with Durham last season and has played in 17 consecutive Tests between the two countries, dating back to November 1986.
It was his undefeated 184 at Sydney in early 1987 which started a remarkable sequence of Australian success.
They won that Test — and have not been beaten by England since, chalking up seven more victories and five draws.
On their last visit here, in 1989, Jones played a major part in the 4–0 Ashes triumph by scoring 566 runs, including centuries at Edgbaston and The Oval.
But his form for Victoria this winter has been depressing and he failed to make the Test team against either West Indies or New Zealand.
Jones, who has played 52 Tests, said: ‘I don't know where this leaves me with my career and it's going to be a pretty hard blow to get over.
Retirement is certainly not on my mind.’
Durham were so convinced Jones would be unavailable for county cricket this summer that they signed West Indian fast bowler Anderson Cummins as his overseas replacement.
The county's director of cricket, Geoff Cook, said: ‘Dean was very popular up here and did a perfect job for us on and off the pitch.’
He is not the only big-name casualty.
All-rounder Tom Moody and injury-plagued fast bowler Bruce Reid are both left out of a squad which arrives in England on April 25.
There are four uncapped players, most notably paceman Wayne Holdsworth who has shown staggering recent form for the champion state, New South Wales.
Holdsworth, 24, bagged 29 wickets in the last three state matches and is regarded as an important addition to the fast bowling line-up of Craig McDermott and Merv Hughes.
The other new faces — all aged 22 — are Holdsworth's uncapped state team-mate, Michael Slater, a top-order batsman, Queensland opener Matthew Hayden and Western Australian all-rounder Brendon Julian.
Tour party
A Border (Queensland, captain), M Taylor (New South Wales, vice-captain), D Boon (Tasmania), M Hayden (Queensland), I Healy (Queensland), W Holdsworth (New South Wales), M Hughes (Victoria), B Julian (Western Australia), C McDermott (Queensland), D Martyn (Western Australia), T May (South Australia), P Reiffel (Victoria), M Slater (New South Wales), S Warne (Victoria), M Waugh (New South Wales), S Waugh (New South Wales), T Zoehrer (Western Australia)
Pakistan to host World Cup final
THE 1996 World Cup cricket final will be held in Pakistan and the semi-finals in India.
The tournament, to be jointly hosted by India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka, will be contested by 12 nations — the nine Test-playing teams and three associate members of the International Cricket Council.
Anti-AIDS drug test results disappointing
THE GOVERNMENT is promising to continue the fight to find a cure for AIDS after the failure of the AZT drug to halt the onset of the disease in trials.
Health Minister Tim Yeo says he is ‘disappointed’ by the results of four-year tests on the drug, also known as Zidovudine, involving more than 1,700 HIV positive patients.
The tests show people with symptomless HIV did not benefit in terms of survival or spread of the disease, whether they took the drug immediately on diagnosis or waited for the onset of infection.
The results, which were reported in The Lancet medical journal yesterday, are described as ‘very depressing’ by the Terrence Higgins AIDS charity.
Wellcome, the drugs firm which makes AZT, suffered a slide on the stock market, wiping £800 million off the company's shares at one stage.
Mr Yeo promises a ‘great deal of effort will go on’, with research into treatment for AIDS boosted by £200 million of Government money in the coming year.
The failure of AZT is ‘disappointing’, he says, but it reinforces ‘the absolutely key message’ that AIDS can be prevented with the right precautions.
A Wellcome spokesman said the Anglo-French Concorde trials show ‘an encouragingly low incidence of adverse reactions associated with one gramme of Zidovudine daily for up to four years’.
He added: ‘Current scientific opinion strongly suggests that combination therapy is likely to provide the next major advance in the management of HIV infection.
‘Wellcome believe therefore that the relevance of Concorde's results to the current clinical management of HIV infection is limited.’
The trials, organised by the British Medical Research Council and the French National AIDS Research Agency, were carried out at centres in the UK, France and Ireland from October 1988.
Nick Partridge, chief executive of the Terence Higgins Trust, said the study had sadly confirmed ‘the limited effectiveness of AZT against HIV’.
Rapist who got bail is finally jailed
A TEENAGE rapist who committed a catalogue of sex and dishonesty offences after being freed on bail by magistrates was jailed for 11 years by two different Old Bailey judges yesterday.
Wayne Thomas, 19, appeared before magistrates on four occasions — but each time they agreed to defence applications to allow him bail.
Yesterday he was branded ‘a danger to the public’ by Judge Brian Capstick QC.
Thomas first appeared before West London magistrates in April last year when he was granted bail on a charge of raping a 14-year-old schoolgirl.
In September he was granted bail on a burglary charge by Ealing magistrates even though he had breached the terms of his earlier bail conditions.
In October, while high on the drug crack, he raped and robbed a 17-year-old girl at knifepoint.
This time Feltham magistrates remanded him in custody.
Police discovered stolen credit cards in his bedroom belonging to four women who had been mugged in the Acton area of West London, offences which all took place while he was on bail.
Thomas's catalogue of crime resulted in him being tried before two different Old Bailey judges for rape.
Yesterday they each sentenced him — for six years for leading a gang rape attack on the 14-year-old, and for five years consecutively for raping and robbing the older girl.
Thomas, from Acton, was convicted of the first rape by an Old Bailey jury on January 29 and of the attack on the 17-year-old girl on Thursday.
Unemployed Thomas had admitted robbing the 17-year-old.
Beazer League
Clarets happy to field same side
CHELMSFORD City manager Joe O'Sullivan could not believe his luck as he named an unchanged side in advance of today's Beazer Premier clash with Bashley at New Writtle Street.
Steve Mosely did not train on Thursday night and Ian Brown's ankle is still sore, but they are the only worries as the Clarets bid to avenge a 5–3 defeat in Hampshire.
With Chelmsford still looking below rather than above, three points are vital and clean sheets against both Worcester and VS Rugby should give confidence.
Mervyn Cawston, 41, keeps his place in goal despite the return to fitness of Kevin Foster and O'Sullivan is also pleased with the recent form of converted centre-back Kurt Davidson.
David Jacques and Dean Crumpton are looking sturdy as the full-backs, but the biggest test will be for Peter Reed and Wayne Hannigan, ball-winners asked to be more creative in midfield.
So the welcome opportunity to name the same line-up and two substitutes gives the City boss hope against a side one point and two places beneath them, but with two games in hand.
Tony Pamphlett, brought in on loan from Redbridge Forest, is still unwell, but O'Sullivan has confirmed his intention of signing the experienced defender this Summer.
Chelmsford squad: Cawston, Jacques, Crumpton, Mosely, Davidson, Reed, Hannigan, Jones, Restarick, Rogers, Brown, Hazel, Staples.
Wife beaten to death by mentally ill railman
BRITISH Rail supervisor Geoffrey Capper battered and strangled his wife to death at their flat in Westcliff, a court heard yesterday.
When police arrested Capper he was sitting in the bedroom strumming a guitar, said Mr Brian Higgs QC, prosecuting at Chelmsford Crown Court.
At the time of the incident Capper, 47, of Fairfax Drive, Westcliff, was suffering from mental illness, said Mr. Higgs.
Capper admitted manslaughter on the grounds of diminished responsibility.
He denied a charge of murder and this plea was accepted by the Crown.
Judge Peter Greenwood described Capper as ‘a highly dangerous man’ and remanded him in custody for a further medical report.
Mr Higgs said Capper had been married to his 47-year-old wife Carol for six years, but it had been a stormy relationship and there were frequent drunken rows.
On June 5 last year a lodger found Mrs Capper dead in bed and phoned the police.
A post mortem showed she had 55 injuries, including broken ribs and bruises to head, neck and body.
She had been beaten and strangled and died from multiple injuries and asphyxia.
Church bells accused of disturbing God's peace
RETIRED teacher George Calvert went to court yesterday to try to stop a noise he says is disturbing God's peace — the local church bells.
For two years he has been complaining that noise from the bells of St Mary the Virgin church at Down St Mary, Devon, has ruined his retirement.
Mr Calvert, whose home backs on to the churchyard and is just 100ft from the bell tower, was at Exeter County Court yesterday to seek an injunction restricting bell ringing to church services.
Medical reports
The bells are rung by the vicar, the Rev Simon Beveridge, each day at 8.30am and 6pm for morning and evening services and by teams of bell ringers on other occasions.
Yesterday's hearing was adjourned until the end of May for Mr Calvert to produce medical reports and noise tests.
Mr Calvert, 63, who has lived in the village for ten years, claimed when the row first surfaced two years ago the vicar was ‘disturbing God's peace’, and affecting his sleep.
But Mr Beveridge, 32, said the issue had united the village's 270 residents in support of the church bells.
Jail for man in bottle attack
A MAN who pushed a broken bottle into someone's face, causing a wound requiring up to 30 stitches, was yesterday jailed for 18 months.
The attacker, Alexander McWalters, 21, acted in a way ‘totally out of character’, a judge was told.
McWalters, of Stanley Avenue, Ipswich, appeared before Judge John Devaux at Ipswich Crown Court.
He had admitted a charge of wounding Jeremy Chitty, causing grievous harm.
Earlier, McWalters barrister, Hugh Vass, stressed his client's ‘exemplary character’ and pointed out that letters of character reference included one from a retired police sergeant.
He said the offence arose from a sense of ‘outrage’ because McWalters believed Chitty had molested a friend.
Mr Vass said his client had lashed out, in a fight outside a pub, not realising at the time that a bottle in his hand was broken.
McWalters, who had worked for Customs and Excise, had an unblemished record.
‘He feels nothing but horror and shame for what he did that night’, said Mr Vass.
Judge Devaux, announcing sentence, said the injuries to Mr Chitty's face had required between 20 and 30 stitches.
Teaching union's ‘stunning victory’ in tests boycott
A TORY council yesterday failed in a High Court bid to halt a teachers' boycott of school tests.
Mr Justice Mantell threw out an application by Wandsworth Council for an injunction to block the boycott of national curriculum testing.
He said teachers had no statutory duty to carry out the work and ruled that the boycott by the National Association of Schoolmasters–Union of Women Teachers was part of a legal trade dispute.
Union general secretary Nigel de Gruchy claimed a ‘stunning’ victory and called on Education Secretary John Patten to hold talks to end the dispute.
Yesterday's decision comes as the National Union of Teachers is poised to boycott national English tests for 14-year-olds in June.
If Wandsworth Council had succeeded it would have set a precedent for councils to take the NASUWT to court.
After the judgment Mr de Gruchy said: ‘The decision enables the NASUWT to continue its action to protect members against excessive workload arising out of the national curriculum testing and assessment arrangements.’
More than 100,000 members of the 190,000-strong NASUWT were last month instructed to begin the boycott after a ballot in which 88 per cent backed industrial action.
Wandsworth had accused union members of acting in breach of their employment contracts and of a statutory duty to carry out continuous assessment of pupils' work.
The Education Department would not comment directly on the court case but said it would be the responsibility of head teachers and school governors to see that tests went ahead as planned.
Nigel de Gruchy outside court yesterday
Parents' anguish as boy admits 50 thefts
Nine-year-old out of control
A NINE-year-old boy who went on a six-month crime spree and carried out more than 50 thefts, went back to school yesterday after police were forced to let him walk free.
The boy, from Witham, Essex, is too young to be charged with a criminal offence.
The age of criminal responsibility in this country is ten.
Police were forced to set him free with a warning — back to the parents who yesterday admitted he was out of control and said they wanted to see him prosecuted.
The boy, who cannot be named for legal reasons, stole thousands of pounds of property from cars, garages, school changing rooms and sheds in the company of two other youths, both aged 14.
The 14-year-olds have been released on police bail.
The nine-year-old tearaway was arrested when a driver caught him trying to get into his car by sliding through the sunroof.
Inspector Mick Barry, of Witham police, said at first officers thought the two older youths may have led the nine-year-old on but it turned out he played a full part in all the crimes.
Insp Barry said: ‘It would be easy to blame the parents, but they seem to have made reasonable efforts to bring him up properly.
Now they admit they can't control him.
In fact no one can do anything with him.
If he doesn't reform he will grow up to be a professional criminal.’
Essex Social Services said yesterday they will not be applying to have the boy taken into care.
Police say the only light is that a psychologist, appointed by social services, is due to interview him and may find out why he steals and be able to recommend a workable deterrent.
The boy's 34-year-old mother told Detective Sergeant Phil Stimpson she and her husband had tried to stop him stealing for years.
Now the family is so desperate they want to move away to start life afresh — away from the older boys who they are convinced lead him astray.
Continued on Page Four
Boy too young to face charges
From Page One
Det Sgt Stimpson said: ‘She searches him every time he comes home or goes out, and she keeps his bedroom bare of the usual toys and clutter so that she can see at a glance whether he has hidden any stolen property.’
The mother has tried locking him in his room, and smacking him.
‘He will sulk for a couple of days and promise never to do it again, but before long he's at it as usual.
If she locks him up he climbs out of the window.’
Det Sgt Stimpson said: ‘She has tried very hard to stop him stealing but now she is so fed up she just wants to move away and try to make a fresh start in a new home.’
He added: ‘She knows he's no angel but she blames a lot of his problems on his older friends, many of whom are into crime of some sort.
She genuinely cares for the boy and is determined to save him from a life of crime.
‘She knows he can't be prosecuted and so does he.
She wished he could be charged because he thinks it might bring home to him the seriousness of what he has done and scare him enough to stop.
She realises he is on the slippery slope towards a life of crime.’
Police get new clues in hunt for killer
DOZENS of new leads have come from members of the public after a reconstruction of the last moments of stabbed businesswoman Jean Bradley, police said yesterday.
Det Supt Bob Fenton, who is leading the inquiry, said all the new information would be studied closely.
A Scotland Yard spokesman said detectives received 30–40 new pieces of information after Thursday's reconstruction, which took place a week after the murder of 47-year-old Miss Bradley, whose boyfriend was teacher Nick Osborne, from Felsted School, near Great Dunmow, Essex.
Miss Bradley, of Crowthorne, Berks, was stabbed repeatedly in the back with an eight-inch carving or butcher's knife as she loaded shopping into her car in Acton Town, west London.
A Scotland Yard spokesman said a number of people had reported seeing a man who answers the suspect's description behaving suspiciously in Acton.
Bullets slump as Arena power on
BASKETBALL: Arena Colchester kept up their push for a play-off spot in the Mid Essex Gravel League with a 90–43 demolition of a disappointing Bramston Bullets.
By the interval Colchester were 39–18 in front.
Bullets seemed unable to set up a consistent attack — Alan Murray was top scorer with just 11 points — and they could not put things right in the second half.
Hard on Arena's heels are the Pope and Smith Cougars, who saw off Essex Police 91–56.
Terry Baker with 17 points and Grant Weston with 16 did most of the damage.
Other results: Page 37.
Top field for veterans time trial
Cycling: A first-class field will assemble at Easter, near Chelmsford, for the Veterans TTA 25 mile time trial tomorrow.Organiser Brian Swallow is pleased with a full card of 120 riders.The youngest competitor is Bob Duke, from Basildon, who turns 40 the day before the event, and the oldest is 74-year-old Bill Hendry, from Farnborough.
Junior third in senior contest
Archery: Junior Michael Peart, 16, from the Deben Club competed in the senior section in the Essex County Indoor championships and finished a fine third behind R Jones, of Racketts, and T Preston, of Braintree.
Rayleigh's M Harper won the senior recurve section, with Deben's S Culverhouse second.
The women's section was won by S Romain of Racketts, with E Lamb of Deben second.
Rayleigh won the team award with Deben in second place.
World number two stars in pro-am
Snooker: Stacey Hillyard, the women's world number two, is the star name at the Braintree Sportsman Snooker Club Pro-Am today, which carries a £1,000 first prize.The financial package, with £400 to the runner-up, £100 to the semi-finalists and £40 to the quarter-finalist, has secured 96 entries.Mark King, who beat Peter Ebdon in last year's final, defends his title.
Trophy battle
Golf: Thorpe Hall pair Jonathan Neal and Stephen Shields head the field of 16 qualifiers attempting to win the Keating Trophy over 36 holes at Romford today.
DAVID Cook has ‘won’ Clare Farrow for 12 months as part of a business award.
David, 21, of Hemingstone near Ipswich won the Kidsons Impey Award of a year's free accountancy and tax advice at the Suffolk Livewire Awards.
As a result Clare will be helping David with his finances during the next 12 months.
David recently established Speedstar, an indoor go-kart chassis and bumper design and manufacturing business.
He hopes his designs will be a winner at indoor kart arenas throughout the United Kingdom.
As well as winning the special award for his enterprise and the potential for his business idea, David also received £200 for reaching the final of the competition.
From a record entry of 30 business plans, six were identified as the most promising and went forward to the final where they were interviewed by an experienced panel of judges.
This year's judges were Richard Yallop, Cranfield School of Management; Charles Hunter, Nat West Bank; Katy Reade, Kidsons Impey; Eddie Alcock, Mid Suffolk Vehicle Services and Suffolk County Councillor; and Carl Bowen, Selby Group — the 1992 Suffolk winner.
The annual Livewire competition is open to 16 to 25 year olds who have been trading for less then a year.
David Cook accepts his accountancy, business and tax package, in the shape of business adviser Clare Farrow from David Franklin, a partner in Kidsons Impey
Major step in building £9m bypass
PLANS to build the long-awaited Kesgrave bypass at an estimated cost of more than £9 million are about to take a major step forward with publication of a series of compulsory orders to obtain the necessary land.
This will allow six weeks for objections to be lodged before a public inquiry is held probably in mid or late summer.
Suffolk county surveyor Jeffrey Stansfield said yesterday that the project was the ‘number one’ priority.
‘The orders will be published very early next week.
This is a massive step forward and signifies to the public that we mean business.’
The announcement follows the county council being sued for £2.2 million because of delays in building the bypass.
Thirteen landowners from Kesgrave are planning High Court action against the authority after giving a cash injection of £1.9 million.
Mr Stansfield said: ‘We are preparing a serious defence and we believe we have a very strong case.’
The landowners, who are developing the 3,000-home Grange Farm estate, say they were told that only 1,600 homes could be erected before the bypass was built.
In 1987 they agreed to pay the sum to help bring construction forward, but the project has been dogged by setbacks.
Work is planned to start next year with confidence high that half of the cost will be met by the Government.
Mr Stansfield said the increase in costs had been partly due to inflation and other features introduced into the scheme.
These included dualling the road, creating a network of underpasses for horse riders, and safety provisions.
Seventy pupils from Clacton County High School took over the council chambers of Tendring District Council at Weeley recently to film their entry for the Citizenship Foundation Youth Parliament Competition.
Using equipment bought from prizes won in recent competitions, pupils enacted Prime Minister's Question Time, a debate on whether or not private vehicles should be banned from city centres, and the Speaker's Procession.
‘Prime Minister’ Courtanay Botterell is pictured being filmed at the dispatch box during a rowdy Question Time.
Judge frees intruder who bound and gagged woman
A KNIFE-wielding intruder who bound and gagged a woman walked free from court yesterday.
Christopher Casabona was sentenced to two years probation after a jury heard how he tied up a woman lodger at her Felixstowe home before leaving with a 15-year-old girl.
The woman was unhurt in the ordeal, which happened on March 20 last year.
She returned to her address to find Casabona inside, holding a knife.
Casabona, 20, of no fixed address, forced the woman to go to a bedroom and tied her ankles and arms before gagging her mouth with adhesive tape.
A teenager who lived in the same address returned and tried to call police after hearing the voice of the lodger and the man, said Charles Kellett, prosecuting.
She failed because Casabona cut off phone wires.
Casabona then took the teenager on a long car drive.
At one point the pair had sexual intercourse in the vehicle, said Mr Kellett.
The judge, Mr Justice Humphrey Potts, said he would have put Casabona behind bars for two years but he had already served an equivalent term on remand.
‘For your age you have a bad record.
Unless you make a fresh start today the future is going to be bleak for you,’ said the judge.
Earlier, it was alleged that Casabona kidnapped the 15-year-old, raped her and tried to murder her by pumping exhaust fumes into the vehicle while they were both inside.
Casabona denied the offences and said the girl willingly had sex with him and had several chances to leave the car.
He was acquitted of rape, attempted murder, administering poison with intent and kidnapping.
He admitted unlawful imprisonment and sex with an under-age girl.
Casabona was also formally cleared of threatening behaviour, assault causing actual bodily harm and threats to kill after no evidence was brought by the prosecution.
Dismal week
Rival upsets BAT shares
POOR U.S. unemployment figures plus big falls by Wellcome and BAT sent shares tumbling for a dismal end to the week.
The FTSE had spent most of the day rising before the depressing U.S. employment statistics which triggered a weak opening on Wall Street.
BAT Industries was unsettled by news that rival Philip Morris expected a 40 per cent fall in tobacco profits and planned price cuts.
It fell 71p, taking Rothmans International with it.
Wellcome's share price lost 85p in early dealing after news that trials of its anti-Aids drug, AZT, had shown it to be ineffective in treating the virus.
The early drop wiped around £800 million off the company's market capitalisation — before staging a modest comeback to stand 51p down.
Early on the FTSE peaked 19.1 ahead after Tokyo provided an early boost, closing almost 350 points up on new-found optimism about the Japanese economy.
Figures showing a fall last month in official reserves did not dent market sentiment.
Instead, investors focused on prospects for recovery in the UK economy.
There was good support for domestic stocks, especially stores and utilities.
British Gas was 6p down after the Monopolies and Mergers Commission extended the time for a study into gas conveyance and storage.
Bishop's direct answer
ASK Frank Bishop for his tip for the Grand National and his answer will be Direct — to suit the style of football he intends to throw at Margate, visitors to Cressing Road this afternoon.
In his bid to make the top eight and earn Iron some cash from the Beazer Homes kitty, he keeps faith with the squad that outplayed Witney last week after Glenn Russell's dismissal, but still lost 3–1.
Braintree's other target, at least in the fan's eyes, will be to finish higher than rivals Sudbury, who must come over the border on Easter Monday.
The clubs are level on points, but the Suffolk side has a game in hand.
Braintree have the psychological edge today, having knocked Margate from the top of the table early in the season with a 5–1 win after a seaside special on the Kent coast.
Braintree have lost just four games at home all season and in the process have scored more goals than any other Southern Division club.
Reverse head out
A NEW type of coastguard patrol boat was launched from the Essex coast yesterday.
Regional divisional controller Tony Griffiths performed the honours at the naming ceremony of the 23ft cabin boat Dolphin at the coastguard station in Walton on the Naze.
The fibreglass boat is the first of its kind in England and is being tested by coastguards in the Thames district.
Previous patrol boats have been semi-rigid inflatable boats.
It will be used for safety patrols, transporting personnel teams around the coast and public relations exercises.
Among civic dignitaries attending the ceremony were Tendring District Council chairman Lionel Randall, lifeboat representatives from Clacton, Harwich and Walton, and representatives from the fire, police and ambulance services.
District controller Ian Jackson stressed the new boat is not an RNLI rescue boat, although it will respond to distress calls while it was at sea.
Built by Webb Brothers of Southampton, the boat is powered by water jet propulsion and is equipped with the latest electronic communications and navigational aids.
The first coastguard boat called Dolphin was recorded as being in service in the Walton area in the late 1800s.
A cash-starved foot ferry service can keep running this year thanks to the help of councillors, the skipper revealed last night.
Alan Pridmore, managing director of Orwell and Harwich Navigation Co, said Tendring council's decision to cut his business rate had saved the firm from closure.
The company, which owns the historic MV Brightlingsea that links Harwich and Felixstowe, has been badly hit by falling passenger levels.
Council spokeswoman Jane Williams said: ‘We were able to award the hardship relief having seen the circumstances of the company and the unique service it provides to the community.’
The relief applied to last year's business rates bill, which is thought to have topped the £4,000 mark.
Meanwhile, the ferry's full summer timetable begins on May 31 when the MV Brightlingsea will run five trips between Harwich and Felixstowe.
The ferry can also be booked for schools and private cruises around Harwich Harbour and beyond.
The Dolphin coastguard patrol boat undergoes trials off Walton on the Naze pier
Tory to give up ward seat
A TORY county councillor will not be standing for re-election next month because he fears his business affairs could lead to his disqualification from office.
Eddie Alcock, who has represented the Castle Hill, Ipswich, division at County Hall for eight years, said: ‘It is to do with a difficult situation which has developed in a company which I am associated with.’
Mr Alcock, a 55-year-old widower who lives in Debenham, has served as vice-chairman of the county's planning committee and chairman of the rivers development area strategy committee and the Brecks project committee.
He has an adult son, David, and is also a Mid Suffolk district councillor.
Leader of Tory-run Suffolk County Council, Chris Penn, said: ‘It is obviously a disappointment to us that he will not be able to stand in May because of his private circumstances.’
There would be opportunities for him to rejoin the council at a later date, however.
Listeners' role in Easter eggs plea
RADIO listeners in Essex are again being asked to ensure that under-privileged children are not eggless this Easter.
Essex Radio and Breeze AM's Community Action Unit have launched their 1993 Easter Egg Appeal in conjunction with the Children's Society to collect as many eggs as possible for poor and disabled Essex children.
In the past, listeners have produced a tremendous response with thousands of eggs finding their way to hospitals and homes around the county.
‘The Easter Egg Appeal is a traditional part of our community affairs calendar and always attracts a good response from individuals and companies,’ said Matthew Jackson, of Community Action.
‘We hope that this year they will once again put the eggs first and bring a smile to the face of a child less fortunate.’
Collection points can be found at Essex Radio in Duke Street, Chelmsford, and Children's Society shops in Braintree and Clacton.
Test blasts shake up residents
EXPLOSIVES testing at a military research base was halted after police received complaints from worried Essex residents.
Parts of mid and north Essex were rocked by the blasts at the Defence Research Agency in Shoeburyness.
Scared residents heard and felt the explosions as far away as Colchester, Witham, Rowhedge, and Kelvedon.
A police spokesman confirmed a number of calls had been received from people worried about what was happening on Thursday afternoon.
Earlier this week, residents in parts of Suffolk experienced similar problems as a result of tests at Shoeburyness.
Both times test work was stopped as soon as MoD chiefs realised what was happening.
Acoustic forecasts had wrongly predicted that any noise generated by the blasts would not affect any towns or villages.
Jury fails to reach verdict
A MAN accused of attacking an Essex police dog handler could face a re-trial.
A Chelmsford Crown Court jury last night failed to reach a verdict on a charge against Gerard Wing of causing actual bodily harm to Pc Colin Elsegood.
Judge Richard Groves discharged the jury after it had considered the case for more than six hours.
Wing, 20, a clerk, of Toppesfield Road, Wickford, had denied the allegation during the two day trial, saying he acted in self-defence.
Miss Stephanie Farrimond, prosecuting, said the Crown needed time to consider its position over whether to ask for a re-trial.
Rescuers work to free girl after fall
MEDICS and police last night worked for more than an hour to rescue a teenage girl who fell 30ft down a railway embankment.
A police helicopter was called in to floodlight the area outside Kelvedon railway station where the 14-year-old girl was trapped.
The youngster had fallen down the steep embankment on the Colchester side of the station, injuring her back and legs, and was unable to move.
A spokesman for Essex Ambulance Service said the rescue operation was hampered because no vehicles could get close to where the girl had fallen.
‘It was boggy and muddy ground and it was pitch black,’ he said.
‘We had to call the police helicopter in to light up the area so we could see what we were doing.’
Two ambulance crews and police officers used a special rescue stretcher to haul the girl up the embankment.
She was carried along the railway line to the station from where an ambulance took her to Colchester General Hospital.
The operation, which started just after 8pm, took more than an hour to complete.
‘She is a bit shaken and quite cold but we don't believe she is too serious,’ added the spokesman.
A Witham police spokesman said it was too early to say what caused the accident.
Animal tests have little real value
Sir,— In a letter to the EADT (March 18), Andrew Blake defends animal experiments and complains that you have printed ‘extremist animal rights’ views.
He claims that ‘animal rights’ people say that mice have equal rights to humans.
My own society, SOLACE (Society for the liberation of animals from cruelty and exploitation), claims no such thing and I do not know of any society that does.
Mr Blake is twisting the argument.
We do not waste time on abstract philosophical arguments about ‘rights’.
We are against animal experiments because they are unscientific and have caused great harm to humans and the planet as well as terrible suffering to animals.
Many drugs have had to be withdrawn because of the ill-effects in humans which did not show up in animal tests.
Official figures are kept of deaths caused by ‘properly prescribed’ drugs.
Dr James D Gallagher, director of medical research at Lederle Laboratories, has said: ‘Animal studies are done for legal reasons, and not for scientific ones.’
Professor Bruno Fedi, winner of a World Health Organisation prize, has said: ‘Every discovery derives from observations on humans, which are subsequently duplicated in animals, and whenever the results happen to concur, their discovery is attributed to animal experimentation.’
Doctor and pathologist Professor Pietro Croce says in one of his articles: ‘One only needs to find the appropriate animal species to obtain the desired result.
You name it, they will get it.
It is tragic that some want us to believe that they can manufacture human health in this way.’
We have articles by doctors and scientist available on request that go into more detail than is possible here.
We are sorry that Mr Blake is ill, and sorry, too, that he has been misled into thinking that experiments on mice can tell anyone anything about a human being.
JEAN FAWCETT (MRS), general secretary SOLACE, 230 Rendlesham Court, Ipswich.
By Cathy Brown
Sir Ranulph Fiennes is a master of stiff-upper-lip understatement.
‘Basically, we crossed Antarctica.
It was 3,500 km, 11,000 ft above sea level.
It wasn't very pleasant.
It hadn't been done before.
There were a lot of crevasses.
It was very cold.’
That is how the former SAS officer sums up his most recent adventure: the first crossing of Antarctica, the coldest place on earth, on foot, an expedition which has left him, not for the first time in his life, with severe frostbite.He is a man of extremes: in 1991 he led an international team which discovered the lost city of Ubar, in the hottest desert in the world, in Arabia.He will be talking about the ‘hot and cold experience,’ as he puts it, at Snape Maltings on Saturday April 24.
His illustrated lecture, A Life in Exploration, is being given in aid of Pro Corda, the Leiston-based chamber music group, and the Aldeburgh Foundation.Sir Ranulph, 48, is officially ‘the world's greatest living explorer’ according to the Guinness Book of Records .
He says he became an explorer ‘in the same way as you became a journalist, by sheer chance.’
‘I didn't get A-levels, so I went into the Army,’ explains the Old Etonian.
‘In the peace-time Army, you teach people canoeing, skiing and mountaineering.
So when I left the Army, I went into that sort of thing.’
In the SAS he undoubtedly learned rather more than that, including the survival skills which he has had to draw on so often in expeditions which have not always gone according to plan.He has been a full-time explorer since he was 25 and ‘like everybody else, in every career, you don't retire until you have to,’ he says.His CV reads like a non-stop Boys Own adventure — shooting up the White Nile in a hovercraft, parachuting on to the Jostedalsbre Glacier and negotiating more than 4,000 miles of Canadian and Alaskan rivers.Between 1979 and 1982, he circumnavigated the world on the Transglobe Expedition, becoming one of the first men ever to reach both the North and South Poles overland.
In 1986, Sir Ranulph made the first of his four attempts with Dr Michael Stroud to reach the North Pole unsupported.
Frostbite forced them to abandon the expedition.In 1988 and 1989 they were defeated by freak weather conditions.
In 1990 they were halted 90 miles from the Pole by wide stretches of open water.Having already travelled more than 500 miles from their starting point in Siberia, they set a record anyway for the longest unsupported polar journey.Then Sir Ranulph abandoned the polar cold for the desert heat, to find Ubar, before again teaming up with Dr Stroud for this winter's headline-making trek to the South Pole, breaking their own record for the longest unsupported polar journey ever made.They returned in February and Sir Ranulph still cannot tolerate running shoes on his frost-bitten feet, to train for his next expedition —‘another hot one.’
Doesn't he ever think ‘Enough is enough.
I am not going through that again?’
He says cheerfully: ‘I can't remember any expedition where I haven't thought that at some time.
But we take the very best equipment we can find, and train as hard as we can, in order to avoid discomfort.’
And he adds: ‘Once back to good food and the right medicine, most human bodies recover very quickly.
My feet are a hell of a lot better.’
Sir Ranulph is currently occupied writing a book about the Antarctic expedition.
His autobiography,Living Dangerously , and his book about the discovery of Ubar,Atlantis of the Sands , are just two of a string of best-sellers he has written about his adventures.
He admits: ‘I love writing.
That is how I make a living,’ he says.
Sitting at a desk working on a book could hardly be more different from battling through a polar blizzard, but it presents a different sort of challenge.
‘Once you are back in England, there are a thousand other things to do: bills to pay, shopping, other sides to living that don't exist in a place like Antarctica, where there is no telephone, and no other people for thousands of miles.’
Sir Ranulph and his wife Ginny — the first woman ever to be awarded the Polar Medal — try to spend as much time as possible at their home on Exmoor, but even between expeditions, there is a lot of travelling to do.
‘I have just come back from lecturing in New York and I am off to lecture in Hong Kong.
I am lecturing all over the place,’ explained the explorer.However, although he also finds time for lectures to raise money for good causes, like his visit to Snape, Sir Ranulph is a notoriously private celebrity.He rarely gives interviews, and does not keep hand-out photographs of himself.
‘I am the photographer on the expeditions,’ he explains.
‘I take lots of photographs of everybody else, but I don't have any of me.’
He leaves the impression of someone who is at his happiest when furthest away from civilisation.Sir Ranulph Fiennes will be presenting A Life in Exploration at Snape Maltings on Saturday April 24 at 7.30 pm.
Tickets, from £7.50 to £10, are available from the Aldeburgh Foundation box office, Tel: 0728 453534.
FA Cup
Wembley set for derby double
USUALLY at this time of the year FA Cup semi-finalists are battling for the right to play at Wembley.
But this weekend all four teams will get a taste of the special atmosphere at the famous old stadium in a derby double.
Today sees the Sheffield clash between United and Wednesday, while tomorrow Spurs and Arsenal bring their North London rivalry to the hallowed turf.
Wednesday manager Trevor Francis said of the Steel City clash: ‘I wish this was the final.
It is going to be a great atmosphere and it's fantastic that between us we have sold 70,000 tickets.
After all the overtures that were made to the FA to get the game switched from Leeds to Wembley the demand for tickets has vindicated that decision.
I hope that the fans who are travelling will make it a great day for the city, have fun and enjoy themselves, and behave.’
Defender turned star striker Paul Warhurst passed a fitness test after recovering from the groin injury that forced him to pull out of the England squad.
But Francis, who has already led Wednesday into the Coca-Cola Cup final and a showdown with Arsenal, refuses to divulge his line-up until just before the kick-off.
United manager Dave Bassett is also refusing to give any hints about his line-up but was boosted by the news that striker Brian Deane and right back Kevin Gage are both fit.
The major worry concerns skipper and key defender Brian Gayle.
Bassett said: ‘Gayle got a kick on the knee at Coventry in our last match and he's not done much work all week.’
Arsenal goalkeeper David Seaman is vowing ‘no slip-ups this time’ as the Gunners go sniping for revenge against Tottenham tomorrow.
Seaman admits it was his mistakes which gave Spurs two crucial goals when they beat Arsenal 3–1 two years ago in the only other semi-final ever to be held at Wembley.
He blames himself for the 35-yard rocket from Paul Gascoigne that ripped through his grasp after just five minutes.
And he also failed to hold a Gary Lineker shot which produced Spurs' third goal.
But he insists: ‘There is no Wembley hoodoo on me.
I don't believe in things like that.
I don't want to even think about the two mistakes I made at Wembley the last time against Spurs.’
The law of averages suggests it is Arsenal's turn to beat their neighbours but the reality is they are weighed down by injury problems while Spurs, never beaten in the FA Cup at Wembley, look set to field their strongest side.
Lee Dixon (shin) and Paul Davis (hamstring) are both major doubts while there may also be a big question mark over Alan Smith.
Port managers vow to beat threat of strike
By Steve Gravenor
ANGRY managers have drawn up contingency plans to keep an Essex port running if dockers vote for an all-out strike, it was revealed last night.
Stena Sealink Line managing director Gareth Cooper has warned that any industrial action at Parkeston Quay would put jobs at risk.
The Rail, Maritime and Transport Union (RMT) has just completed a national ballot asking members, including around 260 at Harwich, whether they support industrial action.
Leaders have called on the membership to back a call for strike action.
The result of the ballot will be known on Thursday, according to RMT official Bob Rayner.
The vote was taken after Stena Sealink Line announced plans to axe 60 jobs, including 19 at Harwich, and impose pay cuts.
However, Mr Cooper said industrial action would achieve nothing but cause job cuts and benefit competitors.
He said the planned job cuts did not affect RMT members and the pay cuts were effectively only a withdrawal of overtime.
‘Even the threat of a strike shatters confidence in our services and drives customers away,’ he said.
‘If we drive away business we drive away jobs.
It will be irresponsible to allow this to happen and therefore the company will maintain normal port services irrespective of any union ballot.
‘It is important the workforce understands that threats of industrial action are counter-productive.’
A company spokesman would not say what measures had been drawn up to keep the port running normally.
However, he said: ‘We will not be held to ransom.’
Grand National
Judy Davies, the only woman rider in today's Grand National, rides long shot Formula One for Ross-on-Wye trainer John Edwards.
She is unlikely to be in the chase for honours, Formula One being quoted at 200–1.
The likely betting front-runners are Captain Dibble, Royal Athlete, Zeta's Lad, Party Politics, and Romany King who is Crusader's choice.
Preview: Page 36
Talks called on shopping centre plan
DEVELOPERS and council officers will meet following increasing uncertainty about the future shape of a major shopping scheme.
David Chartwell, a director of Chartwell Land Plc, said talks with St Edmundsbury Borough Council were needed in the light of a series of about-turns.
Councillors on Thursday decided that the 12-acre Cattle Market at Bury could be developed in small-scale phases.
They had previously ruled out alternatives to a one-phase project comprising shops, a multi-storey car park, bus and taxi interchanges and some housing.
The change of heart followed an outcry by the public who lodged objections to the scheme.
Perfect boost for Ben
BEN de Haan received the perfect confidence booster for his Martell Grand National ride on Royal Athlete when partnering his first Aintree winner for 10 years.
Royal Athlete is trained by Jenny Pitman, who provided the one and only previous de Haan Aintree winner, Corbiere in the 1983 National.
And after Cardinal Red carried him to a two and a half length win over Gaelstrom in the Belle Epoque Sefton Novices Hurdle, de Haan said: ‘That has set me up perfectly for the National.
I'm looking forward to it.’
Track record
Records look set to crash in the National after Double Silk beat the clock on his majestic winning march over the Aintree fences.
The hunter from the Mendip Hills in Somerset smashed the track record as he became the first to complete the Cheltenham-Liverpool Foxhunters' double since Grittar in 1981.
The best bet on National day is that another record will fall on the fast turf and that a vast number of runners will clear the 30 fences.
Double Silk, owned and still ridden at home by retired, 66-year-old farmer Reg Wilkins, was plunged on from 7–2 to 5–2 favourite.
And victory never looked in doubt as he dominated throughout, making the fences seem little more than matchsticks.
Jockey Ron Treloggen's only problem was seeing off the unwelcome attentions of a loose horse, Forest Ranger, who stuck to him like glue all the way from Becher's Brook to the winning line.
Strike brings rail services to standstill
By David Weisbloom
Deserted — Chelmsford station yesterday.
Picture by Nicky Lewin
Dr Peter Burgess pedals off from Humber Bridge in one of his rickshaws to beat the traffic caused by the rail strike
EAST Anglian rail services were brought to a standstill yesterday by striking BR employees, but the effect on the region's economy was reportedly minimal.
InterCity, which is responsible for the Norwich to London 125 service, was halted by the one-day strike, as were trains run by Network Southeast and Regional Railways.
East Anglian Chambers of Commerce said most people who worked in the region travelled by car so business was not unduly affected.
The RAC said morning rush-hour traffic on the A12 between Great Yarmouth and London was ‘busy but nothing out of the ordinary’.
The M25 London orbital was ‘not too bad either’.
Commuters to the capital obviously decided to take a long weekend or were put up in hotels overnight by their employers, said a spokesman.
The 68,000-member Rail, Maritime and Transport Union called the strike after British Rail refused to give a pledge that there will be no compulsory redundancies.
The union, which is currently coming to terms with 7,000 job losses among railway workers, accused BR bosses of going back on guarantees made in 1984.
East Anglian RMT spokesman Peter King said BR employees were prepared to move from one part of the country to another to avoid compulsory redundancies.
‘We are not looking for jobs for life, just a sensible arrangement,’ he said.
‘We have got to the stage where somebody has got to make a stand against job losses.
Someone has got to stand up and say enough is enough.’
Ivor Jordan, of the East Anglian Trades Union Congress, said the strike was necessary to bring home to the public that rail services were being decimated by the Government.
Alluding to the Prime Minister's enthusiasm for charters, he said: ‘It's about time we had a charter for workers’ rights.
I don't expect John Major to do so, but the TUC will.’
Following Mr Major's denunciation of the strike, the region's sole Labour MP, Jamie Cann, who represents Ipswich, said: ‘I believe the railmen have a legitimate case.
I am absolutely behind them.’
Most people accepted more money needed to be spent on the railways with extra staff to keep them going, he said.
Alan Hazlewood, of the Ipswich and Suffolk Chamber, warned strikers that they were threatening working people's jobs, while Jim Wellerd, his counterpart in North and Mid Essex, said member firms had not reported any difficulties.
Rail strike has little effect on area's business
PUPILS from a mid-Essex school have spent the past week conducting a survey of the local public footpath network.
The year nine students from the Anglo-European School at Ingatestone have done the work in co-operation with the county council's Ways Through Essex team.
Head of geography Jim Faulds said the project was an example of the school's interest in environmental issues.
‘Two years ago, we conducted a survey with year ten students into the likely routes of the proposed M12 motorway which could link Chelmsford to the M12,’ said Mr Faulds.
This week, 13 and 14-year-old pupils have been gathering data on the county's public footpath system, working as far afield as Saffron Walden.
The information will now be analysed by the pupils in the classroom as part of their wider studies.
Head of year nine John Hunter added: ‘The results will provide important information about the state of the footpath network in Essex as well as enabling our students to make suggestions on how the network can be protected and enhanced.’
The pupils carried out the project while some of their year nine colleagues were away on an exchange visit to Germany.
Dorcase Demarco, from Great Dunmow, Lee Perryman from South Woodham Ferrers, and James Stagg, from Ingatestone, during their footpath network survey
Jobless driver is jailed after violent clash with officers
TWO POLICE officers were injured during a struggle after they arrested a motorist for failing a breath test, a court heard yesterday.
Ivan Youngman, 26, unemployed, of Branwoods Road, Great Baddow, pleaded guilty at Chelmsford Crown Court to causing actual bodily harm to Pc Paul Dines and common assault on WPc Corrine Clark.
He was jailed for three months.
Mrs Caroline Beasley-Murray, prosecuting, said on April 19 last year two officers patrolling in Witham followed a car, driven by Youngman, which turned into the Mill Road car park.
Youngman was given a breath test which proved positive and was told he was being arrested, but he started walking towards a public house.
Pc Dines took hold of Youngman and there was a struggle in which the defendant's coat was torn.
Youngman shouted: ‘You have ripped my jacket.
You'll pay for that.’
Pc Dines tried to restrain Youngman and was struck several times about the head.
WPc Clark went to his assistance and was also hit.
Pc Dines suffered bruises to his face and forehead and a two-inch gash over his eye which needed five stitches.
WPc Clark sustained a black eye.
Mr. David Josse, mitigating, said Youngman was a man of previous good character who behaved inexplicably that evening.
He became irate after his jacket was ripped and acted in a stupid and regrettable way.
Mr. Josse said Youngman was not involved in the more serious injuries the officer received, but his behaviour incited another man who behaved irresponsibly.
Assistant Recorder Mr. J. Anthony told Youngman: ‘You have an otherwise unblemished record but this was a serious offence of violence on police officers who are entitled to protection by the courts.’
New director will oversee care work
SOCIAL worker David Jenkins has been appointed by the Essex Voluntary Association for the Blind to the new post of director.
He will be responsible for the day to day management of the association, which works to help the visually handicapped in Essex and adjoining London boroughs.
The role will include liaising with social services departments, other statutory authorities and national and regional blind groups.
He will also be involved in monitoring the service provided at the association's residential homes, in Frinton-on-Sea and Wanstead, north-east London.
Mr Jenkins joined Essex Social Services as a residential care officer in 1975, working with mentally handicapped adults.
In 1980, after a two-year course at the Chelmer Institute, he gained the certificate of social service.
In 1986 he became general manager for a private sector group's residential and nursing homes and for the past year has been connected with the Bridge Hospital in Witham, involved with people with learning disabilities.
Mr Jenkins lives at Wethersfield, near Halstead, with his wife Janet, and their children — James, 14, and Kate, 12 — who attend Helena Romanes School in Great Dunmow.
David Jenkins — responsible for daily management of Essex Voluntary Association for the Blind
Fair day's work in aiding job seekers
MORE THAN 400 job seekers went to a fair yesterday to find out about programmes to help with employment or training.
Colchester's Southway Jobcentre was filled with 31 stalls offering information on various Department of Employment schemes, including the small amount known about programmes announced in the Budget.
Other organisations including Colchester Adult Education Centre, Colchester Institute, the Citizens Advice Bureau and job clubs were also represented.
Free tea, coffee and biscuits were on offer and, as well the opportunity to pick up useful leaflets and booklets, visitors could consult stallholders.
Lesley Suttling, who manages the Jobcentre, said she thought that the fair, which was the first one it had staged, had been very successful.
Peter Mills, 52, retired school caretaker, of Brightlingsea, was visiting the fair because he was finding retirement a little boring.
He said he was impressed by the range of stands but wished he was ten years younger because he thought the help on offer was best for younger people.
‘Coming down here and talking to people is better than just looking at boards in a Jobcentre,’ he said.
An unemployed lift engineer's mate, Darren Webb, 25, of Colchester, also appreciated the opportunity to talk to people about the various training and job schemes available rather than having to rely on leaflets.
He said: ‘I think this fair's a good idea.
It gives scope to find out about what's going on now and the new programmes.’
Double for Dunlop a change of fortune
JOHN Dunlop was left marvelling at the difference a day makes when Eurolink Thunder and Captain Horatius doubled up for him at Kempton yesterday.
The Arundel trainer had felt an April fool when his first two runners of the campaign — including an odds-on shot — were turned over at Brighton on Thursday.
But, thanks to a power-packed ride from Pat Eddery, Eurolink Thunder capturing the Laburnum Conditions Stakes and Captain Horatius impressing in the Magnolia Stakes saw his third and fourth do the business.
Eddery had to be at his most determined to beat Nominator whose hallmark is toughness.
Heavy pressure
Giving away 6lbs, Reg Hollinshead's colt lost nothing in defeat, only buckling in the shadow of the post, having been under heavy pressure from well over a furlong out.
‘He's not in any Guineas, but is quite a nice horse,’ said Dunlop, who saddled Eurolink Thunder to win two of his three starts as a juvenile.
‘He's very active and would have been pretty fit first time out.
I will have to be a bit canny with him as I don't expect he will be very well handicapped.’
John Reid took the honours on Captain Horatius, who confirmed his liking for soft ground by stretching away by four lengths from Half A Tick.
Plan to nurture business
ESSEX Training and Enterprise Council is launching a new initiative which it hopes will provide a kick-start for the county's manufacturing sector.
The Superstart scheme is intended to encourage the launch of team-run businesses and has been developed following research into industrial growth expectations and future job creation.
This highlighted the need for the regeneration of the Essex manufacturing base, and a series of seminars are now to be held to discover how many people have workable ideas waiting to be put into practice.
‘Superstart is to encourage and assist people with technical and manufacturing skills to link with other like-minded people to form thriving businesses which will provide additional employment for others,’ said Frances Hoare, of Essex TEC.
‘Our research report stated that future job creation would undoubtedly be generated through small business success.
We are therefore looking for people to have the drive and ambition to start a manufacturing or technology-based business, but may lack the business and commercial knowledge and confidence to go it alone.’
Key business figures, members of professional and trade organisations and financial institutions have already met and offered their support to Essex TEC to help potential Superstart candidates develop and grow their business ideas.
Superstart seminars for those interested in joining the scheme are being held at Stansted on April 14, Chelmsford on April 15, Southend on April 19, Colchester on April 20 and Brentwood on April 21.
Anyone wishing to attend should contact Frances Hoare, Essex TEC's head of business and enterprise, on Chelmsford (0245) 450123.
Gloomy picture
Kodak UK to axe 125 jobs this year
PHOTOGRAPHIC giant Kodak yesterday announced it was axing up to 125 UK jobs.
Most cuts will come at the company's headquarters at Hemel Hempstead, Herts, said a spokesman.
Jobs will be lost ‘across the board’ in manufacturing, marketing and administration during the year.
‘In the current economic climate we have to keep costs down,’ said the spokesman.
‘We are looking at voluntary redundancy, early retirement, job swaps, but if we can't do it by the end of the year we will have to look at compulsory redundancy.’
The move follows a £3 million slide in profits to £241 million.
Kodak has halved its UK workforce to 6,000 over the past 14 years.
A total of 1,300 are based at Hemel Hempstead.
Young Farmers in ‘Green Leaf Watch’ clear-up
THIS weekend has been designated ‘Green Leaf Watch’ by the National Federation of Young Farmers Clubs.
Members all over the country will be carrying out thousands of countryside projects, from clearing out old ponds and footpaths to planting new woodland areas or clearing up urban parks.
In Suffolk, four clubs are taking part in ‘Green Leaf Watch’ this weekend, with other clubs carrying out projects later on in the year.
Bury St Edmunds members will be seen on Sunday from 10.30am, clearing rubbish and rough areas around Northern Way, Bury.
This is part of their annual tidy up, under the guidance of the St Edmundsbury Borough Council.
Ipswich Young Farmers will be clearing rubbish from local parks, and Hadleigh club members will tidy an area of their town near East House, George Street.
Stowmarket YFC has a rural project at Kiln Farm, Great Ashfield, with the co-operation of Roy and David Barker, clearing overgrown kilns on the farm and restoring them, as well as clearing a nearby footpath.
Happy coincidence gives contrast of talents
Leonard Squirrell (1893–1979).
The Haste Gallery, Gt Colman Street, Ipswich, until April 17.
BY GOOD fortune, this exhibition of Leonard Squirrell, the most famous Ipswich-born artist of this century, runs concurrently with that of Harry Becker at Christchurch Mansion, Ipswich.
Their great talents could not be less alike, and it is indeed fascinating to compare these remarkably differing virtues.
Whilst everything that Becker did was at white heat and lightning speed, with drastic simplifications, Squirrell delighted in working with extremely precise topographical accuracy.
He, too, made simplifications, but slowly, after studied reflection and contemplation.
This careful process is seldom more apparent than in Harvest House, Felixstowe, 1953 , in which both the elaborate architectural detail and its surroundings are ordered and controlled with the utmost care.
Mark you, Squirrell was not solely confined to these stylistic limitations.
Indeed, in his very early days, he painted in oils in a manner strongly reminiscent of Corot and the Barbizon School, as in 3.30 am Christchurch Park, 1912 .
This is a very fine work and one regrets that, in later life, he relinquished the oil medium.
A rare later oil,In the Big Quarry, Blakenham, 1933 , shows an impressive, sober grasp of structure.
Let me not suggest that he could not work freely and spontaneously when he chose, as we see in the late The Gipping from Blakenham, 1977 , a watercolour which displays admirable freedom as opposed to recklessness.
But, throughout his long career, he remained impervious to the explosions on the modern art front, remaining true to himself and evincing many similar characteristics to those of that earlier great East Anglian watercolourist John Sell Cotman, whom he greatly admired as, notably, in The Dales, 1961 .
He was, too, extremely accomplished with pastel, as demonstrated in Sun and Storm, Market Place, Norwich 1928 , in which he indulges himself in a drama of contrasted tones and forceful handling rare in his oeuvre.
The big A Corner of Old Paris, 1926 is a more predictable pastel with its calm serenity and attention to detail.
In his etchings too, Squirrell can scale the heights.
No finer example of this can be seen than Castle Acre Priory, 1935 , in which the gaunt power of the medieval ruins is starkly silhouetted against the sky, and he permits himself a rare range of tonal contrast.
On a personal note, in my very early days on the staff of Ipswich Art School, Squirrell was teaching and I have very fond memories of the kindness and helpfulness which this most likeable man extended to me as a new boy.
COLIN MOSS
Components problem
Court setback to Daf survival bid
ATTEMPTS to save the British section of lorry manufacturer Leyland Daf from closure suffered a setback in the High Court yesterday.
The company, which has been in the hands of receivers since February, faces the prospect of its production lines halting after a judge refused to rule that a crucial supplier, to whom it owes large sums of money, was legally obliged to continue providing vital components.
It is understood that the Birmingham-based van operation and Leyland lorry assembly plant in Lancashire have only enough brake and clutch assemblies to last them a matter of days.
Some 3,500 jobs are directly at stake, along with many more held by employees of hundreds of other supply companies with whom Leyland Daf does business.
Automotive Products, of Leamington Spa, Warwicks, will not deliver any more brake and clutch components until it is paid over £758,000 which, it says, it is owed for parts supplied before Leyland Daf went into receivership.
There is no alternative supplier.
Lawyers for the joint receivers, John Talbot and Murdoch McKillop, argued unsuccessfully in the High Court chancery division that AP was in breach of EC trading law by abusing its dominant position as a supplier and holding the company to ransom.
TRAINS were at a standstill yesterday, but traffic was flowing smoothly along a newly-opened section of dual carriageway.
In fact, the A11 stretch at Red Lodge, near Mildenhall, was so busy, the official opening had to be held on a temporarily-closed slip road.
South-east Cambridgeshire MP James Paice cut a ribbon to mark the completion of the £5.5 million one-and-a-half mile scheme which takes 25,000 vehicles a day.
The project is part of a massive plan to dual the whole of the A11 and completes the section from Newmarket to Barton Mills, near Mildenhall.
Mr Paice said: ‘I always remember from when I was first elected six years ago the notorious reputation of the A11 from Chippenham to the Kennett crossroads had as an accident blackspot.’
A spokesman for Cambridgeshire County Council, which hired contractor French Kier to do the work, said a new bridge carried the B1085 over the blackspot.
He said a pollution control chamber, into which all water from the road flowed before discharging into the river Kennett, collected any spillages from vehicles involved in accidents.
It was also planned to extensively landscape the road with tree planting over the next 12 months to make it blend in with the surrounding area.
Congratulations on a slip road of the A11 yesterday as MP for South-east Cambridgeshire James Paice officially opens the Red Lodge bypass
Golf
Chelmsford pair lose title
CHELMSFORD surrendered the London Ladies Foursomes title to Knebworth, the tournament's headline-makers, in the final at a soggy Hedley Wood course.
Essex captain Trish Wilson and Jean Johnson, winners at Sundridge Park last year, lost three and two to Joanne Oliver, 19, and former professional Susan Allison.
The Chelmsford pair battled through the earlier rounds despite their putting, which at crucial moments let them down, but were ultimately found out in a showpiece beset by cold winds and rain.
Three-putts at the disastrous 11th allowed Knebworth, who had beaten Essex colleagues Rochford Hundred 10 and 8 in the fourth round, to pull the score back to all-square with a six.
Chelmsford's confidence was dented, a missing a chance to go one up on the 12th and then losing the next two holes as hope of taking the trophy back to the Widford clubhouse evaporated.
The conditions had been worse in the morning for the semi-finals when Wilson and Johnson beat Mary Jane Cornelius and Tina Brown of West Sussex.
Golf
London Ladies Foursomes, at Knebworth.
Fourth round: Chelmsford bt Reading 4 and 3; S Herts bt Brookmans Park 3 and 1; Crowborough Beacon bt Tandridge 1 up; W Sussex bt Mill Hill 6 and 5; Knebworth bt Rochford Hundred 10 and 8; Royal Mid Surrey bt Sudbury, conceded; Harpenden bt Calcot Park, 22nd; Royal Ashdown Forest bt Purley Downs 4 and 3.
Quarter-finals: Chelmsford bt S Herts 4 and 3; W Sussex bt Crowborough Beacon 2 and 1; Knebworth bt Royal Surrey 1 up; Royal Ashdown Forest bt Harpenden 1 up.
Semi-finals: Chelmsford bt W Sussex 1 up; Knebworth bt Royal Ashdown Forest 6 and 5.
Final: Knebworth bt Chelmsford 3 and 2.
FA Premier League
Anxious Town aim to boost confidence
By Tony Garnett
IPSWICH and their fans have not enjoyed an FA Premier League victory since beating Manchester United in January.
They have slipped to 16th place in the table and suffered a crisis of confidence with only three points out of a possible 27.
But a victory over Manchester City at Maine Road today would help clear all their anxieties away.
Manager Mick McGiven is well aware of the problems.
‘People begin to doubt themselves in a run like we have experienced.
This is what we are up against.
All we need is a victory to put us back on the road.
The tide will turn.’
While Jason Dozzell is making his 400th first team appearance, Town will again be without left-back Neil Thompson, who has an Achilles tendon injury.
Steve Whitton has not travelled because of a bruised hip but there is a chance that Simon Milton will come into the reckoning after successful operations on his ankle and knee.
He is named in a party of 15 and his knack of scoring vital goals could prove a bonus for a side that has failed to find the net in seven of their last nine games.
Phil Whelan has returned from winning his second England under-21 cap in Turkey on Tuesday and looks likely to deputise once again at left-back.
Manchester City are eighth in the table but, amazingly, only two points better off than Ipswich, although they have a match in hand.
Right-back Andy Hill is ruled out by a stomach strain and veteran Ray Ranson will fill the gap.
Garry Flitcroft, one of their emerging young players, is expected to recover from a sore back while Mike Sheron (knee) and Terry Phelan (ankle) have both responded to treatment.
City play a 4–2–4 system with wingers Rick Holden and David White (top scorer with 17 goals) providing the crosses for Eire international Niall Quinn.
Their most expensive players are both defenders and both from Wimbledon.
Skipper Keith Curle and left-back Phelan cost £2.5m each.
That's the sort of outlay Ipswich would never envisage, and rightly so.
The squads
MAN CITY: Coton; Ranson, Phelan, Reid, Curle, Vonk, White, Sheron, Quinn, Flitcroft, Holden, Quigley, Ingebrigtsen and Simpson.
IPSWICH: Baker; Johnson, Whelan, Stockwell, Wark, Linighan, Williams, Goddard, Guentchev, Dozzell, Kiwomya, Youds, Bozinoski, Petterson and Milton.
Referee: Mr. Rodger Gifford (Llanbradach).
at Bristol City tomorrow in the Combination with goalkeeper Jason Winters back after a foot injury.
Ipswich Reserves are
Ipswich (from): Winters, Eason, Vaughan, Theodorou, Tanner, Cotterill, D Gregory, Durrant, Whitton, N Gregory, Scowcroft, Pirie, M Weston.
FA Premier League
Town aim to end crisis of confidence
By Tony Garnett
IPSWICH have not enjoyed a Premier League victory since beating Manchester United in January.
They have slipped to 16th place in the table and suffered a crisis of confidence with only three points out of a possible 27.
But a victory over Manchester City at Maine Road today would help clear all their anxieties away.
Manager Mick McGiven is well aware of the problems.
‘People begin to doubt themselves in a run like we have experienced.
All we need is a victory to put us back on the road.
The tide will turn.’
Town will again be without left-back Neil Thompson, who has an Achilles tendon injury.
Steve Whitton has not travelled because of a bruised hip but there is a chance that Simon Milton will come into the reckoning after successful operations on his ankle and knee.
Phil Whelan has returned from winning his second England under-21 cap in Turkey on Tuesday and looks likely to deputise once again at left-back.
Manchester City are eighth in the table but, amazingly, only two points better off than Ipswich, although they have a match in hand.
Right-back Andy Hill is ruled out by a stomach strain and veteran Ray Ranson will fill the gap.
The squads
MAN CITY: Coton; Ranson, Phelan, Reid, Curle, Vonk, White, Sheron, Quinn, Flitcroft, Holden, Quigley, Ingebrigtsen and Simpson.
IPSWICH: Baker; Johnson, Whelan, Stockwell, Wark, Linighan, Williams, Goddard, Guentchev, Dozzell, Kiwomya, Youds, Bozinoski, Petterson and Milton.
Referee: Mr. Rodger Gifford (Llanbradach).
Labour sets target for council election win
LABOUR is out to double its number of county councillors in Essex and take control of the authority in next month's elections.
That was the bullish message from the party as it launched its manifesto in Chelmsford yesterday.
The Labour group, currently with 25 seats compared to the Tories' 57, believes it needs another 25 to gain control — depending on how well or badly the Liberal Democrats fare.
Senior party members insist it is a realistic target.
‘If we didn't think we had a chance of winning the election we could have produced a manifesto that promised the earth,’ said party chairman Kees Maxey.
‘But we have been responsible and admitted the difficulties we will face in introducing our programme because we believe we have a real chance.’
Central to the manifesto is the party's commitments to increase education provision and halt what it sees as the erosion of social services in the county.
Free pre-school places for those wishing it remains the main plank of Labour's education policy and would eat up the vast majority of the extra £4 million the party would spend while still staying within Government capping levels.
‘We are not interested in just providing a child-minding service,’ said Labour Group leader Bill Archibald.
‘It has been proved that if a child attends a nursery school it benefits throughout the rest of its educational life.’
In the social services field Labour does not argue with the principle of care in the community but believes the scheme is being deliberately underfunded by central Government.
‘There's been a lot of talk about the £14 million funding for community care this year but the fact is £4 million of that went in setting the thing up in the first place and we've only got £10 million left for the rest of the year,’ said Coun Ron Kennedy.
Labour, he said, would fight for more cash to run social services, not just lie down like the Tories and accept what they were given.
This will be a favourite theme for Labour in the run-up the May 6 elections, said party secretary John Kotz.
‘We believe in local democracy and, unlike the Tories, we are prepared to fight our corner for local government.’
Bill Archibald — pledge on nursery education
Meat firm's new identity
HAVERHILL Meat Products, one of the UK's largest meat processors, is launching a major business expansion under a fresh identity.
The company — renamed NewMarket Foods Ltd and based at Little Wratting, near Haverhill — is targeting a number of new areas, including the UK retail, export and food service sectors, to broaden its customer base.
The new identity has been chosen to reflect the spirit of the initiative, which follows the creation of a new management team and a multi-million investment programme at the firm's factory.
The company has built a strong reputation over more than 30 years as producers of fresh pork, cooked meats, sausages and bacon products for UK supermarkets, retailers and the food service industry.
Production now accounts for more than five per cent of the national pig kill.
ANY repeat of yesterday's 24-hour strike over pit closures would consign Britain's coal industry ‘to history’, miners were warned last night.
British Coal's employee relations director Kevan Hunt said another stoppage would be ‘tragic’ and leave the corporation with no future as a major contender in the coal producing field.
‘The effect of the strike is that it makes customers walk away from us,’ he said.
‘It is futile.’
National Union of Mineworkers' president Arthur Scargill said the stoppage, which halted production at collieries throughout the country, had been ‘extremely successful’.
He led a march of several hundred miners and their supporters through Barnsley in South Yorkshire, and urged other trade unionists to join them on other days of action to defend coal, as well as jobs in other industries.
‘We have achieved the objective we set,’ said Mr Scargill.
The corporation claimed that coal was produced at some stage yesterday at 12 of its 50 pits and that NUM members reported for work at one pit in the north-east and one colliery in the Yorkshire coalfield.
It responded to the strike by ending ‘immediately’ the check-off system of collecting union subscriptions direct from NUM members, a move which will present the union with an administrative headache.
NUM president Arthur Scargill —‘strike a success'
MP opposes Essex motorway link
TRANSPORT Secretary John MacGregor has come under fresh pressure to reject any plans for a new motorway linking mid-Essex with the M25.
Consultants appointed by the Department of Transport are currently examining options for improving road links between Chelmsford and the London orbital route.
Although the DoT has said that all options are still open, the consultants are thought likely to recommend the construction of a road from the Chelmsford by-pass to the M25.
The scheme has already been dubbed the ‘M12’ and a Stop the M12 action group has been formed, drawing support from many villages south of Chelmsford.
Chelmsford MP Simon Burns has opposed the idea of a new route and favours a scheme to improve the A12 between Chelmsford and the M25 junction near Brentwood.
The issue was raised by Mr Burns at a meeting with the Transport Secretary earlier this week, and he said yesterday he had made clear the ‘united opposition’ to the scheme which existed.
‘I made it quite plain to him that I could find no-one in mid-Essex who wants this unloved road,’ said Mr Burns.
‘Obviously, as the consultants have not yet published their report, he was not able to comment, but he took on board the strength of feeling against the proposal.’
The consultants are thought still to be some way off publishing their preferred route options for the M12 scheme.
The Stop the M12 group is also opposed to upgrading the A12, fearing this would be just as damaging to the environment.
NATO gives backing to no-fly zone
Brussels: NATO secretary-general Manfred Woerner said yesterday the alliance had agreed to use warplanes to enforce the UN no-fly zone over Bosnia.
Ambassadors from the 16 alliance nations agreed the move at a meeting in Brussels.
U.S. and allied warplanes are expected to start enforcing the ban, ordered by the UN on Wednesday, within the next two weeks.
The agreement marks the first time Nato has taken on a mission beyond its borders since the alliance was founded in 1949.
Comic backs nature fund
COMEDIAN Griff Rhys-Jones has pledged his support for a £200,000 appeal to improve a new nature reserve on the banks of the Stour estuary.
The comic, whose home at Holbrook is opposite Wrabness nature reserve, has agreed to become a patron of Wrabness Nature Reserve Trust.
He has been joined by Harwich MP Iain Sproat and Lord Braybrooke, the Lord Lieutenant of Essex.
The trust is preparing to launch its two-year appeal to pay off land purchase loans, improve road access for the disabled, provide parking, toilets and a wildlife pond and carry out site clearance.
Chairman Ed Abbott said the appeal would begin in earnest soon and he confirmed that Mr Rhys-Jones had pledged his support.
A sponsored swim at Dovercourt swimming pool is planned next month followed by a swim across the Stour later in the year.
The 56-acre former Navy mine depot was given local nature reserve status after a fight to prevent it being developed as the site of 600-inmate prison.
Diadora League
Coleman is back to help Dragons bid
MANAGER Steve Dowman has decided Wivenhoe Town need all the help they can get in the fight against relegation from the Diadora Premier and has recalled Phil Coleman for today's visit to Aylesbury.
The long-serving 34-year-old attacked the Dragons boss for his use of tactics when he took charge, was promptly dropped and has refused to play since until he received an apology.
However, the Dragons have not scored in nearly 12 hours of football without him, taking just one point from the last eight games to sink back into the bottom three.
The consequence is that Broad Lane's two largest personalities have banged their heads together and come up with an undisclosed compromise in an effort to prevent Wivenhoe's first relegation in 30 years of undiluted success.
First task is to get their team-mates to forget about Tuesday's Essex Senior Cup final date with Chelmsford City and ‘make the league a priority.’
Wivenhoe have just two home games left, an Essex derby with Grays and a real six-pointer against Wokingham, and Dowman is demanding two wins, plus a few points away from Broad Lane.
He cannot put his finger on what has gone wrong on their travels — the times of arrival at the ground have even been varied — and now is the time for mental toughness.
‘I'm not a big one for trying to work out all the results — there's no point as you only end up kidding yourself.
If we pick up the results, other teams won't matter,’ he said.
Dowman insists the club spirit is still there, the probables just shading the possibles in a fierce midweek practice match, and now the fireworks have to be used against the opposition.
Phil Coleman…patched up his differences with Steve Dowman at Wivenhoe.
Housing scheme starts
WORK has started on a major business and housing development in north Essex.
Great Notley Garden Village, near Braintree, will provide 2,000 homes, a business park offering 400,000 sq ft of floor space and a hotel.
The residential area will also include community facilities including shops, a village hall, a church, a doctor's surgery and a site for a new school.
Other areas of the 180-acre site will be laid out as woodland and a country park and, apart from new roads, there will be a footpath and cycleway network.
The first new homes on the development, which is being carried out by Brentwood-based Countryside Properties, are due to be completed in the autumn.
Compromise possible in path row
A COMPROMISE could be achieved between the owners of a Suffolk stately home and local residents over plans to divert a footpath which have aroused a storm of debate.
But two Babergh District Council committee chairmen have now locked horns over the deal, with one accusing the other of acting outside his authority by intervening in the dispute.
In January Patrick and Judith Phillips, of Kentwell Hall, Long Melford, narrowly won permission to divert part of a mile-long footpath up the Hall's drive to improve security.
458 local people signed a petition opposing the move, which they said would deprive walkers of their best views of the 16th Century house by steering the path through a plantation.
Because of these objections, the order is unlikely to be approved without a public inquiry and planning chairman Peter Stevens has met Mr and Mrs Phillips to arrange a compromise.
Mr Stevens said yesterday the Phillips were considering amending the diversion so the path skirted the plantation instead of going through it, and he hoped residents would approve the change.
‘This is a regrettable situation with hostile feeling remaining between the village and the Phillips family and I have met Mr and Mrs Phillips to try and find a way forward,’ he said.
However, Melford councillor Richard Kemp, Babergh's personnel committee chairman and Mr Stevens' rival for the Melford seat on Suffolk County Council, said Mr Stevens had exceeded his brief.
‘This exercise was a self-initiated excursion without the mandate of the planning committee and without any consultation with parish or district councillors,’ he said.
The route the Phillips had been asked to consider had already been put to them three times and was the same as the existing one, he said.
Karate
NEAL Bassett, 15, from Badwell Ash won the under-16 title at the British Kyokushinkai Karate Association's national championships at Ilantrisant in Wales.
The Thurston Upper School pupil is a member of the Stowmarket Kyokushinkai Club and has only taken part in the sport for the past three years, progressing from third to runner-up to national champion at his last championships as a junior.
School book's
PUPILS presented their retiring school secretary with a This Is Your Life -style book yesterday when Mrs Pearl Frost left Myland County Primary, Colchester, after nearly 25 years.
She was given a sun dial, two large planters, garden centre tokens and flowers.
The children also presented with her with a This Is Your Life book about her career.
Mrs Frost began working for the education authority in 1943, carrying out secretarial work in the area office.
After time off to have children, she became a secretary at Kendall Primary School, Colchester, where she stayed for five years before moving at Myland.
She intends to spend her retirement tending her garden and will help with some out-of-school activities such as outings and taking the football team to its matches.
Pearl Frost, who is retiring as secretary at Myland Primary School, Colchester, with five-year-old pupils Jodee Mayer and Stephen Stoker and the book of her working life.
Rules change on pets likely
TENANTS living in council owned sheltered accommodation could be allowed to keep their pets without having to apply for permission on an annual basis.Uttlesford District Council has allowed tenants to keep a pet dog or cat, but until now only on a temporary basis.For the past two years, tenants have had to apply annually for permission to keep a pet under the council's rules.
However, now councillors are being urged to give tenants permission to keep pets on a permanent basis, without having to apply annually.The matter will be discussed by the council's housing services sub-committee on Tuesday.The meeting will be told the council's pets policy had not run into any difficulties over the past two years.
Talks between council housing officers and tenants have not revealed any problems about pets, councillors will be told.
Danish outdoor pigs no threat to UK
OUTDOOR pig-keeping in Denmark is expanding, but is unlikely to pose much of a threat to the UK, according to Nick Manderfield, of Breckland Farms, who recently returned from a study tour.
He learned that while there is sufficient suitable land, large scale growth will be limited by the climate and the high cost of labour.
Estimates suggest five per cent of Danish sows are kept outside, and while there is some growth in numbers it is not likely to go beyond 10 per cent.
Mr. Manderfield told members of the East Anglian Outdoor Pig Club — sponsored by the Cotswold Pig Development Company and BOCM Pauls — that cold winters caused permafrost, resulting in wet, sticky surfaces over hard ground.
Labour is expensive so the Danes have ‘become infatuated with technological gadgetry and automation’ but this was more difficult to apply outdoors.
Indoor or outdoor?
Chris Franklin, from the National Agriculture Centre, Stoneleigh, is to speak to the Suffolk Pig Discussion Group on this subject, at The Cedars Hotel, Stowmarket, on Wednesday, April 7, 7.30pm.
Ice hockey
Doshan aims to make sure
ICE hockey clubs competing in the Heineken League promotion play-offs this weekend are in some confusion over what format the league ladder will take next year.
Chelmsford Chieftains know the full extent of the British Ice Hockey Association's idiosyncrasies and will not be taking anything for granted as they prepare.
There are rumours that most of the sides which face off in the first weekend of post-season action could be absorbed into a new, more important third tier of the Heineken League structure.
A lot depends on new sponsors being found to replace the brewing giants, but Chelmsford coach Brad Doshan plans to qualify automatically by winning all six play-off games.
He has given the players a week off training to avoid incurring any injuries.
Perry Doyle, the defenceman, has already been ruled out of today's showdown with Streatham by knee trouble.
The Chieftains rarely enjoy their trips to South London, where they suffered their heaviest defeat of the season 16–3 in December.
A month earlier they had lost 11–9.
But they have also beaten the Redskins 8–4 and 9–6 at Riverside and Chelmsford are the fancied side, so long as their imports play well and the youngsters give their all.
Otherwise, the plush arena and a large crowd might prove too much to handle.
Tomorrow's match at home to Guildford, the Conference B champions, looks less worrying.
Chelmsford have beaten the Surrey side twice on their own ice and know how to cope with the likes of Sean Murphy, Darren Zinger and Danny O'Hanlon.
Play-off details
Today: Streatham (a, 5.00); tomorrow: Guildford (h, 6.30).
April 10: Streatham (h, 6.30).
April 11: Bristol (a, 5.15).
April 15: Guildford (a, 8.00).
April 18: Bristol (h, 6.30).
Man walks away after 220 feet fall from flats
A MAN plunged more than 200 feet from a tower block…and survived when a car broke his fall.
Twenty-six-year-old Christopher Saggers escaped with little more than a broken elbow and a neck injury after falling from the 22nd floor of flats in Salford, Greater Manchester, on Thursday night.
Police said an astonished eyewitness saw Mr Saggers crash on to the roof of the Nissan Micra, lie there for 15 seconds, then get up, brush himself down, and walk away.
The impact almost completely crushed the top half of the car.
A police spokesman said it was a ‘miracle’ that Mr Sagger survived.
The car's owner, Salford University student Michael Afilaka, said a friend leaving the flats had told him someone had jumped on his A-registered vehicle.
‘I looked out from the window from where the man had fallen and what I saw was unbelievable,’ he said.
‘He had landed bang in the middle of the roof and it had caved in.
You could open the doors but it was impossible to get into the car.
It was flattened.
It must have been a million-to-one chance for him to hit the car right in the middle.’
Mr Saggers, of Alpha Street West, Seedley, Greater Manchester, was taken by ambulance to Salford's Hope Hospital, where he was yesterday said to be ‘comfortable’.
The tower block in Salford where Christopher Saggers fell 220ft
The damaged Nissan Micra which broke the fall of Christopher Saggers
Romany King set to reign with likely course record
TOBY Balding trained Romany King to finish second to Party Politics in last year's Grand National.
This year it could well be the turn of the talented nine year old whose main target has been glory at Aintree.
Romany King is five pounds better off than last year for a two and a half length beating and is now ridden by Adrian Maguire, one of the most talented young jockeys on the circuit.
True, Romany King has not been at his most convincing so far this season, but he has been trained with the National very much in mind.
Carl Llewellyn, again riding Party Politics, has his sights set on Red Rum's record of three Grand National victories.
On the eve of the big race the Welsh jockey was predicting further success for Party Politics — and not just in this year's race, but in 1994 as well.
He may have to settle for second this time.
Brief shower
A 15 minute shower provided the only rain to fall on the course yesterday and Liverpool was bathed in unexpected sunshine.
So unless there is a downpour overnight, the Grand National best time set by Mr Frisk three years ago is under threat.
Llewellyn, recently recovered from a broken collarbone, inspected the track yesterday.
‘It's pretty fast and I expect everyone to be going at quite a lick from the start,’ he said.
‘We will be keen to find a bit of room and get out of each other 's way.’
He added: ‘My horse has got quite a high cruising speed and, even if we stay in the middle, he is more than capable of galloping his way back into the reckoning.’
Dunwoody scare
There was a last minute injury scare for Richard Dunwoody, rider of Won't Be Gone Long.
He aggravated an injury to his right hand, damaged a week ago, in pulling up Now Your Talkin in the Sefton Novices Hurdle and must pass the course doctor before racing today.
With conditions on the National course good to firm with firm patches, some leading lights are sure to be inconvenienced.
Racing Post Chase winner Zeta's Lad, eased from 7–1 to 8–1 joint-favourite with Captain Dibble by William Hill, is perhaps the most notable, but trainer John Upson said: ‘He'll be there.’
Runners in the Martell Foxhunters' Chase plough through the Chair fence at Aintree yesterday, but this formidable obstacle claimed no casualties in a race won by well backed favourite Double Silk.
Pair's cause of death still a mystery
POST-mortems on two Romanian stowaways found dead in a container full of baskets after it entered the country through Felixstowe provided no clues to the cause of their deaths.
Police in Norwich, where the bodies were discovered by the importer, sent papers found on the men to the Romanian Embassy yesterday in an attempt to establish their identities.
The men had been dead for at least a week and speculation is mounting that they had suffocated after locking themselves in the container.
A spokesman for Norwich police said: ‘Papers were found on them, but we are not entirely convinced that they are genuine.
We are hopeful that the embassy can help us.’
Until the men are identified beyond doubt they cannot be returned to Romania.
Detectives working on the case are working on the theory that they died of hypothermia or suffocation or a combination of both.
The Customs seal on the container was still in tact when it arrived at basket-ware importers Ronald Kaufmann's in Norwich.
It had been sealed in Romania on March 11.
The men, whose bodies were badly decomposed, were found with some mouldy bread and tins of food, and were dressed in jeans and jumpers.
Long irrigator aids growth of early potatoes
Picture: JOHN KERR
THIS irrigator, standing sentinel over a polythene-covered potato crop, is almost 1,500 ft long and presents a striking landscape feature on A.W.
Mortier (Farms) Ltd's Cedar Farm, Alderton, near Bawdsey.
It is being used on Estima potatoes intended as early bakers.
The crop was planted on March 15 for harvest in July.
The irrigator is a Valmont Centre Pivot with corner system.
Installed by E. Rand and Sons (Engineers) Ltd, of Wetherden, near Stowmarket, in 1984, it comprises 2 x 185 ft spans plus 5 x 170 ft spans with the corner system which automatically follows a buried guidance cable extending a further 256ft.
Each span has a 1 or 1½ hp electric motor which drives through reduction gearboxes to the pair of heavy duty tyres.
The spans keep in line by using a simple micro switch system.
An end gun irrigates a further 100ft when the corner system is fully extended.
Overall length is 1,476ft and covers a half circle of approximately 72 acres.
It can apply 1.1 inches of water to the whole area in 72 hours at a flow rate of 495 gallons per minute.
Water can applied at a lower application rate in a much faster time or heavier rate if required simply by adjusting the travel speed.
Centre pivots were originally an American concept and have become accepted worldwide.
There are more than 20 Valmont systems operating on farms in the UK, all installed by Rands.
Princes to join father for next part of Easter break
PRINCE William and Prince Harry are expected to arrive at Sandringham this weekend, exchanging the media glare of their Austrian skiing holiday for the relative seclusion of the Norfolk countryside.
After a heavily-publicised week on the slopes of Lech with their mother, the Princess of Wales, the princes are likely to join their father for the next part of their Easter holiday.
There was one last bit of excitement for ten-year-old Prince William on the flight home yesterday when he was allowed into the cockpit of the British Airways Airbus as it took off from Zurich.
The princess, looking tanned and relaxed, led her sons into a waiting minibus when the party arrived in London and it is expected the boys will join their father this weekend.
He spent a pretty exciting day himself yesterday, taking lessons in ‘rave’ culture as he visited 400 unemployed youngsters who are on an eight-day break at a Norfolk holiday camp organised by the Prince's Trust.
At one stage of his tour of the camp at Caister-on-Sea, the prince pinned a badge proclaiming ‘Charlie Says Rave On’ to his lapel, and seemed fascinated by the idea of all-night rave parties.
‘Have you ever been to any of those raves?’ he asked one group.
One youngster told him: ‘Everyone has a really good time.
You will have to come to one with us.’
No need to call time on country pubs
COUNTRY pubs are thriving in East Anglia despite Consumers' Association fears that they are disappearing.
The Which?
Guide to Country Pubs says many are being ruined by the introduction of video games and other modern forms of entertainment.
The new guide says up to 10,000 pubs could close by the end of the decade.
In East Anglia, however, the traditional local seems to be holding its own in the face of what the guide calls ‘crass money-making schemes’.
Dick Mainwaring, landlord of the Butt and Oyster at Pinmill, says the country pub serves an important function.
‘The public house is a focal point and always has been.
It's a unique tradition in this country.
I don't have, and never have had, a video machine or electronic gadget in my pub.
I have traditional pub games like darts and dominoes.’
Ian Macehiter, landlord of the Kings Head at Laxfield, says traditional pubs — without loud music — are still an attraction.
‘On Tuesdays we get all the old boys coming in on their horse and carts and they have a sing-song at lunchtime.
This is their meeting place.’
Michael Flynn, landlord of the Brick and Tyle near Colchester, agrees that country pubs are important local meeting places, but says the threat from large pub chains means they are in danger of disappearing.
Brian Cowie, joint managing director of Tolly Cobbold brewery, says many local country pubs are thriving social centres.
‘The country pub is one of the most important elements for retaining the community in the country, particularly as in recent times so many churches have closed.
Not only has it got a place, I can say there are a lot of places where they are thriving and doing well, even close to Ipswich.’
Malcolm Banks, chairman of the East Suffolk Licensed Victuallers Association, says changing social attitudes have not helped small pubs.
‘People don't use pubs like they used to do and that's the demise of the country pub, not so much the other things that have been said.
I think it would be a crying shame if the country pub disappeared but they need customers and there aren't the customers around that there were in the past.’
Sarah Macehiter, landlady at the Kings Head, Laxfield, inspects the beer in the tap room.
Her husband Ian says traditional pubs — without loud music — are still an attraction and meeting place for locals.
Linighan brother in racism dispute
THE brother of Ipswich Town captain Dave Linighan has been accused of making a racist remark to a taxi driver in a dispute over a fare.
In a story in yesterday's Daily Mirror it was claimed that Arsenal centre-half Andy Linighan made the remark, including a comment about Adolf Hitler, after he refused to pay the fare to taxi driver Harry Levy.
The London driver said he picked up the brothers at Grosvenor House Hotel after the Players' Union awards dinner last Sunday.
Mr Levy claimed Andy Linighan was drunk and had fallen asleep in the back of the taxi.
He said he had woken him up when they arrived at Linighan's Harpenden home, where he refused to pay the £63 fare.
The police were called to resolve the dispute, and although Mr Levy did not make a formal complaint he contacted Arsenal Football Club to inform them of the incident.
Harpenden police confirmed that a unit had been called out to resolve a dispute between Andy Linighan and a taxi driver.
Arsenal Football Club are investigating Mr Levi's claims.
No-one from Ipswich Town was available for comment yesterday.
Open up hidden footpaths in towns and cities plea
LOCAL authorities were challenged yesterday to make towns and cities more ‘walker-friendly’ by opening up hundreds of miles of hidden footpaths.
The 91,000-member Ramblers' Association has put forward a three-point plan aimed at giving a better deal to urban pedestrians and those who prefer to travel on foot.
Speaking in Birmingham yesterday Ramblers' chairman Dr Geoff Eastwood said: ‘While millions of people flock to the countryside to enjoy its footpaths and open spaces, those who live in the cities and are without the means to travel to the countryside are losing out on a great potential leisure resource right on their doorsteps.’
The association wants all cities to draw up definitive maps of rights of way as required by law, and to establish walking forums to protect and develop public footpaths.
The association also says the Government should legislate to give better protection from encroachment and development to the green belts and other urban fringe areas.
Act may spell end of the ‘des-res’
By Francesca Mead of Colchester solicitors, Ellison & Co
UNTIL now, you might not have recognised your own home if you had read its description in an estate agent's particulars.
We have all had our share of fruitless journeys to find our dream home, set amid magnificent rolling countryside, only to find that it is 200 yards from the noisy A12, hemmed in by an ugly industrial building, with a pungent smell of pigs wafting across the garden.
Most take the experience with typical British humour and carrying on searching until either the dream home is found or they are worn down by the practicalities of price and location.
Those setting out to look for a new home after April 4 will have the questionable benefit of the Property Misdescriptions Act 1991, which comes into force on that day.
An estate agent must then show that ‘all due diligence’ has been used to avoid a false or misleading impression being given about a property.
Just what ‘all due diligence’ means remains to be seen.
It certainly means more than the absence of negligence.
This sounds reasonable enough because no estate agent wishes to be negligent and if he was the court would direct accordingly on any case which came before them.
The idea of due diligence is well-known to the consumer protection industry.
Since the Trade Descriptions Act came into force in 1969 there is substantial and extensive case law deciding the question of due diligence.
Applying the principle to property descriptions is tricky.
While agents may be fined up to £5,000 for misleading descriptions, in setting out only the basic details of a property much is lost.
Unless only the name and address are given with accommodation measurements (which of course must be accurate) they may be liable under the Act.
The draft schedule of the Act sets out an extensive list of prescribed matters which must be taken into account, and these cover traditional and new areas.
The word ‘environment’, for instance, suggests disclosure to potential buyers of areas within high radon emission levels or properties which are susceptible to other environmentally hazardous substances.
Out will go the flowery descriptions of aspects, views and outlook which have always been so derided by disappointed property viewers.
Even so, they are an important ingredient in the ‘mere puff’ distributed by enthusiastic agents in their drive to sell properties.
Stirring potential buyers to get out and see what is for sale is a key element of successful salesmanship.
(Any restaurateur will tell you that the attractive arrangement of food on the plate is 35 per cent of his job).
The new Act applies to any legal aspect which affects the salability of a property and this is an important improvement.
The exact unexpired terms of long leases are not so critical, but details must be given of time remaining on shorter leases.
Amounts of ground rent, other rents and premiums must also be disclosed with the frequency of rent reviews.
Service or maintenance charges and liability for repairs must also be made clear.
Other matters referred to in the draft schedule include fitness for purpose, which includes liability for subsidence or heave.
Results of surveys, inspections and investigations should be revealed to prospective purchasers.
So should the results of valuations, especially those already given for mortgage purposes.
Physical or structural characteristics, form of building, its condition and appearance, treatments, repairs and improvements, fixtures and fittings are also covered.
The age and history, ownership or use of either land or buildings, the date of any alterations and, importantly, the person or company by whom it was designed, built or altered, and the date are also covered by the Act.
Restrictive covenants, wayleaves, easements, licences, public and private rights of way and restrictions on resale are all covered by the Act, together with planning permissions, building warrants and other statutory provisions, including rates and taxes.
Price alterations and length of time on the market for sale also feature in the Act.
Agents will no longer inform buyers of new instructions when the property has been on the market for upwards of two years.
The Act is seen as a step towards the Government's policy to reform and simplify the property market, although it will add to the burden of estate agents as they strive to survive in what continues to be a testing market.
Most will be extremely cautious until new case law defines the extent of the new Act.
£56m repairs planned for region's highways
DRIVERS in East Anglia are to benefit from a major increase in road maintenance investment in 1993/4.
Expenditure of £56 million is planned for carriageway maintenance in the eastern region with a further £11 million to be spent on renewing and strengthening the region's bridges.
As with national expenditure these increases represent a 15 per cent rise compared with the budget for 1992/3.
In announcing the rises, Minister for Roads and Traffic Kenneth Carlisle also said he was determined to fulfil the Department's commitments under the Citizen's Charter to reduce delays.
Bonuses for early completion are being offered to contractors who will also have to pay a charge for late completion.
Night working is also being used more commonly when environmental and safety considerations permit.
In Suffolk £1.4 million will be spent on maintenance on the A12 between Stratford St Mary and Capel St Mary.
In Essex a further £4.2 million will be spent on the A12 Crown interchange to Stratford St Mary and Boxted Bridge to Spring Lane.
£1.35 million will be spent on the A127.
Mr Carlisle said: ‘This level of investment is necessary to get the best value out of our road network and means that progress can be maintained with the 15-year programme for the rehabilitation of trunk road structures.’
David Bigg of the Braintree and Witham Rail Users Group said he was surprised that extra money could be found for the roads when the railways were desperately in need of extra investment.
‘Obviously one has to welcome investment in road infrastructure, but at a time when there is no cash for new rolling stock or proper line maintenance, I find this very surprising.’
Mr Bigg said speed restrictions on rail lines in East Anglia were about to be introduced because there was not enough money for line maintenance.
Tennis
Veteran stars to shine at Frinton
By Danny Wheeler
TRUE to his promise, Frinton Lawn Tennis Club manager David Taylor has secured some of the true greats to star in exhibition matches in Veterans' Week.
Huge stands will be erected around the main grass court in early July to ensure more spectators than ever get a chance to witness the talents of some heroes and heroines of yesteryear.
Ilie Nastase, always Frinton's favourite, and Roscoe Tanner, the man who introduced the rocket serve, will both be entertaining the crowds.
Also confirmed are Virginia Wade, the 1977 Wimbledon singles champion, and Hana Mandlikova, the nearly woman always in the shadow of Chris Evert and Martina Navratilova.
The presence of Tracy Austin, America's pig-tailed youngster of the late seventies, should be of great interest to the modern day tennis lover following her recent comeback exploits.
She as forced to retire through neck and back injuries in 1983 at the age of just 21.
A fightback to fitness was cut short by a road accident in 1989 but this year, at the age of 30, she beat Katarina Maleeva, ranked ten in the world, in a tournament in California.
She has perhaps lost the chance to emulate the success of the highly-honoured Nastase, who won 57 singles and 51 doubles titles, including Wimbledon with Connors in 1973.
The Rumanian talent was world number one for a brief spell in the same year.
Tanner only reached the heights of number five in 1979, the year that he lost to Bjorn Borg on Centre Court, but the quick-serving style that paved the way for today's generation did earn him an Australian Open triumph in 1977.
Wade will, of course, always be remembered for one special summer's afternoon at the All England Club, but she was also world number two in 1975 and won the first-ever U.S. Open in 1968.
Mandlikova was number three for four years between 1983 and 1987, taken to such heights by two successes in Australia and wins in the French and the U.S. Opens.
The attraction of big names is part of Taylor's commitment to update Frinton's image and involve the local community more in its activities.
‘The auditorium will seat around 800 and the idea is to give more people a chance to enjoy the spectacle of the Dudley Stationary Open Veterans’ Week,’he said.
The dates of the exhibitions are July 5, 6 and 7.
Each match starts at 2.45 pm and tickets, which go on sale from Monday, will cost £5.
Club eases the suffering
A ROTARY club is launching a ambitious £6,000 project to help more than two million people in poverty-stricken Romania.
The Rotary Club of Clacton wants to provide better medical care and child welfare by sending a convoy of two lorries and a minibus full of aid, including medical supplies, to the country.
An advance party is due to leave Ipswich Airport on Monday to prepare for the installation of X-ray equipment at a hospital in the city of Cluj.
It will then carry out research into the needs of other local hospitals and orphanages, so the land convoy following later this year will bring aid to those who need it most.
Publicity officer Maurice Catchpole said the project, which involved co-operation between rotary clubs in England and Holland, was designed to rekindle the much-needed aid programme.
‘Aid to these countries is of a high humanitarian priority at the moment,’ he said, ‘and it is not getting the desired coverage because of problems in neighbouring states.’
The group has started a fund-raising programme to finance the mission.
Events organised include a race night on Saturday, a tea dance, a film night and special concerts.
Anyone who can help financially should telephone Clacton (0255) 426801, 421752 or 812021.
Barclays League Division Three
Boss McDonough quits playing role
By Carl Marston
U'S BOSS Roy McDonough has quit as a player, kissing goodbye to his dream of making 500 League appearances and scoring 100 goals.
‘It's a heart-breaking decision for me to make, but I have been in the firing line of late with the suspensions and I have struggled with injuries all season,’ said the Colchester manager.
‘Three operations in a year have taken their toll.
Sometimes on the morning after a match I haven't even been able to put my socks on because of painful ankles,’ the 34-year-old said last night.
‘It's easier to manage a team playing in defence because you can see the game developing, but it has been a real problem up front, especially with all the pushing and shoving.
‘I would have loved to join the elitist few who have made 500 League appearances and, but for my spell in the Conference and my long list of injuries, I probably would have done it,’ added McDonough, who netted 89 goals in 460 league games.
‘I will continue to train and may play in the reserves next season in case of emergencies,’ added the U's boss, who has been sent off twice and suspended three times during this campaign.
2–0 friendly victory over Norwegian touring side Nessegutten at Layer Road last night with youth team keeper Nathan Munson hardly troubled.
Colchester coasted to a
Munson, whose previous first team outings had been confined to a handful of pre-season friendlies, may well get his chance of a Football League debut before the end of the season, but had little to do against the Norwegian Division Three champions.
The teenager made one neat save to deny Hans Myhras in the 56th minute but otherwise was a mere spectator.
Mark Kinsella broke the deadlock in the 28th minute with a scorching right foot drive from 25 yards, while Paul Flowers and Steve McGavin both saw lobs sail over the bar.
Andy Partner appeared as a second half substitute for fellow youth team centre-half Paul Flowers, but it was second substitute Steve Ball who was quickest into the action.
Ball, who has not started a first team match since the Shrewsbury trip in mid February, beat two defenders before rifling home a glorious 15-yard strike in the 52nd minute.
Colchester: Munson, Betts, Roberts, Kinsella (sub: Ball 45 min), Flowers (sub: Partner 45 mins), English, Cook, Bennett, Abrahams, McGavin, Grainger.Attendance: 777. look at 19-year-old Turkish striker Hassan Ali Mehmet, who has trained at Layer Road this week.
Colchester are having a
Up-and-down battle is hotting up
THERE are some crucial games this afternoon as the promotion and relegation battles in the Courage Leagues hot up.
With just two games to go one of the most concerned teams are Chelmsford.
They are at Westcliff today and Kevin Lander's team still need one point to make sure they do not exit London Division Three North East instead of Canvey Island.
A130 neighbours Braintree can do them a favour today by beating the islanders and condemning them to relegation, while improving their own lowly position in their first season at this level.
In Eastern Counties Division One, third-placed Maldon can substantially improve their hopes of promotion by defeating rivals Newmarket and then pray for Bury St Edmunds to lose at home to Upminster.
In Division Two, Harwich and Dovercourt's chances of going up would be strengthened with a win over Old Palmerians and likewise Clacton, in Division Three, could help their cause with a win over Ilford Wanderers.
Stowmarket gave Clacton a fair thrashing earlier in the season and if they do the same to Loughton it would give Clacton's title prospects a big boost.
But captain Alan Lee is not counting any chickens.
ALTERNATIVE IS ABSURD
WHEN constituency boundaries have been re-arranged, Labour will probably need to gain an extra 75 seats if it is to win an overall majority at the next election.
It is unlikely that John Smith will become Prime Minister unless he can arrange a deal with the Liberal Democrats; and the Liberal Democrats demand electoral reform.
Facing much the same problem in 1929, a Labour government agreed to introduce the Alternative Vote (AV).
This means the voter marks his second preference on the ballot paper; and, if his first choice candidate does not finish in the first two, his vote is transferred to one of those who is still in with a chance.
With the help of a similar system, the right-wing Union for France has just won a sweeping majority in a French general election.
It took 80 per cent of the seats in the National Assembly, with just 40 per cent of the vote — which is by no means a form of Proportional Representation (PR), as favoured by the Liberal Democrats.
Under PR, a party with 10 per cent of the vote can expect 10 per cent of the seats.
Under AV, there are no guarantees.
In France, the Communists with 9 per cent of the vote won 23 seats out of the 577, while the National Front with 13 per cent won no seats at all.
These results are no less erratic than are achieved under our existing first-past-the-post system.
Nevertheless, the Labour Party is being pressed to support AV, because in a British election it would be expected to help the Liberal Democrats at the expense of the Conservatives.
A rough estimate suggests the Liberal Democrats would stand to gain an extra 17 seats, the Scottish Nationalists two, and the Welsh Nationalists one.
The Conservatives would lose 19, and Labour one.
The bargain is one which a minority Labour government could well afford to offer, in return for essential support in the division lobbies.
In addition, Labour is expected to promise the Liberal Democrats fair representation in a new House of Lords, and also in the European Parliament, with PR elections in both cases.
This would make a tempting combination, but that does not mean Paddy Ashdown should be in any great hurry to accept it.
His manifesto last year spelt out several reasons for changing the voting system.
Among them were: ‘abolishing safe seats’; ‘a better choice of candidates’; ‘greater stability in government.’
A quick glance across the Channel will confirm that AV delivers none of these.
It is one thing for Liberal Democrats to support a Labour government for the sake of a liberal reform.
To support a Labour government for the sake of an illiberal reform would be difficult to explain in the first place; and it would become more difficult still when people saw how the reform worked in practice.
The Labour package involves electing a reformed and representative Upper House in place of the House of Lords.
This Upper House would then be set in conflict with the House of Commons; and the Lower House, although largely unreformed and unrepresentative, would have the deciding vote.
This would be so absurd a system, that it could hardly fail to persuade the country that the Lower House must be reformed.
The Liberal Democrats will not wish to compromise their right to lead that campaign.
‘Exciting’ conservation package delights farmer
Next step to get Suffolk scheme backed in Brussels
The Flowton farmer on whose holding Agriculture Minister John Gummer last week unveiled detailed proposals for a £31 million non-rotational set-aside scheme last week, showed his delight once the depth of this Suffolk achievement had sunk in.
‘It is everything that we wanted,’ he said.
‘Even the management prescription is identical to the drawing we provided.’
The swift and comprehensive response by the Ministry to a concerted effort by East Anglia's wildlife conservation lobby, undoubtedly took John Cousins by surprise.
Since the hastily-arranged press conference to launch the discussion document setting out the new scheme, the vice-chairman of Suffolk Farming and Wildlife Advisory Group has been pouring over the fine detail of the Ministry documents, and he likes what he reads, calling it ‘a very exciting package.’
Contrary to some critical comment, he believes that credit for obtaining substantial funding for the scheme should go to the Minister himself, for having taken a personal interest in the scheme.
‘He told me he was proud and pleased that this has now happened,’ said Mr. Cousins.
The next step is for a FWAG deputation to go to Brussels in May, to lobby for EC approval of the non-rotational scheme.
Mr. Cousins has every confidence that the two-day meeting with the Community's senior officials will ensure acceptance.
Commenting on the scope of a scheme that can give every farmer a stake in conservation, he said: ‘If someone wants to make a 20 metre-wide headland, he can run it for a mile and still use up only eight acres of his set-aside land.’
Mr. Cousins argues that a farmer with 1,000 acres, of which 50 acres would be set-aside, would hardly notice eight acres given up to non-rotational set-aside.
He also expects that farmers who shoot will grab such an opportunity.
They will be able to plant wild bird cover, he said, and there will be plenty of options to choose from: headlands, whole fields or any mix of these.
John Cousins made it clear that FWAG does not advocate wholesale public access to farms.
It was recognised that there must be quiet areas on farms for wildlife to thrive.
Those taking up headland set-aside could site it either against a footpath, or right away from areas where members of the public were likely to go.
‘We don't want to dissuade farmers from the scheme for fear of public access,’ he commented.
Summary of main points
Mr. Cousins lists the following main points, in brief, after studying the details of non-rotational set-aside scheme:
Payment is the same as for rotational.
Percentage set-aside requirement same or higher than rotational (Minister wants same).
No agricultural activity permitted (including grazing).
Period probably five or six years.
Tree planting under Farm Woodland Premium Scheme to count towards set-aside.
A mixture of non-rotational and rotational.
Farmers can set aside more than minimum requirement (this takes in farmers on previous five-year scheme).
Management of non-rotational:
Minimum size 0.3 hectares, minimum width 20 metres.
Set-aside rules for 12 months of year.
Land set aside this year will be eligible to enter non-rotational in 1993–94.
Non-residual herbicides may be used provided green cover is not destroyed.
Fertilisers, manure and slurry not permitted except for trees or non-food uses.
Cutting once per year, however 10 per cent may be left uncut, provided uncut area is rotated annually.
Land is set aside subject to the Weeds Act.
Options for non-rotational set-aside:
1.
‘Green corridors.’
Setting aside land adjacent to or linking existing areas of high quality habitat, 20 metres wide.
Must have green cover.
1 metre can be left bare against crop to control weed (2 metres in the case of seed crops).
Cover should be cut to different lengths to maximise diversity, beg long grasses by a hedge and short grasses next to the crop.
2.
Grassland option: Grass cover of different lengths over a field.
Seed should be sown before the end of September.
3.
Natural regeneration option: Not suitable for heavy soils or weed infested areas.
Cut once per year (except area near hedges).
4.
Woodland option: Planting under farm woodland premium scheme or natural regeneration.
5.
Wild bird cover: Spring plants for nesting, beg maize, millet, sunflowers, kale.
Food sources for birds.
Re-planting will have to take place each spring to encourage wildlife and gamebirds.
In addition— non-food use, eg coppice; goose pasture (sacrifice area); sites for ground nesting birds, eg bare land for stone curlews; otter havens, 200 metre areas along river banks; sandy and damp lowland grasslands.
The meadowland scheme: To create new access to the countryside (not open to land with existing public access).
Must be land of interest, eg adjacent to important features.
Premium paid to provide access and to cover costs, eg waymarking.
Habitat improvement scheme: Designed to create or improve a range of valuable wildlife habitats, eg salt marsh in Suffolk.
This scheme is available to land of particular environmental value coming out of the five-year set-aside scheme.
Agriculture Minister John Gummer helps John Cousins site a public footpath sign on Flowtonbrook Farm.
Rugby Union
Sudbury on verge of clinching promotion
By Carl Marston
SUDBURY are just a whisker away from capping a memorable season with promotion from the Courage League National Division Four South, and all roads lead to High Wycombe for the Moorsfield faithful this afternoon.
A victory over High Wycombe in Buckinghamshire would secure Rob Lane's spirited Sudbury the championship and, in turn, the one promotion spot available for next season's new-look National Division Four.
Sudbury, who have already booked their place in the Spicers Eastern Counties Cup final, are currently sitting three points clear of second-placed London Welsh with just two rounds of matches to play.
A slip-up at High Wycombe would not be fatal, because the Suffolk champions have another chance to scoop the title at home to Lydney later this month, but Sudbury are keen to win the championship in style.
Coach Lane has returned from his native Australia to watch his side perform this afternoon.
He has been instrumental in the Sudbury surge this season, instilling fresh confidence and team spirit in a side that has changed little in personnel.
The familiar blue and white hoops were held to a 9–9 draw at Berry Hill on the opening day of the season and since then they have won every league match.
The crunch game came at the second hurdle when Sudbury toppled the mighty London Welsh at Moorsfield, after which they have gone from strength to strength, bolstered by a refreshing brand of running rugby.
Sudbury keep the side that defeated Camborne 22–10 last weekend with number eight Dave Cook having failed a late fitness test on an injured ankle.
Cook sustained that injury during the win over Basingstoke last month.
Mark Pinnegar will thus revert to his old position of number eight with the ever-improving Dave Alecock keeping his place as blindside flanker.
Sudbury: Dyble, Titcombe, Newcomb, Wagland, Hett, Gregory, Glen.
Griffiths, Excell, Prentice, C Pinnegar, Saward, Atherton, Alecock, M Pinnegar.
Replacements: Blowers and Minter.
Custody for youth in frenzied knife attack
Friend stabbed after drinking session
By James Mortlock
A TEENAGER who almost killed a friend during a frenzied stabbing attack was yesterday sentenced to three years and nine months youth detention.
Mr Justice Potts told the 17-year-old youth, who cannot be named for legal reasons but comes from the Bury St Edmunds area, a custodial sentence was ‘essential’.
‘You are a very violent young man.
It's no thanks to you that one of the five stab wounds did not kill your friend Shane Lay there and then.
Had he not received immediate hospital treatment he would have died,’ said the judge, at Norwich Crown Court.
On Thursday a jury found the youth guilty of wounding Mr Lay, 19, of Anderson Walk, Bury, with intent to cause him grievous bodily harm.
During the two-day trial the court heard how the attacker chased Mr Lay into an alley and then plunged a knife into him five times.
The stabbing happened after the two teenagers had been drinking heavily.
Mr Justice Potts told the youth: ‘When you were 16 you committed one of the most serious offences known to criminal law — you wounded your friend with intent to do him really serious injury.’
He said the youth had drunk a ‘wholly excessive’ amount for a grown-up, let alone a boy of 16.
‘At that time you were habitually abusing drink and had a serious problem controlling your temper.
The facts of this case are of such gravity that a sentence of general deterrent is necessary,’ said the judge.
However, he was encouraged by a pre-sentence report which indicated the teenager had ‘grown up’ since last April's attack.
First line of defence
THE BACK line which Gary Hill is convinced is best for Heybridge Swifts is back in action for today's visit to play Tooting and Mitcham in the Diadora First Division.
Rob Sach, Chris Moore, Colin Johnson and captain Micky Stead form the quartet which has played together only three times in 1993.
Only one goal has been conceded in a run of wins that has lifted Swifts out of immediate relegation danger and into the semi-final of the Eastern Floodlight Cup.
The four were split up by injuries and suspensions in the dismal sequence of defeats which followed the FA Trophy exit, but things are slowly turning round, believes Hill.
‘Benjamin Barnett and Dave Matthews compliment each other well up front, and we are looking to take 12 points from the last eight games and finish mid-table,’ he said yesterday.
Entries for cycle event pour in
ENTRIES are pouring in for one of the region's biggest sponsored cycling events — the Tour de Tendring, which will be held on May 9.
Organisers are confident that the final number of riders will be double last year's total.
Tendring District Council is staging the ride, which is being sponsored by Kleenex and Colchester Co-op, to raise funds for the RNLI and to promote the district.
A spokeswoman said: ‘Things are looking really good at the moment with plenty of entries flooding in.
We are all hoping at least to double last year's total number of riders.’
Cyclists can choose between a 20-mile and 50-mile course — both starting at Dovercourt — around the district.
The entry fee is £3 per person or £7, including an event T-shirt.
Application forms can be obtained by phoning (0622) 782501 or (0255) 255141.
TOURISTS going abroad can expect the following rates for sterling:
Australia 2.09 dollars; Austria 16.61 schillings; Belgium 48.79 francs; Canada 1.879 dollars; Cyprus 0.700 pounds; Denmark 9.14 kroner; Finland 9.53 marks; France 8 francs; Germany 2.37 marks; Greece 319 drachmae; Holland 2.66 guilders; Hong Kong 11.45 dollars; Ireland 0.97 punts.
Italy 2,378 lire; Japan 172 yen; Malta 0.544 pounds; New Zealand 2.75 dollars; Norway 10.11 kroner; Portugal 217 escudos; South Africa 4.80 rand; Spain 169 pesetas; Sweden 11.31 kronor; Switzerland 2.20 francs; Turkey 13,430 lire; USA 1.4970 dollars.
MPs in clash over impact of rail link
TWO ESSEX MPs clashed in the Commons yesterday over the likely impact on the south of the county of the proposed high speed Channel Tunnel rail link.
Junior transport minister Steven Norris, MP for Epping Forest, said the 67-mile route through Kent, Essex and East London will have little environmental impact.
However, Labour's Andrew MacKinlay claimed the route was chosen by the Government for political reasons.
Mr Norris said standards applied in reaching the decision were the same as those used for all other major transport infrastructure projects.
The route announced by the Government last month after years of consultation and studies of alternatives had the added bonus of regenerating the East Thames corridor.
It was ‘extraordinary’ that the chosen route, from Folkestone to Rochester and Gravesend, crossing the Thames at Dartford and entering London through Dagenham and the East End to a terminal at St Pancras, required the demolition of only 11 homes.
‘For a 67-mile route the environmental impacts are surprisingly few,’ said Mr Norris.
There had been a ‘painstaking process’ to ensure the right route was chosen.
‘All our work has shown that the selection of the corridor is right,’ he added.
However, many people in Thurrock fear that construction of the rail line will further blight the area.
Mr MacKinlay told the Commons yesterday: ‘It is a route that has been chosen to protect the Conservative Party.’
The shortest route through Kent, entering London from the south, was clearly the best but had been rejected for political reasons, he added.
Irish driver in a muddle
MUDDLED Irishman Patrick Carlisle missed an appointment with a judge in Gloucester — because he went to Colchester instead.
He drove to the wrong side of England because he was ‘confused’ by the similarity of the place names, he told Gloucester Crown Court on Thursday.
By the time Mr Carlisle arrived in the right Roman town days after the original date for the hearing he was left wondering if it had been worth the bother.
Appeal Court Judge Gabriel Hutton upheld his appeal against a £250 fine for misuse of lorry trade plates and cut it to £100.
But the unemployed former garage owner from Armagh admitted the two trips across the Irish Sea had cost him £600.
Gloucester magistrates had made the original fine in his absence without knowledge of his limited means, the crown court was told.
The diversion to Colchester was a genuine error Mr Carlisle said.
‘I was with someone else and we must have misread the address.
We just saw the last three letters and thought it was Colchester.’
New gym welcomes physically disabled
SUSIE and Ian Cornell have found what might at first sight look like a most obvious corner of the fitness market — a gym for the unfit.
Existing fitness centres can be intimidating places with not so much as an ounce of unwanted fat on display.
Under Pressure, officially opened yesterday in Chelmsford, is aimed at all those who feel they have just too much flab to fight it in public, but perhaps the biggest difference between this gym and any other is the fact that physically disabled people are made especially welcome.
Susie, 41, has suffered from multiple sclerosis for 20 years and knows from first-hand experience the difficulty in finding facilities geared up for those who actually gain most from regular exercise.
The gym, in Navigation Road, therefore, bristles with specially designed work-out machines and facilities made easily accessible for the disabled.
Ian, a 42-year-old manufacturing engineer, says the aim is to make a success of this pilot centre and then offer the idea to local authorities around the country.
‘The leisure industry has paid lip service to the sort of groups we cater for,’ he said.
‘I just think there is an enormous number of people out there who would benefit most from a fitness centre who through either shyness or disability won't go near them.’
Crucial to the centre is the relaxed atmosphere, making clients of all shapes, sizes and ages feel at ease.
‘This is not a sweat shop,’ Ian said.
MP Simon Burns and Chelmsford Mayor Edgar Roberts were among the dignitaries who attended Under Pressure's official opening yesterday afternoon.
Susie Cornell, who has been a multiple sclerosis sufferer for 20 years, at the Under Pressure gymnasium
Drive to collect unwanted drugs
A MAJOR drive to keep drugs and medicines out of the hands of children has been launched in Essex.
The county's family health services authority is asking for unwanted items to be handed in so that they can be disposed of safely.
Collection points will be set up in six major towns and the FHSA's secure vehicle will tour the county throughout the summer.
Discarded or forgotten drugs are the cause of thousands of accidents each year involving children.
Some efforts to dispose of drugs can be harmful to the environment.
The FHSA van will be in West Square, Chelmsford on April 17; Culver Street West, Colchester, on June 19 and Pier Avenue, Clacton, on August 21.
General situation: Northern Ireland and most western parts of the country will have a wet morning, but should brighten up with sunshine and showers in the afternoon.
On the other hand, eastern and central areas should start dry, but will become gradually more cloudy with outbreaks of rain in most places by the evening.
However, the extreme south-east might stay dry until after dark.
Feeling cool in the wetter areas and windy everywhere, especially in the far north.
East Anglia: Cold at first.
Sunny spells.
Rain after dusk.
Wind mainly south to south-east fresh.
Maximum temperature 12C (54F).
Outlook for tomorrow and Monday: Changeable with rain at times.
Windy in most places.
SEA PASSAGES
Southern North Sea: Wind south-east, veering west later, moderate to fresh.
Fair, rain later.
Visibility mainly moderate.
Sea moderate.
The classroom goes into the countryside
ESSEX school students of all ages now have a unique opportunity to study at first hand the integration of wildlife and landscape conservation with modern farming techniques.
The Bovingdon Hall Farm arable trail and Cow Wood ancient woodland trail at Bocking are the inspiration of owners Mr and Mrs John Tabor.
The two trails have been designed as a flexible resource to provide ideal project material for environmental science, geography and history studies.
During the last two years requests from schools to visit the farm increased by almost 50 per cent and this convinced the couple that a proper arable trail was needed.
With help from Writtle Agricultural College and Essex Farming and Wildlife Advisory Group, a grant was obtained under the Ministry of Agriculture's countryside initiative.
The scheme has been sponsored by the Nat West Bank and is designed to encourage agricultural colleges, in co-operation with others, to use their resources in creating and running large-scale quality projects in the countryside for the benefit of the rural community.
Writtle College has also signposted the three-quarter mile circular trail route, built stiles and bridged a large ditch.
The tours are self-guided and regular training sessions are held at Bovingdon Hall to familiarise teachers with the trails and farming practices.
Special care is taken to ensure that teachers understand and can interpret correctly for their students, the plants and wildlife they are likely to encounter along the way.
Help is given with these two-hour courses by the farm's manager, Essex FWAG, Essex County Council's forestry department and by field studies officers from the county council's Daws Hall Field Centre at Lamar, near Halstead.
A converted farm building, donated by Mr and Mrs Tabor, has been turned into a study room filled with photographs and displays illustrating work and life on the farm.
Where the arable trail demonstrates how conservation and modern farming techniques can flourish side by side, Cow Wood, with a history going back to medieval times, emphasises the environmental importance of well-managed woodland and is a logical extension of the Bovingdon Hall concept.
The farm was one of the first in Britain to join the Countryside Commission's demonstration farms project.
Teachers are shown how to carry out many simple experiments.
Here at Bovingdon Hall Farm, Bocking, they see how to test the acidity of the soil.
Eggstravaganza
A jumble sale and eggstravaganza takes place at Cotton village hall today, from 10 am to noon, with entrance costing 10p, and not as reported in yesterday's EADT.