

NEWS
ELDER ABUSE BREAK THE SILENCE
Campaign reveals the scandal of elder abuse
Community Care is launching a major campaign this week to press the government to respond to a hidden national scandal — the abuse of elderly people in their own homes.
We can reveal that ministers will come under increasing pressure from a range of new research on the plight of elderly people, who are widely beaten, tormented or robbed by relatives or carers.
The campaign comes as the government's community care policy seeks to persuade more frail elderly people to stay in their own homes rather than go into residential care.
But social workers, who have the lead role in assessing elderly people's needs, lack the skills and legal powers to respond to signs of abuse.
In a new consultation paper to be published this month the Law Commission will propose social workers be given ‘clearer and more appropriate powers’ to take action when they suspect abuse.
The paper, on legal protection for mental incapacitated adults, will recommend legal definitions of adults at risk be extended for vulnerable elderly people.
‘The local social services authority should also be the agency responsible for initiating proceedings in relation to the care and protection of incapacitated, mentally disordered or vulnerable people,’ says the paper.
New national research, revealed here for the first time, shows that less than one in five local authorities across the UK have internal guidelines for social workers on dealing with elder abuse.
The survey of 135 social services authorities, completed in February this year, did find, however, that another third were drafting such guidelines, and a further 25 per cent were considering doing so.
The research was carried out by Bridget Penhale, a hospital social work team leader in Norfolk and a member of BASW's special interest group on ageing.
She said this week: ‘It's crucial that guidelines are backed with training.
Having procedures is one thing, but a lot of training is needed just to raise awareness of elder abuse.’
The scale of the problem of elder abuse is highlighted by a study last year, which suggested that up to half a million elderly people may be suffering abuse from carers or relatives.
A follow-up study by Jim Ogg, based at the Royal London Hospital, is expected to reveal links between carers who abuse and levels of stress they are under.
Pressures on carers will increase as Britain faces a population explosion among the most vulnerable elderly people.
The estimated four million people over 75 are expected to increase by more than 40 per cent by 2030.
‘Demographic factors and community care policy concern us all and we should regard elder abuse as a serious issue,’ Ogg said.
As part of our campaign, we are carrying out a detailed survey of the incidence of different types of abuse and the need for legal reform.
Peter Smallridge, president of the ADSS, said: ‘I hope this campaign will help alert everyone — politicians, public and professionals alike — to these areas of concern.’
The campaign is also to be backed by a new body, ‘Action on Elder Abuse’, to be launched in the autumn by Age Concern England.
Sally Greengross, Age Concern's director, said: ‘We need legal reforms and clear, nationally agreed guidelines so that professionals know what to do about elder abuse.’
Greedy son preyed on his distressed mother
‘Mrs J’ is not a typical victim.
She is an articulate and knowledgeable woman who is fully aware of her rights.
But Community Care can reveal how she so easily fell prey to her son and lost almost everything.
Financial abuse is the most common abuse against elderly people.
Almost always it is the abused person's word against the abuser.
Mrs J, whose identity we cannot reveal for legal reasons, was a councillor in NHS management.
Several years ago her husband died suddenly at the age of 64.
She was also undergoing tests for suspected glaucoma.
Her distress was compounded by moving away from friends and colleagues to live with her only son.
Over the next few years, Mrs J was pressured into lending her son large sums of money.
She was also embroiled in buying a house with him.
She told Community Care : ‘He promised he would look after me.
When we were buying the house, he said he couldn't get the mortgage on his salary.
This was untrue, but I had already lent him the money.’
Within months, she claims, she was confined to her bedroom.
‘I had no one to talk to.
The law doesn't protect you.
I had no independent advice and my son took advantage of my confusion caused by distress.’
When Mrs J discovered her son had opened her will, relations broke down completely and Mrs J found herself locked out of her home.
For four years, she camped at friends.
Mrs J: Left destitute until she forced her son to settle out of court
A Court of Protection exists to defend elderly or mentally incapacitated people, but it is not widely known.
In the case of Mrs J, she took the unusual step of taping every conversation with her son and his wife and was eventually able to force her son to settle out of court.
He returned her money and some of her belongings.
Four years later Mrs J was able to sell the shared house and buy a cottage for herself.
Mrs J's MP will seek to raise the issue in the Commons to close a gap in the law which leaves elderly people open to financial abuse.
CAMPAIGN OBJECTIVES
legal powers for social workers to intervene
protection of elderly people's property
guidance and training for all relevant staff
registration of private domiciliary agencies
Report warns of care gap for elderly people
The burgeoning elderly population may in future be left without levels of support currently provided by relatives, a new report suggests.
It reveals a significant gap between the number of informal carers needed by the year 2000 and the number of people who expect to be doing the job.
It is anticipated that one in five Britons will be carers by the turn of the century.
But carers charity Crossroads says most people are unaware that they could be the one in five.
It is calling for a public education campaign to bridge the gap and help people prepare for caring in advance.
A survey of more than 1,000 employees found that 84 per cent do not think the need to look after a loved one will ever affect them.
Only one-third knew about the financial benefits available to carers, less than half knew of support services available and only 38 per cent would turn to social services for advice.
The lack of awareness and planning could pose a major problem for employers and society, according to Jill Pitkeathley, director of Carers' National Association.
Pitkeathley: Warnings of future problems
‘There are more women caring for elderly relatives than looking after children under five but as yet we've heard little about it.
Employers are going to have to make allowances.’
She said it was important for people to prepare for their caring responsibilities by discussing needs of elderly parents among the family.
Only 13 per cent of carers in the surveyed workforce had any support from charities or voluntary organisations and only 12 per cent received help from health and social services.
The survey found that 16 per cent had made plans about caring for relatives, and many said they were prepared to help with less demanding tasks such as transport and shopping.
London council to face legal case
Greenwich Council is facing legal action for failing to house a young woman who was assessed as in need.
The pressure group Children Act Housing Action Group and 17-year-old Carol Aston are seeking a judicial review into the housing department  refusal to accept that Aston was vulnerable and at risk, despite a referral from the SSD.
Aston has been awarded legal aid.
CAHAG claims it will set a precedent for other authorities, allowing it to challenge other authorities which are failing in their duty.
Aston was eventually offered a temporary place in a hostel occupied exclusively by men, many of whom have been recently released from prison or who have drug problems.
Matt Kelly, chairman of CAHAG, said: ‘Greenwich has compounded its refusal to acknowledge that she is vulnerable and at risk by offering a child in need totally inappropriate accommodation.
This is in direct contrast to the department's duty to provide assistance to her.’
Hardship increased
The introduction of the Disability Living Allowance has been slammed as a nightmare for claimants by the all-party Commons Social Security Committee.
Its report this week says serious delays of up to a year in awarding benefit to some disabled people was ‘tantamount to maladministration’.
Many suffered hardship waiting for payments but were also made ineligible for help from the Independent Living Fund and other benefits because of the ‘complete administrative disarray at the Benefits Agency’.
It had been swamped with work in the first months after the allowance's introduction.
The committee wants the DSS to revise performance targets so all claims are cleared within 60 working days.
Extra staff brought in to clear the backlog should be kept on until a thorough review is made.
The government says the agency will pay compensation to claimants who suffered delays of more than eight months.
A £10 premium would be paid for every month of delay beyond the eight months.
AIDS charities' grants slashed
The government has cut its grants to two leading AIDS charities to focus on high risk groups.
Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley announced the grant to the Terrence Higgins Trust will be reduced from £450,000 to £150,000 over three years.
London Lighthouse's grant is to be cut from £300,000 to £150,000.
Nick Partridge, chief executive of the Terrence Higgins Trust, described the cut as dramatic.
‘The demand for our services will continue to rise over the next three years.
We now face the difficult task of maintaining our vital services with progressively less support from the government.’
Court action dropped
The court action against Neville Mighty, the whistleblower in Islington's children's homes scandal, has been dropped.
Mighty was sacked last year for alleged gross misconduct after it was claimed he harassed a child and had inappropriate talks on sex with ex-residents.
He claims he was framed by Islington because he revealed incidents of abuse in the borough's children's homes.
At last week's hearing at Newham Magistrates Court, the prosecution offered no evidence and the case was dismissed.
Mental illness
One in four adults in Britain is suffering from mental illness at any one time, according to the Mental Health Foundation.
More than three million people suffer from severe mental illness.
In its latest report published this week,Mental Illness: The Fundamental Facts , the foundation claims that 12 million people visit their doctors with symptoms of mental illness, but only 7 million are identified.
This is costing more that £22 billion in treatment, benefits, and days lost.
Families fail
Eight Kent families have failed to get a High Court order forcing two health authorities to hold an independent review of complaints about consultant paediatrician Heather Richardson.
The decision followed the withdrawal of Richardson's co-operation in view of threatened full-scale legal action by some of the families.
The two judges agreed with Canterbury and Thanet Health Authority and South East Thames Regional Health Authority that without the doctor's co-operation the reviews would be unworkable.
Racist system
The committee for Non-Racist Benefits has launched a charter demanding urgent government action to stop racist practice within the social security system.
The charter highlights 16 areas of concern including language difficulties and is aimed at raising the awareness of racism within the system which can result in individuals losing their benefits.
Veto on child sexual abuse compensation
Thousands of people who were sexually abused in their childhood may be denied compensation following the failure of a test case last week.
Two High Court judges upheld the right of the Criminal Injuries Compensation Board to refuse payouts to two women because they were sought too long after the abuse took place.
The women, from south London and Newcastle, now aged 28 and 30, were abused respectively by their father and stepfather.
The Newcastle woman saw her compensation claim turned down by the CICB, while the London woman received partial compensation of £5,000.
The CICB said the woman were abused so long ago that their cases had to be considered under the pre-1979 rules which excluded compensation for offences committed by relatives living under the same roof.
High Court judge Lord Justice Leggatt said he did not consider the CICB's rules to be irrational.
The making of a claim was a privilege rather than a right, and claimants would therefore be expected to heed whatever rules had been in force.
Emily Furman, solicitor for the London woman, said: ‘We are very disappointed.
The ruling means that a lot of people, most of them women, are unlikely to be compensated for serious psychological damage done to them at very young ages.’
More support for reforms
A new-style community care support force is being set up to maintain the health service's momentum on implementing the reforms.
The original Community Care Support Force was formed last year to help both health and local authorities prepare for implementation.
It was disbanded on 2 April after it six-month life came to an end.
No official announcement has yet been made by the DoH, but it is understood that the new ‘community care unit’ is to be headed by Liz Wolstenholme, general manager of Bradford Family Health Services Authority and one of the 18 members of the original Support Force.
The new unit, based at the NHS management executive offices in Leeds, will focus mainly on the role of health authorities, GPs and nurses in community care.
It will also liaise with the SSI on joint working between health and social services and any implementation problems.
Practical guidelines are likely to be made available to health managers, but there will be no helpline number.
When the Support Force was disbanded, it left some confusion among social services managers about whether practical help from the DoH would continue after April.
It now seems likely that any such support will come direct from the SSI, already monitoring progress on implementation,(News, 29 April).
Lack of sensitivity over needs of black children
SSDs are failing to live up to the Children Act requirements to provide an ethnically sensitive service for black children in their care.
Black social workers claimed last week that some SSDs were failing to implement the complaints procedures under the Children Act, or even to tell young people about them.
‘Children then cannot challenge racism or culturally inappropriate placements,’ said Perlita Harris from Black and In Care.
Harris said little, if any, qualitative changes in foster care, residential care, and adoption had been made.
Perlita Harris (right) and Rukiya Oseye, from Black and In Care, address black workers
‘We acknowledge the good work done by some workers but any change is still very piecemeal,’ she said.
‘There are local authorities that have not bothered to have a policy — let alone implement it.
Things have not changed in care.’
Under the Children Act agencies have to give due consideration to a child's race, religion, language, and culture.
Aminah Husain Sumpton, a freelance trainer and guardian ad litem , welcomed the Children Act but she said its full potential had not been achieved.
‘There is a need for a service to be ethnically sensitive but the Act is only as good as those who use it.’
She pointed out that there were no comprehensive national statistics on how many black children there were in care.
The workers made their comments at the tenth anniversary conference of the Association of Black Social Workers and Allied Professions held last week in London.
The association's first conference in 1983 looked at the needs and rights of black children in care.
The conference this year took the same theme and posed the question has anything really changed?
Chairperson Pennie Pennie asked what difference it had made having anti-racist, equal opportunity policies in SSDs.
She believed it was still a struggle to address the needs and rights of black children in the care system, she said.
‘There is too much rhetoric and learning the right words.
It sounds very nice but nothing is changing.’
Kirk's SWD plea for extra care cash
The Church of Scotland has called on all Scottish authorities to follow Lothian's example and provide extra cash to help bridge gaps in community care provision.
It claims that only Lothian is providing extra payments to maintain standards of care, even though all authorities are receiving Scottish Office grants.
‘Other authorities argue that the grants have made no impact.
To do nothing borders on irresponsibility,’ said social work director Ian Baillie.
As well as giving a basic residential rate of £185, Lothian is offering supplements of £25 for a single room and between £5 and £30 for extra services to cater for disability, intellectual impairment, and personal care.
Long-awaited consultation from the Scottish Office on the inspection of social work services has just been published this week.
The paper proposes that arm's length inspection units should report to chief executives instead of directors of social work as at present.
It also outlines the role and functions of the Social Work Services Inspectorate.
The ADSW claimed current arrangements for arm's length inspection were proving successful and no case had been made for the change.
‘We believe we should be accountable for out services and the inspection responsibility is to ensure they are of good quality,’ said secretary Sandy Cameron.
Birmingham refutes minister's criticism
Birmingham SSD insisted last week that junior health minister Tim Yeo had been ‘misinformed’ about the death of a 14-year-old girl in the department's care.
Sally Ann Cattell died in a stolen car which crashed during a police chase last March, but the SSD denied reports that she had absconded from the children's home, St John's in Erdington, to which she had moved three days before the incident.
Yeo has written to the department criticising what he claimed was its decision to ‘down-grade’ the level of security on the girl.
He asked the department to review all decisions to reduce security levels over the past year, and report to the SSI within three months.
Shortly before launching new guidance on physical restraint last week Yeo accused the SSD of complacency, and said it should consider tightening up its policies and procedures.
A DoH spokesman said: ‘She frequently absconded, had a criminal record, and was mixing with undesirable people, yet she was moved to a home with even less security that the one she was in before.’
But a Birmingham SSD spokeswoman said that, far from absconding, Cattell had been given permission to leave the community home with education to visit her mother.
‘It is not true that we down-graded the level of security, I don't know why the minister suggested that.
We were working towards her rehabilitation; at the time she was co-operative and relaxed, and there were no indications she was likely to be involved in that sort of incident.’
She admitted the girl had been in and out of voluntary care because her mother had been unable to cope with her.
Cattell had absconded several times from a previous home, mixing with older people, some of whom were allegedly involved in crime, drug abuse and prostitution.
Cattell had only returned to the department's care in February, after another difficult spell with her mother, but her condition had apparently improved significantly.
‘Two days before the accident happened she had been out shopping with a member of staff and had returned unescorted.
We would have been acting wrongly had we not given her permission to visit her mother.’
Lump-sums for low benefit job-seekers
The government is hoping to tempt more people who are disabled or unemployed back to work by paying their benefits in an initial lump sum.
People who would normally be entitled to small weekly amounts of disability working allowance or family credit if they took jobs, are to be paid instead with an advance of up to £104 to make benefits for those who get jobs appear more attractive.
Social Security Secretary Peter Lilley said last week the lump sum, which will replace regular payments to those who would qualify for up to £4 a week, would help with initial back-to-work expenses.
But the Child Poverty Action Group said claimants also needed help with child-care expenses and travelling costs, which were not one-off.
CPAG director Sally Witcher said: ‘A far better solution would be to deduct work-related expenses from earnings before assessing for family credit or disability working allowances.’
Concern as Welsh inquiry drags on
North Wales MP John Marek is to meet Home Office minister Lord Ferrers next week to express his concern at the length of time the North Wales child abuse inquiry is taking and the fact that no outside police force is overseeing it.
Marek, who represents Wrexham, site of the Bryn Estyn children's home, said the public inquiry into the allegations, which is unlikely to take place until after criminal trials, must have ‘the widest possible terms of reference’ and must ‘look into the social services handling of these matters’.
Clwyd director of social services John Jevons said he, too, was concerned at the delay.
Dismissal unfair
A social worker at the centre of the pin-down scandal in Staffordshire has had his claim for unfair dismissal upheld by an industrial tribunal in Birmingham.
Jaime Rodriguez was the team leader responsible for The Birches, one the homes where pin-down was developed by social worker Tony Latham.
Staffordshire County Council says it will study the tribunal's decision before considering action.
System failure
The needs of blind and partially sighted people cannot properly be met within a ‘standardised’ care management system, says a new report published by CCETSW.
The lack of social workers trained in the needs of deaf and hard of hearing people also presents SSDs with a ‘massive’ task in upholding users' rights, says the report.
Care managers should review their understanding of such needs and listen to users, it says.
Halal meals
Lancashire County Council has launched a new partnership initiative with ethnic minority communities aimed at providing Halal meals to Muslim elders in SSD establishments, hospitals , nursing homes, and so on.
The Enterprise Development Partnership has been spearheaded by social services, and will aim to provide jobs for young Asian people who want to train in food preparation and business skills.
Equality option
Baroness Cumberlege, a junior health minister, has called on health authorities to promote equal opportunities and provide appropriate services for black and ethnic minority communities.
Speaking at an open day at the London Chinese Health Resource Centre, she praised the work of Chinese social workers, doctors and nurses in care provision.
Adopters' rights
A Bill has been introduced into the Commons aimed at giving adopters the right to ‘maternity leave’.
Cheryl Gillan MP, who brought in the ten minute rule bill, says adopters need the same employment security as birth parents.
The bill, backed by BAAF, is unlikely to succeed.
JOB FORUM CAREERS CONVENTION
DETECTING THE QUALITY EMPLOYEES
Solving All Your Recruitment Needs
Ambitious social workers will be pouring into Manchester later this month to explore the job opportunities provided at New Century Hall, Corporation Street.
That is the venue for the recruitment event of the year — the Community Care Job Forum and Careers Convention.
For two days, 19–20 May, it puts social workers in touch with a range of employers with genuine vacancies.
Entry is free and the opening hours are 10am–6pm on Wednesday and 10am–5pm Thursday.
There will be advice and information on training, career development, and how local authorities are changing in the mixed economy of care.
Mother's fury at ‘punitive’ decision
Sheila Silcock has spoken for the first time about her anger when her son Ben was banned from a MIND drop-in centre in Roehampton, south-west London.
In a widely publicised incident a few months later Ben, diagnosed as schizophrenic, climbed into a lions' cage at London Zoo.
Silcock said her son was banned for life from the Cambir Centre, run by Wandsworth MIND, after hitting a member of staff.
The centre manager later resigned after failing to stop the case going to court where Ben was put on probation.
‘It was unduly punitive to take him to court and throw him out of the centre,’ Silcock said.
‘To have banned him for a few months would have been one thing, but to take him to court and ban him for life seemed to defeat the object of the exercise.’
Sheila Silcock believes her son Ben was unfairly treated by MIND
The centre's manager had established a rapport with Ben and encouraged him to take medication which he otherwise tended to overlook.
But she was away on the day he struck out.
Silcock, who explains in this week's issue why she supports community supervision orders, said Ben consistently failed to take prescribed drugs.
‘Not taking the drugs made him feel powerful; it made him feel part of a colourful world which was far more exciting that real life,’ Silcock said.
‘But coming off the medication also made him more aggressive.
Because his illness doesn't make him unhappy he's got no real motivation to stick to his medication.’
She does not pretend that Ben's ordeal resulted directly from the ban, but she believes it contributed to the chain of events which led inexorably to his present stay in south-east London's Bethlem Hospital.
Wandsworth MIND insisted last week the ban had been only temporary, although director Frank Dillon was unable to say how long it was for.
‘Categorically he was not banned for life.
There might be a possibility of listing the ban in the future.’
Graduates now face job worries as reforms bite
As the community care reforms bed down signs are already emerging that the government may have significantly over-estimated demand for field social workers.
CCETSW has been under government pressure to raise the number of newly-qualified social workers to 5,000 a year, partly to meet demand from the shift to care management.
But a CCETSW working party set up in response to the acute shortage of practice placements heard evidence that social workers finishing DipSW courses were having problems finding jobs.
Jenny Weinstein, CCETSW's head of practice learning who led the working party, said some members wanted a reduction in the numbers of students entering DipSW courses.
‘In some parts of the UK cuts in local authority spending and the move to the purchaser-provider split meant that for the first time students coming off social work courses were having real difficulties finding jobs’ Weinstein said.
‘One or two working party members felt there was no point in taking as many students on to courses if the practice placements weren't available and their skills weren't going to be needed in the new world.’
Stressing CCETSW's target annual figure would remain 5,000 students, she said evidence showed that some qualified social workers were losing out to other professional groups in the race for care management posts.
‘In one borough the care management role working with clients between 16 and 60 has been given to occupational therapists, while in another you are eligible if you are a community nurse, occupational therapist, or a social worker.’
CCETSW was convinced care management posts should be filled by qualified social workers.
‘It's difficult to know what employers and purchasers are going to do, whether they are going to purchase the services of qualified social workers or not.’
CCETSW will not move to introduce proposed reforms to practice placement funding for at least another year.
Plans for a ‘funding pool’ to finance placements in all sectors were favoured by most agencies, which responded to a recent CCETSW survey.
The government has provided no new money.
New guidance on sexual abuse of vulnerable adults
New guidelines for dealing with the sexual abuse of adults with learning difficulties have been published by the Scottish Society for the Mentally Handicapped.
Most current work concentrates on child sexual abuse, and SSMH has been concerned for some time about the vulnerability of adults with learning disabilities.
The guidelines are the results of two years' consideration with  professionals in the field.
‘We are only now facing up to the fact that people with learning difficulties are vulnerable to abuse.
We need to ensure people receive proper help and counselling, both to deal with abuse now and to prevent it in the future,’ said Chris Cullen, who holds the SSMH chair in learning difficulties at St Andrews University.
NEWS FOCUS
Controlled restraint
RESIDENTIAL CARE
New DoH guidance on restraining children in care leaves some unanswered questions, reports Susan Clark
Mixed feelings greeted the final draft of the restraint guidance, published last week after a series of long delays.
It is supposed to end the uncertainty surrounding the limits of control of young people in residential care.
But some believe the DoH has stopped short of adequate advice, while others believe the new guidance opens up the system to abuse.
The guidance states staff can now bar the exit of the home to stop residents leaving, and even use force to overpower them.
But it leaves it up to staff to assess the limits that may be used in given circumstances.
‘The onus is on the care worker to determine the degree of restraint appropriate and when it should be used,’ says the document.
David Jones, general secretary of BASW, welcomed the guidance.
‘There has been an escalation in the number of complaints against staff recently.
We are pleased the guidance has clarified the position.’
But he was concerned the guidelines could be seen as an encouragement to use physical restraint inappropriately.
The use of restraint must be within a narrow context and affecting only a very small number of residents, he said.
The Children's Society fears the new guidance could lead to ‘pin-down’ type regimes.
Director Ian Sparks condemned the government's move towards ‘containment’.
‘As long as residential care remains a Cinderella service, young people will continue to run away.
The care system will become more and more punitive,’ said Sparks.
The DoH has extensively revised the original draft issued last year, advising when restraint is acceptable and how far staff can go.
But it tells authorities to seek legal advice when writing up their own guidelines to staff.
Allan Levy, co-author of the Pin-down report, said the guidance should have been clearer.
‘The guidelines are helpful but I am concerned it still leaves too much to individual authorities and agencies to decide for themselves.
I would have expected the DoH to present its own views on the legal use of restraint rather than allow regional variations to develop,’ said Levy.
The need for guidance on restraint has been fed by the intense media attention on lack of control in homes, which is said to have allowed young people to abscond — such as the case of Sally Ann  Catell , who was killed last month in Birmingham while driving a stolen car.
Local authorities are also facing an increasing number of fines and compensation orders placed on them by magistrates when children in their care cause damage in the community, even though they cannot exercise the same rights of control as parents.
There are now less then 11,000 young people in residential homes.
But with the push towards fostering, adoption, and family care, the problems facing carers in the residential sector have increased as the majority of residents are older with varying degrees of behaviour and emotional problems, an issue the government acknowledges.
Peter Smallridge, ADSS president, endorsed the emphasis on care and control rather than punishment.
But he stressed the importance of counselling young people.
In doing so he voiced the main concern of all the watchful parties: the risk that control through physical restraint may emerge as common practice over the use of counselling.
NCB chairwoman Barbara Kahan warned: ‘It is critical managers take on board the responsibility to make sure staff understand what they are allowed to do.
Staff must be given the extra support and training required.’
The principles of caring
The DoH has issued the guidance to fill gaps in the Children Act, building on Volume 4: Residential Care.
At the launch of the document,Guidance on Possible Forms of Control in Residential Care , Tim Yeo, junior health minister, explained it was not a reference manual giving explicit directions for care workers.
‘It should provide clear principles, but it does not remove the need for individual judgement,’ he said.
The principle behind allowing care workers to use physical restraint is the serious threat to life and property.
The document lists the situations: ‘actual or grievous bodily harm, physical or sexual abuse, risking the lives of, or injury to, the self or others by wilful or reckless behaviour, and self-poisoning.’
‘This covers prostitution, drug abuse, and stealing cars,’ said Yeo.
If the care worker believes the young person is at risk or presents a risk to others they now may take action to physically stop the individual leaving the home.
This can be done by barring the exit or holding the person's arm.
The action must be explained and initially be persuasive rather than coercive.
But if the situation escalates, physical restraint is permitted.
The guidance states how far staff may go.: ‘The physical restraint is the positive application of force with the intention of overpowering the child.’
The DoH is sensitive to the charge that the Children Act has gone too far in favour of children at the expense of upholding the rights and responsibilities of parents and guardians.
But Yeo emphasised the guidance was not meant to swing the pendulum back.
At no time is restraint to be used as a punitive measure, or in situations where the crimes that could be committed would be minor, such as shoplifting.
But abuse of the new powers is possible, and the fear is that new pin-down regimes could develop.
It certainly extends the rights of control.
It permits homes to be locked up at night, although it states: ‘On no account should children be locked into their bedrooms at night whatever their age and competence.’
Brief periods of withdrawal will be allowed to calm agitated individuals, especially if they are unable to understand because of severe learning difficulties, autism, or emotional disorder.
The guidance warns that ‘unreasonable’ periods of time may constitute a restriction on liberty.
However Yeo refused to state what was unreasonable.
‘It would be extremely arrogant and impractical to put in black and white, hundreds of miles from where these events are happening, what should be done in all cases,’ he said.
General principles have been included to try to avert intolerant regimes being created.
‘A distinction must be maintained between the use of a ‘one-off intervention’ which is appropriate in the particular circumstances, and using it repeatedly as a regular feature of a regime,’reads the document.
And at all times any force must be preceded and accompanied with dialogue to explain the action.
The government, local authorities and voluntary organisations agree that training and staff supervision is essential to creating a positive setting.
This would ensure against abuses and provide skills in counselling.
The guidance also covers the extent staff may go to in touching and comforting young people in children's homes.
It advocates ‘parental affection’ but advises this must not be interpreted as sexual.
PRACTICE FOCUS
DRUGS AND ALCOHOL
System misuse
New arrangements for providing treatment to people with drug and alcohol problems have been implemented with only a minimum of preparation.
Frances Richford reports on the dilemmas it creates for SSDs
Drug abuse is spreading alarmingly fast according to recent government figures.
Yet the new arrangements for providing treatment and rehabilitation to people with drug and alcohol problems — through community care budgets rather than social security payments — have been implemented with little preparation.
This has been through no fault of local authorities, according to Noel Towe of the Local Government Drugs Forum.
‘Until last October authorities were expecting this money to be ringfenced so did not consider this client group when they were consulting and drawing up their assessment models,’ he said.
‘When the government decided not to ringfence the money, the future was still uncertain during the period of the judicial review.
As a result many departments are far behind.’
New guidance from the Standing Conference on Drug Abuse, Alcohol Concern and the Local Government Drugs Forum with input from other specialists and the DoH, aims to help authorities look at the most effective and useful ways of assessing the needs of alcohol and drug misusers and managing their care.
Alcohol and drug misusers may fear approaching statutory agencies for help, especially if they are parents.
They will have fluctuating motivation which may be influenced by outside factors such as a court appearance, loss of drug supply, or family breakdown.
They may have a transient lifestyle, be homeless or live in insecure housing which may make it difficult to establish their ‘ordinary residence’.
Or they may be isolated from supportive social or family networks and have problem-related health problems such as HIV, hepatitis, TB, and mental health problems.
They are likely to have low self esteem, a low income or no money.
They may have changing patterns of substance use and an unstructured lifestyle which may lead them to want services intermittently.
This is unlike other adult service users whose motivation is likely to be high and whose need is consistent, so assessment should be.
Speed of response is also important.
Andrew Hemmings who manages an alcohol recovery project in Manchester for Turning Point, said people had lost heart and started to drink again because of delays in establishing whether the local authority was going to pay for treatment.
‘Whereas previously we could get the money from the DSS, now there is a long, cumbersome process to go through and people are falling by the wayside because of it.
Last year we dealt with 16 different local authorities so it is very time consuming.’
Use or misuse: How can local authorities help assess need?
The Local Government Drugs Forum has issued advice on fast track assessment for drug and alcohol misusers to prevent this happening.
But a major difficulty remains: SSDs will be reluctant to commit themselves to picking up the bill for several months' residential rehabilitation for someone who may have arrived in the area the previous week.
Yet many people with drugs and alcohol problems move frequently between areas, and may have no settled residence.
Although the government has told authorities they should not refuse a fast track assessment to someone just because they cannot establish ordinary residence, there is nothing to say they may not.
Trust is another major problem.
According to the guidelines, only a small proportion of people with drug or alcohol problems have any contact with social services.
Most will be reluctant to undergo assessment, either because they are involved in criminal activity or they expected to be subjected to a judgmental and disapproving attitude towards themselves, or because they are afraid their children may be removed from them.
So the care manager, whether from the SSD or voluntary sector, must fully understand the problems affecting drug and alcohol misusers as a group, and be able to appreciate the unique needs of individuals.
The advice document proposes four alternative models of assessment and care management for drug and alcohol misusers, and discusses the advantages and disadvantages of each from the point of view of the local authority and the service user.
It favours a system where people can access assessment from several different points of contact including non-statutory agencies through trained, accredited care managers.
Training would be done jointly, and existing patterns of primary service contact would be maintained.
But even the best option feels like making the best of a bad situation — the square peg of this escalating health and social problem is being forced into the round hole of a system of service rationing which was designed with anyone but drug and alcohol misusers in mind.
Guidelines on assessment and care management for alcohol and drug misusers from   Advice on fast track assessment available from the    
PEOPLE
Knowsley's energetic commuter
On the long list of staff grievances originating from community care restructuring, job insecurity appears high up, and when the legislation is coupled with an unknown entity such as a new director, workers get even more uppity.
But at Knowsley SSD staff will be pleased to learn their new director, who started this week, is a man who likes gradual, evolutionary change rather than sweeping transformation.
First Jeremy Ambache intends to get to know the people.
‘The principle behind care management is to evolve quality systems based on users’ needs,’says Ambache.
‘The staff know about quality of specific services and how to improve them.
I want to know their views on what needs to change.’
Ambache has a lot of energy, and manages to fit an enormous amount into each day.
He walks, runs, studies, meditates, and travels.
His desk may be tidy but the drawers are bulging with bits and bobs that reveal a busy life.
Variety is important to him, and he has translated that into his career by moving around the country.
After graduating from York he joined Birmingham, specialising in child care.
He asked to go to the most demanding area and ended up in Smallhealth and Sparkbrook with a case load of up to 60 children.
Over the next decade he was able to build up comprehensive experience in Hammersmith & Fulham, Brent, Croydon, Berkshire, and lately as assistant director in Bedfordshire.
‘I made a lot of lateral moves in middle management and gained much generic experience,’ he explains.
One incident which contributed to his training managed to reach the national papers.
While at Croydon SSD, Ambache had to support his director in a battle with a while couple who wanted to adopt a black child they had been fostering.
Croydon rejected their application, advocating some-race adoption.
With the country's media focused on the authority, the government reacted with a kneejerk.
Ambache refuses to say anything worse than he was ‘quite critical’ of the government's response.
The SSI investigated, but the result vindicated Croydon's stance.
And now guidelines advise on same-race adoption policy.
Ambache: Wants to promote gradual evolutionary change
Ambache hopes this sort of attention will not occur at Knowsley.
He wants to be left alone to get on with the job, including completing Knowsley's ‘positive futures’ programme to develop a direct services system for supporting those in need living in the community.
Professionally Ambache will also continue to support demands for a social workers' council.
‘A strong central focus is essential,’ he says.
‘It would set the standards.’
Ambache has always supported BASW and is still a member.
In the past he has sat on the central committee and was chairman of the London branch.
For now he will continue to live in London, but more out of consideration for his daughter who is sitting her A-levels than a disinclination to move north.
In fact he is looking forward to moving.
‘It will be a different culture and humour.
High unemployment means I'll be dealing with different issues.
But it is a close community with lots of support.
And the people are more open and direct.
That suits me.
I'm all for open, direct speaking,’ he says, bluntly.
Peter Bibby has retired as deputy director of social services in Brent.
Bibby joined the council immediately after the child care crisis of the mid-80s and was responsible for various changes essential to the organisation, introducing new child care services and revising structures.
He has been involved with child abuse services, chairing COCAN and Brent Area Child Protection Committee.
Hampshire has set up a new post for housing and care in the community.
Alan Hagger has been appointed county accommodation officer to develop three-year housing strategies with the 13 district councils in Hampshire, the independent sector and the Housing Corporation.
Hagger was formerly an adviser for people with learning disabilities.
Herman Ouseley has become the first black chairman of the Commission for Racial Equality.
Ouseley, who took up the post last week, was Britain's first black local authority chief executive, appointed in Lambeth three years ago.
POLITICS
LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Conflict of philosophy
Concerns over the proper role of local government in providing services to communities featured high in a Lord's debate last week.
Diana Sutton reports
Local government is preying on many people's minds.
Today's county council elections take place as important overhauls of local government services and finance, the council tax and community care, are being implemented.
And last week the peers engaged in a debate on local democracy and local services moved by Lord Williams of Elvel.
Many of the speakers came from a local government background, having spent years in social services or as councillors.
A few persistent themes emerged during the debate: local democracy and the vexed question of the relationship between local government and central government; the crisis in local government funding; and the community care reforms.
For many, the question of local government's powers, role, and value was summed up by Baroness Hollis (formerly leader of Norwich Council).
She said: ‘Local government is about local differences.
It speaks for a place — whether it be a mining community, an ageing seaside resort, the Orkney Islands, an ancient cathedral city or a deprived inner borough — as nobody can.’
While this may seem obvious and logical to many, it is a controversial statement.
The government attacks Labour's vision of local government as municipal socialism, holding up the London boroughs of Lambeth and Haringey as examples.
The Liberal Democrats see local government as an extension of their ideas about representation and democracy and changing the electoral system.
In the government's eyes, local government is run from the top down, rather than from the ground up.
Lord Strathclyde, the minister responsible, said: ‘It is for parliament to decide the powers, functions and responsibilities of local government.’
This view sounds consistent with the philosophy often cited by groups of service users — that standards should be consistent across the country and that people should have minimum entitlements to services wherever they live.
But it sits uneasily with the often-heard principle that ‘local services should respond to local needs’.
It also begs a question about whether the government is changing its tune?
John Major is the first prime minister in 40 years to have any background in local government.
So there could be reason to think his administration would bring a new dawn for local democracy.
But changes in how local government gets its finance, with only 15 per cent available to be raised locally, represents a massive shift towards centralisation.
This is contrary to Thatcher's beliefs about locally accountable services and the power of the local ballot box.
Lord Williams of Elvel quoted the ACC chairperson, who described the new system thus: ‘The man who pays the piper calls the tune.
The government are paying up all the money.
They are saying we have an absolute right to say what should happen.’
Lord Williams described it as a system the old Soviet Union would have been proud of.
The persistent problem of over-legislating and under-resourcing was highlighted.
Lord Williams drew attention to the stream of legislation attacking the principles of local government.
He said even the chairperson of the Tory-controlled ACC had described the government's attitude as obnoxious.
For many, local government and the voluntary service sector concerns about the reality of community care implementation featured highly.
The Earl of Longford said the ‘statement issued by a number of organisations involved in the issue — Age Concern, MENCAP, MIND, the National Schizophrenia Fellowship and others — calls on the government to match the principles of community care with actions that will guarantee effective care.
‘The government have raised great expectations but there is no sign whatever of their being honoured under the present arrangements.’
But this was not Lord Grimond's view.
He strongly criticised local government for increasing bureaucracy and asked why anyone with an interesting and busy life would want to be involved with it.
His view about Orkney — which is his local area — showed a lack of faith in social workers to the extent of preferring society's problems to be solved informally.
He said: ‘Many of the problems concerning the children in Orkney would have been solved in the old days by the pressure of the community.
But now such matters are the business of social workers and others.
So there are certain positively damaging effects.’
The government's philosophy is put in context by the volume and complexity of recent legislation affecting local government in general and social services in particular.
Authorities have had to deal with two major changes in local government finance, the Children Act, the community care reforms, three pieces of housing legislation, restrictions on political activity stemming from the Widdecombe report, ‘Clause 28’(the ban on the ‘promotion’ of homosexuality), and the numerous education reforms and moves towards compulsory competitive tendering and contracting.
All these legislative changes have made it increasingly difficult for local authorities to avoid appearing to lurch from crisis to crisis.
The fundamental shift is from provider to enabler.
Most commentators, whatever they think about this as a philosophy, agree it is the ‘clients’ or ‘users’who lost out.
They are uncertain whether statutory entitlements will be met, never mind whether other services will be provided.
Baroness Hollis said: ‘The government chief inspector has to warn local authorities not to tell the disabled and the frail what they are entitled to in case they should happen to ask for it, which would take the counties through their capping limit.’
The government still believes the enabling authority is the model of the future — a move away from what it sees as the tired, sterile and unresponsive provider-centred, municipal socialism of the past.
A torrent of new legislation
An extraordinary 145 pieces of legislation affecting local government have been passed by Conservative governments since 1979.
What follows is just the tip of the legislative iceberg which has affected local government in the past few years.
It includes some of the most controversial and most significant for social services.
LETTERS
A NEED TO CARE WITHIN LIMITS
Parkinson's Law states that ‘work expands to fill the time available’.
So effectively Robert Harris and Noel Timms (‘Backs against the wall’, 15 April) turn Parkinson's Law on its head when they say that in residential care ‘time expands in accordance with the potentially limitless tasks which exist’.
What I feel is being expressed in Harris' and Timms' paraphrase is frustration at the awesome time-wasting and prevarication which presently occurs in cases where secure accommodation is at issue.
Secure accommodation is appropriate for some young people and should be used, with the firm application of DSS guidelines.
I think that if a young person consents to such a placement, then it seems they have the emotional capacity to tackle their behaviour without recourse to such a placement; such an attitude needs working with, not locking away.
It must be the responsible adults who decide to place a child thus, with a clear explanation to the young person this is happening because adults will not tolerate such behaviour.
Gushing statements to the young person about how this is for their own good, or ‘this is going to hurt me more than it hurts you’(attitudes which are still prevalent) are quite unhelpful, virtually damaging in fact.
They actually lessen the possibilities of guilt and remorse being felt by the young person for the behaviour which brought about such action.
If the adults feel guilty, then let them take it to supervision.
All young people need limits and most get them in their families in oblique and subtle ways.
Those out of control need clear limits imposed on them, and adults need to provide them; it is their duty.
In such situations it is authentic caring, in contrast to the shilly-shallying of court procedure and buck-passing.
DAY CENTRES ARE FOR EVERYONE
What a depressing comment by Derrick Edwards, Dorset's community care co-ordinator.
(22 April, page 6).
In speaking of an ‘intelligent’[sic ]man who had become disabled, Mr. Edwards stated: ‘There was no way he would have fitted into one of our day centres’.
Why, one wonders, is Mr. Edwards so dismissive of day centres?
This centre, contracted out to Queen Elizabeth's Foundation for Disabled People by Kent SSD, can offer considerable advantages to any physically disabled person.
With over 60 activities each week, free transport, self-selection buffet (no, there isn't a treacle pudding in sight) and a strong staff team, we can provide a responsive and non-patronising service to anyone.
However, we can go one better than that.
Several of the tutors here are disabled people with the sort of skills that we are desperate to use.
One computer teacher has severe MS, the sports psychology instructor is a centre user, and several sub-groups, including the women and disability forum, are run entirely by disabled people.
If Mr. Edwards' client lived in this area, we would welcome his talents with open arms.
Is this the start of a campaign for the rights of ‘intelligent’ clients?
CONTRADICTIONS OF THE ACTS
I am mindful that Noel Timms' and Robert Harris' book,Secure Accommodation in Child Care was written prior to the implementation of the Children Act 1989 and relates to research undertaken earlier (‘Backs against the wall’, 15 April).
However, I wish to address one potentially significant impact of the Act in relation to secure accommodation applications in civil proceedings.
Section 25 of The Children Act requires local authorities to make an application for a secure accommodation in the family proceedings court not the youth court.
As specified proceedings under section 41 of the Act the court shall appoint a guardian ad litem — a player not referred to at all in the article.
Appointment of GALs in secure accommodation applications is not only a major challenge of the Act, but is a significant change from previous practice, as it provides an opportunity for an independent investigation.
Within my own panel courts have agreed to adjourn hearings, and make an order for a short period of time to enable a more thorough assessment.
A GAL acting on the day in court on a duty basis (with the child's solicitor) succeeded in persuading the local authority to withdraw their application, with the court's agreement.
There is provision for the GAL to be separately represented if their recommendation differs from the young person, and if they are of sufficient age and understanding to instruct the solicitor themselves (the GAL will advise solicitors about this).
The family proceedings court has to look at the Welfare Checklist (section 1, 1989 Children Act) and, as the writers say, the conflict between the child's welfare being paramount and the need to protect the community present a real paradox.
There may be a tendency for courts to err on the side of caution, and for orders to be made for the full length of time, but the recent judgement by the High Court in relation to an appeal in North Yorkshire may encourage the courts to exercise discretion with greater confidence, and take advice from the GAL.
The contradictions between the Criminal Justice Act and the Children Act are no more accurately highlighted than this example.
When the criminal proceedings in the youth court end, and the same young person who has been held in secure accommodation or remand on the same day may be the subject of an application in the family proceedings court, with a guardian to represent them.
This is usually alongside a lawyer from the children's panel, rather than one with experience in criminal cases.
We seem to be back to the ‘deprived’ versus ‘depraved’distinctions which the 1969 Act sought to end.
THE TWO SIDES OF ASSISTANCE
I wish to set the record straight on personal assistance schemes, raised by Malcolm Stone (Letters, 8 April).
He implies that pay and conditions for personal assistants rely on the exploitation of staff for their cost-effectiveness.
It is true the funding arrangements at the time of the research did not allow for holiday pay, sick pay, and so on.
However, the vast difference in cost between current personal assistance schemes and provision of service-based packages of care makes it clear that a fully funded personal assistance scheme would still, in many cases, be cheaper.
The cost-effectiveness lies, not in the low pay of personal assistants, but in the bureaucracy involved in the provision of traditional services, and in the salaries of the professionals who regulate their supply.
One alternative often offered by professionals as a solution to personal assistance needs requires young people to work long hours for a ‘dole plus’ package.
By contrast disabled people and our organisations have called for staff to be paid proper wages.
To imply disabled people are responsible for the under-payment of personal assistance services in these circumstances is a nauseating misrepresentation of facts.
Meals-on-wheels are not generally provided to disabled people on the grounds that they cannot afford to eat; rather they are provided because they need assistance to prepare a meal, and providers find it more convenient to meet this need by providing the meal itself.
Research shows people would actually prefer the dignity of shopping for their own food and then cooking it themselves, with assistance.
When designed in a holistic way by the disabled person, the package of assistance which enables them to do so is no more expensive than the service-based alternative.
Malcolm Stone understands a key implication of the report, that we waste ‘an awful lot of money’ on training professionals.
This is an argument for redirecting funds to more user-controlled solutions.
INFORMATION PLEASE
I am a social work student looking at research into recruiting Asian carers for adult family placement schemes .
I would like to hear from any schemes with success in recruiting Asian carers and organisations that have undertaken research in this area.
I am a second year diploma in social work student at Bournemouth University and am collecting information on service user evaluation of day services for people with learning difficulties .
I would welcome any information on this and I am particularly interested in hearing from anyone who has experience of facilitating or participating in any such evaluation.
I am setting up an information service for the carers of people with mental health problems .
I would like to know if an easily accessible written package, with information on topics such as diagnosis, psychiatric drugs and their side effects, how to adjust to living with mental health problems in the family and so is available, or if there are any leaflets on the subject.
I am conducting research into the education provision and support for young people who are looked after by the local authority .
I would like to hear from anyone who works in this field and we could be of mutual assistance.
I should like to hear from social workers with experience of working with children and young adults with Dubowitz Syndrome .
South Glamorgan SSD's Emergency Intervention Service enables people with learning disabilities to remain in the community, and to prevent the inappropriate hospitals providing support during an emergency.
For example, if a carer has a sudden illness and has to go into hospital, the Emergency Intervention Service can support someone in their own home or provide alternative accommodation in the community.
We are trying to find out whether any similar services exist in other counties, or, if not, how emergency situations are dealt with.
I should be interested in hearing from anyone involved in family interventions where a family member suffers from schizophrenia .
How was training obtained?
What strategies for reducing expressed emotion have been  effective ?
Have any difficulties been encountered in defining roles within multi-agency or multi-disciplinary teams?
We are a group of professionals from health and social services looking at pregnancy where one or both of the partners has a learning disability .
We would welcome any information or research.
COMMENT
‘No problem’
Elder abuse is the most frightening and dangerous manifestation of our society's marginalisation and institutionalised oppression of older people.
They are in danger of freezing to death in winter, and are told to get knitting.
They must survive on meagre pensions, but are discriminated against if they want to stay in work.
And they are abused in their own homes by relatives and carers, and the response of the government, in the shape of Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley, is that this is not ‘a major problem’.
Community Care believes elder abuse is a major problem.
Today we launch our campaign, as the Community Care Act causes more elderly people than ever to rely on the six million people who care for relatives at home.
The Act emphasises the crucial importance of support for those carers, and without strategies to empower them the Act cannot work.
But as social workers know all too well, family relationships and ‘caring’ relationships are also relationships with dramatic imbalances of power.
It is time to empower elderly people too.
As one survivor of elder abuse tells Community Care this week (News, page 1), care in the community risks making elderly people even more vulnerable.
Family relationships and ‘caring’ relationships are also relationships with dramatic imbalances of power
Elder abuse has not been a priority for research or for developing practice guidance for social workers and other staff who have direct contact with older people.
It is notoriously difficult to research its prevalence, not least because older people and carers are rarely willing to talk about it.
But this is no excuse.
Neither does it excuse the fact that SSDs have been woefully slow in producing practice guidance for staff.
Throughout the campaign, this magazine will call on SSDs to improve their record on elder abuse.
We will also raise awareness by conducting our own research into the numbers of cases coming to SSDs' attention.
The law does not adequately protect older people from abuse.
We exclusively reveal that the Law Commission is proposing new legal powers to protect them, and believes that SSDs should take the lead (News, page 1).
Many of Community Care 's readers are aware of cases of abuse, or suspect it, but do not know how to react.
We aim to help staff deal with this problem.
As usual social workers must be at the forefront of confronting what everyone else — including the Secretary of State — prefers to ignore.
LIVE ISSUE
CRIMINAL JUSTICE ACT
JUSTICE AT RISK
The public outcry against young offenders has given a bumpy ride to the seven-month-old Criminal Justice Act.
Catriona Marchant investigates what youth justice workers are finding is wrong — and right — with the new Act
The Criminal Justice Act was hailed as a far-reaching piece of legislature when it was launched last October.
Now it appears to be on the ‘at risk’ register, its reputation battered and bruised, part of it under review before it has even reached its first birthday.
The Act enshrines principles social workers fought hard to get on the statute book.
It recognises that custodial sentences are the least effective way of dealing with young offenders, and emphasises community penalties like supervision orders.
Juvenile courts have been replaced with youth courts which include 17-year-olds.
But only months after it was implemented, two ten-year-old boys were charged with murdering two-year-old Jamie Bulger in Liverpool, a crime which, coming hard on the heels of reckless teenage joy-riders, fuelled a public outcry.
A parent refused to be bound over, saying: ‘When I send him out of the house in the morning to go to school, I don't know what he'll be doing all day’.
The court fined her £40
Reports of unreasonably high fines imposed for minor offences further inflamed public feelings.
A youth throwing away a crisp packet was fined more than £1,000, but uncontrollable young people in care seemed immune to the judicial process.
The Home Secretary has ordered a review of unit fines and is said to be keeping an open mind about other parts of the Act.
But what is really happening in the youth justice teams around the country, and is it right to condemn the Criminal Justice Act so soon?
Community Care has found both good and bad practice in the youth courts.
For example, there have been long delays in hearing juvenile cases in some youth courts, where numbers of court appearances have doubled.
But in areas where social workers and probation have emerged to form youth justice teams, more cases are being allocated.
Criminal justice campaigners like NACRO are almost in despair, fearing they will see ten years of hard work thrown into reverse.
‘There is a suggestion that the Act has been dreamed up by left-wing lunatics, when in fact it was devised by a Conservative government after wide consultation,’ NACRO's director Vivien Stern told a conference on young adult offenders last month.
But there are more than a few teething problems.
Since the Act was introduced,Community Care has discovered that, far from preventing young people going into custody, more 17-year-olds are being locked up.
And cash-strapped SSDs are furious about large compensation bills levied on them following crimes committed by young people in their care.
Chris Stanley, NACRO's policy development officer, has been monitoring the Act's impact on SSDs and is anxious to play down some of the recent media hype.
‘Our impression is that there is not an enormous problem out there, although there are isolated groups of young people who offend.’
But he says the numbers of young people going into custody have ‘rocketed’.
The Home Office has reportedly seen an increase of more than 40 per cent in the number of young people sentenced to young offender institutions.
Spokespeople will not confirm this, but point out that numbers do fluctuate from year to year.
Stanley also reports an increase of section 53 sentences for crimes like murder and serious assault.
Youth workers in Leeds have also seen a sharp increase in the number of 17-year-olds in custody.
‘Even in areas where there are bail support programmes, youth courts are choosing not to use them,’ says youth justice manager Anne Oliver.
But it is difficult to tell whether this is the fault of the Act, or due to the public backlash against young offenders.
In other parts of the country, youth justice workers are more concerned about the massive backlog of cases.
In Leicester youth court, the influx of 17-year-olds has doubled the number of juvenile offenders coming before magistrates.
The court has introduced an extra day's sitting, but the clerk of the court confirms cases are still being adjourned to dates five weeks ahead.
Before the Act was introduced, it was two weeks.
This means cases (which are generally adjourned four times from first hearing to sentence) are taking 20 weeks to complete instead of eight.
A Leicester youth justice worker says the team has a heavy workload — on one day last month the youth court was due to hear 38 cases.
‘The extra court sitting is on the same day as the other hearings so we have to rush between the courts.
Those working in the adult magistrates courts have become lounge lizards,’ he complains.
At Leeds youth courts — the second busiest in the country — youth justice workers have also seen the number of appearances double since the introduction of the Criminal Justice Act.
The courts hear about 40–45 cases a day.
There are more courts sitting so the backlog is less than in Leicester, but youth justice manager Rick Amos says the joint probation and social services team is ‘extremely busy’.
Ideally, cases should be completed in eight weeks for certain persistent young offenders.
‘Under the Criminal Justice Act it has been progressively more difficult to meet this,’ he admits.
But smaller courts serving rural areas report less of a problem.
In Leicester's neighbouring Coalville and Hickley youth court, for example, there was no backlog of cases.
Leeds youth justice manager Anne Oliver, who is also chairperson of the Association of Youth Justice, says she has been getting mixed messages about the first seven months of the Criminal Justice Act.
‘In some areas it is as if nothing has changed, and in other areas there are some quite bizarre decisions.’
In Leeds, for example, some magistrates are deciding to use the powers to bind over parents for a sum of money: if the child reoffends the cash if forfeit.
‘In some cases the parents are quite bewildered.
Often it is the mother from a single parent family,’ says Oliver.
‘In one case a parent refused to be bound over, saying: ‘When I send him out of the house in the morning to go to school, I don't know what he'll be doing all day’.
The court fined her £40.’
Keeping track of young people is particularly difficult when they are being looked after by an SSD.
In recent well-publicised cases, SSDs have found themselves paying compensation to victims of crimes committed by young people in their care.
In March, North Yorkshire SSD was ordered to pay a massive £7,000 for its alleged failure to control a 14-year-old boy in its care.
The boy was convicted of 71 offences, including 40 charges of burglary, after absconding from a children's home.
It was the second fine against the SSD, and the  council is appealing against both.
Social services director John Ransford, who is also ADSS secretary, says there is less money left for other services.
‘Had it been normal parents sitting in court, would they have been ordered to pay £7,000?
My view is that they would not.’
Last month, Wakefield was ordered to pay £1,000 compensation to an elderly woman who was robbed by a 14-year-old boy in care.
Bob Rose, manager of the specialist child care units, says unless SSDs put young people in secure care they may have less chance of controlling young people than parents.
‘The SSD can't incarcerate all the young people they are looking after.’
One of the principles in the Act is that the severity of the sentence should reflect the seriousness of the offence.
Rose is also uneasy about the legal definition of ‘seriousness’.
He is concerned that youth courts are interpreting seriousness quite harshly.
‘Stealing a car seems to be automatically serious enough to merit a custodial sentence,’ he says.
‘It is a serious offence, but it means first-time offenders committing that crime could find themselves in prison.’
But the Act has some benefits.
Chris Stanley says the ethos of the juvenile court has extended to the new youth courts, and adult sentences like probation orders and combination orders are not being used extensively.
NACRO has also found that about eight out of ten young people are being fined.
The Act aimed to boost the fairness of fines, and introduced means-related unit fines as a way of punishing young offenders.
Valerie Jones, who is manager of one of Lambeth's youth justice teams, says they have written 160 pre-sentence reports since last October.
They ‘vastly under-estimated’ the number of pre-sentence reports they would have to write, but although busy, they are coping, she says.
‘The number of adjournments before the Act was notorious, and reports would never get allocated.
With the Act, the youth justice team took on report writing, and we are managing to get them done.’
The jury is still out on the Criminal Justice Act, even if it is swinging towards the negative rather than the positive.
But most professionals point out we are still in the early stages of implementation.
‘We should not condemn it yet, but continue to look at how it is working out in practice,’ says John Ransford.
Caught in the Act: A self-styled vandal in Newcastle
POLICY:
INTERNATIONAL PLACEMENTS
COME FLY WITH US
Next week's NISW's International Centre to facilitate placements overseas will be launched.
Terry Philpot finds optimism in the face of British insularity
So this is where I book the conference place in the south of France, the minister quipped.
The suite of small rooms which constitutes NISW's embryonic International Centre does not look like a command station for the international social work jet set.
But the minister's little joke reflects a suspicion among many in social services that going ‘over there’ is less about learning than enjoying a jaunt.
The profession's insularity mirrors a national trait.
Hold a conference in Sheffield, London, or Birmingham and there's work to be done.
Hold it in Stockholm, New York, or Lyon and it's seen as a freebie for ‘lucky old you’.
And as for a study tour, well, that's just an all expenses paid holiday for two or three weeks.
The International Centre, which gets off the ground officially with a ministerial blessing (jokes aside) at its launch next week, won't be booking anyone into any conferences in Nice, the Gambia or Malta.
It will be recognising that social workers need to spend time on practice placements abroad, and that social workers from other countries need to come here.
It isn't primarily there to facilitate exchanges, either (though, if it can help it will).
No one in Bolton needs to find a counterpart in Dusseldorf if their wish is to visit Germany.
Neither does the inquirer need to come with a programme almost ready made wanting the centre only to book the air tickets.
Mark Watson and John Warwick, joint co-ordinators, who double as NISW consultant and information officer respectively, are happy to talk to those who have no more idea about what they want to do than, say, look at child abuse in Texas, as they are to someone who can build on a clutch of ready-made contacts.
Indeed, they may be able to help the would-be Texas traveller by uncovering the fact that Philadelphia or New Hampshire may be more productive places to seek a placement to seek a placement so far as child abuse is concerned.
‘We want to generate a market from practitioners who see some value in going somewhere to learn something,’ says John Warwick.
Last April the DoH gave the centre funding of £106,000 a year for three years.
This was after a number of bodies — SCA, BASW, ADSS, ADSW, and the Association of Chief Probation Officers among them — undertook a feasibility study.
NISW initially saw the need after receiving a large number of requests for information and assistance from home and abroad.
John Warwick (left) and Mark Watson are ready to help the would-be traveller
Ploughing the way in some far flung foreign fields is already underway in social services.
Kent has paired with Pad de Calais départment while the European Institute for Social Work has found a home in the University of Kent.
Students have long enjoyed the EC-backed ERASMUS programme to facilitate the visits.
The centre has most information and contacts on Europe and North America and it is working on those on the Indian subcontinent, Eastern Europe and Africa.
It is also taking over responsibility from the DoH for the Council of Europe fellowships and World Health Organisation fellowships.
In addition, it is working with the British Council within whose short (two week) and long- (three months and more) term programmes social work placements can be found.
Eventually, the centre will be self-financing by charging fees to practitioners.
It wishes to cater for those in practice at whatever level.
Part of the service will include a cultural briefing before departure on language and customs.
But the centre sees itself not only as a source for facilitating placements.
It has set about systemising the information which is available about social work elsewhere.
Presently there is no comprehensive source, though there are a number of specialist sources.
But although the centre hasn't gathered everything under one roof, if it hasn't got the information, it now reckons it can tell inquirers where to find it.
It will publish a bi-monthly newsletter.
Once underway, the centre hopes to use consultants in different parts of the UK who will interview would-be applicants to see how serious they are and ensure their visits will have some practical value.
It envisages those visits being as varied as the need — from the person wanting a four-month placement to work with elderly people in Poland or an adoption agency in Jamaica, to someone who is planning a two-week holiday in California who wants to take off a couple of days to spend them visiting the local branch of the US National Association of Social Workers.
John Warwick likens the centre to going to a travel agent where you get convenience and choice.
In the same way that the agent will give you a package to the Canaries or go-as-you-please trek in the Himalayas, so the centre may attach an inquirer to a study visit to Sweden with 20 others or arrange a single stay in Peru.
The centre has already placed 50 or 60 people here or abroad but it has its own problems to overcome: there are few, if any overseas versions of NISW as most of the work tends to be located in the ministries of health or welfare.
Finding an opposite number is not always easy.
But for the proverbial team leader or residential worker from Calderdale or Glasgow, the task of finding a placement abroad will be the easier for not having to seek it on their own.
The International Centre is based at .
An exhibition and information fair is being held next Tuesday between 1–4pm at the Royal National Hotel, London 
CAMPAIGN: ELDER ABUSE
A NATIONAL SCANDAL
Elderly people are marginalised, disadvantaged, and abused in countless ways.
Many are unable, or too afraid, to speak out.
Here we introduce our campaign, to show that elder abuse is everyone's responsibility
Hundreds of thousands of elderly people are being abused in their own homes — physically and emotionally neglected; sexually abused; and financially abused.
It has been estimated that three million elderly people in Britain are at risk.
As violent crime against elderly people seems to increase, the resulting moral outcry can blind us to the fact that huge numbers of elderly people are abused in their own homes by carers — sons, daughters, husbands, wives, other relatives as friends, and paid carers.
For Community Care 's readers, an even more unpalatable fact is that few social workers have any idea what to do if they suspect elder abuse or know it occurs.
Practice guidance and training are rare.
The Community Care Act was implemented as part of a major cultural shift is SSDs which has supposedly made services more responsive to the real needs and wishes of service users.
And there will be more elderly people in the community than ever before.
So this week Community Care launches Elder abuse: break the silence — its major campaign for 1993.
In the European Year of Elderly people, we aim to ensure all our readers and the wider public are well aware of elder abuse at this crucial time for services for elderly people.
And we are calling for change.
Our stated objectives are:
to call for all SSDs and SWDs to issue guidance to staff on identifying and dealing with elder abuse;
to call for all SSDs and SWDs to offer training on elder abuse for all social workers and domiciliary care staff who work with elderly people;
to call for changes to the legislation on:
the protection of elderly people's property;
social workers' legal powers to intervene in abusive situation; and
the registration of private domiciliary care agencies.
Unfortunately, Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley said, in 1991: ‘I don't frankly think that abuse against the elderly is a major problem.’
Over the three months of our campaign,Community Care will show that it is, and that SSDs are not well equipped to cope — something the DoH will have to act upon.
Ageism is one of the most insidious forms of discrimination, one which is widely accepted and rarely challenged.
Elderly people are systematically marginalised and elder abuse is an extreme example of our lack of concern for elderly people and those who care for them.
Even in social work, working with elderly people is often seen as having less status, and being less challenging than working with other clients.
By giving such a high profile to elder abuse,Community Care will show that the abuse of elderly people is a concern and a responsibility for everyone, just like the abuse of children — not only for those who work directly with elderly people.
Researching the prevalence of elder abuse is notoriously difficult, and information on the abuse of black elders is non-existent.
Like all abuse in the home, secrecy cloaks both perpetrators and victims.
Elderly people rarely speak out and abusing carers deny that their behaviour is abusive.
Quite rightly, professionals are struggling to understand the pressures of caring, and their sympathy for carers can make them ignore or misread signs of abuse, or even to interpret abuse as a response to the difficulties some elderly people present.
But while prevention — which must include support for carers — is essential, ignorance disempowers workers, carers and elderly people themselves, for whom it could even be fatal.
Community Care 's news pages will bring you up-to-date information on the latest research and innovations in practice.
And over the next three months, we will try to define elder abuse itself, and examine good practice and training in depth in our features pages, highlighted by the campaign logo.
This week, Joy Francis investigates the first category of elder abuse: physical abuse  and physical neglect (see page 18) while Mervyn Eastman, recognised as the first social worker to highlight elder abuse, examines the problems of defining elder abuse (see page 20).
For the rest of May staff will investigate the realities behind the categories of abuse: financial abuse, emotional abuse and sexual abuse.
The rest of the campaign will investigate producing practice guidelines for SSDs; training strategies; how elderly people disclose (or don't disclose) abuse; how assessment, and the Community Care Act in general, can take account of elder abuse; providing support for carers; arguments for the registration of private domiciliary care; arguments for and against ‘at risk registers’ of elderly people; models of good practice from SSDs; and opportunities to learn from child protection legislation.
PHYSICAL FINDINGS
Physical abuse must be recognised as a problem worth solving before its true extent can be known.
Joy Francis reports
The image of an elderly person being physically abused by a relative in their own home is powerful and disturbing.
It is hard to disregard the problem in light of the 1992 OPCS national research findings that up to 400,000 elderly people may be suffering from this type of abuse, and the stress in the community care legislation on maintaining elderly people in their own homes.
But the absence of conclusive evidence on the extend and nature of the problem has unfortunately led to a mixed government response.
In addition to Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley's well publicised and controversial statement that elder abuse was not a ‘major problem’ is the worrying view from junior health minister Tim Yeo who said last year: ‘In a very small number of cases the carer cannot cope and responds with violence.’
These comments, which some specialists in the field dismiss as ill-judged and politically expedient, add another obstacle to a course already dotted with hurdles.
One is the difficulty of establishing a viable and nationally recognised definition of physical abuse.
This minefield is compounded by the moral nature of the problem; about what is and is not acceptable behaviour.
Before any appropriate action can be taken, it must be clear to all concerned what constitutes physical abuse.
As consultant geriatrician in the department of medicine for the elderly at Edgware General Hospital, Ann Homer deals with patients over 75 who come in for respite services.
To help identify cases of abuse, Homer has a working definition of physical abuse based on the Pillemer And Finkelhor model of being pushed, grabbed, slapped, or hit with a weapon.
Work still needs to be done to establish the severity, intensity, and frequency of physical abuse to enable workers to carry out preventive work and target resources appropriately
This working definition is crucial because of the difficulty in distinguishing between accidental and non-accidental injuries.
‘Older people tend to bruise more easily.
As they get older they tend to have very thin skin and can bruise from the slightest injury.
Just helping them into a chair can cause quite a lot of bruising.
Also, as you age you lose your protective reflexes when you fall and this can result in the most bizarre types of bruises,’
Another reason Homer is cautious is the lack of correlation between the presence or absence of physical signs of injury and the presence or absence of abuse.
Sometimes no marks are left on patients.
In one case an elderly man's son who was his carer would deliberately pull out the catheter inserted by the nurse.
In another, a patient was knowingly given too much Insulin by his daughter.
Though it didn't leave any physical signs, ‘it did untold damage,’ says Homer.
But who carries out this type of abuse?
Homer does not go overboard for the stereotype of the well-meaning, but stressed carer who may snap once or twice out of exasperation.
A study she conducted in 1990 showed it was not this simple.
Family relationships are more complicated and involve patterns which have become an intrinsic part of the relationship.
A lot depends on the quality of communication and interaction.
‘There are two main patterns.
One is that the abuse is part of the way two people communicate over a long period of time.
This could be long-term spouse abuse, or equally an abusive parent/child situation which resulted in a shift of power with the child becoming the carer.
The other pattern is that the child has psychiatric or psychological problems or is dependent on drugs or alcohol.
Physical abuse is strongly associated with carers having these sorts of problems,’ she says.
Denial by the physically abused person is another barrier to obtaining accurate figures.
The reasons for this include embarrassment, guilt, and the fear that the abusing relative will be taken  away and they will be left alone, especially if the abuser is the abused person's main support in the community.
There is also the strong possibility that family loyalty will prevail despite the abuse.
This can be exacerbated by the abused adult suffering from mental illness and confusion.
Jim Ogg, research and development officer with the Royal London Hospital care of the elderly department and Tower Hamlets SSD, has direct experience of the many ethical barriers researchers face when trying to obtain highly personal and sensitive information from those cared for about physical abuse.
‘There is a lot of denial and it is very difficult to talk about the abuse when it is happening to you, especially if you are a researcher as you don't have much contact with the person on a regular basis,’ Ogg says.
‘It is difficult to get statistics from social workers’ and district nurses' case loads, because there aren't any comprehensive record keeping systems.
So it is difficult to get a feeling of what workers are dealing with.’
Misperceptions of elderly people — from seeing them as a burden and expecting them to be docile, to assuming that older people cannot be aggressive or violent — play a part in how physical abuse is perceived.
‘The problem is the marginalisation of elderly people from mainstream society, a lack of rights, and the fact that they are not politicised as a group.
They don't set their own terms about what they expect for a good quality of life, so other people do it for them and we do a bad job of it.’
Workers must be armed with helpful practice-friendly definitions of physical abuse, stresses Barbara Mallon, senior social worker with Bedfordshire SSD.
After nine years of working with elderly people over 65 and coming across cases of physical abuse without a definition or context, she carried out a study between 1988 and 1989.
A checklist of the types of physical abuse was developed to identify and categorise them.
Out of 133 identified cases of abuse, 51 per cent had some element of physical abuse.
Specifically, 42 were beaten, hit or slapped; eight were pushed; seven were roughly handled; four were pushed down the stairs and two cases of attempted assault were noted.
Informal meetings with 100 carers also brought home the reality of mutual abuse, with roughly half saying they were abused, though it still has to be determined what part physical abuse played.
For grass roots workers, the findings are important as may are worried about how to intervene in cases of physical abuse, the stress involved and the fact that it may be too complex.
For Mallon, workers must always remember ‘that you are dealing with adults’.
Work still needs to be done to establish the severity, intensity, and frequency of physical abuse to enable workers to carry out preventive work and target resources appropriately.
But for this to be achieved, the government must acknowledge it as a problem worth solving.
Community Care's campaign
Our aims:
1.
All SSDs/SWDs to issue practice guidance for staff
2.
All SSDs/SWDs to offer training on elder abuse to all staff in direct work with elderly people
3.
A review of legislation on protecting elderly people's property; social workers' powers to intervene in abuse; registration of private domiciliary care
4.
To raise awareness
FIGHTING IT RIGHT
Mervyn Eastman helps launch our campaign by examining the thorny problems of defining elder abuse, an essential first step for any agency or worker
For an agency to attempt strategies, policy guidelines or practice procedures on elder abuse it must be clear about defining the problem.
A definition which fails to confront abuse fails to bring about effective interventions and risks increasing the incidence of abuse.
The only reason for defining abuse is to ensure that incidents are identified and reduced by good professional and managerial practice.
But agencies are finding it profoundly difficult to reach a consensus.
A definition is a moral judgement.
It explicitly states that certain behaviours are either abusive (wrong) or not abusive (right).
An 80-year-old man does not realise his response to his 75-year-old dependent partner is abusive.
So is it?
A carer, worn out by the unending demands of her task, shakes her mother when she spits out her tablets.
Is she abusive?
Should these people be seen as ‘victims’ who need protection?
Intent could be a factor in defining elder abuse.
If it is a factor, does that mean that unintentional abuse should be excluded?
What if the intention is to protect the older person, say by locking them in a room?
No definition can be ‘correct’, as there is no national definition, but agencies must be comfortable with it and aware of the assumptions and values behind it.
My early definition was greatly influenced by my view in the late 1980s and early 90s that public attention should be drawn to elder abuse.
I was also influenced by the plight of carers.
The London Borough of Enfield's definition is: ‘The physical, emotional, or psychological abuse of a vulnerable adult by a formal or informal carer.
The abuse is repeated, as is the violation by a person or persons who have power over the life of a dependent.’
Within that definition are some key concepts: formal (paid) carer; informal relative or carer; violation; power and dependency.
Are these concepts valid?
They are based on assumptions which must still be tested.
The definition drawn up in Enfield makes explicit:
a range of behaviours (physical, emotional, etc);
the carer (a service provider and ‘relative’ are equally culpable);
violation;
power (is in the hands of the carer); and
dependency (is a factor).
An important debate centres around how far the definition of what constitutes abuse criminalises the so-called abuser.
I now consider the older person to be a victim more than the carer.
This is a shift away from the ‘plight of carers’ to the plight and powerlessness of the person being abused.
One way to strengthen this position is to use police definitions of abuse:
Common assault : pushing, thumping, forced medication, pulling hair;
Actual bodily harm : physical sign of assault, including emotional/psychological abuse;
Grievous bodily harm : unlawful wounding, including cuts, or using a weapon which causes actual injury;
Grievous bodily harm :(with intent);
Manslaughter;
Murder ; and
Theft : dishonestly appropriating property belonging to another with the intention of permanently depriving the owner of it.
Does defining abuse in these terms fail to recognise the stresses on carers?
Some argue that it does.
I use police definitions because this reflects the fact that to violate another person is unlawful, realigning the imbalance which has occurred as carers have generally become more empowered.
Who actually speaks up for the vulnerable older person?
Who protects them as we increasingly emphasise the difficulties of caring?
Defining abuse can allow the relative power of the carer to take precedence over the plight of the older person.
A disclosure can lead to the older person being further disadvantaged.
The ‘blame’ is removed from the carer who abuses.
The victim's behaviour (even condition) is recognised as triggering the abuse.
It becomes the ‘fault’ of the ‘victim’who them becomes the ‘perpetrator’and the carer the victim.
Agencies who intervene are in danger of finding themselves in the role of persecutors!
Agency definitions of abuse and what behaviours constitute abuse must maintain the balance of responsibility between the abuser and abused.
The notions of ‘blame’ and ‘fault’are further values which unsupported workers can trip over unless they are explicitly addressed within policy and practice guidelines.
Claudine McCreadie argues that a definition must specify:
whether the chronological age is relevant;
the setting of abuse (domestic or institutional);
the relationship of the abuser to the abused;
whether dependency is a factor;
whether intention is relevant;
what constitutes abuse; and
the categories of abuse, for example physical, emotional, material, neglect, sexual.
As Community Care launches its campaign, I would argue these principles: first, abuse is wrong and a criminal offence.
Second, a definition should make its moral base explicit and be owned by the agency.
Third, carers have power over dependent vulnerable relatives regardless of the stress of caring, and that power can be misused.
Fourth, a definition should help with confrontation and reduce the numbers of older people at risk, otherwise the definition is meaningless.
Finally, the dilemmas associated with abuse have more to do with anxiety over taking a moral position than with the complexity of the subject.
LAW: MENTAL HEALTH
NOT JUST A QUICK FIX
The New Year's Eve mauling of Ben Silcock by the lions at London Zoo sparked calls for the introduction of compulsory supervision of mentally ill people in the community.
It also prompted a government review of the Mental Health Act.
Ben's mother Sheila Silcock writes for the first time about her experiences.
She asks whether compulsory treatment in the community would be so bad if the alternative was hospital.
The mental health charity MIND opposes the proposals for community supervision orders.
Legal officer Adina Halpern argues for provisions in the Mental Health Act to be used instead to help people like Ben Silcock
If my son had been on medication at the end of last year he would not have made an unprovoked attack on his father in November, nor attempted to share his New Year's Eve lunch with the lions.
Seen in the context of a ten-year history of disturbed behaviour, these incidents could have been prevented.
Whenever Ben stops his drugs his mental state deteriorates; he becomes increasingly irrational, agitated and aggressive, even violent.
He usually ends up in hospital, stabilises on medication, takes it for a while after being discharged, then stops — sometimes inspired by marijuana.
Ben was allocated a council flat where he lived alone by choice.
His family regularly helped him but he lacked a social focus.
The day hospital only provides short-term support.
The local drop-in centre, run by a mental health charity, banned Ben for violent behaviour.
Drugs are no substitute for a social support network, but social support  alone is not always enough.
At present, unless people with mental health problems are sectioned under the Mental Health Act, they can refuse medication regardless of the consequences.
There are problems when a client will not accept help.
Even a highly skilled team working with a client whose trust can be won cannot compel medication.
And what if the client is suspicious or hostile?
Ben told his social workers to go away.
If all else fails, compulsory treatment as an out-patient or in hospital may be an option.
But it must have built-in safeguards to prevent abuse.
It must never be used as a quick fix, but only as part of a dedicated care programme.
This might be achieved using the power of guardianship, often regarded as toothless as it has no power to enforce medication.
The Mental Health Act Commission pointed out in a discussion paper in 1986 that guardianship ‘has been so little used that its potential is untried’.
The commission proposed then that the guardian could require the client to receive medical treatment prescribed by the responsible medical officer.
Under CSO proposals from the Royal College of Psychiatrists, the care team would have the right of access to the client and a better chance of using gentle persuasion.
However, the grounds for admission to hospital for treatment are unclear.
But would preventive compulsory treatment be so terrible if, without it, people deteriorate and end up in hospital?
Then their freedom is curtailed, their choices limited and their frustrations increased.
It is the last place they want to be.
There is such a fear among some professionals of infringing civil liberties that we may, paradoxically, make things worse for the mentally ill person in the long run.
We should not oppose the principle of compulsory treatment simply because it could be misused.
The quality of the carers determines how sensitively and humanely it is administered.
Adequate resources and funding, both sadly lacking at present, are also vital.
The role of the family is ambiguous.
The Royal College's report urges families to become involved, but this conflicts with the client's right to confidentiality.
As the nearest relative, I have found the care team bound by rules of confidentiality which limit communication.
Yet is the family maintains supportive contact with a relative, they need to know the strategy of the care team and how to respond in the relative's best interests.
If they think the person is deteriorating, should they tell the care team?
Where can they turn in a crisis?
Unlike doctors and social workers, families are never off duty.
They need the same support and information they would get in a case of physical illness.
Surely we can do better for people with mental problems and their families?
MIND opposes the introduction of community supervision orders and the concept of compulsory treatment in the community.
The recent proposals made by the Royal College of Psychiatrists are unjustified, unnecessary and unworkable.
When individuals such as Ben Silcock do not receive the treatment or other care they are believed to require this is not due to the paucity of powers in the Mental Health Act.
It is because of the lack of community care resources and professionals who don't understand the scope of their powers under the existing law.
Also, as Sheila Silcock's article highlights, the nearest relative may be unaware of their rights under the Act.
The Royal College's proposals give the patient an unrealistic choice: to accept treatment in the community or to return to hospital.
They fail to explain when a CSO will be used or how it would be implemented.
Given Ben Silcock's  apparently hostile attitude to authority, how would supervision work?
Can supportive and sympathetic monitoring accompany compulsory treatment?
Surely CSOs will damage the already unbalanced power relationship between the user and provider of services.
Given that one of the requirements of the order will be the patient agreeing to accept treatment, what possible reason can there be for the order to exist?
Similarly, if a person is able to accept supervision, how can it be argued that they are not able to consent to the medical arrangements given during it?
The Royal College's proposals would allow a person to be recalled to hospital by a doctor without an application by an approved social worker, even where a person is symptom-free.
This would be contrary to the European Convention on Human Rights.
The adverse effects of neuroleptic medication can be debilitating and distressing.
They can include blunting a person's thinking and motivation, impotence, and weight gain.
Many would argue that medication prevents a good quality of life.
In any case, non-compliance with medication is only one of the factors which affects the progress of a psychotic illness and the possibility of a relapse.
So what alternatives are there to the proposed extension of the law?
A man with Ben Silcock's history was detainable under the present law.
A person can be detained in hospital for treatment on health grounds under section three of the Mental Health Act.
Paragraph 2.9 of the Code of Practice to the Act makes it clear that a person can be detained on the basis of a known history of mental illness following non-compliance with medication.
Further modifications to the Code proposed by the DoH will clarify this point.
The kind of supervision suggested by the college could be achieved by guardianship; yet guardianship under the Act has been very little used.
A statutory duty on a local authority to appoint an approved social worker to consider the use of guardianship could be included in the Act.
And the nearest relative's right to call for an assessment by the local authority could be extended to guardianship, forcing authorities to give reasons for not exercising their power.
The duties imposed by section 117 in the Mental Health Act on aftercare apply to those individuals for whom the CSO is intended.
They could be clarified by statutory directions as to how assessments are to take place on discharge from hospital and the SSD's obligations in relation to section 47 of the NHS and Community Care Act.
Resources need to be provided to make the care programme approach a reality.
Finally, services could be rendered more attractive to users.
Community care requires a lot more than a syringe.
MIND fears CSOs will be used as a quick fix by doctors when no community care services are available.
YOUTH CRIME: FEMALE OFFENDERS
THE TRIALS OF YOUNG WOMEN
Young women who offend often receive quite different treatment than their male counterparts.
Kendra Sone investigates the reasons for this inequality
Everyone has had a chance to air their views about what should be done with young offenders — everyone, that is, except the young people themselves.
The voices of the young women who enter the criminal justice system are even less likely to be heard than those of their male counterparts.
Their numbers are comparatively small, most receive cautions and they are less likely to make it to court.
A common complaint from clients and workers is that courts give young women sentences designed to control and confine their behaviour rather than punishments which fit their crimes.
Plymouth youth justice team manager Phil Kendrick says courts view young women's crimes differently and that this is reflected in the sentences dished out by magistrates.
The team is awaiting the outcome of an appeal against a combination order which is normally awarded for serious offences like burglary.
The young woman was also pregnant and Kendrick believes this consideration could have influenced the court's decision.
When nearly all services are geared to young males, young women are inevitably marginalised
Elizabeth Reynolds, a youth justice team manager for Dorset says the courts are still ‘far too interested in non-offence-related issues where females are concerned.
‘In one far from isolated case, the court requested a pre-sentence report for a shoplifting offence and we believe it was because the girl was pregnant.
A male would have received a conditional discharge or a unit fine.’
Charlie Bell of the Association for Youth Justice agrees: ‘Magistrates see 16- and 17-year-olds who are pregnant and homeless and are tempted to use their criminal powers to address these needs.’
A youth justice team may have no more than two or three females on orders at any one time.
Because of this, authorities have found it hard to justify expenditure on services geared specifically to the needs of young women.
Where services have grown up, it is mainly due to the efforts of individual workers or managers.
Young, female and losing out
Dorset ran a diversionary group specifically to meet the needs of seven young women in the north of the county.
Elizabeth Reynolds explains: ‘They were offenders, on the verge of being accommodated and displaying promiscuous behaviour so we were very concerned about the health risks.’
Hackney SSD's support group for young females tackles health, sexuality and anything else the clients want to discuss.
The group is run for six to eight females for a period of eight weeks and aims to improve their social skills and self-esteem.
Opinion is split on the wisdom of treating young men and young women differently.
Some argue that the welfare needs of young offenders of both sexes should be addressed equally.
But when nearly all services are geared to young males, young women are inevitably marginalised.
‘Young women interested in the car or motorbike projects are put off by the number of young men,’ says Hackney project worker Berverlin McKenzie.
She adds that many of the issues tackled by their group wouldn't get discussed if boys were present.
Section 95 of the Criminal Justice Act 1991 says workers must avoid discriminating on grounds of race or sex.
For this to work, the same facilities must be available for both sexes.
But when it comes to sentencing, this is not the case.
There is a drastic shortage of attendance centres for young women.
Authorities ranging from North Yorkshire to Dorset have been pressing for funds to convert existing boys' attendance centres into mixed facilities.
In Dorset Elizabeth Reynolds wrote to mixed attendance centres around the country asking whether or not there were problems accommodating both boys and girls.
Resources proved to be the only issue.
‘Like making sure there were separate shower facilities and a  chaperon if only one girl was attending at any one time.’
Despite her efforts, ‘the Home Office is indicating we might not have enough young women to justify the facility.’
York is awaiting Home Office approval for a mixed attendance centre.
If approval is not granted, Stewart Gallimore, principal officer at North Yorkshire SSD, fears that magistrates may be tempted to impose a tougher sentence than the offence warrants — so young women will lost out yet again.
GLUE WAS THE CUE FOR TROUBLE
When a local policeman told Sharon Rogers that, ‘by the time you're 16 you're going to be pregnant, homeless and stuffed up with drugs’, she believed this summed up the attitudes of many of the police and social workers she encountered during her offending career.
Attitudes which she believes contributed to its length.
Rogers was just 10 years old when her behaviour first caused concern.
‘At first it was just smoking and drinking.
My offending started when I became a habitual glue sniffer at the age of 12 and I began stealing to finance it.’
‘At 15 I was into burglaries and shoplifting.
We would go into the big shops in town and take anything big, anything we could get away with.’
‘To begin with the police wouldn't touch me, they just took me home to my parents.
Then they (the police) would lock me up for a couple of hours at a time but I didn't get charged until I was 15.’
Rogers was well known to the police and she believes it was this fact which led to a court appearance for a minor offence.
‘I got caught writing on a bus; I was arrested and charged and told I was going to get a caution.
But I ended up being sent to the juvenile court where I received a conditional discharge.’
Rogers believes earlier intervention focusing on her glue sniffing could have stopped her becoming a persistent offender.
‘At 13 or 14, I should have been taken away from my family and placed somewhere where I would have felt loved and like a real person.’
Rogers does not underestimate the problems she caused those charged with her care.
Outbreaks of violence were common, usually brought on by a mixture of glue and alcohol.
Her time in care included a spell in a family group home, where she found staff supportive, ‘they knew how to handle my violence’.
This was followed by a semi-independent girls' hostel.
Rogers says she was pushed towards independent living too seen.
She was made to heave the hostel and the SSD  found her a flat.
‘But I wasn't ready for it.
I said there was no way I wanted to live on my own.
I had never cooked a healthy meal and I was only there a month when I got into burglary.’
‘At 17 I was placed in a mental hospital for two days.
The doctors there said all I needed was love and attention.’
Twice-weekly counselling sessions were arranged to deal with her glue sniffing.
‘But I just used to hide my glue bag in the toilet before I went in to see my social worker.’
‘They knew I was a sniffer but I was put on a YTS placement to learn to be a carpet fitter.
This gave me easy access to glue.’
Eventually her offences led to prison.
She served four months and gave up the glue.
But her problems didn't end there.
‘When I came out, all my friends were inside and my family didn't want me.
I went into a YWCA and got pregnant and frightened.’
Rogers eventually got involved with community work through a mother and baby group.
She now has a similar job in a related field.
OFF THE STREETS
Fifteen-year-old Janet Rye is serving an intermediate treatment order for assault.
If she was a boy, she says, she would have been put in a young offenders' institution.
Her problem is her temper, she says.
She thinks she has learned to control it but the label sticks: ‘Policemen still stop me in the street and say: ‘Hello Janet, who have you hit today?’’.
Rye praises the IT she has received: ‘The project has kept me off the streets and taught me useful things like carpentry.
I'm doing my room now.’
Even more valuable has been the friendship and help she found while attending a young women's support group.
Here participants were given a chance to discuss sexuality, health, relationships, self-esteem and abuse.
The group had to be single sex, she says.
‘If boys had been there I would have just sat and twiddled my thumbs.
One girl talked to us about her sexual abuse.
If boys had been there she might never had said anything.’
IN BENEFIT
Cash versus care
Arranging to care for elderly people in their own home or in private residential accommodation can often be overshadowed by financial wrangles as to who pays what.
Paul Burgess examines the dilemma in the light of new legislation
Isn't there too much emphasis on money in the community care debate and not enough on caring responsibilities?
Money matters: Elderly people are often unaware of the choices they have if they are unexpectedly discharged into care
If anyone is in any doubt that financial questions play an important part in the new arrangements of care in the home and private residential care — or ‘care in the community’ as the government would have it — they could usefully have watched the BBC TV Panorama programme ‘Dumping Granny’on 26 April.
Even allowing for the fact that television programmes are necessarily selective choosing shocking cases to illustrate the point, and also allowing for the evident confusion with the programme caused by pre-1 April material combined with a post-1 April dialogue, some disturbing situations were illustrated.
In each case good advice to the individual or family could have made a crucial difference.
Similar cases are still likely to occur.
Take Rosa Millard, an intelligent woman of 80 whose daughter could no longer care for her.
After being admitted to hospital where she received treatment for breathing problems, she was said not to need any further treatment (or was ‘blocking a bed’ which is not at all the same thing) and discharged into a nursing home.
Clearly believing she had no choice but to stay there she unwillingly shared a room with a woman of 93 suffering from senile dementia.
Yet the DSS was paying for the place and she could have shopped around if she had been provided with the help to do this.
She died 12 days later from her breathing problems.
In another case Betty Jones who is 86 and unwell couldn't cope with her senile husband of 83, and because he couldn't return home from the day centre a place had to be found for him.
It was a tragic scene as he was led off.
It was a tragic scene as he was led off.
There was no mention at all of social services.
It looked a classic case for the Independent Living Fund (before new claims were abolished by the government in December 1992) to pay for a package of care and support which would have helped her cope.
The question of married couples came up and one relative expressed shock that his elderly father was being chased for ‘maintenance’— a financial contribution towards the costs six months after his spouse had been admitted to a nursing home.
The liability of husbands and wives (it does not apply to unmarried couples which seems anomalous) arises out of the National Assistance Act 1948 and the income support regulations, and is discretionary for the local authority and DSS.
If income support is in payment, there is unlikely to be any advantage for the local authority in pursuing maintenance as the DSS will simply reduce their contribution by the same amount.
The guidance to DSS staff is measured and accommodating, but is little appreciated by their local offices, and demands for maintenance can be ill-judged and irregular.
In Mrs Brockett's case Panorama only seemed to recognise half the issues.
After a lengthy period of care at home, she was first admitted to hospital, then to a nursing home.
Her one-third ownership of the home which she had shared with her daughter and son-in-law was identified as an asset which would be realised to help meet the charges.
But as reported, there was no consultation with her daughter about the discharge into the nursing home.
This is contrary to DoH guidelines.
It meant the costs and the financial implications were not explained to the relatives, although the consequences for them were quite serious.
And it begs the question on whose authority the nursing home place was accepted and at the price asked.
As far as the capital assets were concerned, it was not clear who was pursuing the matter, although there was an implication that the local authority was involved.
The suggestion had been made that the house be sold to release Mrs Brockett's share.
Not surprisingly, the daughter and her husband were less than thrilled at this and the further suggestion that they could rent their home back!
Current regulations provide that the value of a client's home should be ignored if the absence is temporary.
Where it is permanent, it should still be ignored if the client's spouse or child under 16 or an elderly or disabled relative is still living there.
In other cases the local authority must make a judgement — exercise their discretion as to whether it would be reasonable to ignore it.
For example, this seems desirable where the home is also occupied by an elderly companion or a former carer who has no other residence to go to.
In last month's In Benefit (22 April) mention was made of the value of a benefits check when a client is being assessed for his/her ability to pay towards charges.
The implication for the client of finding a title to attendance allowance and the severe disability premium or invalid care allowance could be up to an extra £78.60 and is therefore an alternative option to residential care.
OFFLOAD
MAD CAREW
TOO MANY ROWERS SPOIL THE RACE
I have received an anonymous offering from Lancashire County Council, signed only ‘Grass roots’.
The trouble with anonymous contributions to this page, not that I'm not grateful for anything I can get, is that the people who send them can't get a lovely Community Care mug whereas those like Nicholas Holbrook,(see below) who refuse to hide their creative light under a bushel, have a mug winging its way to them at this very moment.
‘Grass roots’ writes: ‘Once upon a time, social services and the Japanese decided to have a competitive boat race on the river Thames.
‘Both teams practised long and hard to reach their peak performance.
On the big day, they were as ready as they could be.
The Japanese won by a mile.
‘Afterwards, the SSD team became very discouraged by the loss and morale sagged.
Senior management decided the reason for the crushing defeat had to be found, and a project team was set up to investigate the problem and recommend appropriate action.
‘Their conclusion: the Japanese team had eight people rowing and one person steering.
Social services had one person rowing and eight people steering.
‘Senior management immediately hired a consultancy company to do a study on the team structure.
Millions of pounds and several months later the consultancy company concluded that too many people were steering and not enough were rowing.
‘To prevent losing to the Japanese again next year, the team structure was changed to four steering managers, three senior steering managers and one executive steering manager.
A new Quality Performance system was set up for the person rowing the boat to give him more incentive to work harder and become a key performer.
‘The next year the Japanese won by two miles.
‘The SSD laid off the rower for poor performance, sold off all the paddles, cancelled all the capital investment for new equipment, halted the development of a new canoe, awarded high performance awards to the consultants and distributed the money saved to senior management.’
IN A TIZZ OVER CODING QUERIES
This week's prize goes by unanimous decision of the judges to East Sussex director Nicholas Holbrook who sent me this letter on alarmingly realistic DoH headed notepaper, with alarmingly realistic signatures of SSI supremo Herbert Laming and Alan Langlands of the NHS Management Executive.
Apparently it was circulated to senior managers in East Sussex on 1 April.
‘The worrying part,’ Holbrook writes, ‘was that some very senior people took it seriously.’
Very worrying indeed for him, I should have thought.
The letter is about the vexed question of ‘unmet need’ and whether to record it and employ extra solicitors or whether to ignore it and allow the DoH to remain in blissful ignorance.
It says each local authority will be issued with its own set of confidential codings for registering unmet need, for example‘members’ special clothing requirements' or ‘grass collection services’.
The codings, it says, will be changed monthly and the whole system will be introduced by 1 May.
No wonder they were in a tizz in Brighton.
At the end of the letter is someone to contact if your codings haven't arrived by implementation date.
I haven't managed to find out whether anyone from East Sussex actually rang up in a panic.
If anyone in the SSD can shed any light on the matter, or better still on the origins of the letter, she or he will immediately be nominated reader of the week, be the envy of all and sundry, and receive a special prize.
FLOWER SHOW COMES HOME
A company called Master Transcriptions is marketing audio tapes of this year's Chelsea Flower Show for visually impaired people:
‘For the first time, people with a  disability [sic]or print handicap will be able to enjoy a guided tour of the event without leaving their homes.’
SPONSORSHIP THE EUROPEAN WAY
A mole in The Children's Society has sent me a copy of a letter the society received from organisers of the European Social Services Conference to be held in Kent in July.
The conference will be attended by directors, health service chief executives and directors of purchasing, as well as delegates from the independent sector.
The letter invites the Children's Society to sponsor the conference.
Much outrage has been expressed that a charity should be asked to sponsor the wine at dinner, for example,(£1,000 plus VAT) for a lot of highly paid public and private sector bigwigs.
An alternative, if you're hard up, is to sponsor a coffee or tea break, at a cost of £300 plus VAT.
However, I do not share The Children's Society's indignation.
I would like to announce that from now certain major sponsorship opportunities are opening up on this page.
At the bottom of the market, the Reader of the Week Award can be sponsored for 50p.
But those who really wish to curry favour with Mad Carew can sponsor a five-course dinner plus wine for two for £70 and get a generous mention on this page.
Cheques to the usual address please.
THE WAY WE WERE
Seebohm reorganisation might have created one door for people to turn to but often that door was closed.
That was the warning given by David Fleet, director of social services for Tower Hamlets, and new president of the Institute of Social Welfare.
Too often it was not open because social workers were at meetings, he told members at the twenty-fifth AGM.
‘We have always stood for service.
We have tried to stand aside and we see ourselves as an institute that cares