

THE GENESIS OF RUSSIAN ‘ABSOLUTISM’
Numerous labels have been attached to the political system which Ivan the Great bequeathed to Muscovy at the beginning of the sixteenth century — oriental despotism (Plekhanov, Szamuely), patrimonial monarchy (Pipes), estate-representative monarchy (Cherepnin).
In part this variety reflects the poorly defined vocabulary available to historians seeking to distinguish various traditional authoritarian regimes.
But it also derives from sharply differing interpretations of the nature of the Muscovite system.
The central issue at stake is simple and crucial to an understanding of Russian history.
How far was the State — the power concentrated in the hands of the Grand Prince — representative of and responsive to privileged groups or interests within society?
Was the ruler's freedom of action significantly limited by independent institutions and social pressure or was he in a position to subject every social stratum to his own will?
In a famous description of Basil III, the Imperial Ambassador Sigismund von Herberstein described him as the most despotic sovereign on earth.
‘He has power over both secular and clerical individuals and freely, according to his will, disposes of the life and property of all.
Among the counsellors whom he has, none enjoys such importance that he would dare to contradict him in anything or be of another opinion.’
Unification under Moscow had been accompanied by the creation of a powerful centralized monarchy.
All appointments to military and administrative posts were in the gift of the Grand Prince.
It was in his name that taxes were collected, the law enforced, war waged and treaties signed.
His realm was bound together by an increasingly standardized legal code, gradually extended over newly incorporated areas, a rudimentary  postal system, and uniform coinage, weights, and measures.
Executive, legislative, and judicial authority flowed from him and there were no legal limitations to his power.
Muscovite ceremony and rhetoric — the messianic claim, after the fall of Constantinople (1453), that it was Moscow's destiny to be the ‘Third Rome’, and the adoption of the twin-headed eagle, the Imperial emblem inherited from Byzantium — surrounded the person of the Grand Prince with an ever more glorious halo, emphasizing the slavish subjection of all to his semi-divine authority.
2.1 The small state seal of Ivan IV (1569).
The twin-headed eagle.
inherited from Byzantium. was to remain the royal emblem until the fall of the monarchy.
Yet the Grand Prince's position was in fact more complex than Herberstein's influential picture suggests.
Ivan III and Basil III were not despots on the Asiatic model.
The Grand Prince lacked a sizeable military apparatus directly responsive to his will.
With the money economy spreading extremely slowly, he could only centralize very limited financial resources.
The central bureaucracy was embryonic and his provincial officials were spread wafer-thin and proved very difficult to supervise.
In these conditions he was in no position to ride rough-shod over the interests of either the Church or the nobility, and in the mid sixteenth century there were momentary signs that the wealthier commoners were gaining a modicum of political leverage.
On the other hand, Muscovy's social élites did suffer from weaknesses which made them much less independent and their property much less secure than elsewhere in Europe.
With the eclipse of the Greek patriarch, there was no rival  foreign ecclesiastical authority comparable to that exercised by Rome in Catholic Europe; the Grand Prince faced neither parlements , nor Magna Charta; and individual landowners who fell foul of the monarch enjoyed no legal protection.
Equally important, the peasantry at the bottom of the social pyramid were acutely vulnerable to royal power.
The great mass of them, those living on the lands unoccupied by nobility or church (the so-called ‘black’ lands — as distinct from the ‘black-earth’regions), owed allegiance only to the Grand Prince.
And during the sixteenth century the Crown exploited this massive reservoir of land and labour to effect a major increase in state power.
The most significant institution outside the State itself was the Church.
The favour shown it by the Mongols had enabled it to consolidate its position across Russia long before the Muscovite State managed to do so.
Culturally dominant and playing a pervasive role in the everyday life of élite and masses alike, it wielded enormous influence.
Enjoying immunities from various forms of taxation and from administrative interference by the State, the monasteries were at a distinct advantage in accumulating land and retaining scarce peasant labour, and they benefited from a flow of bequests by repentant sons of the Church.
The non-celibate parish clergy were little better off than their peasant flock, but in the early sixteenth century over 25 per cent of all cultivated land was in clerical hands.
The combination of spiritual, cultural, and economic influence at its disposal made the Russian Church in some ways better placed than its Western counterparts to resist the ambitions of the newly centralized State.
When Ivan III manoeuvred to undermine the security of monastic property — before most of his Western peers embarked on the same road — he found himself unable to do so.
His method was to patronize the so-called ‘Nonpossessor’ reformist current within the Church, which urged the clergy to shed material wealth and pursue their spiritual mission unencumbered.
The hierarchy, however, mounted stiff resistance and publicly denounced any attack on ecclesiastical privileges and property.
This conservative response, led by the fiery Abbot Joseph of Volokolamsk, carried the day, and Ivan's successors were unable even to halt effectively the further growth of ecclesiastical landholding.
Yet the Josephite victory presaged no broader attempt to circumscribe royal power.
The challenge from the Nonpossessors, viewed sympathetically as it was by the land-hungry Grand Prince  and aristocracy alike, had frightened the Josephites too much for that.
They feared that to alienate the Grand Prince, who had a wide measure of control over appointments to the hierarchy, would leave them vulnerable to the intellectual vigour of the ‘heresy’.
To crush their rivals, therefore, they sought not to limit the power of the Grand Prince but to gain influence over him by identifying themselves with the elevation of his personal authority.
It was the Josephite hierarchy which orchestrated the remarkable development of monarchic ideology which so impressed Herberstein.
It was the Metropolitan Makarii who nurtured Ivan the Terrible's hugely inflated notion of his office, and who prepared the dramatic ceremony which saw him crowned in 1547 not as mere Grand Prince but as unfettered ‘Tsar’(derived from ‘Caesar’).
Rather than checking the power of the State, the Church thus augmented it, ensuring only that the Tsar would launch no wholesale attack on monastic property.
The Church drew ever closer to the State but became a distinctly junior partner.
At the top of the social pyramid was the aristocracy, large landowners whose families had long served Moscow (the boyars) and ex-appanage princes who had gradually been drawn to the metropolis.
They provided the high command in wartime, bringing their own retinue to serve in the royal army, and the senior personnel for enforcing order in the countryside.
It was they who surrounded the monarch and provided most of his advisers.
The Boyars' Duma (Council) might lack closely defined rights, but by custom the Tsar legislated and acted in consultation with it.
Even if individually neither their lives nor their property were secure, collectively they constituted an interest group with whom the Grand Prince was intimately bound up.
2.2 Ivan the Terrible.
by Vasnetsov.
The artist's impression of Ivan's majestic features and lavish robes captures the awe inspired by the first Grand Prince to be crowned ‘Tsar’.
What limited their political weight, however, was the fragile nature of their landed wealth.
In contrast to much of Western Europe, primogeniture was not practised in Russia: a father's property was divided among his heirs.
Very quickly the greatest fortune tended to be dissipated among innumerable descendants.
This process prevented even the most distinguished families from establishing the kind of firm territorial base which underpinned the political influence of Western aristocracies.
Instead of seeking to contain royal power they were preoccupied with gaining the favour of the Grand Prince, or control of the government when the monarch was personally weak or a minor.
For apart from the unique case of the Stroganov family, who built an immense entrepreneurial empire, the only way to replenish the family fortunes lay in service    to the State.
The Grand Prince could confer lucrative posts in the army and provincial government as well as new grants of land confiscated, unoccupied, or held by mere peasants.
The competition for senior posts in the royal service became formalized in the so-called mestnichestvo system, whereby precedence was based on the rank achieved by a boyar's most eminent forebears.
The system posed some obstacles to the monarch's freedom of appointment, but it reflected above all the nobles' concern to benefit from rather than to limit the power of the State.
Groups further down the social scale were in a much weaker position than the boyars or the Church to press their interests upon the Grand Prince.
The Prince looked upon the towns as part of his patrimony and those townsmen not on monastic or boyar land as his tenants.
With a few exceptions, sixteenth-century towns were in any case little more than glorified military and administrative headquarters, supplied by a small population of artisans and petty traders.
The townsmen developed no organizational bases comparable to those of Western cities, no craft guilds or town councils.
Ancient institutions representing the urban population had withered under the Mongol yoke.
Where the veche had survived, in Novgorod and Pskov, the centralizing activity of Ivan III and Basil III had been deliberately designed to destroy it.
The political weakness of the commoners corresponded to their economic weakness.
One of the features which most sharply distinguished Muscovy from western and much of central Europe was the relative backwardness of her commercial, manufacturing, and urban development.
Kiev's flourishing trade had been undermined by inter-princely warfare, nomadic incursions, and the virtual severance of her commerce with Byzantium.
The Mongol invasion had hit the urban centres particularly hard, and the tribute paid to the Golden Horde for over two centuries had made recovery difficult.
It is arguable that Russia suffered more than her fair share of famine and plague, and her wooden cities were again and again ravaged by fire.
Certainly the climate impeded the development of internal communications, thereby retarding the division of labour and the break-up of self-sufficient estates, villages, and indeed households.
The critical handicap under which she laboured, however, appears to have been the low yield of the land.
In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries the yield ratio of her major crops was less than half that of western Europe and well below much of central Europe.
With incomes pegged little above subsistence level, the domestic market remained very small, and what  inter-regional trade did develop was generally in the hands of the boyars, the monasteries, and the Grand Prince.
Since the overwhelming majority of the population were necessarily involved in tilling the soil, the supply of labour for handicraft and manufacture was restricted.
Moreover, the struggle for control of what little surplus was produced gave rise to various forms of bonded labour which created further barriers to economic development.
Muscovy's commoners, of course, were not an undifferentiated mass.
Despite its primitive agricultural methods, the peasantry was far from monolithic: above the significant numbers of outright slaves, beggars, and migrant workers, were the peasants on private and church lands suffering various degrees of bondage, military colonists on the frontiers, and peasants on the ‘black’ lands whose only obligations were to the State.
Moreover, the early sixteenth century saw tentative signs of further differentiation.
The reunification of Russia coincided with and helped to sustain a century of relative prosperity which lasted into the 1560s.
In the richer agricultural regions the dues owed to the Grand Prince, or to lay and ecclesiastical landowners, gradually began to be converted from payment in kind to money rents.
More successful peasants began to elevate themselves above their fellows, to accumulate land and employ their own labourers.
Local trade grew perceptibly and a thin stratum of relatively well-off artisans and merchants began to emerge.
It was partly in recognition of these tender sprouts of leadership among Russia's ‘third estate’ that during the 1550s Ivan the Terrible drew up a new legal code and made a number of important administrative reforms.
He offered the leading commoners in most towns and regions the option of taking over their own administration and taxation.
Under the existing system, royal governors entrusted with judicial and tax-collecting powers ‘fed’ upon the local population, using their very brief tenure of office to line their own pockets.
For the State the system was unsatisfactory because so little revenue found its way to Moscow, yet fixed salaries were beyond the government's means.
The major advantage of the new proposal, from Ivan's point of view, was the additional revenue it would bring to the central treasury, for his offer was conditional on a steep rise in the rate of taxation.
But he was also responding to a mounting chorus of complaint about the system of ‘feeding’, which was disastrous for the local population.
Tax burdens were arbitrary and unpredictable and the judicial verdicts of royal governors were blatantly dependent upon bribery.
‘Fear not the law,’ ran a popular  proverb, ‘fear the judge.’
The relatively well off, the ‘best people’ of the provinces, therefore, welcomed Ivan's proposal and it appears to have been widely implemented.
To prepare his reforms, Ivan summoned the first Zemsky sobor (1549), the consultative body destined to play an important if erratic role in the next century of Muscovite history.
It established no right to be consulted, was dominated by the nobility and clergy, and such leading merchants as were included were appointed rather than elected.
It was primarily a means for the Tsar to sound out the men in his service.
Yet it also represented at least a first step towards an institutional framework for dialogue between State and commoners.
The dialogue, however, was not destined to prosper.
The 1560s marked the beginning of a period of economic dislocation and social upheaval which stunted the development of Muscovy's fragile ‘proto-bourgeoisie’.
This period of upheaval was to have an epoch-making impact upon the whole structure of Muscovite society.
It saw two crucial and intimately connected social changes gather irresistible momentum: the creation of a new stratum of service landholders — the pomeshchiki and the subsequent enserfment not only of those peasants already suffering de facto bondage, but of the entire Russian peasantry.
This dual process had begun in the late fifteenth century.
Ivan III had established several thousand new landowners on the estates confiscated from the victims of his conquest of Novgorod in the 1470s.
Small farms were assigned to sons of noblemen and promising warriors, on condition they reported annually for military service.
This conditional landholding — the pomestie — created the nucleus of a new service stratum dependent on the Prince in a way the boyars had never been.
Under Ivan the Terrible the pomestie system was expanded in the most dramatic fashion possible.
The rising prestige of Ivan's royal office went to the head of that gifted but vicious and unbalanced character.
Encouraged by the Josephite hierarchy, who rightly suspected Nonpossessor sympathies among his closest advisers, the Tsar became increasingly impervious to advice.
His conquest and annexation of the khanates of Kazan and Astrakhan further inflated his self-confidence.
And in the midst of his fateful Livonian War (1558–83), he launched a bitter attack upon the treachery and corruption he claimed to detect among the boyars and clergy.
In 1564 he abruptly withdrew from Moscow and threatened to abdicate.
When begged to return, he relented only on condition he could carry out a remarkable experiment: the so-called oprichnina , Ivan designated something like one-third of the country, carved out of scattered towns and provinces, as his personal  domain, and set up a new administration to subject it to his personal will.
To sweep graft and treason from the land, he created a 6,000-strong arm of oprichniks, a terrifying death squad, dressed in black, the regalia of each warrior including the skull of a dog and a symbolic broom.
Whole families of suspect boyars were butchered and their lands confiscated.
The terror became increasingly arbitrary, hitting out at lesser nobles, merchants and peasants.
The Metropolitan was deposed and strangled, individual monasteries ransacked, and Novgorod, still the greatest city outside Moscow, was despoiled in a manner which made Ivan III ‘s treatment of it a century earlier appear positively statesmanlike.
Not until the shock of the Crimean invasion did Ivan abolish the oprichnina , and intermittent terror continued for the rest of his reign, swallowing up not a few of the opochniks themselves.
Ivan's aims have left historians in a quandary.
It is extremely difficult to discover any coherent pattern to the oprichnina and, although it is true his victims included many boyars, Western scholars have had great fun exploding the carefully constructed ‘class’ explanations advanced by Soviet historians.
Whatever his motives, his experiment was made possible by the power he had to distribute land to the motley collection of individuals who would join him.
In exercising this option he rapidly increased the number of pomeshchiks.
By the end of the sixteenth century, in the central provinces little was left of the ‘black’ lands owned nominally by the State and inhabited by peasants owing dues only to the Crown.
The pomeshchiks had become a substantial body and provided the military backbone of the State.
The rise of this new landholding stratum had a drastic impact upon the Russian peasantry.
The pomeshchiks derived their livelihood in part from an irregular salary paid while on active service, but primarily from the income they could extract from the peasants settled on their farms.
On average they had only five or six peasant households at their disposal, and since they lacked the capital, the expertise, and the time to raise peasant productivity, the exactions they made were onerous.
Life on their farms was distinctly less attractive to the peasantry than conditions on monastic and boyar estates, let alone in the new territory opened up by the conquest of Kazan and Astrakhan.
Yet growing numbers of boyar and state peasants found themselves subjected to the harsh rule of small landowners.
2.3 The heavily-clad cavalry of sixteenth-century Muscovy.
Although the pomeshchiks proved difficult to train and discipline.
they played a vital military role until the introduction of firearms and new-formation regiments in the seventeenth century.
(Woodcut from Herberstein's Gratiae Posteritati .
1560.
To make matters worse, during the 1560s, 1570s, and 1580s the country suffered economic and demographic losses of catastrophic  proportions.
The combined impact of the Livonian War, the oprichnina , and the Crimean invasion of 1571, together with a steeply rising tax burden and severe famine ravaged the central and western regions of Muscovy.
Foreign visitors were appalled by the evidence of massive depopulation, by the sight of whole villages abandoned.
Feeble recovery in the 1590s was cut short by the famines of 1601–03 and the prolonged disruption of the Time of Troubles.
Those peasants who had not disappeared became ever more anxious to migrate while the pomeshchiks became ever more anxious to tie them to the land.
The classic conditions for enserfment were created: an abundance of land and a dearth of labourers.
Unable to offer economic inducements, the pomeshchiks relied increasingly  upon sheer force to keep their peasants, exploit their labour, drive them deeper and deeper into debt, and reduce them to servile status.
And the government began to respond to their request that the repressive power of the State be mobilized in their support.
The process of legal enserfment began.
Ivan III had recognized the peasant's right to leave his lord, provided he settled his debts and paid a fee, laying down only that such movement should take place at the end of the harvest, during the fortnight surrounding St George's Day (an autumn as well as spring feast in the Orthodox calendar).
This remained the law until the 1580s.
Ivan IV then began the practice of temporarily halting any movement at all during a number of ‘forbidden years’.
In the 1590s landlords were permitted to recover fugitive peasants for up to five years after their flight.
Under mounting pressure from the pomeshchiks, this period was gradually extended until, in 1649, the peasants were permanently bound to the land and forbidden to move.
The process which led to the entrenchment of serfdom in Russia — just when it was being undermined in the West — has been the subject of prolonged historiographical debate.
Whereas in much of eastern Europe, which was moving in the same direction, enserfment seems to have been the response of a very powerful nobility to a labour shortage (made more acute in areas responding to the growing Western market for grain), in Russia the State clearly played a greater role.
But was the State's action dictated by its own interests or those of the nobility?
The Russian nobility were much less formidable than their counterparts elsewhere, they had not yet begun to export grain, and for the great landowners serfdom was not an unmitigated blessing: as long as there was still peasant mobility they were in a position to attract labour away from the  estates of their weaker rivals.
From the point of view of the State, too, there were drawbacks: although fettered peasants were easier to tax, their complete immobilization would impede the colonization of newly acquired lands in the south and east.
What settled the issue was the rise of the pomeshchiks.
As the State's military requirements increased and the number of pomeshchiks to be sustained multiplied, the demands made on the peasantry intensified.
With the yield from the land at best stagnant and the available work-force actually contracting, only naked force could extract the required surplus from the Peasantry.
The needs of Muscovy's new military backbone could not be ignored.
An alliance between the new landowners and the State enforced full-scale enserfment.
The consequences were profound, both for countless generations of abased families and for the socio-political setting in which the Russian Empire took shape.
On private land, the State made the pomeshchik responsible for the collection of taxes from his serfs and then left him to his own devices.
The lord's power over his serfs became absolute.
He was free to lay down what proportion of their produce was to be made over to him, and how many days in the week they were to work the fields he set aside for his own use.
He was their final court of appeal and punished them as he saw fit.
Gradually he established the right to separate them from the land, to buy and sell serfs like cattle.
Males and females alike were subject to his whim.
The relationship struck at the very roots of their human dignity.
Serfdom stifled both collective and individual initiative among the peasantry.
Unlike outright slaves, they maintained themselves by cultivating the land conditionally allotted to them by their master.
But there was little incentive to raise productivity when any increased surplus would simply be creamed off by State or landlord.
In any case, the land and time left at their disposal was steadily reduced from the seventeenth century as pomeshchiks and monasteries expanded their demesne and exacted dues in labour (barshchina ) rather than quit-rent (obrok ).
Nor was there much room for individual initiative.
Under pressure from both the State and the poorer peasants, the burden of taxation was imposed equally among the households of the village.
To ensure that each household was in a position to meet its obligations, the practice spread whereby the land was periodically redistributed among the villagers.
Each household was given a number of strips scattered between the desirable and less desirable fields.
Under these conditions, individual consolidation, experimentation, and accumulation became extremely difficult.
In many parts of the country, it was left to the peasants to apportion both land and the payments due to the landlord and the State.
The primitive democratic organization which took on these duties, the village commune, may have afforded some consolation to the peasantry, and undoubtedly fostered something of a collectivist mentality.
But the commune also served a major coercive function since the majority in each village stood to lose should an individual either fail to meet his share of the payments due or take to flight.
2.4 Muscovite peasants.
The axe became symbolic both of peasant labour and peasant revolt.
(Seventeenth-century illustration from the Voyages of Olearus.
The predicament of peasants on state lands which had not been handed over to private landowners was marginally easier, but did not differ fundamentally from that of the private serfs.
The judicial and administrative functions left to the commune were somewhat broader, and in place of the pomeshchik stood a lowly government official.
But here too the peasant was tied to the land, taxed ever more heavily, and confronted by the same obstacles to economic self-improvement.
The establishment of serfdom conditioned the way in which the relationship between State and society developed from the seventeenth century onwards.
Where the serfs were concerned, of course, there could be no question of the legal expression of their interests.
The only way the peasantry could exert political pressure was by flight or revolt.
Peasant violence was generally localized and poorly organized, but there were serious risings in almost every decade of the seventeenth century.
A major dimension of the Time of Troubles was the outbreak of peasant resistance in every region of the country, and the revolt of 1606–07 led by an ex-slave named Ivan Bolotnikov attracted widespread peasant support.
In 1670–71 the government briefly lost control of a vast area from the Don to the Volga as peasants rallied under the leadership of a Don Cossack named Stenka Razin.
The government responded to such pressure not with concessions or negotiations but with outright repression.
The uprisings in the early part of the century may have served temporarily to postpone formal enserfment, but they were powerless to prevent it.
Urban economic and political development suffered severely from the social and demographic upheaval set in train during Ivan IV's reign.
The number of tax-paying urban households fell by no less than 45 per cent between the mid sixteenth century and the 1620s, and recovery was protracted and uneven.
The binding of the peasantry to the land severely restricted urban migration.
With peasant income actually in decline during the seventeenth century, the domestic market grew painfully slowly.
To make matters worse, even in their depleted condition the cities remained a vital source of income to the government.
The Romanovs reimposed military governors and the townsmen were in no position to challenge the demands made upon them.
The fact that the government had to rely on the townsmen themselves to apportion and gather the levies was therefore an additional burden rather than a basis for establishing municipal independence.
Too weak to bargain over the State's impositions, the townsmen could do no more than try to spread the burden as thinly as possible.
To this end they repeatedly urged the government to return fugitives to their cities, and to abolish the immunities enjoyed by church and noble land in and around the cities.
Artisans and traders living on this privileged land escaped the tax and other service duties of townsmen.
Although the State shared the townsmen's interest in broadening the urban tax base, the political influence of the Church and landowners delayed any decisive legislation.
Major urban riots in 1648, however, concentrated the government ‘s mind.
Urban land enjoying immunities was confiscated and artisans and traders living there were included in the towns’ tax-paying rolls.
At the same time, all townsmen were  forbidden to leave their home cities, and in future only townsmen were entitled to practise urban trades and crafts.
Lacking economic dynamism and political weight, the townsmen aspired no higher than to become a closed caste heavily burdened by duties to the State.
In this hostile environment, there were few opportunities for townsmen to accumulate capital.
During the seventeenth century, it is true, there were growth points in the economy.
The State actively fostered foreign trade, notably with English and Dutch merchants in the west and Persia in the south, and fitfully encouraged the establishment of a number of large-scale manufacturing enterprises.
Yet international trade and the major enterprises were generally in the hands either of the Tsar or of foreigners, and the privileges granted Western entrepreneurs were not withdrawn until late in the century.
As a result only a thin stratum of wealthy native merchants developed.
Their prosperity was directly dependent upon political favour: the government itself constituted the most valuable market, established monopolies in the most lucrative goods, disposed of much of the available credit, and had the legal power to advance or halt new ventures.
Moreover, as with the rank-and-file townsmen, the State's bureaucratic weakness led it to impose crippling burdens on the leading merchants.
The most eminent among them, headed by the so-called gosti , were saddled with the dubious honour of running the Tsar's own commercial interests, or collecting customs and excise dues.
The system distracted them from their own businesses and led many of the richest families to ruin, punished for failure to fulfil the Tsar's expectations.
Moreover, by turning the most prosperous commoners into semi-bureaucrats exempt from taxation, it alienated potential urban leaders from the mass of townsmen.
Although prominent merchants were summoned to the meetings of the Zemsky sobor in the seventeenth century, their dependence on the Tsar left them little leverage.
Thus, although the cities were fiscally too valuable for the government deliberately to stunt their economic and institutional development, its own needs led it to do just that.
The ‘service city’ which evolved was firmly subordinated to the interests of the State.
What did constrain the seventeenth-century monarchy was the growing class of landowners.
The privileges of the boyars, it is true, were steadily undermined.
During moments of acute royal weakness they tried to re-establish their influence, but as a political force they were clearly in decline.
Ivan the Terrible had not only decimated their ranks during the oprichnina but had eroded the  distinction between their hereditary property (votchina ) and the conditional terms of the pomestie by establishing a norm of military service to be borne by all estates.
The Time of Troubles had further weakened their position, and as the Duma swelled in size from about 30 in the 1620s to almost 180 in the 1680s, the old families found themselves dissolving among the parvenus.
The abolition of mestnichestvo in 1682 symbolized the decline of boyar pretensions and their fusion with the pomeshchiks.
2.5 A meeting of the Zemsky sobor , as imagined by a nineteenth-century artist.
The Tsar presides over an assembly made up predominantly of landowners, seen here standing at a respectful distance, and leading members of the Church's hierarchy, seated at the front
But the relationship of the landowning class as a whole to the crown was by no means one of abject subordination.
For its part, the royal government was fully conscious of its dependence upon the pomeshchiks.
There could be no thought of undermining the class which served as the first line of resistance to smouldering peasant insubordination.
The new Romanov dynasty, elected to the throne in 1613, took care to cultivate their support.
Between 1613 and 1622 the Zemsky sobor , in which the pomeshchiks predominated, was generally summoned at least once a year and it continued to play an important consultative role until 1653.
The landowners were able to express their views on problems of internal security, foreign affairs, and taxation increases.
Through the forum of the  Zemsky sobor and through joint petitions they were able to exert considerable pressure upon state policy.
The position of the pomeshchiks certainly had its own weaknesses.
They had no corporate institutions at the provincial level; they were divided by wide variations in wealth, education, and regional interest; their consciousness of sharing common interests was vague and little developed.
Those best placed to influence government policy were also most dependent on state patronage to further their military and civil careers, while the police and tax functions delegated to serf-owners made the whole class in one sense a part of the machinery of government.
But the fact that they did not impose formal constraints upon royal power reflected above all their overriding interest in the maintenance of a strong central state capable of holding the peasants in check.
This was why, having secured the legal codification of serfdom in 1649, they showed little anxiety to consolidate an institutional mouthpiece at the centre and the Zemsky sobor faded away.
The harmony that reigned between the partners was less than complete.
From the mid seventeenth century the proportion of the government's revenue coming from direct taxation of the peasantry began to rise steeply.
Since the pomeshchiks depended on the same source — peasant produce — for their income, there was always a conflict of interest over the portion to be paid to the State.
But the alliance between State and serf-owners was too close to generate formal dialogue let alone confrontation between them.
During the course of the century the limitations to government authority over the pomeshchiks were fully exposed.
The pomeshchiks became more and more absorbed in their farms, and as these grew in size, military service for a minimal salary became less and less attractive.
The government faced mounting problems in enforcing the service obligations which were supposed to accompany landownership.
It found itself unable to prevent the pomeshchiks from buying and selling their estates and rapidly establishing de facto hereditary rights of ownership.
The instrument of royal power which the pomestie system had been designed to create became increasingly unsatisfactory.
It was the military deficiencies of the pomeshchiks which gave the government the greatest grounds for concern.
Even if they had been eager to serve, these landowners could be no more than part-time soldiers.
Between campaigns they had of necessity to return to supervise their estates.
In this they suffered from the same defects as the streltsy , the small force of regular infantry originally  set up during Ivan the Terrible's reign.
Unable to pay the rank and file an adequate salary, the government had been compelled to allow these semi-professional soldiers to engage in petty trade and handicraft and to farm a small plot of land.
In the case of both pomeshchiks and streltsy , their need to support themselves during much of the year placed enormous obstacles in the way of training and disciplining them, or introducing them to new methods of warfare.
By the seventeenth century the ill-organized cavalry of the pomeshchiks, still generally armed with bows and arrows rather than firearms, was becoming less and less effective.
Even as a match for the Tatar warriors of the Crimea, who were similarly equipped, their value declined when in the 1630s and 1640s a strong line of fortifications was built in the south.
Against Western armies they were becoming distinctly anachronistic.
Muscovy's major European rivals were investing in full-time professional infantry and modernized cavalry using firearms.
By the time of the Smolensk War against Poland of 1632–34 the government had recognized the need for reform.
Between 1630 and 1680, therefore, growing efforts were made to organize the Muscovite Army on a new basis.
Foreign mercenaries were hired to officer new-formation regiments into which an increasing number of peasant recruits were drafted.
The infantry replaced the cavalry as the army's mainstay, and the emphasis was placed on European-style firearms and artillery.
By the 1680s the old-fashioned cavalry of the pomeshchiks had disappeared as an independent force, the streltsy were restricted to internal policing duties, and Muscovy had gone a long way towards establishing a professional army.
The heavy cost of military modernization generated major fiscal and administrative innovations.
To increase direct tax revenue, liability was shifted from a land base (which had discouraged peasants from expanding the area they sowed) to a flat rate per peasant household.
Various new indirect taxes were introduced, and in the late 1650s and early 1660s the coinage was debased.
Popular resistance to these measures gave the government pause, but efforts to increase revenue continued.
In administering the expanding army and the various forms of taxation, the central offices of the bureaucracy multiplied.
By the 1680s there were over fifty chancelleries (prikazi ) set up to deal with new tasks and newly incorporated areas.
In retrospect their structure seems irrational with no clear  division between territorial and functional responsibilities.
But the major chancelleries, concerned with finance, the army, and foreign affairs, do not appear to have operated inefficiently, and  their officials became steadily more specialized.
Although revenue tripled in real terms during the seventeenth century the budget was not brought into balance.
The Treasury was still unable to pay and supply the army adequately — despite the fact that over half the budget was devoted to military expenditure even in peacetime.
All too often the soldiers had to be allowed to supplement their income in a manner reminiscent of the streltsy .
Nevertheless, the State's room for manoeuvre was increasing.
The civil and military instruments which would provide peter the Great with the leverage for a more forthright assertion of state interests were taking shape.
If the changes set in train in Ivan the Terrible's reign recast secular society, the impact upon the Church was no less momentous.
On the face of it, the debilitated condition in which Ivan left the Crown, compounded as it was by the extinction of the Rurik line on the death of his son Fyodor in 1598, much enhanced the political stature of the Church.
During the Time of Troubles the patriarchate (established in 1589) became a vital focus of authority.
The Church took the lead in rallying the forces which drove out the poles and established the Romanovs on the throne.
It was as patriarch that Michael Romanov's father, Filaret, dominated the government between 1618 and 1633.
In the 1650s patriarch Nikon claimed for the Church an autonomy which exasperated Alexis I, the most pious and gentle of tsars.
As late as the succession crisis of 1682 patriarch Joachim played a critical role and even briefly acted as Regent.
Yet in fact the Church's power was being eroded throughout the seventeenth century.
Filaret owed his eminence less to his holy office than to his son's willingness to treat him as a co-ruler.
The fact that Nikon overreached himself was clearly exposed when Tsar Alexis forced him to withdraw from public affairs and subsequently had him deposed and replaced by a more pliant successor.
And Joachim was swiftly ousted when Sophia established her regency.
Forceful individuals might use the prestige of the patriarchate to wield political influence, but this only disguised the decline in the political weight of the Church.
In temporal terms, the Church suffered from the growing interest shown in ecclesiastical wealth by both pomeshchiks and the government.
Pomeshchiks on small and medium-sized estates resented the privileges enjoyed by monasteries and looked hungrily at their lands, while the swelling needs of the Treasury drew the Tsar's attention to the resources of the Church.
Repeated steps were taken to raise the Church's contribution to the state budget, to remove tax  immunity from church land, and to prevent more land coming under clerical control.
Though church property remained intact, it became progressively less secure.
More ominous still were the first serious cracks in the Church's spiritual hegemony.
The absorption of a substantial Muslim population as Muscovy pushed east and south presented a relatively minor problem — although it underlined the Church's reliance on state support and fiscal sanctions to convert the heathens.
Of much greater significance were contacts with Western Christianity which increased markedly from the mid sixteenth century along with closer military, diplomatic and commercial exchanges between Muscovy and central and western Europe.
The Polish intervention during the Time of Troubles briefly raised the spectre of a Catholic Tsar in Moscow.
The ensuing struggle to detach the Ukraine from Poland and bring it under Russian rule did nothing to weaken Western influence.
Indeed the gradual incorporation of the eastern Ukraine into Muscovy between the 1640s and the 1670s actually aggravated the problem.
Once incorporated into Muscovy, the Ukraine radiated deeply unsettling currents of thought.
While under Polish rule, the Orthodox hierarchy in the Ukraine had been able to resist the spread of Catholic influence only by adopting many of the methods and some of the ideas characteristic of the Counter-Reformation.
There had been a determined attempt to root out abuses among the clergy and to raise their intellectual calibre.
And now, even if the Muscovite hierarchy felt Ukrainian methods to be tinged with Latin heresy, they could no longer ignore the issues raised.
Moreover, pressure for reform had already arisen within the Russian Church.
This had found partial expression as early as 1589 when the government had persuaded Constantinople to raise the Metropolitan of Moscow to patriarchal status in order to strengthen Orthodoxy's defences.
During the 1620s Patriarch Filaret had sanctioned cautious liturgical reform precisely to forestall foreign infection.
In the reign of Alexis I the Ukrainian stimulus took full effect, and the Tsar himself eagerly supported a flurry of reforms aimed at intellectual and moral renovation.
Accumulated errors were to be erased from the holy books, services were to be conducted in a more intelligible manner, sermons were to be encouraged, and scholarship was to be actively fostered in a number of monasteries; at the same time, new saints were canonized, clergy and  laity alike urged to observe the prescribed fasts, and for a brief time the government even went to the lengths of closing the taverns.
The result of these efforts to stiffen  Orthodoxy's moral fibre, however, was to spark off a disastrous schism within the Church.
2.6 Contemporary painting (c. 1660) of Patriarch Nikon at he height of his power and influence.
Much of the blame for the schism is generally attributed to Nikon, the overbearing prelate elevated to the Patriarchate in 1652.
He pushed ahead with further reforms, insisting that Russian practice be brought into line with that of the Greek Mother Church.
Relying upon authority rather than cultivating widespread support, he soon came up against resistance from those who detected a tampering with the basic fabric of Orthodoxy.
The issues on which the schism turned have often seemed to Western scholars so  insignificant as to be almost laughable.
How could grown men and women risk excommunication, persecution, and even burn themselves to death rather than see the altar procession move from left to right, the number of alleluias cut from three to two, and the number of fingers used in making the sign of the cross raised from two to three?
To Nikon's opponents, however, the changes not only smacked of foreign heresy but seemed to threaten the whole meaning of the liturgy, to break the link between the service and the faith.
Although the reforms had the support of the Tsar and in 1667–68 a church council anathematized those who refused to conform, the attempt to impose the new liturgy by force proved unsuccessful.
Resistance, concentrated among the peasantry but common among the urban population including the streltsy , was widespread and the Church found itself confronted with mass disobedience.
The ‘Old Believers’, as the schismatics became known, lacked intellectual vigour, but their protest gave expression to more general social discontent and they contributed to popular revolts from that of Stenka Razin (1670–71) onwards.
The Established Church was never able to stamp them out.
The challenge to its authority increased its reliance upon the secular power, upon fines, torture, and execution.
By the late seventeenth century, with its economic base vulnerable and its spiritual authority flouted, the Church was ill equipped to stand up to an increasingly dynamic State.
The general decline in the Church's influence was reflected in a degree of secularization in Russian culture.
A narrow élite among the wealthier landowners and bureaucrats was developing tastes and interests which broke the Orthodox mould.
Alexis I himself took several initiatives, setting up a court theatre and appointing tutors not only for his sons but for his daughter Sophia as well.
Literacy among the children of noblemen was increasing and secular literature based on the spoken language of Muscovy began to rival the traditional fare of saints' lives written in Church Slavonic.
Art and architecture reflected a new refinement, a new concern for luxury and symmetry, and even iconography placed more emphasis upon natural, realistic representation.
Traditionalist resistance, of course, remained strong.
Change was popularly associated with the impious ways of foreign heretics.
In 1652 Alexis was persuaded to establish a new ‘foreign suburb’ in Moscow to replace the one destroyed during the Time of Troubles.
The growing numbers of immigrant soldiers, merchants, architects, craftsmen, shipwrights, and doctors were to live apart from Orthodox Muscovites.
Yet these efforts to preserve tradition by isolating  society from Western influence were doomed to failure.
On the one hand, growing diplomatic, military and commercial exchanges with the West inevitably involved increased intellectual contact.
Equally important was the fact that various ideas and fashions developed in the West answered a native need for new forms of expression.
Like much of the rest of the Continent, Muscovy was gradually drawing on the example of dynamic elements in the countries of the Atlantic seaboard.
The speed of change should not be exaggerated.
By the standards of the West's most sophisticated citizens, the life-style, the table manners, the long robes and flowing beards of Moscow's élite still seemed antiquated.
The cosmopolitan ways of Prince Golitsyn, the Regent Sophia's favourite, stood out even at court.
But the more closely historians examine the seventeenth century, the more precedents they find for the innovations associated with the name of Peter the Great.
THE PRIME OF THE EMPIRE
It was in the eighteenth century that Russia became a major European power.
The most spectacular rise in her international status occurred in the reign of Peter the Great (1682–1725).
His Great Northern War against Sweden, concluded by the Treaty of Nystadt in 1721, secured for Russia her ‘window on the West’.
Peter founded the new capital of St Petersburg on the Gulf of Finland to demonstrate Russia's permanent footing on the Baltic.
Embassies were rapidly established in the capitals of Europe and the Imperial title he accepted from the newly created Senate was gradually recognized by his fellow monarchs.
During the mid eighteenth century, without making major territorial gains, Russia significantly increased her influence both in the Baltic and in central Europe.
This was reflected in her growing ascendancy over Poland, and in the newfound respect with which the major continental powers treated her.
The cornerstone of over a century of Russian diplomacy was laid with the signing of a formal alliance with Austria in 1726.
Under Anne (1730–40) the two eastern monarchies defeated French sponsorship of a candidate for the Polish throne.
Russian support for Austria in the Seven Years War (1756–63) brought Prussia to the brink of ruin: Frederick the Great was saved only by the death of Elizabeth (1741–61).
In the south, although French support for Turkey postponed any decisive reckoning, the military balance was clearly moving in Russia's favour.
The reign of Catherine the Great (1762–96) saw the largest territorial acquisitions since the sixteenth century.
The Empire expanded across a broad band of territory running from the Baltic to the Black Sea, and down to the Caucasus.
Most satisfactory for Russia were the gains made at the expense of Turkey.
Until now Turkish protection of the Crimean Tatars had enabled them to  launch repeated slave raids on Russian territory, prevented settled cultivation of wide areas of the Ukraine, and blocked Russian access to the Black Sea.
The defeat of Turkey in the War of 1768–74, therefore, marked a major step in consolidating Russia's southern flank.
By the Treaty of Kuchuk Kainardzhi Russia acquired a Black Sea coastline.
In 1783 she proceeded to annex the nominally independent Crimea and to construct a large Black Sea fleet.
Turkish efforts to reverse the verdict between 1787 and 1791 were unavailing and by the Treaty of Jassy she was compelled to acknowledge Russian rule across the northern coast of the Black Sea.
The Empire's expansion in central Europe was a much more qualified blessing.
Recurrent Polish resistance to Russian domination encouraged Catherine to destroy the buffer state altogether.
Russia's prolonged struggle with Turkey gave Prussia and Austria the leverage to ensure that they should benefit from the dismantling of Polish independence.
By the partitions of 1772, 1793, and 1795, therefore, Poland was carved up between the three powers and erased from the map.
Russia acquired 6 million new subjects who would prove impossible to assimilate and constitute the Empire's most dangerous national minority.
During the brief reign of Paul I (1796–1801) Russia agreed to extend protection to the Caucasian kingdom of Georgia against the encroachment of Persia.
When protection turned to annexation Russia faced Georgian resistance and became involved in a long if relatively untaxing war with Persia (1804–13).
By Paul I's time, however, Russia's primary concern was with the destabilizing energy radiating from revolutionary France.
Dissension among France's enemies broke up the Second Coalition, though not before Russia's most revered commander, Suvorov, had temporarily driven the French from northern Italy and conducted a legendary retreat through the Swiss Alps.
Paul then allied briefly with Napoleon before he was assassinated in favour of his son, Alexander I (1801–25).
Map 4 The western expansion of Russia under Peter I and Catherine II.
1689–1796
It fell to Alexander to bear the full brunt of Napoleon's ambition.
Russian participation in the Third Coalition ended in disaster at Austerlitz (1805), but Alexander used the breathing-space afforded by the Treaty of Tilsit (1807) to good effect.
He drastically lowered the price demanded from Turkey for an end to the War of 1806–12, and having deprived Sweden of Finland he hastily concluded a treaty with her in 1812.
That summer Napoleon assembled the Grande Armée and in June invaded Russia through Poland.
The  Russians denied him the decisive pitched battle on which he had counted.
The Armée's massive size proved a positive handicap to Napoleon as its supply problems became horrendous.
By the time the French approached Moscow, General Kutuzov was ready to  stand his ground.
On 7 September on the field of Borodino the Russians inflicted the worst savaging any army of Napoleon's had ever suffered, before withdrawing in good order.
Moscow was abandoned, but Napoleon could make little use of its capture — especially since nine-tenths of the old capital was burned to the ground.
As winter approached, Napoleon was unable to advance further, nor could he persuade the Tsar to negotiate.
On 19 October the French Emperor turned for home.
The retreating army was ravaged by hunger, cold, disease, and ever more audacious and vicious assaults by peasant partisans.
Alexander insisted upon chasing the French all the way back to Paris.
A relieved Russian establishment conferred upon him the title of ‘the Blessed’.
He had done what all Europe had failed to do: he had stopped Bonaparte.
Alexander extended Russia's borders further west than ever and they remained essentially unchanged until the First World War.
Despite Allied opposition he reconstituted the expanded Polish territory under his control as an independent kingdom linked to Russia through the person of the monarch.
He created the Holy Alliance of Christian monarchs dedicated to peace and upholding the existing order, and in subsequent years urged Great Power intervention against national revolutions in Spain, piedmont, Naples and, with less conviction, Orthodox Greece.
His brother Nicholas (1825–55) adopted an even more rigidly conservative approach towards the West.
A fierce revolt in Poland in 1831 was crushed and the separate kingdom abolished.
During the revolutions of 1848 he used his seemingly impregnable position to repress rebellion in Romania, to restore Habsburg control in Hungary, and to prevent constitutional change in Germany.
Alexander the Blessed had been succeeded by ‘the Gendarme of Europe’.
In fact, however, the empire had passed its prime by Nicholas's time.
Russia's armies were adequate to increase her influence in central Asia and to inflict further defeats on both Turkey and Persia, thereby extending Russian rule in the Caucasus.
They could deal with the ill-organized forces of eastern Europe's revolutionary outbursts.
But their limitations were fully exposed in the course of the Crimean War (1853–56).
Nicholas's government underrated the concern felt by Britain, France, and her traditional ally Austria over Russia's growing influence in the Balkans, and above all over the     possibility that Constantinople might fall under her sway.
Nicholas refused to back down from asserting his right to protect the Sultan's Orthodox subjects, Turkey declared war, and Britain and France came to her aid.
In the ensuing conflict Russia was defeated at sea and humiliated on her own doorstep by the fall of her Crimean naval base at Sevastopol.
She was compelled to sue for peace and under the terms of the Treaty of Paris was disarmed on the Black Sea.
How are Russia's massive expansion and the remorseless rise in her international prestige in the century and a half before the Crimean War to be explained?
A significant part of the answer lies in the social, economic, and political problems of her neighbours, and the pattern of their diplomatic manoeuvres.
The remarkable ascent of Swedish power from a tiny base was doomed to retraction in the eighteenth century, and Russia was the natural beneficiary.
Poland's collapse owed as much to the failure of her serf-owning nobility to cooperate behind a powerful central government and army as to the exertions of her neighbours.
Social and economic stagnation ensured Turkey's decline (and to an even greater extent Persia's) compared to Europe's major powers.
The rivalry between Austria and Prussia, and their involvement in the wars of the West, increased Russia's weight in central and eastern Europe.
Yet this provides only a part of the explanation.
In order to benefit from favourable international developments, indeed in order to avoid falling victim herself to the volatile diplomacy of the period, Russia had to mobilize her resources far more effectively than she had under Peter's predecessors.
It was his success in    mobilizing men, arms, ships, and provisions which was most characteristic of Peter's reign.
He abolished the streltsy and the old service cavalry altogether and, building on Muscovy's new-formation regiments, he completed the construction of a regular standing army.
It became possible to instil the drill, discipline, and skills required to make the army an effective fighting force.
It became possible to standardize the matériel and develop strategy in a way that had been beyond Muscovy's capabilities.
3.1 Peter the Great.
This equestrian portrait (by Franz Casanova) conveys Peter's commitment to Russian military might and also the costume and manners of the west.
The Petrine military system remained unchanged in essentials until after the Crimean War.
The rank and file were drawn from forced levies laid upon the tax-paying population.
Service was for life: this was reduced to twenty-five years at the end of the eighteenth century, but all too often the difference was purely nominal.
The officers were drawn from the nobility.
Peter made service in the army or the civil administration compulsory and lifelong for all noblemen.
The term of service was reduced by his successors and in 1762 it was made voluntary, but the great bulk of the officer corps continued to be staffed by hereditary noblemen.
During the eighteenth century the irregular Cossack hosts were gradually brought under control and absorbed into the regular army.
Although the government was cautious about enrolling men from newly incorporated minorities, the size of the army rose in line with the population — which increased from some 15 million under Peter to double that figure under Catherine II and reached about 67 million by the 1850s.
At the same time as Russia became a leading military power she began to develop a considerable naval capacity as well.
Peter founded the navy out of virtually nothing, recruiting officers and sailors in the same way as for the army, and used it to good effect against the Swedes.
Renewed progress was made, after a prolonged period of decline, when Catherine II's acquisition of the northern coast of the Black Sea initiated a major shipbuilding programme.
The shift from short-term mercenary troops, from unreliable feudal levies, and part-time forces expected to earn their own living was undertaken by most of the powers of early modern Europe.
Success depended upon discovering ways to supply the standing army.
In Russia, rank-and-file wages were kept very low, and throughout the period Russian regiments supplied many of their own needs, a high proportion of ‘soldiers’ serving as tailors, carpenters, cobblers, and so forth.
In peacetime, regiments were billeted upon towns and villages.
Nevertheless, it was necessary to raise and administer far more revenue than Muscovy had ever handled.
At  the centre Peter created a governing Senate to oversee all administration.
He replaced the overlapping chancelleries with colleges in which efficiency was to be ensured by the mutual responsibility of thirteen top officials in each, and which at least in theory had more clearly defined duties.
Under Alexander I they were in turn replaced by distinctly more effective ministries.
At the local level Peter left tax collection to the army, dealing through intermediaries chosen by the peasantry and townsmen themselves.
From Catherine II's reign the local administration began to expand, and although the number of officials remained miniscule the system sufficed to meet the needs of the army.
Peter's reign saw the most dramatic leap in the revenue raised by the State.
It is estimated that he trebled it in real terms — and this at a time when the population was stagnant, His most important innovation was the poll-tax in place of the household tax, which the peasantry had been able partially to evade by merging households.
The poll-tax, a fixed annual levy placed on all tax-paying males regardless of age, together with the rent imposed on state peasants, formed the basis of state revenue for over a century.
In addition Peter imposed an astonishing range of indirect taxes, on everything from beards to blue eyes, the most important being those on alcohol and salt.
In the nineteenth century, as the pace of domestic and foreign commerce quickened, indirect taxes gradually yielded more than the poll-tax.
Peter also greatly increased the subventions paid out of church revenue towards the needs of the State, a process which culminated in the secularization of church property in the 1760s.
Peter himself achieved a balanced budget, but his successors found it necessary to supplement their income by resorting to ever larger foreign loans.
With the help of the army, then, Peter and his successors were able to squeeze more revenue from the population.
But the State's increased income also reflected significant economic development from Peter's reign onwards.
Forced labour was used to found metallurgical and textile industries, making Russia self-sufficient in arms and uniforms.
The major step in agriculture was the opening-up of the rich lands of the Ukraine as Russian rule was consolidated against Turks, Crimean Tatars, and Cossacks, while the establishment of outlets to the Baltic and then to the Black Sea greatly expanded foreign trade.
Once the industrial and social changes which were transforming the West during the later eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries began to find military expression, of course, the limits of  Russia's resources would be fully exposed.
Handicapped by serfdom, primitive agricultural methods, and the far-flung, inconvenient location of her natural resources, it was impossible for her to keep pace.
The most graphic illustration of her rapid relative industrial and technological decline is provided by figures for production of pig-iron.
Whereas in the 1780s she produced twice as much as her closest competitor, Great Britain, by the end of the Crimean War she had been overtaken by Belgium, France was exceeding her output threefold, and Britain no less than fourteenfold.
The army itself constituted a major drain on the economy.
It numbered well over a million men by Nicholas's day.
Annual recruitment had to be even heavier than this total suggests, since well into the nineteenth century a high percentage of recruits died before even reaching their regiments and disease took a heavy toll among established troops.
Yet the government found it impossible to reduce the size of the army.
The extended frontiers, the recurrent danger of resistance from national minorities, and the permanent threat of peasant disturbances necessitated a huge military presence.
Nor could the standing army be cut by building up a reserve since trained men, automatically liberated when drafted, could hardly be returned to enserfed villages.
Russia's defeat in the Crimean War certainly owed something to poor leadership and complacency at the top.
But in an age of railways and steam-power it became increasingly difficult for her to compete.
Her army and navy were becoming antiquated.
The State which organized the Empire's military effort is described in both Soviet and Western historiography as an ‘absolute monarchy’.
The label draws attention to three important developments which distinguish it from the early Romanov State.
In the first place, the creation of a regular standing army marked a qualitative change in the authority of the monarchy.
Whereas Muscovy's streltsy and pomeshchiks had proved thoroughly unreliable and resistant to central organization and discipline, Peter bequeathed a military machine responsive to hierarchical control.
The last traces of independence within the military establishment were removed and the State's powers of coercion greatly enhanced.
The second major departure was the coup de grâce administered to the Church, the one institution outside the State with which Muscovite monarchs had been compelled to reckon.
Peter firmly subjugated the Church to the State.
The patriarchate was abolished and ecclesiastical administration taken over by the Holy Synod (1721), a department of state headed by a layman.
After the  secularization of church lands, initiated during the brief reign of Peter III (1761–62) but completed by Catherine II, the clergy became salaried employees of the State.
The political independence of the hierarchy was broken.
Finally, from the time of Peter the Great decision-making power was concentrated in undiluted form in the hands of the monarch.
Peter ceased appointing his most trusted aides to the Boyars' Duma, the Duma's residual right to be consulted went by default, and the institution withered away.
The Zemsky sobor , whose role in decision-making had never approached the status of a right, disappeared altogether.
The nearest thing to a Zemsky sobor summoned by Peter's successors was Catherine II's Legislative Commission (1766–68).
It helped make the government conscious of some of the preoccupations of nobility and townsmen, but when its proceedings were interrupted by the Turkish War, Catherine allowed the experiment to lapse.
Nor did any of the projects for constitutional constraints upon the Tsar's discretion bear fruit.
The only major attempt to impose terms on the Crown was made in 1730, when Peter's daughter Anne was offered the throne.
The Supreme Privy Council, established during the reign of Peter's widow Catherine I (1725–27), sought to establish the right to participation in, and an effective veto over, all major policy decisions.
Although the Empress submitted momentarily, divisions within the nobility enabled her to tear up the councillors' terms.
Both Catherine II and Alexander I were urged early in their reigns to make significant if less dramatic institutional reforms, but in neither case could the reformers mobilize strong pressure upon the monarchs to consent.
The more sophisticated projects drawn up by Speransky in 1809 and Novosiltsev in 1819 were made at Alexander's instigation and fell to the ground the moment he lost enthusiasm.
Thus no institutional check upon the Tsar was established.
Even when the incumbent on the throne showed little inclination for active policy-making, those who acted for the Tsar owed their power solely to proximity to the throne.
These developments concentrated enormous power in the hands of the individual on the throne.
His personality and judgement were of most significance in the fields of foreign and military affairs.
There were of course major guidelines within which even the most idiosyncratic monarch would operate: security in the west, a steady probing towards outlets in the Baltic and the Black Sea, incremental expansion and pacification in the south-east.
Yet major strategic decisions could depend very much upon the will of the monarch.
The grim determination with which Peter the Great  restored the army after the disaster at Narva (1700), and risked all in the decisive battle against the Swedes at Poltava (1709), reflected in large measure his own indomitable, exuberant, ruthless personality.
Peter III was personally responsible for the abrupt cessation of hostilities against a prostrate Prussia in the midst of the Seven Years War.
Alexander I rebuffed repeated advice that he come to terms with Napoleon during the French invasion.
The Crimean War was as much the product of Nicholas's own judgement — or misjudgement — as of any irresistible pressure upon him.
There was plenty of room for sheer caprice: Paul I's order for an overland march across unmapped territory to wrest India from the British was only the most bizarre instance.
Military organization, too, owed much to the whim of the Tsar.
Virtually all the Romanovs from Peter's time took limitless pleasure in the glitter and order of parade-ground drill, thereby seriously diminishing the emphasis on combat training.
Equally striking was Alexander I's experiment with ‘military colonies’, which was very much his own pet scheme.
He envisaged combining farming and family life with military service in idyllic rural settlements.
But the colonies were run on a shoe-string and generated explosive tensions; both officers and men loathed the system, and the attempt to make it pay by imposing the most detailed and humiliating regulations sparked off repeated risings.
With over a third of the standing army enrolled in the colonies, the situation became dangerous and Nicholas phased them out.
For all the Tsar's power over the army, where domestic affairs are concerned the phrase ‘absolute monarchy’ may obscure as much as it reveals.
It conjures up the picture of an omnipotent and independent sovereign — the image actively cultivated by the ideology of Tsarism.
It was this image of the disinterested and all-powerful Tsar which so endeared the ‘little father’ to generations of Russian serfs.
And the myth was sincerely believed by many of the monarchs themselves.
Their personal responsibility for decision-making seemed to elevate them above the social struggle, to make them neutral arbiters between the competing interests of nobles, townsmen, and peasants.
Paul I was the last Tsar who actually enjoyed his office.
His successors were weighed down by the sense of duty.
Nicholas wore himself out seeking to keep control over every conceivable decision in his own hands, so convinced was he that the sovereign alone could perceive the common good.
This supposition informs much Imperial legislation and permeates many liberal treatments of the nature of state power.
Yet the reality was different.
Although the post-Petrine State was much more formidable than  that of Muscovy, there remained very real constraints upon the options open to the Tsar.
These were of two kinds: those deriving from the social structure on which the monarchy rested, and those implicit in the rudimentary nature of the administrative instruments at the Tsar's disposal.
In a society based on serfdom, order depended upon upholding the authority of the serf-owners.
To subvert them would be to incite peasant revolts even more threatening than those which punctuated the eighteenth century.
It was simply inconceivable for the monarchy to contemplate sweeping away the nobility.
This is not to deny that the monarchs themselves became increasingly conscious of the social tension, economic stagnation, and moral evil implicit in serfdom.
Tsar after tsar floated notions of at least ameliorating the virtual slavery of the peasantry: Nicholas set up no less than nine secret committees to consider the issue.
Yet each tsar was advised against drastic action and each duly backed away.
To tamper with serfdom was certain to arouse wild expectations among the peasantry and would require the most rigorous control.
Should the nobility refuse to cooperate, the monarchy would be left high and dry and the monarch himself would be unlikely to survive.
Nothing could be done without noble acquiescence.
The effective veto that the nobility exercised over this most central issue of social life was guaranteed by the whole structure of the State.
The army, the Tsar's ultimate weapon, was commanded by noblemen.
The influence this gave to the nobility was most clearly demonstrated in the role played by the élite Guards regiments in settling the succession struggles in the period between the reigns of Peter I and Catherine II.
Should a wayward tsar stray too far from the path approved by the nobility, he could be replaced.
Nor was noble influence brought to bear only in moments of crisis.
In the eighteenth century the civil administration was overwhelmingly staffed by men of noble origin.
Thereafter the proportion of commoners began to rise, but the upper reaches remained wholly dominated by the nobility: at Nicholas's death 70 per cent of the highest ranking bureaucrats were landowners, often possessing vast estates.
Despite the arrival of occasional parvenus such as Speransky in the early decades of the nineteenth century, the Tsar was surrounded by military and civil advisers who were bound by the strongest bonds to the serf-owning nobility.
And the royal family itself, despite intermarriage with foreign royalty and its unique treatment in law, lived and moved within the milieu of Russia's aristocracy.
It is in this context that the absence of any corporate forum through which the nobility could participate in decision-making should be understood.
Various secondary explanations for the Russian nobility's failure to mount a fronde against the Crown can be adduced.
Court politics were pursued within a context of competition between rival patronage groups.
Senior officials inevitably tended to view any proposals for constitutional reform or institutional innovation according to the impact that would be made upon their own position and that of their clientele.
This made it impossible for those who did advance reform proposals, such as Panin under Catherine II and Pahlen under Alexander I, to organize united pressure upon the Tsar to compromise his authority.
Moreover, outside Moscow and St Petersburg political consciousness among landowners remained weak.
Not until Catherine II deliberately established permanent provincial assemblies of the nobility (1785) were there any estate institutions in which pressure upon the central government might gather momentum — and even then the assemblies remained passive and ill-attended.
As in the seventeenth century, the development of political consciousness was inhibited by the low cultural level of provincial noblemen, and by the differences in outlook between noblemen of different regions and different degrees of wealth.
In any case, the career patterns of service to the State and the rapid fragmentation of noble estates, divided among several heirs, continued to deprive them of strong local ties comparable with those of British and French noblemen.
But the fundamental explanation for the absence of political confrontation between Crown and nobility remained the community of interest between them.
The need both for foreign and domestic security was evident to all.
It was royal troops who drove out Poles, Swedes, Turks, and Frenchmen; it was government forces which kept the serf in his place.
The fate of Poland demonstrated the price to be paid for oligarchic fracturing of state power; the Pugachev rebellion (see below, pp. 61–2)(1773–74) demonstrated all too brutally the need to buttress the Tsar's authority.
Only when the Crown showed itself unable or unwilling to uphold their serf-owning authority would the nobility be motivated to question the Tsar's ‘absolute’ power.
3.2 Catherine the Great.
Allegorical portrait by Levitsky of the empress as Lawgiver in the temple of Justice.
Though Catherine assiduously cultivated an image of absolute authority.
she was well aware of the limitations on her own power.
Individually, the Russian nobleman continued into the eighteenth century to enjoy much less security under the law than his Western counterpart.
The ruthless punishment meted out to senior officials who fell from favour reflected the general lack of legal safeguards for life and property.
Yet, while bureaucratic power over    commoners remained capricious right into the nineteenth century, steady progress was made in entrenching the individual rights of noblemen.
From the mid eighteenth century, in theory at least, they could not lose rank, estate, honour, or life without trial by their peers, and they became immune to corporal punishment.
Catherine's Charter to the Nobility of 1785, which formally confirmed these rights, also recognized their absolute property rights and exemption from personal taxation and billeting obligations.
Not the least of the offences which led to Paul's assassination in 1801 was his contemptuous treatment of courtiers.
Noble sense of personal dignity had passed the point where such treatment was tolerable.
The constraints imposed upon the State by the interests of the nobility are sometimes overlooked because of its apparent collective vulnerability to state interference.
Yet such interference was possible for only one ruler of Imperial Russia: Peter the Great.
The creation of a regular army and somewhat more effective administrative apparatus enabled him briefly to force the pace of change in the face of widespread noble hostility.
The astonishing range of innovations made by this tireless giant of a man gave contemporary noblemen — never mind humbler folk — the sense of being in the hands of some alien, elemental force.
His most striking imposition on the nobility was the introduction of compulsory, lifelong service to the State.
All noblemen over the age of 15 were to register for service and proceed through the fourteen grades of a carefully constructed Table of Ranks (1722) drawn up for military, civil, and court service.
He succeeded in forcing several thousand nobles into service by threatening them with loss of status and land.
No other eighteenth-century European élite was so ruthlessly dragooned.
Yet even Peter's ascendancy over the nobility must not be exaggerated.
The most prominent families had no objection to service — it had long offered them the surest route to power, wealth, and prestige.
Those who did object found various means of evasion, and in any case, within a very brief period, the initially reluctant provincial nobility became acclimatized.
During the succession crisis of 1730 complaints against compulsory service were barely audible even among the lesser nobility.
In 1736 the period of service was cut to twenty-five years, and in 1762 Peter III abolished compulsory service altogether.
By the time of Catherine's Legislative Commission (1766–68), the predominant concern among the nobility was to exclude commoners from the Table of Ranks.
Even the middle-ranking provincial posts continued to attract humbler noblemen who often took them up after retiring from the army.
Having  acquired the taste, a service career became increasingly attractive to them.
It offered wider horizons, higher status, an opportunity to wield power, and, above all, a valuable source of income.
Through the fruits of office a significant proportion of the payments imposed on the taxable population flowed to the nobility.
They made Peter's creation their own.
The symbiotic relationship between State and nobility limited the scope of state power and conditioned government policy.
The most fundamental limitation concerned jurisdiction over private serfs.
Provided the landlord ensured that his serfs' poll-tax did not fall too far into arrears, he was left to his own devices.
During the eighteenth century the State acknowledged his right to punish to the point of death a serf who displeased him, to enrol him in the army, to exile him to Siberia, to trade and dispose of his human property as he pleased.
Catherine explicitly denied the serf's right to appeal to the State against his master's treatment.
Private serfs, some 46 per cent of the total peasant population at Nicholas's death and concentrated in the most fertile areas of the Empire, were beyond the reach of the State.
A large portion of the State's scarce resources was absorbed in upholding the serf-owners' authority and subsidizing their income.
Throughout the eighteenth century peasant flight, resistance, murder, and revolt were endemic, and the incidence of peasant disturbance began to rise again soon after the Napoleonic Wars.
Government forces had constantly to be at hand.
Nor was government aid to the landlord restricted to armed assistance.
Despite the opportunities opened out from the late eighteenth century by an expanding grain trade, a marked increase in the land available, and a steady rise in labour and money dues extracted from the peasantry, the nobility found it difficult to make ends meet.
Through the agency of the Nobles' Bank established in 1754, and later the State Loan Bank, the State issued massive loans to sustain them.
In 1762 commoners were forbidden to purchase serfs, thereby giving noble industrialists a temporary advantage since hired labour was still scarce.
By steadily eroding the townsmen's monopoly over urban trade and craft, the State assisted not only serf entrepreneurs but also their noble masters who claimed much of their profit in the form of quit-rent.
Since noble interests were not always uniform, deference to their wishes did not dictate all the Tsar's major decisions, but it did inform every sphere, including the fiscal, commercial, and, very often, the tariff policy of the State.
Dependence on the nobility was not the only constraint upon  the ‘absolute monarchy’.
Even where noble interests constituted no barrier, the government's effective power was severely limited by the rudimentary nature of the bureaucratic apparatus available to it.
The Tsarist Civil Service was small, inefficient, ill-rained, and corrupt.
Peter almost doubled Muscovy's few thousand administrative posts, but his successors cut the number so that in the mid eighteenth century the total was still little over 10,000.
Catherine II sharply increased the number, which reached about 38,000 by the end of the century, and in the nineteenth century steady expansion set in bringing the total to some 114,000 by Nicholas I's death.
Yet, although the number of officials for every 2,000 head of population rose from one in the 1750s to about four in the 1850s, the proportion was still incomparably lower than that prevailing in the West.
Even in the towns, where officials were concentrated, the government had to rely right into the nineteenth century on reluctant elected townsmen to carry out a host of fiscal, economic, and general administrative functions.
Although the government found the ‘service city’ far from satisfactory, it was not until Catherine II's reign that centrally appointed officials began to take over many of these functions.
Some strata of the urban population were still apportioning and collecting their own tax dues in Nicholas I's reign.
As for rural Russia, it remained palpably undergoverned.
Officials underwent no formal education in the eighteenth century, and in the early nineteenth the level of education in the provincial offices remained very low.
Efforts by Alexander I's reforming minister, Speransky, to make promotion dependent upon examinations were frustrated by opposition from officials.
Not until the end of the Napoleonic Wars did increased specialization effect a sharp drop in the number of transfers from military to civil service.
The preference given to hereditary nobles, and the free exercise of patronage, retarded the establishment of administrative ability as the major criterion for promotion.
What aggravated the problem of developing a genuine bureaucracy was the paltry level of salaries.
Catherine laid it down that every post should be paid, but the limited funds set aside by the government were rapidly eroded by inflation.
The result was a level of corruption which became proverbial.
Officials from the highest to the lowest subsidized themselves by creaming off state revenue and taking bribes — a modern version of Muscovy's ‘feeding’ system.
In the absence of any clear division between administrative and judicial functions, even the humblest official enjoyed arbitrary power.
The haphazard state of the law left bribery the only effective method  by which individual commoners could cushion the action and demands of officials.
The result was a morass of confusion.
It was impossible for the government to derive any clear picture of its own administrative apparatus, let alone of the distribution of resources in the Empire.
When under Nicholas the governor of each province was instructed to draw up an annual report, the information supplied was hopelessly vague and did nothing to identify the major weaknesses and problems of the administration.
Nicholas frankly admitted that for the most part the reports were a pack of lies.
As late as the 1850s local offices kept no regular accounts.
Even where it was possible to draw up useful statistics, local officials were reluctant to forward information which might increase the demands made upon them by their superiors in St Petersburg.
Repeated attempts were made to rationalize the system.
Building on Peter's efforts, Catherine II restructured local government (1775) by dividing the Empire into fifty tidy provinces, subdivided into districts, each with its own administrative centre.
Admirable as such schemes seemed from St Petersburg, they looked very different on the ground: it was reported from one ‘city’ designated an administrative hub that no one had entered or left it for three months.
At the centre some progress was made.
Alexander's ministries, each with a clearly defined function and headed by a single official, represented a distinct improvement on the old colleges.
Perhaps the most important achievement of Nicholas's reign was the codification of the laws: the publication of an authoritative digest in 1835 made it possible at least to begin to impose standard procedures on the bureaucracy.
The institutes of higher education and jurisprudence established in the early nineteenth century began to train a small number of highly competent officials who consciously broke with the haphazard approach of the past.
Yet to the end of the period the central government expressed intense frustration at its inability to carry out its policies.
Tsar after tsar resorted to officials outside the regular hierarchy or appointed ‘watchdogs’— fiscals, procurators, inspectors, Nicholas's notorious police of the Third Section — to supervise and expose maladministration.
One motive behind the efforts of both Peter and Catherine to enhance the role of elective institutions among nobility and townsmen was to discipline appointed officials.
But the impossibility of relying upon orderly execution generated a mass of unproductive paper-work.
Much of the bureaucracy's time was absorbed in checking and double-checking its own work.
Backed by the army, the administration was generally able to keep a semblance of order, to crush peasant insubordination, and to gather at least a proportion of the taxes decreed.
But it could not begin to realize the grandiose schemes dreamed up in St Petersburg to establish schools, orphanages, hospitals, clinics, veterinary services, insurance funds, grain stores, and so forth.
Viewed from the Winter palace the much-vaunted power of the monarchy seemed distinctly overrated.
For Russia's commoners, of course, the frustration experienced by the central government did nothing to make the burdens imposed by the State any less onerous.
In many ways the capricious and unconstructive nature of the administration made its demands weigh even more heavily.
For the government gave so little in return: the roads remained abysmal, the judicial system tortuously slow and arbitrary, the educational and health facilities minimal.
And the constant drain from the cities, in cash and service, retarded capital accumulation, technical advance, the development of independent urban culture, institutions, and political assertiveness.
It is true that despite her natural handicaps and the overriding barrier to mobility and enterprise represented by serfdom, Russia's non-agricultural economy did expand substantially in the period.
The military-oriented industries founded by Peter on forced labour gradually gave way to more diversified manufacture based on hired labour (generally serfs still sending payments back to their villages).
The domestic market grew as the demands by government and nobility for cash forced increasing numbers of peasants into handicraft production and petty commerce.
The abolition of internal customs tolls in 1775 provided a major stimulus.
Regional specialization developed, the major division of labour being between the grain-surplus areas of the south and the grain-deficit areas of the north and centre.
Foreign trade responded to the opportunities opened up by the outlets to the Baltic and later the Black Sea, grain becoming the major export.
The quickening pace of commerce increased the urban population: a mere 3 per cent of the population in 1700, it rose to about 8 per cent in 1800 and reached around 11 per cent by the 1850s.
But this urban growth was not matched by commensurate development of a bourgeoisie comparable to that of many parts of the West.
Leadership might have been expected from the more substantial merchants, members of the élite merchant guilds established by Peter and reformed by Catherine.
Instead their political energy was absorbed in enhancing the privileges of guild membership, seeking  exemption from as many of the burdens of the ‘service city’ as possible, and distancing themselves from petty traders.
In any case, during the eighteenth century the basic manufacturing sectors were dominated by noblemen, socially far removed from the merchants.
The ravages of the Napoleonic Wars hit the merchant guilds particularly hard.
And when their membership began to recover and expand, and the noble grip on industry to slip, the influx came largely from successful peasant entrepreneurs.
Culturally deprived and still closely tied to the village, the latter did nothing to raise the level of sophistication or political consciousness of the proto-bourgeoisie.
The most dynamic economic growth took place on the periphery of the Empire — in Poland and the south — and here ethnic divisions and sheer distance from the political centre acted as further constraints.
A high proportion of merchants in the textile-dominated Moscow region belonged to the inward-looking Old Believer tradition.
Many of the most wealthy merchants and industrialists were to be found in St Petersburg, where Peter had done his best to concentrate commercial activity.
It was here that in 1846 a revised version of Catherine's largely unsuccessful Charter to the Towns (1785) created the first urban institutions capable of significantly improving local amenities.
Yet the capital's merchants were made particularly conscious of their dependence upon government favour and contracts, and this inhibited any coherent assertion of non-noble interests.
The one issue upon which the merchants felt most sure of their ground in petitioning the government concerned the stranglehold on foreign trade by foreign companies.
Yet as late as the 1840s foreign entrepreneurs controlled 90 per cent of Russia's imports and 97 per cent of her exports, besides making considerable inroads into domestic commerce.
Even here Russia's middle class could not mount a significant campaign.
Their political weight remained minimal.
If the townsmen found difficulty in making their voice heard, unyielding resistance to pressure from the rural masses was the primary domestic function of the State.
Worst off were the private serfs, whose numbers grew with the extension of serfdom to the Ukraine and the newly settled lands of the south.
Since the State virtually abdicated all responsibility for their welfare, they were at the mercy of their masters.
There was a remorseless rise in the demands made upon them, especially from the late eighteenth century.
State peasants, who as a percentage of the rural population grew to about 54 per cent by the time of the Crimean War, fared little  better.
They continued to enjoy rather more autonomy in running their own affairs, but the state officials who dealt with them were scarcely less rapacious than landlords.
Theoretically the government had greater leeway to introduce reforms to improve their conditions and increase their productivity.
But the efforts in this direction of Nicholas's Minister for State Domains, Kiselev, foundered on the chronic inability of the central government to discipline its local officials.
Both government and landlords continued to uphold the village commune as a convenient instrument for apportioning tax, labour dues, and, in many areas, allotments of land.
The commune provided some marginal bargaining power for the peasantry since concerted resistance could not be lightly dismissed.
Neither landlord nor state official relished resorting to calling in the military whose help would not be given gratis.
But the commune continued to act as a major obstacle to the emergence of any substantial stratum of better-off peasants.
In the less fertile north and central regions, where peasant trade and crafts developed most rapidly, a measure of differentiation did develop as successful petty peasant entrepreneurs hired their fellows.
In the black-earth regions, however, the great majority remained close to the breadline.
In the absence of any significant improvement in agricultural techniques the peasantry were acutely vulnerable to harvest failure, and living standards in many areas actually declined in the period.
The only method by which the peasantry could bring serious pressure to bear upon their masters was through flight or outright resistance.
In the 1720s a government survey counted almost a quarter of a million fugitives, and the opening out of new lands to the south and east continued to attract desperate peasants throughout the eighteenth century.
In Moscow province alone, between 1764 and 1769 some thirty noblemen were murdered by their serfs.
Generally the government was able to contain such local outbreaks.
But when endemic peasant resentment fused with numerous cross-currents of resistance, the situation could easily get out of hand.
The most important rebellion was that of 1773–74, named after its Cossack leader Emilyan Pugachev.
Beginning as a Cossack revolt against government encroachment on their traditional liberties, the uprising rapidly attracted support from Old Believers, minority nationalities trying to shake off Russian colonization (most notably the Bashkirs), serfs assigned to work in the mines and factories of the Urals, and tens of thousands of peasants.
The rebellion spread across a vast stretch of eastern European Russia and severely shook  the government and nobility alike.
It was successfully repressed, and integration of the Cossacks into the regular army deprived subsequent risings of similar leadership.
But soon after the Napoleonic Wars the incidence of peasant disturbances began to rise again: there was a serious outbreak in the Urals in 1835 and widespread violence in 1847.
3.3 Pugachev holds court.
Some of Pugachev's followers identified him as the true Tsar, Peter III.
returned to life, and he was venerated accordingly.
The peasantry never became resigned to their condition.
Government actions were repeatedly misinterpreted as portents of imminent relief.
The abolition of compulsory service for the nobility (1762) appears to have been widely read as an indication that freedom for serfs would follow shortly.
Countless rumours of noble treachery against the generous wishes of the Tsar, and an astonishing number of ‘false tsars’ believed to be coming to their aid, kept peasant hopes alive.
Their trust in the Tsar himself remained unshaken: but it never entailed acceptance of their subordination to officialdom, the army, or the nobility.
If anything the gulf separating them from an outside world which uprooted families and whole villages for labour on distant farms, or worse still in factories and mines, which extracted taxes, recruits and grain, which subjected them to constant brutality and humiliation grew steadily wider.
The most striking new manifestation of the gulf between the villages and the outside world was cultural.
While the peasantry remained loyal to traditional customs, dress, idiom, and primitive Orthodoxy, the nobility and officials underwent a cultural transformation.
Peter the Great gave dramatic impetus to the westernization which had begun to affect Muscovy.
He himself made an  extended visit to the West at the outset of his reign and on his return he created consternation — and a legend — by his impatience to change the face of Russia.
With his own hands he cut off the beards of leading courtiers and ordered all noblemen to abandon this ancient symbol of Orthodox manhood.
Russia was to stop numbering the years on the calendar from the creation of the world, the élite were to adopt Western dress, to refine their manners, to refrain from belching, spitting, and picking their noses in public, and the traditional seclusion of noble women was to be abruptly terminated.
Peter's efforts were epitomized by the new European-style capital of St Petersburg.
He increased significantly the number of Russians travelling to the West and the number of skilled foreigners settling in Russia.
Despite very limited success in establishing schools, he did his best to compel young noblemen to gain a basic education by making it a condition of securing a marriage certificate.
He simplified the alphabet and gradually, as the everyday speech of the élite was given new literary form, Church Slavonic was displaced.
The basis was laid for the flowering of secular literature in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth century.
Under Elizabeth and Catherine the sumptuous, French-speaking court was the inspiration for westernization in architecture, furniture, art, music, dancing, theatre, and cuisine.
By degrees the new mores spread from St Petersburg and Moscow to the provincial cities and in time affected the humblest noble homes.
A mere fraction of the population shared in the cultural revolution.
In 1801 students enrolled in schools of all kinds numbered no more than one in a thousand, and by Nicholas's death this figure had only risen to six.
The government deliberately concentrated its efforts on higher education: by the 1850s there were six universities with a total of some 3,500 students.
For the autocracy the aim was not to spread general enlightenment but to improve the quality of the civil and military leadership, to train men capable of developing administrative, military, and technological skills.
Both Peter and Catherine II were also consciously seeking to raise Russia's international prestige by bringing her court, her diplomatic corps, the cultural life of her élite abreast of more refined rivals.
In many ways the results were gratifying.
The style of the élite was westernized, secularized, ‘civilized’ in an astonishingly brief period.
A country that could boast the encyclopaedic knowledge of Lomonosov (1711–65), the elegance of Karamzin's (1766–1826)History of the Russian State , and above all the poetic genius of Pushkin (1799–1837) found its sense of cultural inferiority fading.
But the autocracy paid a heavy  price.
For the sophistication which benefited the State also made possible the articulation of ever more intransigent criticism of the whole structure of Russian society.
The government did its best to stifle such criticism.
Catherine reacted furiously to the first major attack on serfdom and autocracy,Journey from Petersburg to Moscow (1790) by A. D. Radishchev (1749–1802).
Exiling the author to Siberia, she pronounced such sedition ‘worse than Pugachev’.
The upheaval of the French Revolution made her increasingly hostile to the ideas of the Enlightenment which earlier she had actively promoted in Russia.
After the first decade of Alexander I's reign censorship became progressively more heavy-handed, and under Nicholas I travel to the West was curtailed and efforts made to prevent the import of seditious books.
Nicholas's government mounted a counter-offensive, using press and pulpit to reinforce loyalty to Orthodoxy and autocracy.
Yet these measures enjoyed no more than limited success.
Effective censorship and monitoring of Western contacts was beyond the capability of the administration.
And whatever attractions Church and throne may have had for the peasantry, their hold on educated society was being slowly eroded.
The political subservience and intellectual torpor of the Church's hierarchy prevented Orthodoxy from rebuffing new currents of scepticism and secularization.
Autocracy appeared the very linchpin of everything that offended a small but intellectually dynamic intelligentsia which was breaking away from the traditional values of the nobility.
To conservative opinion the emergence of a critical intelligentsia from within the womb of privileged society was puzzling.
It was simply incomprehensible that some of these writers, teachers, students, and independently minded landowners should go beyond reformism to full-blown visions of social transformation.
Yet the formation of the intelligentsia, that most elusive of Russian social phenomena, is explicable without attributing any peculiar, inborn extremism or heroism to Russia's educated youth.
In a society rigidified by autocracy and serfdom, the educated could easily find their ambitions thwarted, their sensibilities offended.
The caprice and incompetence of the bureaucracy, the arbitrary administration of justice, the seemingly ubiquitous police could not fail to affront at least some among an élite increasingly conscious of their own dignity.
Life as an officer in the army was barbaric, life as an official was corrupt, humiliating, and, in the words of the radical young Dostoevsky, ‘as boring as potatoes ‘.
The culturally conservative world of commerce and industry was hardly more attractive, and relatively  few noblemen combined the capital, the ability, and the inclination to find satisfaction in serf-based farming.
3.4 ‘Gambling for souls.’
Gustave Doré's mid-nineteenth-century caricature depicts Russian landowners gambling not for money but for bundles of serfs.
For the intelligentsia, the humiliating treatment of serfs symbolized the moral inequity of the entire system.
It was upon serfdom that the critics of Tsarism rapidly came to focus their attention.
Serfdom seemed to lie at the root of many of their own frustrations, to preclude progress, be it economic, social, or political.
Even the most loyal officials found it increasingly difficult to defend serfdom on moral grounds.
To the emergent intelligentsia the moral iniquity of ‘baptized property’ was intolerable.
Acquaintance with social progress in the West highlighted what V. G. Belinsky (1811–48), the foremost literary critic of the 1840s, called ‘cursed Russian reality’, and added a sense of national humiliation to their indignation.
Yet this discontent was denied political or institutional expression.
Aspirations which in many Western countries attached themselves to autonomous organizations, pressure groups, and even political parties found no outlet in Tsarist Russia.
In the absence of a vigorous middle class the intelligentsia lacked any effective levers through which to bring about change.
Deprived of other outlets they brought all their compressed energy to bear on the world of literature and ideas.
Hungrily devouring the latest fruits of Western thought — Romanticism, German philosophical idealism, French socialism — they adapted this intellectual harvest to express and  grapple with their own problems.
In doing so they invested Russian literature with a moral passion and intensity which remains breath-taking.
The most creative artists were by no means always preoccupied by social criticism.
Much of Pushkin's poetry exuded an almost Renaissance delight in the richness and beauty of life.
N. V. Gogol (1809–52), whose novel Dead Souls (1842) painted a devastating and influential picture of provincial life in Russia, discovered on reflection that his political views were distinctly reactionary.
A favourite theme of early nineteenth-century literature was the personal ordeal of the ‘superfluous man’, the quest of the young, educated Russian for a meaningful role in life.
Yet in Russia's polarized society neutrality was impossible.
Even when no political or social statement was intended, the most abstruse philosophical inquiry, the most obscure historical research, the narrowest psychological study took on political meaning.
And where a subversive message was intended, it was easily woven into any subject-matter.
No amount of censorship could hold back the rise of a new social consciousness bursting to find expression.
Before Nicholas's death few of Russia's disaffected minority went beyond a loosely conceived commitment to liberty and justice and fewer still took their protest to the point of action.
The major exceptions were the Decembrists.
The march to Paris at the end of the Napoleonic Wars had stimulated the imagination of a significant number of Tsarist officers.
Taking pride in the military feats which raised Russia's prestige, they aspired to erase the features which most disfigured their homeland: autocracy and serfdom.
Six hundred men, some from the most distinguished aristocratic families, went on trial for the quixotic rising of December 1825.
The affair was venerated by later revolutionaries as the opening round in their battle against the autocracy.
More indicative of future trends than this rising from within the officer corps were the activities of the Petrashevtsy in the 1840s.
Several overlapping circles of young officials and students in St Petersburg began to take up french socialist ideas, particularly those of Charles Fourier.
Before being struck by a wave of arrests in 1848, the most audacious among them — including the flamboyant M. V. Petrashevsky himself — were on the brink of establishing a radical organization.
For the most part, though, the energy of the first generation of intelligentsia was absorbed in the ideological quest which blossomed in the 1840s.
The major division among the exceptionally gifted intellectuals of Russia's ‘marvellous decade’(1838–48) was  between the so-called Slavophiles and the Westerners.
Their debates encompassed the whole range of problems which would preoccupy successive generations of the intelligentsia.
The Slavophiles were critical of serfdom and political oppression but they sought a way forward which would draw on what they perceived as Russia's peculiar strength: the social solidarity expressed in both the Orthodox faith and the traditional peasant commune.
The Westerners, on the other hand, envisaged progress towards civil liberty and economic justice along Western lines.
The most radical Westerners, following a path very close to that of the Petrashevtsy , aspired to something more than liberalism and embraced socialism.
It was Alexander Herzen (1812–70) who, having emigrated to the West in 1847, began to give currency to what was to be the dominant theme of the revolutionary wing of the intelligentsia for the next four decades.
He fused the dreams of Western socialists with the egalitarian and democratic potential he saw in the peasant commune to create a unique brand of Russian socialism.
The revolution, when it came, must be a peasant revolution, transforming autocratic, serf-ridden Russia into a land of autonomous and free village communes.
The immediate impact of the founding fathers of what came to be called revolutionary ‘populism’ was minimal.
Lacking any organization and completely out of touch with the peasant masses in whose interests they sought to speak, they were easily dealt with.
Yet the peasantry represented, at least potentially, a lever of social change which the more moderate intelligentsia lacked.
The danger of a conjuncture between the heirs of Pugachev and those of Radishchev haunted the government and fired the desperate efforts of Nicholas's last years to silence all criticism.
THE GREAT REFORMS AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE REVOLUTIONARY INTELLIGENTSIA (1855–1881)
From the mid nineteenth century the pace of change in Russia rapidly accelerated.
The decade following the Crimean War saw the most dramatic social and institutional upheaval that the Empire had ever undergone.
Central to the so-called ‘Great Reforms’ of the period was the abolition of serfdom.
By the Statute of 1861 the 22 million serfs owned by private landlords were set free from personal bondage.
The fundamental relationship upon which the economic, social, and political structure of the Empire had been based was to be dismantled.
So profound were the changes implicit in the statute that historians of all schools of thought have recognized its promulgation as an epoch-making event.
In the Soviet view it marks off an entire millennium of ‘feudalism’ from the capitalist phase which it inaugurated.
The long-term repercussions fully justify the significance attached to Emancipation.
For the serfs themselves, it brought to a close the degradation of chattel status and opened the way to the rehabilitation of their human dignity.
As Emancipation took effect it would loosen many of the constrictions which handicapped the economy, accelerating the replacement of forced labour by wage labour and the spread of market relations.
Conditions would become more conducive to entrepreneurial initiative, capital accumulation, the division of labour, technological innovation, and industrialization.
In time the development of the market would speed up the rate of urbanization and reshape the social structure, thereby undermining the traditional dominance of the Tsar and landowning nobility.
Yet the immediate impact of the statute was much less dramatic than this longer-term picture might suggest.
The terms on which the peasantry were set free perpetuated in new forms many of the obstacles to economic growth and social change characteristic of serfdom.
The principle of the statute was that the serfs should be emancipated with their household plots and an allotment of land, but that they should pay for this land.
The amount of land made available for them to purchase should be approximately equivalent to the allotments they had tilled for their own subsistence under serfdom.
The government would compensate the nobility immediately and the peasantry would repay the government with annual redemption dues spread over a period of forty-nine years.
In practice the peasantry emerged even worse off than these guidelines implied.
The peasants' allotments were significantly smaller than those they had used before Emancipation; the ‘cut-offs’ withheld by landlords were particularly large in the fertile black-earth regions and were a source of intense and lasting bitterness.
The price the peasants paid was artificially inflated to compensate the nobility for the dues in labour and cash which they were losing.
However unattractive the peasants found the terms of redemption, they were compelled to transfer from the initial status of ‘temporarily obligated’ tenants to outright purchasers if their landlords insisted.
On the other hand, where it suited the nobility to retain ownership they could, until 1881, refuse to embark upon redemption at all.
Where redemption did go into effect immediately, the peasantry soon found their allotments inadequate, and their land hunger was exacerbated by a massive population increase which averaged about 1.5 per cent per year in the second half of the nineteenth century.
The administrative arrangements adopted by the government to ensure discipline and orderly payment of taxes and redemption dues made the situation worse still.
Except in the most westerly provinces, the land was redeemed not by individual peasants but by the village commune.
The survival of the communal bond severely dampened the stimulating impact that Emancipation might have had upon peasant enterprise.
Saddled with responsibility for all peasant obligations, the commune remained very reluctant to give permission to individual members to seek even temporary employment elsewhere so that the number of peasants siphoned off the land into the cities was restricted.
Moreover, joint responsibility inhibited innovations in agricultural methods.
There was no prospect that the tradition-bound villagers would pool their meagre  resources to experiment in collective farming.
Equally, the extension of the traditional practice of periodic redistribution of the land between households continued to militate against individual initiative.
Separate households might briefly establish a privileged position within the commune and rent land from the nobility on their own behalf, but it remained extremely difficult for them to consolidate their scattered strips of land or to introduce new methods and seeds.
There was a somewhat greater measure of differentiation between rich and poor peasants than in the past, but the combination of collective responsibility, mounting population pressure on the land, and a growing fiscal burden had a constant levelling effect.
Clearly the phasing out of the serf-owners' authority and of traditional dues did provide an immediate improvement in peasant conditions, and the opportunity to buy land increased peasant security.
Peasants on crown lands and state peasants, liberated by the Statutes of 1863 and 1866 on broadly similar terms to those of private serfs, were able to buy rather more land on better terms.
But the peasantry as a whole remained in a condition of extreme economic weakness.
This weakness was reflected in their continuing social and political subordination.
Despite increasing integration into the market, the village remained in large measure set apart from the world outside, regulating its own affairs through customary law under the tutelage of the police.
The other Great Reforms of the 1860s, affecting the judicial system, the press, and the universities, made little impact on the peasantry, and although they gained a minority voice on the new local government bodies (the zemstva)set up in 1864, they viewed them as an additional burden rather than as a vehicle for their own interests.
For the most part their political impact was still restricted to illegal resistance.
During the Crimean War and in the years immediately before Emancipation, peasant disturbances reached a level which has led Soviet historians to identify the period as Russia's first ‘revolutionary situation’.
Acute peasant disappointment at being made to pay for land they considered their own led to widespread and in places violent protest between March and May 1861.
But the government had taken elaborate precautions to crush any resistance.
Although below the surface tension remained high in the countryside, and there were repeated rumours of an imminent ‘real’ Emancipation, the number of disturbances tailed off.
Disappointing as the terms were from the peasant point of view ‘for the Imperial government to grasp the nettle of Emancipation  at all was a remarkable departure.
The step which for decades successive tsars had contemplated but abandoned in the face of noble opposition was taken at last.
That a measure apparently so contrary to noble interests was carried through has encouraged the view that, in the hands of a determined tsar, the Russian State was able to ride roughshod over every class.
From the moment Alexander II (1855–81) took power, an image was built of the ‘Tsar Liberator’ as a resolute and liberally minded champion of progress who imposed his autocratic will over the objections of subservient nobles and bureaucrats.
Yet as historians have examined the memoirs of those who knew Alexander, as they have combed through his letters, his marginal comments on state documents, and his private papers, what they have found has been uniformly disappointing.
All witnesses concurred in one thing: Alexander was singularly irresolute. from boyhood he had been easily discouraged by obstacles in his path.
As Tsar he was inclined to agree with the last person he had spoken to and to authorize wholly incompatible initiatives by different ministers.
His impressive whiskers concealed a decidedly weak chin.
Moreover, his values differed little from those of his unlamented father: he was committed to upholding autocracy, the nobility, and Russia's military might.
He was by no means an inhumane individual; he was a loving father, he was faithful to his wife for many years and to his mistress until death.
Like his father he recognized the evil in human bondage.
But he left no unequivocal evidence of why he personally felt Emancipation necessary.
His view of the world was thoroughly conservative.
While the statute was being prepared he noticed the word ‘progress’ in an  official document: ‘What is progress?’he scribbled across it.
‘I ask you not to use this word in official correspondence.’
A stubbornly reactionary tsar might conceivably have delayed the measure, but the key to the decision to emancipate lies considerably deeper than the mind of Alexander.
The Tsar's support for emancipation must be understood within the broader context of the State's role in a serf-based society.
That role involved two primary and overriding responsibilities: to guarantee domestic and foreign security.
The head of the Third Section had explicitly warned Nicholas that friction between serf and master constituted a time-bomb which threatened the whole Empire.
Peasant disturbances grew ominously in number and intensity as each decade passed, and outbreaks were overwhelmingly concentrated on private estates.
Confronted by    noble resistance and alarmed by foreign upheaval, Nicholas had shelved the issue and committed himself to upholding the status quo at home and abroad.
It was the catastrophe of the Crimean War which rendered this commitment untenable.
Humiliated on her own doorstep, Russia's ability to influence Western affairs was sharply curtailed.
The whole framework within which Nicholas had viewed the options before him broke down.
Moreover, the war rudely brought home the military cost of social and economic backwardness.
The Treasury had run up a huge deficit.
Russian forces had been incomparably less well armed than those of Britain and France.
Supply problems during the war made it seem madness to postpone further the steps necessary to improve communications and construct strategic railways.
The correlation between serfdom and economic backwardness was now conventional wisdom, vague though the economic analysis on which it was based might be.
The case for following the Western example of reducing the costly standing army by building a reserve of trained men became incontrovertible.
Yet as long as serfdom remained, so did the objection that it was not safe to return hundreds of thousands of trained men to the countryside.
Serfdom was becoming a dire threat to both domestic and foreign security.
4.1 Alexander II, the ‘Tsar Liberator’, in his study.
Although Alexander's public image set him apart from his conservative father, Nicholas I, in fact the values of the two Tsars differed little.
It is this conjuncture which explains why a state rooted in the social and economic dominance of the serf-owning nobility should have undertaken Emancipation.
It also explains why the Tsar was able to secure the acquiescence of the nobility.
The sense of urgency over the issue took time to spread.
It was not at first shared by most serf-owners in the provinces, or indeed by most of the great landowners among senior officials.
Individual noblemen had of course learned to their cost of both peasant fury and Russia's military decline.
A minority, responding to a combination of moral conviction, economic incentive, and fear, might favour some form of Emancipation.
But the vast majority preferred to live with the moral problem and forgo the reputed advantages of freely hired labour rather than contemplate the abolition of their traditional rights over their peasants.
Yet should their own government, run by fellow noblemen and dedicated to their security, conclude that serfdom was too dangerous to perpetuate, they would bow to the inevitable.
And it was this message which, haltingly, the Tsar and  some of his ministers began to communicate.
At a meeting of the Moscow nobility on 30 March 1856, while insisting that he had no immediate plans for Emancipation, Alexander delivered the famous warning: ‘You yourselves know that the existing order of ruling over living souls cannot remain unchanged.
It is better to abolish serfdom from above than to await the day when it will begin to abolish itself from below.
I ask you, gentlemen, to consider how this is to be accomplished.’
4.2 The terms of Emancipation are proclaimed on an estate in Moscow province in 1861.
The authorities took care that the change in the status of the peasantry should upset neither their discipline nor their deference.
Understandably, the nobility dragged their feet.
The Secret Committee which Alexander set up to consider the matter also played for time.
The Tsar showed signs of lapsing into inertia.
But the sense of urgency was becoming more and more widespread, enveloping the key Ministry involved, that of the Interior.
The Minister, S. S. Lanskoy, elicited a half-hearted proposal from the nobility of the Lithuanian provinces in the west that their peasants be emancipated without land.
This was used as the basis for invitations, issued at the end of 1857, to the nobility of every province to form committees which would draw up projects for the  emancipation of their peasants.
Once the commitment was public, and peasant expectations soared, it rapidly became clear that the government could not back-track without risking explosion from below.
Though he showed no very clear signs that he realized it, the Tsar had crossed the Rubicon, carrying the nobility with him.
Noble energy was directed into the debate over the precise terms, rather than the principle, of early Emancipation.
The government's overriding concern to ensure domestic stability ruled out the possibility of landless Emancipation.
It was axiomatic that peasant agriculture must not be jeopardized, that the peasantry must remain closely bound to the land, and that the spectre of a restless, landless proletariat must be avoided.
The sharp rise in peasant disturbances between 1857 and 1859 underlined the dangers of an excessively harsh settlement.
Nevertheless, while the statute was taking shape the nobility were able to reduce the quantity and quality of land in peasant hands and to extract limited amendments to the legislative proposals.
In acquiescing, the government was well aware that the final terms would provoke peasant hostility, and took suitable precautions.
In the capital the police told employers to work their men to the point of exhaustion the day before the terms were to be made known in order to leave them too weary to protest.
The statute was promulgated during Lent, in the hope that abstention would find the peasants in subdued mood.
The military were fully alerted and when the village priest read out the details the police were in attendance to stifle the groans of disbelief with which they were met.
Throughout, the Tsar had made abundantly clear his wish to damage the position of the nobility as little as was compatible with social order — and with the parlous condition of the State Treasury.
In doing so he avoided confrontation: the State continued to be guided by a primary concern for the interests of the landed nobility.
Nevertheless, the crude and uncomplicated alliance between State and nobility which had characterized the heyday of Tsarism could never be the same again.
Conservative though its aims were, in carrying through so fundamental a reform as Emancipation the government could not help but loosen the rigid framework of public life.
The provincial committees of the nobility summoned to discuss the peasant question rapidly became involved in a wide-ranging dialogue with the government.
The prospect of losing the traditional source of their wealth and authority induced among many noblemen a reappraisal of their role which amounted almost to a crisis of identity.
The attention of both reactionary and liberally  inclined noblemen focused upon the need to establish a new basis for local government.
In part they were motivated by concern to shore up the influence of their class over provincial affairs.
But they were also seizing the opportunity to express their frustration with the caprice, incompetence, and sheer inadequacy of provincial administration and judicial procedures.
Blemishes which had been accepted as part and parcel of a society based upon serfdom now lost their justification even in noble eyes.
At the same time as it stimulated Political activity and consciousness among the provincial nobility, the process leading to Emancipation also speeded the emergence of a more socially diverse public opinion.
The government found it expedient to slacken the grip of censorship in order to encourage loyal expressions of support for the Emancipation programme.
There was a dramatic flowering of public discussion and debate; whereas under Nicholas I on average no more than eight new journals were founded annually, that number leaped to thirty-three in the early years of Alexander II's reign.
The government's discomfiture during the Crimean War had aroused great expectations of major change even before Alexander became committed to Emancipation.
Once that commitment became public, the non-government press mounted quite unprecedented pressure for reform in a whole range of different fields.
For a time the movement for reform even embraced demands for a Constitution.
The most outspoken advocates of public participation in central government were a minority of activists among the provincial nobility.
Their campaign reached its height in the winter of 1861–62 at a time when the anxieties of both reactionary and liberally inclined sections of the nobility were intense.
The transition to the new order did not seem to be going smoothly.
It appeared likely that the alarming peasant disturbances of the previous spring would be repeated, and there were many reports of peasants refusing to fulfil their ‘temporary obligations’ or to agree to the redemption terms envisaged in the Statute of Emancipation.
Many landowners feared for their immediate financial position as well as their ultimate physical security.
Some blamed the government for ineffective support for their interests and conceived of an oligarchic assembly in St Petersburg which would reinforce the bonds between Tsar and nobility.
Others, led by the liberal nobility of Tver province, believed that security lay in a more radical break with the past and envisaged a broadly based assembly which would help reduce tension in the countryside.
The  overall tone of noble criticism remained moderate, yet political consciousness had taken a momentous leap since Nicholas's death.
Until 1862 the mood within the government was by no means unresponsive to pressure for reform.
The abolition of the authority of serf-owners made inevitable significant administrative and judicial changes.
Moreover, the process of organizing Emancipation had given the initiative within the central bureaucracy to a minority of officials who were enthusiastic about a broad programme of reform.
When establishing the Editing Commissions responsible for drawing up the Statute of 1861, the Tsar had recognized the need to appoint men who not only could cope with the intricacies of the legislation involved but who positively favoured Emancipation, who were convinced in their hearts as well as their heads of its desirability.
This brought together a powerful nucleus of ‘enlightened’ bureaucrats and strengthened the position of like-minded officials working for reform through various ministries, notably that of justice.
They tended to move in the same circles and share many of the same values as the liberal nobility and progressively minded public opinion articulated by journalists, writers, professors, and students.
On some issues support for reform within officialdom was widespread.
Even the least ‘enlightened’ senior officials in St Petersburg and governors in the provinces shared public frustration at the incompetence of the local bureaucracy.
The severe straits in which the Treasury found itself after the Crimean War made it seem quite impractical to seek a solution which involved increasing the duties of officialdom.
The idea of establishing elective councils outside the existing administration with responsibilities for some aspects of local government therefore made sense to ministers.
Official sympathy did not extend to pressure for constitutional change: ‘enlightened’ bureaucrats interpreted such pressure as the work of reactionary oligarchs, while most conservative officials saw behind it the machinations of radical members of the intelligentsia challenging the entire social structure.
But within and outside the government support for legislation which would vastly increase civil liberty and the scope for political activity by reforming local government, the judicial system, censorship, and the universities gathered seemingly irresistible momentum.
Before these reforms were implemented, however, the prevailing mood of government, nobility, and a large section of the  educated public underwent a sea-change.
The confidence which marked the early years of the reign that major liberal reforms could be introduced without endangering the social and political order was severely shaken.
An omen that more conservative counsels might yet prevail was given within weeks of the promulgation of the Emancipation Statute when the Tsar dismissed the officials most closely identified with reform, headed by Lanskoy and his deputy ‘Nicholas Miliutin.
Lanskoy's successor as Minister of the Interior, P. A. Valuev, was a prickly character cast in a much more cautious mould.
for the time being, many ministers continued to favour cultivating support among as wide a section of the educated public as possible.
The government attitude towards protest among university students, towards press censorship, and the growing problem of unrest in Poland vacillated between firm repression and conciliation.
But in the summer of 1862 anxiety began to get the upper hand.
A rash of illegally printed revolutionary pamphlets was followed in May 1862 by the outbreak of alarming fires in several cities, including the capital itself.
The coincidence naturally accentuated suspicion even among officials more intrepid than Valuev, whose own chambers were scorched.
Radical journalists headed by N. G. Chernyshevsky (1828–89), N. A. Serno-Solovievich (1834–66), and D. I. Pisarev (1840–68) were held morally responsible and arrested for sedition.
The so-called Sunday School movement — a voluntary campaign launched in 1859 on a wave of public enthusiasm for providing basic literacy and numeracy for workers and their children, and staffed by students and minor officials — was condemned as a cover for dangerous propaganda and suppressed.
Pessimists among the Tsar's ministers urged that the reform programme be curbed, and some of the more visionary proposals — such as those of the Shtakelberg Commission considering legislation to regulate the conditions of urban labour — forfeited essential support within the government.
At the same time the Pressure for reform from the nobility abated sharply.
Confirmation that ministers were drawing up plans for local government and judicial reform was enough to satisfy many.
Moreover, the peasantry were proving more acquiescent than had been expected, and the government was responding to the financial concern of the nobility with a variety of measures including plans to establish provincial banks.
By the time of the St Petersburg fires both provincial nobility and the main stream of public opinion in the cities were much more receptive to official appeals for loyal  support.
What finally transformed the situation was the outbreak of violent rebellion in Poland in April 1863.
Until then there had been widespread sympathy for Polish aspirations for greater autonomy ‘and the government had moved cautiously in that direction.
But news of the massacre of Russian troops stationed in Warsaw, combined with what seemed in Russia a serious threat of foreign intervention on the rebels’ side, altered attitudes dramatically.
Press and provincial assemblies hastened to proclaim solidarity with the Tsar.
The initiative moved firmly back into the hands of more conservative forces within the government.
The Polish revolt, coming on top of evidence of underground activity by the radical wing of the intelligentsia, cast a suspicious light over all pressure for reform.
Loyal and moderate as the noble constitutionalists seemed, any concessions to them might open the way to federalism, separatism and even more dangerous tendencies.
Too much momentum had gathered behind several of the major reform proposals for them to be abandoned, but the final legislation reflected the government's intense concern that the new freedom should be carefully circumscribed.
The local government statute of early 1864 duly established the zemstvos, elective bodies at provincial and district level empowered to improve a range of local facilities from transport, credit, and insurance to health and education.
But care was taken that the wealthier members of the nobility should dominate the minority of peasant and urban representatives, the zemstvo budget and powers of taxation were strictly limited, and through the provincial governor and local police the government retained close supervisory powers.
At the end of 1864 the legal system was reformed and the judiciary separated from the administrative bureaucracy, as reformers had long urged.
judges were to be irremovable, trials were to be held in public, juries were to adjudicate serious criminal cases, and elected justices of the peace were to hear minor criminal and civil cases.
This was the most thoroughgoing and remarkable of all the reforms which followed Emancipation, promising a giant stride towards security under the law.
Yet here too the government was careful to reserve the right to deal with cases it considered politically dangerous through administrative action outside the control of the courts.
Regulations laid down in 1865 made life significantly easier for the bulk of the press, reducing pre-publication censorship and committing the authorities to refer most alleged offences to the courts.
But again the government retained extensive administrative powers to give it a free hand in dealing with radical writers and  journalists.
The same qualifications characterized the University Statute of 1863 which, while granting the universities greater autonomy, made clear that it was to be exercised within narrow guide-lines.
As the new legislation came into force the government's concern to limit the scope for independent initiative was further intensified.
In April 1866 an emotionally unstable radical student named D. V. Karakozov made an attempt on the Tsar ‘s life.
The incident played into the hands of advocates of harsher measures of control.
The grimmer tone of government was set by the new head of the Third Section, P. A. Shuvalov: typical of the ministerial changes which took place was the replacement of A. V. Golovnin, the liberally minded Minister of Education, by the notoriously reactionary Dmitrii Tolstoy.
The leading radical journals were closed and Tolstoy instituted much closer supervision of university curricula and student activities.
The rights of the zemstvos were curtailed and they were forbidden to communicate with each other even on the most mundane matters of common concern.
Mounting pressure was brought upon judges to interpret the law as it suited the government, and when the courts refused to be cowed, the police resorted freely to administrative action.
Every aspect of government policy was affected by the new mood.
The efforts of the Minister of War, D. A. Miliutin, to take advantage of Emancipation and introduce universal conscription and a reserve army on the Western model were frustrated by conservative opposition.
Only after Prussia's startling display of military efficiency against Austria (1866) and France (1870–71) would he be able to overcome this opposition.
Earlier attempts to defuse the Polish problem, including a more generous form of Emancipation designed to detach the peasantry from the nationalist nobility, gave way to reliance on force majeure and an aggressive policy of Russification.
Alarmed by the sense of losing control over the sprawling Empire, the government moved further and further away from the spirit of the ‘enlightened’ bureaucrats.
Not until gripped by a severe crisis of confidence at the end of the 1870s would the authorities be driven again to blend repression with conciliation.
On the face of it, the regime's growing concern for security was paradoxical, since the number of peasant disturbances fell away sharply after 1863.
Police reports suggested that the countryside was more quiescent than it had been for generations.
Beneath the surface, however, conditions remained tense and the calm was broken by occasional serious outbreaks of disorder, most notably in  Kiev province between 1875 and 1878.
The backdrop of rural discontent kept at a minimum the government's tolerance level for criticism and signs of independent organization in the cities.
Yet not only was the urban population rapidly increasing, it was becoming ever more complex and articulate.
As we have seen, the stimulus given to the economy by Emancipation was at first limited.
Agriculture was briefly disrupted and a manufacturing recession, exacerbated by a drop in military orders after the Crimean War, a severe financial crisis in 1858, and a fall in cotton imports during the American Civil War, was only overcome in the mid 1860s.
Thereafter, however, the economy expanded considerably.
A minority of landlords commanded sufficient capital to adapt successfully to farming based on hired labour and greater mechanization, thus contributing to a very sharp rise in Russia's grain exports.
Indirectly, this helped to stimulate industrial development.
Moreover, for all its reluctance to see the emergence of a proletariat detached from the land, the government became more and more firmly convinced of the need to encourage manufacture.
The lesson of the Crimean disaster, underlined by Prussia's triumphs, impelled officials in the Ministry of War to urge that Russia develop strategic railways and reduce her dependence on imported arms.
The Ministry of Finance, headed from 1862 to 1878 by the liberal economist M. K. Reutern, became equally convinced that only by significant industrial expansion could the regime's chronic budgetary problems be solved.
Reutern rationalized the administration of the Treasury, improved banking and credit facilities, and, breaking dramatically with the intensely cautious financial policy of Nicholas I's reign, made large loans available, particularly to industrialists willing to undertake railway construction.
Russian industrialists were still largely dependent on foreign raw materials and machinery, but from the late 1860s they did enjoy a steep rise in orders.
The metal and machine industries benefited most directly, while the stimulus spread to the textile and other light industries.
The quickening pace of commercial life during the reign was reflected in a fivefold increase in joint-stock companies and a twenty-fold expansion of the railway network.
This striking rate of growth should not obscure the fact that the absolute level of industrial activity was still extremely low.
Russia's economy remained overwhelmingly agrarian, the peasantry were in no position to provide a strong market for industry, and not until the following reign would the State itself embark upon large-scale industrial investment.
Nevertheless, the economic development achieved was sufficient to  generate a degree of social change that alarmed the government.
Of immediate concern was the increase in the ranks of the urban poor.
Despite the measures taken to bind the peasantry to the land, rural conditions drove a small percentage to the cities in search of work.
Unskilled and impoverished, they found limited employment opportunities, were ill-paid and insecure, and urban health and housing conditions deteriorated sharply enough to arouse unease among the police.
Moreover, reluctant though most educated Russians were to admit it, there were clear signs that the urban migrants, village ties provided no guarantee against the emergence of that Western curse, a restive urban working class.
In May 1870 St Petersburg cotton spinners staged what was widely seen as Russia's first fully fledged strike: within days a report was on the desk of the Tsar himself.
The newly established courts treated the offenders too lightly for the liking of the authorities, and the press gave the case unwelcome publicity.
The government reacted by issuing instructions that future strikes should be dealt with outside the courts, and that press comment should be curtailed.
But the number of strikes and disturbances grew during the 1870s, peaking at the end of the decade.
Equally ominous was the illegal foundation in St Petersburg of the short-lived Northern Union of Russian Workers to improve the conditions of labour.
As yet working-class protest was on too small a scale and too sporadic to pose a major challenge, but it contributed to official anxiety.
Direct pressure on the government from the business community remained distinctly limited.
A minority of the more sophisticated industrialists, technical experts, academics, and publicists enthusiastic about Russia's industrialization did begin, with official support, to form organizations through which to voice the needs of industry.
In 1870 they helped organize the first All-Russian Industrial Exhibition and the first All-Russian Congress of Manufacturers and People Interested in Native Industry.
But this small avant-garde was by no means typical of the business community.
On such matters as labour legislation, it tended to be very much more ‘progressive’ than most manufacturers, arguing the need to cultivate a self-respecting, educated, skilled, and sober working class.
Moreover, even this articulate minority urged its views upon the government in extremely respectful tones, while the great majority of Russian industrialists and merchants remained politically obsequious, inhibited by cultural backwardness, ethnic divisions, and their sense of dependence upon the State.
The respect the government accorded them was  correspondingly limited: it was significant that among the great civil reforms of the reign that of urban government should have been left until last, and that when enacted it should have concentrated power in the hands of a very narrow élite.
Moreover, when in 1870 urban administrative councils (dumy ) analogous to the rural zemstvos were established, even the most prominent commoners tended to defer to the minority of nobles represented on the councils.
Far from taking municipal institutions as a platform for broader political participation, they dragged their feet even about using these bodies to improve urban facilities.
Towards the end of the 1870s they did gradually become more outspoken in pressing the case for tariff protection and against any legislation which would interfere with their rights as employers.
But the business community remained muted and far removed from the assertive bourgeoisie of Western Europe.
4.3 The cultural conservatism of Russia's merchants, many of whom were Old Believers, is captured in this late nineteenth-century photograph of merchants of Nizhnivgorod drinking tea.
Nevertheless, the expansion of the urban economy — and of the education system — rapidly broadened the ranks of educated Public opinion outside officialdom.
Alongside the lawyers, doctors, and teachers appointed in the wake of the Great Reforms were now being added technological experts, economic statisticians, managers, engineers, and educated entrepreneurs.
Together with the  more refined landowners, they provided steadily widening scope for cultural, philanthropic, and professional organization and activity beyond the immediate control of the government.
The expansion of the reading public called into being a commercially viable and increasingly sophisticated press, and provided the context for the masterpieces of Russia's golden age of literature.
The political attitudes articulated by journalists and writers were by no means either homogeneous or uniformly hostile to the government.
The political allegiance owed by the three greatest novelists of the Period, for example, could hardly have had less in common : I. S. Turgenev (1818–83) was a moderate liberal, F. M. Dostoevsky (1821–81) preached his own brand of Orthodox conservatism, and L. N. Tolstoy (1828–1910) was to become a great prophet of non-violent protest against modern civilization.
Their artistic genius — the exquisite delicacy of Turgenev, the psychological penetration of Dostoevsky, the panoramic vision of Tolstoy — illuminated the whole range of Russian intellectual, cultural, and social life and Appealed to all shades of public Opinion.
There were times when large sections of the educated public rallied to the government.
During the Polish revolt of 1863, M. N. Katkov (1818–87) established himself as the leading spokesman of an upsurge in nationalist fervour.
In the late 1870s the government was almost embarrassed by the enthusiasm for a crusade against Turkey expressed by Panslavist publicists.
Yet the predominant attitude of the educated public towards the regime was critical, and security-minded officials were made uneasy by ‘society's’ growing self-confidence.
Moreover, as Alexander's reign proceeded the government was given cause for alarm by the most radical section of the educated public: the revolutionary wing of the intelligentsia.
The revolutionary intelligentsia were to assume an importance out of all proportion to their meagre numbers.
They helped to bring about a severe crisis of authority at the end of Alexander's reign, they laid the foundations for the major radical parties of the twentieth century, including the Bolshevik Party, and they provided the country's leadership in the early Soviet period.
Accordingly, they have been the subject of intensive research and fierce controversy.
What motivated them, whom did they represent, were they altruistic democrats or ambitious élitists? for Soviet historians the revolutionaries of Alexander's reign were the authentic, if Utopian, spokesmen of the peasantry, and their Bolshevik heirs became effectively fused with the proletariat.
Western historians tend to see them as alienated intellectuals motivated not by the interests of any  major section of society but by a host of heterogeneous ideas, romantic and modernizing, dictatorial and democratic.
A third view treats them as the forerunners of a managerial class destined to impose its own oppressive rule upon peasants and workers.
Until the period of Emancipation, only a few isolated individuals had carried the dissent of the ‘marvellous decade’ to the point of revolutionary commitment.
Herzen, the most gifted man of the 1840s, had in 1853 founded a Free Russian Press in London, smuggling his publications into Russia in the hope of stimulating pressure for the transformation of the Empire.
from the late 1850s, however, a vigorous subculture, generating a series of revolutionary organizations, took root within Russia's privileged élite.
The major sources of recruitment to this subculture were the institutions of higher education.
During the first decade of Alexander's reign university enrolments rose appreciably, while professional and technical colleges were expanded in line with the Great Reforms.
It is true that even by the mid 1870s the total student body was little over 10,000 in a population of 75 million.
And for those willing to serve the State there was no question of a graduate unemployment problem before the 1880s.
Yet far from ensuring loyalty to the status quo, their elevated position made students receptive to radical ideas.
Deliberately nurtured as an élite destined to man the upper reaches of the State, they developed a sense of their own importance and dignity which gave them the confidence to question the conventions of Tsarist society.
Young, ebullient, and articulate, the student world was uniquely conducive to the free flow of new ideas and encouraged a disregard for differences in social origin, an egalitarian sense of solidarity quite unlike the stratified society outside.
Students of noble origin predominated, but there was a marked increase in the number of sons of lower officials, urban commoners, and, especially during the 1870s, the clergy.
Although these assorted commoners, or raznochintsy , remained a minority both within the student body and within its radical wing, they represented an important leaven whose underprivileged background and frequently severe poverty increased social awareness among their fellow students.
In these conditions controversy over student fees or over interference by the authorities — be it with the freedom of speech of progressive professors, the content of the curriculum, or the right of students to form their own organizations — sparked lively protest.
In the period of Emancipation, in the late 1860s, and again at the end of the reign the government faced major student disturbances.
Moreover, disciplinary measures proved  counter-productive.
Individuals who were expelled for political activity or failure to meet the fees — or simply for poor examination results — were given additional grounds for grievance, while the punishment of an entire college tended to strengthen student esprit de corps .
In a highly charged political atmosphere it was a short step from dispute with the authorities over student issues to broader criticism of the socio-political structure.
Student assemblies, cafeterias, and libraries provided a semi-institutional network within which radical ideas and literature could circulate.
Though the great majority of students never became deeply involved in radical activity, those who did, together with pupils lower down the education ladder, made up over half the 7,000–8,000 political offenders of the 1860s and 1870s.
Moreover, by providing a sustained source of recruits they brought into being the radical subculture which revolved around discussion circles, experimental communes, and avant-garde journals.
During the 1860s the energy of the radicals was absorbed for the most part in rebellion against the values and conventions of the educated world from which they sprang.
‘What can be smashed, must be smashed,’ wrote Pisarev, the most brilliant spokesman of the men of the 1860s.
‘What withstands the blow is good; what smashes to smithereens is rubbish.’
Identifying with the ‘nihilists’ of Turgenev ‘s Fathers and Sons (1862), and inspired by the heroic portrayal of the ‘new people’in Chernyshevsky's immensely influential What is to be Done ?(1863), they heaped scorn upon their elders.
The moral niceties, the aesthetic sensibilities, the philosophical abstractions of even the most progressive wing of conventional public opinion were luxuries Russia could not afford.
Progress depended upon an ascetic, unflinching commitment to ‘realism’.
Only that which was immediately useful had value.
The most respected fields of study in the radical milieu were the natural and physical sciences.
They scorned the authority of tradition, religion and the family.
Several of the leading radical publicists of the 1870s made their name as champions of female emancipation from the domination of fathers and husbands.
The life-style, the communes, the language, the dress, the hair-styles and blue-tinted glasses of the men (and women) of the 1860s were designed to distance them from what they saw as the hypocrisy of conventional society.
By the end of the decade, however, cultural revolt was being overlaid by concern for broader social problems.
This was reflected in the literary diet on which the radical subculture fed.
In addition to a steady flow of Western social, political, economic, and scientific works, contact was being made with Western radical organizations, including the first International, and an expanding body of Russian social criticism was becoming available.
A number of short-lived clandestine presses were set up within Russia, and at the same time radical publicists took full advantage of periods of lighter censorship.
Between 1857 and his arrest in 1862 Chernyshevsky, in collaboration with N. A. Dobroliubov (1836–61), made of Sovremennik (The Contemporary ) the most outstanding legal vehicle for subversive propaganda.
In the second half of the reign the most important radical thinkers included P. L. Lavrov (1823–1900), P. N. Tkachev (1844–86), and the rather more moderate N. K. Mikhailovsky (1842–1904).
At the same time the enormous success enjoyed by Herzen's London-based Kolokoi (The Bell ) between 1857 and 1863 launched a tradition of émigré journals whose number multiplied rapidly during the 1870s.
The dominant theme of this literature was concern for the well-being of the peasantry.
The radical intelligentsia identified their own revolt against the status quo with the plight of the peasantry.
This process of identification was crucial to the entire revolutionary ethos.
It is explicable, at one level, by their profound sense of guilt over their own privileges, cultural and material, for which the masses, as Lavrov wrote, had paid ‘billions of lives, oceans of blood, incalculable suffering and the endless toil of generations’.
At the same time they saw a causal link between the predicament of the peasants and their own frustrations; the political, social, and cultural constrictions which impinged directly upon them seemed to be the product of a society based upon oppression of the masses.
Moreover, peasant resistance appeared to be the only social force that could conceivably transform Russia.
During the 1870s their sense of being at once indebted to and dependent on the masses generated a highly romanticized image of the simple virtue and integrity of peasant life.
In seeking a path forward for peasant Russia, therefore, they spurned the prescriptions of laissez-faire liberalism.
Informed by Western socialism, they saw in capitalism a brutal form of exploitation.
The Russian peasantry must not be condemned to the ordeal of the proletariat of Manchester or Birmingham.
Nor did they see any future in piecemeal political reform of the autocracy.
The parliamentary façade of Bismarck's Prussia, the french democracy which had crushed the Revolution of 1848 and did the same to the Paris Commune in 1871, and even Britain's constitutional monarchy seemed  merely to disguise flagrant injustice.
By broadening the bases of support for the regime among the relatively privileged classes, constitutional reform might in fact make radical change harder to achieve.
The revolutionaries' lack of interest in a programme of political reform and gradual extension of the rule of law did not imply indifference to individual liberty.
Indeed their protest against restrictions on the individual was almost anarchist in tone.
But even if the revolutionaries had been willing to settle for gradual extension of liberty the middle classes appeared powerless to extract major concessions from the Tsarist regime.
And in fact, the isolation and weakness of the radical milieu put a premium upon commitment to an unqualified Utopia.
Compromise seemed to imply concern for their own privileges and betrayal of the masses.
The ‘populist’ ideology they developed, therefore, was socialist.
Reacting both against existing conditions in Russia and against the prospect of capitalist development they built upon the specifically Russian socialism adumbrated by the Petrashevtsy and spelled out by Herzen.
At its centre stood the peasant commune, they believed, had preserved the peasantry from the corruption of private property.
With its egalitarian traditions of periodic redistribution of the land it provided a basis on which Russia could bypass capitalism and make a direct transition from semi-feudalism to socialism.
They rejected the liberal view that the commune was a barrier to economic progress.
Relieved of the burdens imposed upon it by state and nobility the commune could flourish — especially once, as most of them envisaged, individual use of the land had given way to collective farming.
Moreover, few believed that in avoiding capitalism Russia must forgo modern machinery and technology.
An anti-industrial current was evident within populism, voiced most explicitly by Mikhailovsky who deplored the dehumanizing effect of the ever more specialized and narrow division of labour that industrialization involved.
But, in so far as the subject was addressed, the dominant view was that by integrating modern industry into the communal structure Russia could enjoy its benefits without enduring proletarianization.
The overriding concern of the populists, however, was to free the peasantry from poverty and to do so before Russia had irrevocably embarked upon capitalist development in agriculture and industry.
They engaged in a passionate search for a ‘science of society’ which would demonstrate that Russia need not follow the Western path.
The anxiety that she was on the point of doing so created a mounting sense of urgency during the 1870s.
It was these conditions that gave rise to the revolutionary movement or Alexander's reign.
Euphoria over the government's commitment to Emancipation had created a short-lived hope that the Tsar might carry through a major redistribution of wealth ‘from above’.
But even before the Statute of 1861 was promulgated, radicals were abandoning these hopes and those who counselled patience came under fire.
With the publication of the terms of Emancipation inflammatory pamphlets began to call for a mass uprising.
In 1861 ‘Land and Liberty’, the first underground organization since the days of the Decembrists, was formed.
It had no more than a skeletal structure and embraced liberals as well as socialists.
The failure of the Warsaw uprising, where it had several adherents among the Russian officers of the garrison, dealt the organization a severe blow.
It was liquidated in 1864 when it had become evident that the peasantry would not mount an immediate challenge to the Emancipation terms.
To would-be revolutionaries it was becoming abundantly clear that their central problem was lack of contact with the masses.
During the 1860s a few isolated attempts to form close-knit organizations overlapped with more widespread efforts to develop educational circles for workers and to take up posts as village teachers or medical assistants in order to establish links with the peasants.
Police surveillance made communication between different groups difficult, while separate circles and indeed individuals were acutely suspicious of submitting themselves to any centralized underground authority even in the interests of ‘the cause’.
Their suspicions were heightened by the case of S. G. Nechaev (1847–82), an amoral firebrand who tried to build a rigidly disciplined organization by brazen deception, and to assert his own authority by involving his fellow conspirators in the murder of one of their number.
The trials of 1872 and 1873 which followed his exposure and the arrest of several dozen radicals whom he had deliberately implicated gave the case wide publicity, as did Dostoevsky's classic The Devils (1872), based upon it.
Nechaev's dictatorial style highlighted an issue that had already begun to exercise the populists.
A centralized revolutionary organization, created and directed by the intelligentsia, might ‘run ahead’ of the peasantry, or even develop ambitions contrary to those of the masses and subject them to a new form of oppression.
A minority viewed such anxieties as veiled excuses for inaction, but the majority would endorse the warning Herzen had delivered in 1862 that the revolutionaries must not ‘take the people for clay and ourselves for sculptors’.
The result was that when  impatience to reach out to the peasantry boiled over into a significant movement in the early 1870s there was minimal planning and organization.
4.4 Arrest of a revolutionary student.
Although the inadequacy of the security police became increasingly apparent to the government during the 1870s, to radical students they seemed ubiquitous and frighteningly well-informed.
The ‘mad summer’ of 1874 saw some 2,000–3,000 young radicals leave the cities and ‘go to the people’.
Adopting peasant dress and a peasant craft they sought to spread political consciousness with the help of revolutionary literature couched in peasant idiom.
The euphoria of that summer gripped radicals of various persuasions: some sought merely to serve the peasantry, with no clear political goal; some hoped to lay the foundations for a conscious peasant socialist movement; others shared the hope of the veteran anarchist, M. A. Bakunin (1814–76), that it would be possible to ignite immediate peasant rebellion.
The experience was disillusioning.
Not only did their numbers seem insignificant in the vast Russian countryside, not only were they rapidly overtaken by police arrests, but they found great difficulty in putting their ideas across to the peasantry.
Peasants might share their longing to see the abolition of taxes and noble landownership, but they could make little of the more visionary socialist elements of the young radicals' propaganda, or indeed of their attacks on the revered Tsar.
Moreover, in  the absence of any evidence of impending upheaval, individual peasants were wary of risking involvement in seditious talk.
Although there was another substantial missionary exodus in 1875 and some radicals settled semi-permanently in the villages, the euphoria evaporated.
The failure of 1874 helped to overcome radical reluctance to form centralized organizations.
It also forcibly raised the question of the need for political change before substantial propaganda could be spread among the peasantry — a question shelved since the early 1860s amid general hostility to constitutional compromise.
In 1876 the second ‘Land and Liberty’ was formed.
While attention remained focused upon the peasantry, renewed emphasis was given to contact with urban workers.
It was from ‘Land and Liberty’ that the populists' most effective organization evolved.
In the south of Russia radicals had begun to combine ideological propaganda with ‘propaganda by deed’: terrorist attacks on officials.
In 1878 a young revolutionary named Vera Zasulich (1851–1919) shot and wounded the Military Governor of St Petersburg, General Trepov.
Her aim was to avenge the brutal treatment of comrades in police custody.
But the impact of her deed both upon public opinion and upon the government directed revolutionary attention towards this form of political action.
The turn to terror coincided with the renewed willingness on the part of some radicals to consider seeking constitutional concessions as a preliminary step to social change.
Physical attacks on leading government figures might at least disorganize the regime enough to force it to accede to the appeals for political reform which were once again coming from more moderate sections of public opinion.
In 1879 ‘Land and Liberty’ split into two parties, the ‘Black Repartition’, which remained faithful to a programme of propaganda, and the ‘People's Will’, which concentrated its efforts on ‘disorganization’.
The ‘Black Repartition’ was stillborn but the ‘people's Will’became the most highly centralized and coherent underground organization Russia had ever seen.
It enrolled less than 50 members but it attracted active support from up to 2,000 sympathizers.
The Executive Committee pronounced a sentence of death on the Tsar himself and, after repeated attempts, succeeded in assassinating Alexander on a St Petersburg street on 1 March 1881.
The terror campaign induced in the government something approaching panic.
This was partly because it proved so difficult to crush or even to assess the strength of the ‘People's Will’.
But it was also because the overt challenge to the authority of the State high  lighted the potential for much more widespread unrest.
Peasant disturbances might be running at a low level, but evidence was mounting of severe discontent in the overpopulated black-earth regions.
Labour protest in the cities might pose no immediate security risk but it had gathered pace ominously throughout the 1870s.
Student demonstrations increased sharply at the end of the decade and although the educated public in general dissociated themselves from the violent means and socialist ends of the revolutionaries, a large section of the press showed scant sympathy for the government.
The major trials which followed the movement ‘to the people’ were used with great skill by the accused and their defence lawyers to expose the incompetence and brutality of the police, to draw attention to the plight of the peasantry, and to win sympathy for the wretched poverty of many students.
A significant minority of the zemstvos joined in liberal demands that the government return to the spirit of the Great Reforms, respect the independence of the courts and the freedom under the law of the press, and provide some means for public participation in framing legislation.
4.5 The assassination Alexander II, March 1881.
The ‘People's Will’ achieved their aim after at least six unsuccessful attempts.
A first bomb failed to destroy the imperial carriage, and the Tsar dismounted to investigate (above).
when a second bomb exploded at his feet (opposite).
The government's growing sense of isolation was heightened by the damaging outcome of the Turkish War of 1877–78.
During most of Alexander's reign, the regime had carefully avoided all but minor military entanglements.
The Caucasus had been steadily pacified and nominal Russian authority made effective.
In central Asia local commanders had taken the initiative in extending the Empire over vast areas defended only by relatively weak local tribes.
In the Far East substantial territory had been more or less peacefully wrested from the embattled Chinese Empire.
This semi-colonial expansion took place without great enthusiasm in St Petersburg.
The government was determined to avoid confrontation with any  Great Power over peripheral areas where significant economic development was out of the question.
St Petersburg's major diplomatic goal had been to nullify the clauses of the Treaty of Paris which had disarmed Russia on the Black Sea.
This was achieved when Russia was rewarded for the benevolent neutrality she had maintained while Prussia redrew the map of central Europe: in 1870 she was able to renounce the clauses without risking diplomatic isolation.
But in 1876 the protracted decline of Turkey's power in Europe provoked a crisis in the Balkans.
When the Slav nations of the Ottoman Empire tried without success to overthrow Turkish authority, Russia gradually moved from diplomatic pressure in their favour to a declaration of war in April 1877.
The war was hailed in Russia as a crusade for the liberty of fellow Slavs and aroused nationalist fervour expressed most stridently by a group of Panslavist publicists.
After initial disappointments the Russian Army succeeded in forcing the Treaty of San Stefano upon Turkey in 1878.
Austria-Hungary, Britain, and France, however, viewed with alarm the dramatic increase in Russian influence in the Balkans which the treaty implied.
At the Congress of Berlin Russia was compelled to accept revised peace terms.
This was felt at home to be a major humiliation, and the government found itself under fire from the whole spectrum of public opinion.
The diplomatic débâcle strengthened the hands of ministers who urged that the fierce police measures taken against sedition during 1879 should be combined with efforts to conciliate less intransigent critics.
In January 1880 General M. T. Loris-Melikov, a hero of the Turkish War, took charge of the government, first as head of an emergency Special Administrative Commission and, from August, as Minister of Internal Affairs.
He tried to broaden the base of support for the government, relying as far as possible on legal processes in restraining the press and arresting suspects, sacking the hated Minister of Education, Tolstoy, and planning steps to alleviate the burden of redemption payments on the hardest-pressed peasants.
In January 1881 he went so far as to recommend the involvement of zemstvo and municipal duma representatives in commissions appointed to consider reform of peasant affairs and local government.
He even suggested that a few such representatives from outside the government might be co-opted on to the State Council, the supreme bureaucratic body beneath the Tsar.
It was entirely characteristic of Alexander that he marked Loris-Melikov's draft of the latter proposal with a question-mark.
But the Tsar accepted the proposal for commissions on the very day he fell victim to the ‘People's Will’.
The assassination momentarily stunned the government, and the new Tsar, Alexander III (1881–94), fled to his country palace.
‘When you are retiring, Your Majesty,’ he was urged by K. P. Pobedonostsev, who had been his boyhood tutor and from 1880 to 1905 was Procurator of the Holy Synod, ‘do shut the doors behind you not only in the bedroom but in all adjoining rooms, the hall included…check every evening underneath the furniture.’
Although throughout the crisis Alexander III had expressed his contempt for any concessions to appease the government's critics, for some two months after coming to the throne he hesitated to reverse official policy.
Loris-Melikov continued to press significant innovations to strengthen public support for the government.
Pobedonostsev, on the other hand, together with a minority of reactionary ministers, strongly urged the dismissal of Loris-Melikov and bold reaffirmation of the autocratic principle.
At the end of April, having assessed the strength of the opposition, Alexander took Pobedonostsev's advice, issued an uncompromising manifesto and precipitated the resignation of Loris-Melikov and several other relatively liberal ministers.
The reforms already set in train were either dropped immediately or gradually diluted, and from 1883 a period of intense reaction set in.
Alexander III's approach reflected his own predilections, but it was also based on a sound sense of the options open to him.
Even if he had been so inclined it would have been extremely difficult to pursue reforms which posed a significant threat to the interests of the landed nobility.
By rejecting reform, on the other hand, he won the enthusiastic support of the great majority of the nobility.
Their social and economic pre-eminence was just beginning to seem more precarious and they wholeheartedly welcomed vigorous confirmation of the regime's commitment to the status quo.
Moreover, the  opposition seemed to wilt.
The police rapidly destroyed the remnants of the ‘People's Will’ and successfully contained underground activity during the rest of the 1880s.
‘Temporary’ regulations of August 1881 — ultimately extended until the fall of the Empire — empowered the government to declare virtual martial law wherever and whenever it chose to do so.
In the absence of a direct threat to order the public opinion which had caused Loris-Melikov such anxiety appeared powerless.
During the 1880s there was no effective protest against increasing infringements of the independence of the courts, the press, the universities, and the zemstvos.
Reaction seemed triumphant.
Yet in the longer term a regime resting upon the narrowing social base of the landowning nobility was doomed.
The discontent generated by the government's pursuit of a reactionary Utopia in defiance of rapidly accelerating social change was to explode in the revolutionary upheaval of 1905.
INDUSTRIALIZATION AND REVOLUTION
While Alexander III and his son Nicholas II (1894–1917) remained resolutely committed to unvarnished autocracy, Russia's traditional social structure passed through a Process of profound transformation.
Underlying much of this change was the rapid industrial development of the period.
In large measure this was the result of the steady spread of market relations.
The peasantry were being drawn into the money economy, thereby raising consumer demand.
Both handicraft production — the great bulk of which was done by village peasants rather than urban artisans — and the major light industries, headed by textiles and sugar, expanded fast.
Even more striking was the upsurge in heavy industry, and for this the State itself was primarily responsible.
The focal point of the policy developed by the government was the construction of a railway network.
A major stimulus in the industrialization of most European countries, railways held out particular promise to an economy uniquely handicapped by vast distances and poor communications.
They would link the Empire's far-flung mineral resources with each other and with the centres of population; they would enormously increase the volume of both domestic and foreign trade; and their construction would create a massive new demand for coal, iron, steel, and manufactures.
It was in the 1880s that the Ministry of Finance began to coordinate its tariff, fiscal, and investment policies to extend the railway lines already laid.
The major problem was the shortage of domestic capital.
The aim, therefore, was to attract substantial foreign investment.
This could only be achieved if foreigners could rely upon the stability of the rouble, which made it essential to maintain a favourable balance of payments and avoid a budget  deficit.
From 1881 the trade balance was kept positive with the help of high protective tariffs, culminating in a prohibitive tariff in 1891, and positive steps to increase exports, especially of grain.
The government's budget was strengthened by increased customs revenue and more particularly by a spectacular rise in indirect taxation.
The results were gratifying.
The rouble became progressively stronger and in 1897 foreign confidence was ensured  by placing it on the gold standard.
The conclusion of an alliance with France in 1894 had already contributed to the favourable publicity which Russian securities received in the West.
With world interest rates low, investment in Russian state securities and direct investment in Russian industry became highly attractive.
The government poured money into the railway programme while subsidies and guarantees encouraged private capital to develop the supplying industries.
Map 6 Railways in European Russia by 1900
The full force of the policy was felt during the 1890s under the dynamic organization of Count Witte, Minister of Finance from 1892 to 1903.
Annual railway construction more than trebled between the end of the 1880s and the boom years of the late 1890s.
The production of leading minerals required by the railway programme — iron, coal, and oil — rose almost as fast between 1885 and 1900, and virtually every sector of industry benefited from the stimulus.
Although light industry continued to exceed heavy industry in terms of value of output, the balance between the two shifted significantly.
Russia, it is true, still lagged behind her major industrial competitors.
She was highly vulnerable to sharp downturns in the economy and from 1900 to 1903 suffered particularly severely from an international depression.
Her new heavy industries were concentrated in narrowly restricted areas.
She remained an overwhelmingly agrarian country.
Nevertheless, the economic development achieved by the turn of the century was sufficient to have a profound impact upon the social and political life of the Empire.
It was in a sense paradoxical that a regime for which the social repercussions accompanying industrial development in the West were anathema should have become actively committed to industrialization.
Yet its motives are not difficult to see.
In large measure it was responding to the rapid industrialization of Russia's Great Power rivals.
Unless she could dispose of the same modern means of transport and production, the same machinery and armaments, Russia could not hope to uphold her political independence.
The strategic necessity of railways, in particular, was becoming ever more pressing.
Likewise, even conservative ministers felt the force of the argument, ably expounded by Witte, that the regime's domestic stability depended upon its financial strength — and this required sustained economic growth.
In any case few statesmen grasped that there was a profound contradiction between the economic and the social policies being pursued by the government.
This was in part because there was still no unified  policy-making body, no cabinet.
The government could pull in two opposite directions without fully realizing that it was doing so.
While the Ministry of Finance energetically fostered industrialization, the other ministries still pursued conservative social policies which ignored or even impeded economic change.
This led to intense interdepartmental rivalry and antagonism, most clearly visible in repeated clashes between the Ministry of finance and the Ministry of the Interior.
They adopted widely divergent approaches to almost every issue — from tariffs and taxation to the affairs of the nobility, the peasantry, and the working class.
But the illusion was preserved, among conservative ministers as well as by Alexander III and Nicholas II themselves, that in Russia industrialization need not upset the traditional social structure, let alone undermine the authority of the throne.
In some respects, of course, greater economic and commercial activity did strengthen the regime.
The resources at its disposal expanded.
During the 1880s the poll-tax was abolished and indirect taxes — especially the liquor monopoly — became the major source of government revenue.
They proved much easier to collect than direct taxes and made it possible for government revenue to keep pace with the swift rise in production.
Although a proportion of this was absorbed in investment and servicing the growing national debt, the bulk financed a great expansion of the apparatus of the State.
The bureaucracy developed fast — not only in terms of the proportion of officials to subjects, but also in terms of education, efficiency, and levels of pay.
The police force swelled, the political police (Okhrana ) developing relatively sophisticated techniques of social control.
At the same time both the army and the navy became better equipped.
This, together with closer economic ties with the West, added to the Empire's leverage in international affairs.
The assumption underlying Bismarck's diplomacy in the 1880s, that given her conflict with Austria-Hungary over the Balkans Russia would have to accept German terms to avoid diplomatic isolation, proved unfounded.
When Germany raised high trade barriers against Russian grain and closed Russia's access to the German money market in the late 1880s, France was happy to come to Russia's aid.
Paris became Russia's major source of foreign capital, while diplomatic and military negotiations culminated in the alliance of 1894.
Successive finance ministers were adamant that Russia was in no position to risk war, and her Western policy was necessarily cautious.
Nevertheless the steep decline which her diplomatic status had suffered since the Crimean War was arrested.
In one respect, too, the development of large-scale private enterprise increased the support within society on which the regime could count.
for while the economic power of leading industrialists and businessmen grew enormously, they tended to remain as politically subservient as the traditional merchant community.
They cooperated extremely closely with the Tsarist government.
Three factors stand out in explaining this harmonious relationship.
In the first place, there was the range of benefits at the government's disposal — subsidies, credit, large contracts, tariff protection.
Witte was particularly lavish with financial aid in times of crisis, and assisted in the formation of producer associations, thereby fostering the concentration of ownership in the hands of large banks and corporations.
Major financiers and industrialists, notably those in St Petersburg, were made acutely conscious of their dependence on ministerial goodwill and it became increasingly common for senior officials to take up directorships on the boards of leading companies.
Equally important in retarding the political independence of the business community were the continuing divisions and antagonisms within it.
The development of heavy industry intensified regional specialization, typified by the massive iron- and coal-mining enterprises of the Donets basin in the Ukraine, the oil industry in the Caucasus, and the textile-oriented Moscow region.
This created significant differences of approach to a variety of policy issues from tariffs to labour problems.
Moreover, a marked tension developed between the predominantly Great Russian businessmen of the centre and the variety of mutually divided ethnic minorities operating on the periphery — including poles, Jews, Armenians, Greeks, and Tatars.
Taken together with the very large percentage of investment in heavy industry held by foreign interests, this presented a formidable obstacle to the emergence of a politically powerful business lobby.
Representative organizations were formed, but they remained under firm government tutelage and studiously avoided issues beyond a narrow range of business problems.
Perhaps the most fundamental factor drawing government and businessmen together was the common ground they shared in relation to labour.
Large-scale employers could not fail to appreciate their dependence upon the regime for a cheap and docile work-force.
In the interests of security the government refused to countenance labour organizations and strikes were a criminal offence.
In a situation of massive rural underemployment and  considerable urban unemployment, this ensured that labour's bargaining power was minimal and that Russian wages were extremely low.
It also meant that the police were immediately involved when serious disputes arose between labour and employers.
Although government officials were often highly critical of the appalling working conditions for which employers were responsible, their overriding concern was to demonstrate to workers that organized protest could not pay.
A rudimentary factory inspectorate was set up in 1882, but government intervention in labour relations was overwhelmingly favourable to employers.
It was not surprising that leading industrialists and financiers found no more than minor fault with the Tsarist regime.
Only in the upheaval of 1905, with labour Protest running out of control, would they be moved to criticism.
Yet the very factors which inhibited the politicization of Russia's business classes also limited the political value of their support.
Far from commanding respect they were the object of widespread disdain and, although a few magnates became major patrons of the arts, they were in general almost wholly lacking in cultural influence over the wider educated public.
The economically less powerful sections of the middle classes were growing fast both in numbers and in political consciousness.
Their ranks were swelled not only by the general growth of the economy and steady expansion of secondary and higher education but also by the rapid development of services run under the aegis of the zemstvos and staffed by the so-called ‘third element’— teachers, doctors, statisticians, veterinary surgeons, and agricultural experts of various kinds.
Their political affiliation was by no means uniform.
Russian intellectual and cultural life was becoming increasingly diverse.
The turn of the century saw the birth of the so-called ‘silver age’ with its explicit rejection of art as a vehicle for social and political criticism.
The flowering of Russian opera and ballet pointed in the same direction.
It was symbolic that a group of prominent and progressively minded intellectuals tried, in 1902–03, to open a dialogue with the hierarchy of the Orthodox Church.
They failed, but not since the Slavophiles of the 1840s would any self-respecting member of the intelligentsia have dreamed of such an enterprise.
Such socio-political criticism as there was in the music of P. I. Tchaikovsky (1840–93), the paintings of I. Repin (1844–1930), and the drama of A. P. Chekhov (1860–1904) was expressed with great subtlety.
Yet the prevailing mood of public opinion remained distinctly hostile to the regime.
Opposition sentiment was  galvanized by a catastrophic famine and cholera epidemic in 1891–92.
The government was blamed and its tariff and trade policies came under fierce attack.
It became ever more difficult to prevent public discussion of political issues.
As in the reign of Alexander II, repressive measures against rebellious students and outspoken journals tended to exacerbate rather than quell criticism.
The demand for guaranteed civil liberties and public participation in state decision-making gathered pace.
An important landmark was the foundation in 1902 of the émigré journal Osvobozhdenie (Liberation ), edited by Peter Struve (1870–1944), a gifted political economist.
The journal showed up the regime in the most clumsy, incompetent, and oppressive light.
In 1904 a loosely structured organization, the Union of Liberation, was formed to unite all sections of the opposition.
With growing assurance it mounted pressure for constitutional democracy based upon universal, equal, secret, and direct franchise.
On its own, enlightened public opinion had little more chance of shaking the regime than in the reign of Alexander II.
But under Nicholas II, active discontent became increasingly evident among wide sections of society, both privileged and non-privileged.
Most perplexing, from the point of view of Tsar and government, was the growing resentment expressed by the landowning nobility.
Even by Romanov standards, the last two tsars were not gifted statesmen.
Their recorded remarks and their Private diaries reveal a breathtaking insensitivity to the strains within the society over which they ruled.
Yet neither was completely lacking in political sense.
Although they faithfully echoed the time-honoured myth that the Tsarist government stood above social divisions and cared for the interests of all classes, they firmly grasped that the mainstay of the autocracy was in fact the landed nobility.
Accordingly, they did all they could to protect the nobility's privileged position.
In taking steps to tighten control over the peasantry and the zemstvos, the government saw itself consolidating the alliance between State and nobility.
Wherever possible local landowners were chosen to fill the powerful post of land captain, established in 1889 to discipline the peasantry.
The zemstvo reform of 1890 increased noble domination of the local assemblies.
Both Alexander and Nicholas were also extremely concerned to perpetuate noble preponderance among senior civil and military officials.
Sustained efforts made to limit educational opportunities for commoners were inspired in part by the hope that this would ensure that noblemen would provide the increasingly specialized and trained personnel required.
Through  out the period the government made crystal clear its anxiety to shore up noble landownership.
The Noble Land Bank established in 1885 became the source of low-interest loans to rescue insolvent estates and encourage landlords to secure their future by investing in and improving their land.
The problem of conserving the noble land fund was the central preoccupation of a high-powered ministerial conference which Nicholas set up in 1897 to consider what further aid could be given to the nobility.
Yet, for all the goodwill of the government, the position of the nobility was gradually being eroded.
The pressures which led many noblemen to sell their land were largely beyond the control of the State.
Grain prices during the 1880s and 1890s, in Russia as elsewhere, were severely depressed, making it even more difficult for landowners accustomed to rely on serf labour to adapt to commercial farming.
At the same time land prices soared in response to peasant land hunger, and the option of selling became increasingly attractive.
Between Emancipation and 1905 the amount of land in noble hands fell by over a third.
The sympathy of the Tsar was of only marginally more help where state service, the other major bastion of noble power, was concerned.
All the efforts of the Ministry of Education could not produce a sufficient flow of educated recruits from the landed nobility.
Although social origins remained a crucial determinant of promotions, increasing professionalism within both army and bureaucracy tended to make ability ever more significant.
By the end of the century the link between state service and landed wealth had become markedly weaker: even among the highest ranks of the Civil Service, over 70 per cent of the personnel were landless, and the proportion was greater still in the officer corps.
The nobility's landholdings remained formidable, and the dominant ethos among both officers and senior officials was still overwhelmingly sympathetic to noble privilege.
Yet the symptoms of decline were tangible and created a growing sense of embattlement among middle-ranking landowners.
Their resentment focused on the way industry seemed to be benefiting at their expense.
Although reactionary journalists found difficulty in framing a coherent economic policy — and their spokesmen within the government were pulverized by Witte's expertise — they became increasingly critical.
They attacked specific measures such as tariffs which forced up the price of agricultural machinery.
And they blamed the finance Ministry's favouritism towards industry for the plight — and the restiveness — of the peasantry.
Although the Tsar    heartily endorsed their values and aspirations, by the late 1890s they were becoming deeply embittered by what they took to be the government's inadequate concern for their well-being.
Their anger began to take political form.
This was visible not only in fierce complaint from reactionary newspapers but also, paradoxically enough, in the growth of the liberal zemstvo movement.
The number of committed liberals among the middle-ranking landowners who dominated the zemstvos was not large.
But they commanded a stronger sense of political direction and greater willingness to take an active part in the zemstvos than the more conservative majority.
Moreover, their criticism of the arbitrary nature of the bureaucracy and autocracy seemed to correspond to the widespread dissatisfaction among the provincial nobility.
This enabled them to seize the initiative at the turn of the century and ally the zemstvos ever more closely with the broader liberal and constitutional movement.
5.1 Famine.
During the famine of 1891–92. the peasants were forced to strip the thatch from their barns and houses to feed their starving livestock.
(Contemporary engraving from the Illustrated London News .)
The decline in noble landownership was not accompanied by any improvement in the conditions of the peasantry.
Repeated commissions and zemstvo investigations drew a grim picture of peasant destitution and growing frustration.
In fact, recent research suggests that average grain consumption per head in the village did not fall during the period: a vast amount of unused land was brought into cultivation and yields slowly rose.
Peasants were also able to cushion the impact of indirect taxes by falling back on barter and home products when necessary.
Generalizations about the trend in peasant living standards, however, are not easy to make.
This is not because of any dramatic differentiation between rich and poor within a given village: the great majority remained ‘middle’ peasants directly dependent on their own labour for their livelihood.
But there were significant variations from year to year and between different regions.
The grain-short areas of the north and east benefited from the low price of grain.
Moreover, it was here that peasant incomes were most often supplemented by handicraft production making them less directly dependent upon the vagaries of the harvest.
Paradoxically, it was the grain-surplus areas which were most at risk of severe deprivation and periodic famine.
It was in these areas that the depressed level of grain prices caused most hardship.
Compelled to raise cash for payment of rent, redemption dues, taxes, and essential purchases, they were driven to sell as  much grain as possible, retaining minimal reserves for subsistence and planting.
This left them highly vulnerable to harvest failures such as those of 1891 and 1901.
The evidence of acute poverty was widespread.
Arrears on direct taxes, and especially redemption dues, constantly rose despite the harshest punitive measures, including flogging and property confiscation.
Such critical features of the peasant economy as horse-ownership showed a disastrous drop during the late nineteenth century.
Worst of all was the high incidence of epidemics, chronic sickness, and malnutrition.
The policies of the Ministry of Finance were widely blamed both for peasant misery and for the threat to social stability which it entailed.
Reactionary, liberal and latter-day populist opinion alike tended to view the peasantry as the victim of the heavy industrialization programme.
The rapid increase in indirect taxes, it was maintained, wiped out any relief to the peasantry from the abolition of the poll-tax and periodic cancellation of unpaid redemption dues.
High protective tariffs penalized the peasant consumer.
And at a time of frequent harvest failures and recurrent food shortage, exports of grain were being ruthlessly forced upwards.
The peasantry, it seemed, were being squeezed in order to earn foreign exchange and uphold the value of the rouble.
I. A. Vyshnegradsky, Witte's predecessor at the Ministry of finance from 1887 to 1892, was credited with the heartless motto: ‘We will go hungry, but we will export.’
The early stages of industrialization certainly brought precious little relief to the peasantry, and grain exports were undoubtedly vital to the ‘Witte system’.
Yet the government's conversion to a policy of favouring industrialization did no more than exacerbate the peasant predicament.
The proportion of government revenue directed into industry was a mere fraction of that devoted to the upkeep of the armed forces and administration.
The main burden borne by the peasantry remained that of the State and the landed nobility.
Government policy towards the village changed remarkably little during the period.
The commitment to the commune, as the best means of taxing and policing the peasantry, was repeatedly reaffirmed.
A proposed programme of resettlement from the most overpopulated areas was shelved for fear of raising peasant expectations and unleashing dangerous mass migration.
The resources made available to the peasantry to purchase land through the Peasant Bank (1883) were niggardly compared to those available to the nobility, and accounted for a small proportion of the land the peasants managed to acquire.
Minimal effort was made to assist  peasants in improving their farming methods: the attempts in this direction of a few dynamic zemstvos only highlighted how little was being done in the Empire as a whole.
The State, in short, pursued a Policy of neglect towards peasant agriculture.
When asked in 1890 if a country like Russia should not have an independent Ministry of Agriculture, Vyshnegradsky was responsible for another bon mot : ‘But the Minister of Agriculture will not have anything to do.’
The effect was to leave the peasant in a vicious circle of poverty.
Pressure on the land mounted as the rural population swelled by some 25 Per cent between 1877 and 1905.
Although urban migration accelerated, it acted as a very inadequate safety valve: between 1880 and 1913 the proportion of the labour force working in agriculture only dropped from 74 to 72 per cent.
Moreover, the population tended to rise fastest where the shortage of land was already acute, notably in the black-earth provinces in which the peasantry had acquired least land at Emancipation.
A hard-pressed villager could hope that numerous sons would increase the household's income, especially since the allocation of land in most communes was related to the size of the household.
Overpopulation strengthened the attachment of most peasants to the relative security of the commune: even without government backing the commune would in all probability have remained prevalent in the most densely populated areas.
Yet if anything the commune's effect on productivity became even more deleterious: the greater the land-shortage, the greater the temptation to overwork strips of land held on brief tenure.
Accordingly, peasant aspirations remained firmly fixed on the one panacea of which they could conceive: the land of the nobility.
The very intensity of their land-hunger, however, forced up the cost of both renting and buying land to levels which were quite unrelated to the land's yield.
At the same time overpopulation kept agricultural wages at pitiful rates.
The result was intense resentment against noble exploitation.
The whole peasant outlook precluded them from meekly submitting to the dictates of the market.
Deeply rooted in peasant culture was the belief that the land should belong to whoever worked it with his own hands.
Such inroads as modern culture made into the village tended to fortify this conviction.
The slow but steady spread of literacy, the increasing contact with urban life, the ideas propagated by young radicals and democratically minded members of the ‘third element’— all tended to strengthen peasant intransigence.
At the same time the conservative and pacifying influence of the Orthodox Church began to weaken  markedly.
There is little evidence that peasant faith declined, but the authority of village priests was progressively undermined: in terms of culture and way of life they differed too little from the ordinary villagers to inspire much respect, and the miserly provision made them by the State resulted in constant friction over money matters between priest and parishioner.
The last decades of the century saw the flowering of numerous bizarre but intensely committed religious sects which often reflected disenchantment with both Church and State.
Even the hallowed belief in the benevolence of the Tsar began to wane.
The incidence of rent and labour strikes and land seizures from private landowners rose sharply during the 1890s.
Serious crop failure in 1901 was followed by major peasant uprisings during 1902 in the Ukraine, the Volga area, and Georgia.
Any significant weakening in the authority or military resources of the government would have been liable to unleash rural disturbances on an even greater scale.
5.2 ‘Corner’ lodgers in a workers' flat in St Petersburg in the 1890s.
Overcrowded conditions meant that families could rent no more than a ‘corner’ of shared accommodation.
Such conditions fuelled discontent and facilitated the spread of radical ideas.
If the government's support for the landowning nobility perpetuated its age-old conflict with the peasantry, the direct corollary of its close alliance with industrial employers was confrontation with labour.
Numerically, the industrial labour force remained  relatively small.
At the turn of the century, out of a total active population of some 45 million, less than a quarter were non-agricultural employees and only some 2 million were employed in factories and mines.
But working-class discontent was fierce and the ability of the industrial proletariat to paralyse large plants and even whole areas by strike action gave them an immediate power of disruption which the peasantry lacked.
The grounds for working-class discontent struck even the least sympathetic observer.
As in the West, the early stages of industrialization were accompanied by atrocious conditions.
Labour's weak bargaining position, combined with the speed with which new industrial centres such as the Donets basin of the Ukraine were developed and older cities such as St Petersburg expanded, ensured that little attention was given to the needs of the work-force.
Wages were seldom sufficient to support a family.
Workers lived in insanitary and overcrowded rented rooms and cellars where family life was impossible, or in the most spartan and soulless dormitory blocks thrown up by employers.
Discipline at work was harsh: use of the birch only faded out in the 1890s, there was no job security, and management imposed fines for the slightest transgression.
From the employers' point of view this harsh regime was made necessary by the nature of the work-force.
Throughout the period a high percentage of workers, especially in the newly developed areas and the many enterprises set up in rural areas, were born into peasant families.
Even those whose fathers spent some years in industry tended to be brought up in the village.
Not only did they lack skills but they did not adapt readily from the rhythm of agricultural life with its long periods of inactivity and frequent holidays, to the demands of modern industry.
No matter how deep their urban roots, workers found difficulty in coming to terms with the long hours, unhealthy environment, and frequent accidents at work.
Yet deprivation alone does not explain the militancy and relatively strong political consciousness of the factory proletariat.
The specific structure of Russian industry played an important part.
The major industrial developments were heavily concentrated in a few key areas of the Empire.
By the turn of the century, the central industrial area around Moscow, the north-western area around St Petersburg, the major cities of Poland, and the Ukraine employed over 60 per cent of all workers.
Moreover, within these areas workers were concentrated in large enterprises to a far greater extent than in the West.
In both metallurgical and textile industries almost half  the factory workers were employed in plants of over 1,000 workers.
This reflected the rapid introduction of the most modern machinery modelled on the West; the need for enterprises in new areas to be self-sufficient in a variety of secondary products; and the repeated if brief depressions which hit Russian industry, eliminating competitors and encouraging mergers.
This combination of giant enterprises and regional concentration fostered working-class militancy.
Sheer size made relations between employers and workers impersonal, facilitated the circulation of radical ideas, and generated a sense of solidarity among workers.
It made it easier for workers to appreciate the potential power of strike action: statistics confirm that the larger the plant the greater was the propensity to strike.
Moreover, where labour disputes in small enterprises might cause little stir, stoppages in major plants proved highly contagious.
By the same token, protest in these larger enterprises brought immediate intervention by police or even troops: the workers could not fail to associate the political authorities with the hated employer.
From the mid 1880s there was a marked increase in the incidence of strikes.
In 1896 and again in 1897 almost the entire textile industry of St Petersburg was briefly paralysed.
The depression which spread from 1899 only temporarily weakened the strike movement and aggravated unemployment and urban discontent.
Towards the end of 1902 and during 1903 several important cities in the south, including Rostov-on-Don, Baku, and Odessa were hit by mass strikes.
Government reaction only exacerbated the problem.
Such legislation as was passed — on female and child labour, on the length of the working day, and on labour contracts — was feebly enforced.
The Ministry of Finance was sympathetic to employers' insistence that their authority should not be undermined.
The Ministry of the Interior, too anxious about the security implications of labour unrest to leave matters alone, experimented from 1901–03 with police-run labour organizations which it was hoped would divert working-class energy from political towards economic and cultural aims.
These so-called ‘Zubatov unions’ proved abortive and indeed contributed to the explosion of protest which was to shake the regime during 1905.
Mounting social tension was accompanied by the swift development of national consciousness among the Empire's ethnic minorities.
According to the census of 1897, only 43 per cent of the population were Great Russians, and the regime's overt identification with them and with the Orthodox Church alienated the minor  minority nationalities.
A heavy-handed policy of Russification tended to push even relatively mild cultural movements, such as that in the Ukraine, in the direction of political protest.
The dynamics of the process varied widely.
In some cases the government's attempts to tighten its control and impose administrative and cultural uniformity created nationalist opposition where virtually none had existed: this was most evident in the Baltic provinces dominated by a Germanic aristocracy and in the semi-autonomous Duchy of Finland.
Particularly harsh was the treatment of the Jews.
By the turn of the century the Empire contained about 5.5 million Jews — almost half the Jewish population of the world.
They were restricted to Poland and the ‘Pale of Settlement’ to the east of Poland.
Not only were they excluded from most professions, but efforts were made to prevent them acquiring land and to restrict their access to secondary and higher education.
Moreover, at moments of crisis — notably in 1881, 1903, and October 1905 — the authorities connived at vicious pogroms against them.
The result was evident not only in a growing emigration movement but also in the disproportionately high number of Jews in the most radical political parties.
National parties of various complexions were set up to represent many of the minorities — from Letts in the north to Armenians and Georgians in the south, and above all the Poles.
The long history of Polish resistance played an important part in heightening the regime's suspicions of signs of cultural autonomy anywhere in the Empire, and in fuelling the aggressive nationalist tone adopted by both Alexander III and Nicholas II.
The last two tsars intensified the Russification programme in operation in Poland since the 1860s, but hostility to Russia showed no signs of abating and a large garrison had to be stationed there.
Nationalist unrest among the minorities in general, and the Poles in particular , constituted an important ingredient in the upheaval of 1905.
The transformation overtaking Russia's social structure produced major changes in the radical subculture of the revolutionary intelligentsia.
They reacted, in particular, to the upsurge in proletarian and, from the turn of the century, peasant unrest.
Although as yet their role was peripheral, from the point of view of Russia's subsequent history the new ideology and forms of organization which they adopted in this period merit close attention.
The reaction which followed the assassination of Alexander II had crushed the ‘People's Will’.
Student unrest persisted, and numerous small revolutionary circles formed and dissolved, but the 1880s were a period of relative gloom and inactivity.
The peasantry  remained distressingly unresponsive to agitation and the rapid development of industry seemed to be strengthening the regime and foreclosing the option of direct transition to peasant socialism.
It was in these conditions that Marxist ideas began to gain currency.
Marx's works had already begun to penetrate Russia earlier, but until now they had been used to buttress populist attacks on capitalism, rather than to develop a Marxist approach to revolution in Russia.
During the early 1880s, however, five émigré revolutionaries, three of whom had belonged to the stillborn populist organization ‘Black Repartition’, founded the ‘Emancipation of Labour’ group, dedicated to spreading Marxism in Russia.
Their leader, George Plekhanov (1856–1918), wrote the founding texts of Russian Marxism, spelling out with crystal clarity the implications for Russia's future that could be drawn from Marx's socio-economic analysis.
The heart of Plekhanov's message was that Russia was bound to undergo capitalism.
The commune was doomed by the spread of market relations: the peasantry would be divided between capitalists and propertyless labourers.
Moreover, the development of capitalism, both industrial and agricultural, and the polarization of social classes, was heartily to be welcomed.
Only by massive development of her technology and human skill, her ‘productive forces’, could the economic base of socialism in Russia be laid; only by the formation of an organized proletariat could socialist revolution be carried out.
The notion of bypassing capitalism, of direct transition from feudalism to socialism, was idle Utopianism.
The remnants of feudalism, the Tsar, and the old landowning nobility, must first be swept away in a bourgeois revolution which would inaugurate the full flowering of capitalism.
Only then would follow the final reckoning between capital and labour, the abolition of private property, and the construction of socialism.
Russia's revolutionaries must shed their populist illusions, realize that Marx's analysis was fully applicable to Russia, and take their place alongside the proletariat.
From the early 1890s Marxism caught on among young radicals with remarkable speed.
For decades the revolutionaries had rejected outright capitalism, the bourgeoisie, and the Western path in general; they had seen the creation of a propertyless proletariat as a disaster to be avoided at almost any cost and had sought to move directly to socialism based on the commune.
Now, suddenly, those who clung to these notions were thrown on to the defensive and soon outnumbered.
Marxism was all the rage.
Several factors  contributed to the appeal of the new ideology.
It provided answers to every conceivable question with an assurance and a seemingly impregnable logic which the romantics of the 1940s, the nihilists of the 1860s, and the populists of the 1870s had sought but never found.
It guaranteed the ultimate victory of the revolution.
After decades of failure and the deep self-doubt of the 1880s, its offer of scientific proof that socialism was inevitable exercised a powerful attraction.
Whereas the populists had been haunted by the race against time, against the break-up of the commune and the growth of the bourgeoisie, history was on the side of the proletariat.
And the vision held out was of a Russia transformed from grinding poverty, ignorance, and rural backwardness into a society that would not only be just and free but modern, dynamic, industrial.
Above all, Marx's analysis seemed to be borne out by reality, by developments both in the West, with the rapid rise of the German Social Democratic Party (SPD), and in Russia itself.
However inadequate his predictions proved in the twentieth century, Marx's appeal remains incomprehensible unless it is recognized that he did have an unsurpassed grasp of nineteenth-century capitalism.
His analysis made sense of the social changes overcoming the Empire.
A factory proletariat was being formed and, as populist agitators had already discovered, the proletariat bore all the characteristics Marx had depicted — it was brutally exploited, profoundly alienated, and capable of striking heavy blows against employers and government alike.
The Marxist groups of the early 1890s devoted themselves to self-education, fierce polemics against the populists, and propaganda among circles of selected workers.
During the mid 1890s, however, they began to turn to mass agitation at factory level and found the workers highly responsive.
In 1895 the ‘League of Struggle for the Emancipation of the Working Class’ was set up in St Petersburg and its members made an important contribution to the major strikes of 1896 and 1897.
As local groups multiplied, pressure grew for the formation of a united party.
In 1898 the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party was founded, only to be shattered by police arrests.
But the effort was renewed and in 1900 Plekhanov's group, augmented by younger recruits, set up Iskra (The Spark ), an émigré journal designed as a rallying-point for like-minded Social Democrats.
In 1903 a second congress, held in Brussels and London, and dominated by delegates loyal to Iskra , re-established the Party.
This second founding congress, however, was marred by an immediate schism.
The split reflected a portentous difference of  approach within the Party.
The initial bone of contention was the question of the terms on which sympathizers should be admitted to the Party.
One faction (the Bolsheviks —‘partisans of the majority’) favoured a narrow definition which would admit only dedicated and disciplined activists, while another (the Mensheviks —‘partisans of the minority’) envisaged a much broader Party enveloping wide sections of the proletariat.
What on the surface appeared a relatively minor issue in fact went to the heart of a fundamental question facing the Social Democrats: that of the relationship between the Party and the rank and file of the proletariat, the class for whom it was designed.
5.3 Members of the St Petersburg League of Struggle for the Emancipation of the Working Class, 1897.
Lenin is seated in the centre, on his left is l.
Martov, Lenin's closest ally until the bitter controversies which split the Marxists in 1903
The hard-line approach was articulated by V. I. Lenin (1870–1924).
Lenin was the son of an education official in Simbirsk province and trained to be a lawyer.
His older brother was a populist executed in 1887 for plotting to assassinate the Tsar, and as a teenager Lenin was drawn into the revolutionary movement.
He was a short, energetic man, modest in his tastes and happily married, though childless.
He combined outstanding intellectual ability with  a vigorous, highly disciplined, and formidable personality.
The remarkable role he played in Russia's development can only be understood in terms of his total immersion — intellectual, emotional, moral — in Marxism.
Three fundamental points must be made about his ideological make-up.
In the first place, he believed that Marx had bequeathed a method of analysing the social process which was scientific, which went to the very roots of reality.
Secondly, he believed an essential condition of the triumph of the proletariat was that it be guided by Marxism.
Finally, he was convinced, he knew with every fibre of his being, that he himself had mastered this science of society.
It was this absolute conviction which turned a gifted politician into one of history's most significant leaders.
For Lenin, the role of the Party was precisely to provide the guidance, the ‘revolutionary theory’ which Marxist analysis yielded.
The Party must be the institutional embodiment of Marxism.
The overriding priority, therefore, was to ensure that the structure of the Party should guarantee its ideological purity.
That purity was all too easily sullied.
The class enemy, the bourgeoisie and its allies, wielded a vast array of ideological weapons designed to mislead the proletariat.
In England they had managed to restrict the horizons of the working class to piecemeal economic goals, to mere trade unionism.
He saw similar ‘economist’ tendencies among Russian activists who considered themselves revolutionaries but in fact were prime carriers of bourgeois distortions.
Petty-bourgeois and peasant elements were constantly being drawn into the proletariat, bringing with them innumerable illusions.
It was in the very nature of the constantly growing working class that full socialist consciousness, full understanding of the revolutionary destiny of the proletariat, could not be achieved simultaneously by all sections.
Initially, in fact, only genuinely revolutionary members of the intelligentsia and the most advanced cadres of the proletariat would be abreast of revolutionary theory.
The purpose of the Party was to knit together this vanguard, to build a structure so homogeneous, so ideologically uniform that it would be impervious to infiltration by bourgeois revisionists — or police agents.
Accordingly, Lenin insisted upon an exclusive definition of Party membership, speaking in his major tract on Party structure —What Is To Be Done ?(1902)— of a party of ‘professional revolutionaries’.
Likewise, it was his image of a party united by a scientifically based theory which enabled him to insist upon a steeply hierarchical structure.
The ‘correct’ line on any issue was established not by a survey of opinion within the Party but by rigorous scientific  analysis.
Once this had yielded a conclusion, there was no room for further debate.
To permit dissent within the Party would be to reopen the door to bourgeois deviations.
Lenin's approach made the relationship between the Party and the rank and file of the proletariat seem simple.
The Party was by definition the vanguard of the proletariat.
The social origin of its members, the initial preponderance of intelligentsia over workers, was utterly irrelevant.
Contact with less advanced elements might well fluctuate, subject as it was to constant police intervention.
But an ideologically sound party had little to fear from this: it could never come adrift from the true interests of the class.
And as soon as conditions permitted, the class would come to realize it.
The vigour with which Lenin pressed his own view of the Party played a major role in crystallizing the latent divisions among the Social Democrats.
It was in large measure in reaction to Lenin's position that the Mensheviks clarified their ideas.
There were serious differences within their ranks, a fact which provided a serious handicap in subsequent years, but they all found Lenin's concept of the Party unacceptable.
Not that they were unmindful of the dangers of a diluted and ‘revised’ version of Marxism which so preoccupied Lenin.
They too had supported Iskra and the creation of a united party, and had condemned ‘economism’ within Russia and ‘revisionism’in the German SPD.
Little objection had been raised to the forthright tone of What Is To Be Done ? when it first appeared.
But once the Party had been firmly re-established, their primary attention switched to the disconcerting evidence of a gulf separating Party activists and rank-and-file workers.
The problem was real enough.
Even at the height of the strike movement of the 1890s there had been a certain amount of friction between workers and intelligentsia.
Following the economic downturn of 1899 there had been a brief decline in strike action and contact had become more difficult to sustain.
And by the time the workers' movement revived in 1902, the energy of activists was caught up both in Party organization and in the challenge posed by the burgeoning liberal and neo-populist movements.
for the Mensheviks it was crucial that the Party should not risk isolation from the class it sought to represent.
This was why they adamantly opposed Lenin's vision of the Party.
Instead of rapidly expanding the ranks of the Party, it threatened, in their view, to reduce them; instead of bridging the gap between a party dominated by members of the intelligentsia and the working masses, it threatened to institutionalize that gap.
To the Mensheviks Lenin's vision smacked of élitism.
It was Leon  Trotsky (1879–1940), a brilliant young recruit to the party, who expressed most succinctly the interwoven ideological and personal antagonism which Lenin provoked.
The effect of Lenin's strategy, he warned, would be that the party substitutes itself for the class, ‘the party organization substitutes itself for the party, the Central Committee substitutes itself for the organization and, finally, a ‘dictator’ substitutes himself for the Central Committee’.
Lenin's heavy emphasis on discipline and centralized control within the Party was particularly unattractive to activists drawn from the minority nationalities.
Whereas among the Bolsheviks in this early period about 80 per cent were Great Russians, the proportion among the Mensheviks was only a third.
In both factions Jews were prominent, but only the Mensheviks attracted a significant proportion of minority nationals, especially Georgians and Ukrainians.
When most of the leading Social Democrats, including I. Martov (1873–1923) and, following the congress, Plekhanov threw their weight against Lenin, the Bolshevik faction failed to gain control of the Party's leading organs.
Some of the implications of the schism became apparent during the upheaval of 1905.
The Mensheviks threw themselves into the working-class trade unions and other organizations which sprang up, seeking the fusion of the Party and the rank-and-file proletariat.
The Bolsheviks, on the other hand, reacted with much more caution to these institutions and tended to emphasize the need to establish Party control over them.
A related difference concerned the revolutionary timetable.
Both factions of the Party interpreted the upheaval as a ‘bourgeois democratic’ revolution.
For the Mensheviks this implied that state power must pass to bourgeois parties, and although the proletariat must play a major, even leading role in overturning autocracy, it would be madness for the Social Democrats to take part in government.
Socialism could not yet be built and they would inevitably disappoint proletarian expectations.
Lenin, on the other hand, could see a role for the Party in government.
He had much less faith in the revolutionary determination of Russia's bourgeoisie than the Mensheviks, and he emphasized the revolutionary potential of the peasantry.
This opened up the prospect of democracy being installed not by a bourgeois government but by ‘a revolutionary democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry’.
Such a government, he conceded, was unlikely to survive long.
Once noble land had been appropriated, the wealthier peasants would move over to the side of the bourgeoisie, and bourgeois rule would follow.
But meanwhile democracy would  have been taken much further than the Mensheviks envisaged — and there was even the possibility that, if revolution broke out in the West, the ‘dictatorship’ might be sustained by aid from socialist regimes abroad.
In the event, the outcome of 1905 disappointed both factions.
But difficult as the schism was for many workers and indeed activists to understand or justify, its far-reaching ramifications had already begun to emerge.
by no means all the revolutionaries were converted to social democracy.
For a significant minority, Marxism remained a callous and abstract scheme.
Were they to applaud the ruin of hard-working peasants, the indescribable misery of proletarianization, the fat profits of ruthless capitalists in agriculture and industry?
During the 1880s and 1890s populist economists insisted that Russian capitalism was an artificial product of state policy, and that it was doomed by the weakness of the domestic market and its inability to compete abroad.
By the late 1890s this argument had become much harder to sustain.
Leading neo-populist theorists, of whom Viktor Chernov (1876–1952) was the most influential, emphasized instead the distinction between development in industry and in agriculture.
Industrial capitalism was indeed expanding productive power and creating a sharp division between employers and employees.
But agricultural capitalism was wholly unprogressive, merely exploiting the poor without advancing production in any way.
Moreover, the vast majority of the peasantry were already semi-socialist: they were not yet persuaded of the need for collective farming, but they did reject private landownership and depended upon the labour of their own hands.
Events in the cities would unfold much as Marx had envisaged, with a phase of bourgeois rule culminating in proletarian revolution, but there was no need for the peasantry to pass through capitalism.
Peasant revolution could achieve the immediate ‘socialization’ of the land and abolition of private ownership in preparation for the ultimate transition to socialist production.
Chernov placed less emphasis on the peculiar virtues of the peasant commune than had his populist predecessors, and sought to integrate the development of urban capitalism and Marx's insights into his neo-populist programme.
In 1901, encouraged by the resurgence of peasant unrest, several local groups combined to form the Socialist Revolutionary (SR) Party, and were joined the following year by the émigré Agrarian Socialist League.
Although in theory a homogeneous body directed by a unified Central Committee, in fact the new party proved decidedly more amorphous than its Social Democratic rival.
Party  policy and the implications of party membership were less than clear.
It was not until the very end of 1905 that the first Party Congress was summoned and an official programme adopted, and the immediate sequel was the defection of splinter groups to left and right.
There were important divisions over tactics — the older guard tended to disapprove of the wave of terrorist attacks mounted by younger members between 1901 and 1907.
Moreover, although the Party probably enrolled rather more members among workers, intelligentsia, and artisans than either the Mensheviks or the Bolsheviks in this period, the prime constituency towards which it turned — the peasantry — remained very difficult to organize.
The number of peasant members was derisory.
Nevertheless, some contact was made with the village, primarily through teachers and medical assistants, and the SRs were able to exert their influence over the All-Russian Peasants Union, the most important peasant body to emerge during 1905.
Despite its organizational drawbacks, and a very sharp decline after 1907, the Party had gained substantial urban support and seen its faith in mass peasant rebellion vindicated.
The catalyst which in 1905 transformed this complex pattern of social and political agitation into a direct assault upon the autocracy was a disastrous war with Japan.
Although Russia's eastern expansion was much less extensive than in earlier periods, she increased her influence over northern Persia and joined in the international scramble for influence in China.
But in the Japanese Empire she at last came up against an eastern power developing at a rate comparable to her own, and one capable of offering effective resistance.
The conflict arose over rival ambitions in Manchuria and Korea.
The Russian approach to negotiations was complacent in the extreme.
The issue was of far greater importance to Japan than to Russia, yet the Tsar and most of his ministers expected the Japanese to be easily intimidated.
They were not.
Emboldened by an alliance with Britain made in 1902, Japan attacked Russian forces in January 1904 and proceeded to inflict a series of devastating defeats upon her by land and sea.
In Russia the war aroused no more than a brief flicker of patriotic enthusiasm: years of nationalist propaganda under the last two tsars failed to bear fruit.
The war was widely regarded, not without justice, as the product of intrigue at court and among a handful of entrepreneurs.
Mobilization was unpopular: there was serious disaffection within the armed forces, dramatically highlighted by the mutiny on the battleship Potemkin in June 1905.
Repeated doses of bad news from the front generated mounting criticism of government incompetence; ministerial confidence was  visibly shaken; and discontent which had been smouldering for years burst into flame.
Government handling of the crisis was anything but skilful.
Alternating attempts at forthright assertion of authority and tentative gestures of conciliation exacerbated the situation.
The use of force against workers, peasants, political activists, and minority nationalists simply intensified the incipient revolution and pushed all groups further to the left.
By the summer of 1905 the government looked so vulnerable that even irreproachable traditionalists such as the Marshals of the Nobility concluded that political reform was inescapable.
5.4 Bloody Sunday.
January 1905.
Troops confront the peaceful demonstration, led by Father Gapon, in which traditional deference was combined with demands for far-reaching social and political reform.
The official estimate of the number who died in the violence that followed was 130: unofficial estimates varied from over 200 to more than 1,000.
Following the assassination in July 1904 of V. K. Plehve, the notoriously unpopular Minister of the Interior, his successor, D. I. Sviatopolk-Mirsky, tried to soften the government's image.
Censorship and control of public associations was slackened.
The result was a tremendous upsurge of liberal and revolutionary propaganda, a campaign of banquets and public meetings to demand reform, a zemstvo congress to draw up specific proposals for change, and the formation of a series of politically oriented unions.
A final experiment by the police at labour organization backfired disastrously.
The St Petersburg Assembly of Factory Workers, set up with official approval in February 1904, broke loose from its sponsors and under the leadership of Father Gapon, a maverick but inspired orator, helped foster a virtual general strike in the capital.
On 9 January 1905 the Assembly organized a monster demonstration to present the Winter Palace a petition which was at once humble and radical.
In launching troops against the unarmed, hymn-singing crowds of men and women, the Romanov regime committed one of its greatest political blunders.
The effect of ‘Bloody Sunday’ on Political consciousness among workers and peasants alike was by all accounts traumatic.
In February an attempt was made to placate working-class anger.
The Shidlovsky Commission summoned representatives to be elected by the major factories of the capital.
The Commission was never able even to begin its discussions, so radical were the workers' demands, but the elections generated great excitement among the proletariat and Provided valuable political experience.
In May the efforts of V. N. Kokovtsov, the Minister of Finance, to persuade representatives of the industrialists to agree to improve the conditions of labour collapsed ignominiously.
The employers, with new-found spirit, informed the Minister that labour unrest was the result of political rather than economic conditions, and withdrew from the discussions.
In the summer attempts to extract  expressions of loyalty from the peasantry went awry.
Instead the All-Russian Peasants Union was formed, and at its first congress in July proceeded to demand the abolition of private property in land and the convening of a Constituent Assembly.
In August the concession of autonomy to the universities simply turned them into centres for the most frenzied political activity and public debate.
The clearest index of the pressure upon the government was given by the constitutional concessions which the Tsar, despite his profound religious attachment to autocracy, was gradually forced to make.
In the autumn of 1904 he was still rejecting the mild suggestion from Sviatopolk-Mirsky, very much along the lines of Loris-Melikov's proposals of 1881, that representatives of public institutions should be co-opted on to the State Council.
By February he felt compelled to commit himself to summoning a Consultative Assembly.
In August the new Minister of the Interior, A. G. Bulygin, published details of the (restricted) suffrage for the Assembly.
The same month the storm of strikes at last abated, peace was made with Japan, and it seemed possible that the government would recover its balance.
But the worst was still to come.
A further outbreak of strikes at the end of September, initiated by printers in Moscow, spread like wildfire, paralysing not only Moscow and St Petersburg but many provincial cities as well.
The demands of the workers were more than ever focused upon political change.
The Union of Railwaymen brought the railways to a halt, the liberal Union of Unions and leading liberal figures proclaimed full support for the strikes, and many employers showed sympathy by lenient treatment of striking workers.
The disparate movements of protest were for a moment united in massive resistance.
The regime shuddered.
In desperation the Tsar appointed Witte to handle the crisis, committed himself to creating a unified cabinet under Witte's premiership, and on 17 October issued a historic Manifesto.
The autocracy undertook to guarantee full civil liberty, to give major legislative powers to the promised Assembly (the State Duma), and to broaden greatly the franchise on which it was to be based.
The Tsar's 400-word Manifesto immediately divided the forces arrayed against him.
The propertied classes rallied to the government and called for a halt to all disturbances.
The Union of October (Octobrists), a loose political alliance led by landed nobility and a few prominent industrialists, was formed to work with the Tsar on the basis of the Manifesto.
Employers brought maximum pressure to bear on workers in order to restore order: recalcitrant strikers  faced lockouts.
The liberal centre considered the Manifesto less than satisfactory but sufficient grounds for a return to normality.
They formed the Constitutional Democratic (Kadet) Party, dedicated to using the concessions of 17 October as a stepping-stone towards full parliamentary democracy.
Moderate unions, including the Union of Railwaymen, called for an immediate return to work.
But widespread resistance and protest demonstrations continued.
Although a number of concessions helped pacify minority nationalists, the most militant remained unreconciled.
Substantial military force had to be used in the Baltic and in Poland where martial law was instituted.
The period from October to December saw a rash of localized mutinies among soldiers and sailors from the naval base of Kronstadt near St Petersburg to the Far Eastern Army.
They were firmly crushed by loyal units, but the implications of unrest within this ultimate bastion of the regime severely frightened the authorities.
Most alarming was the failure of the Manifesto to appease peasants and workers.
Peasant disturbances — labour and rent strikes, land seizures, and direct assaults on noble manors — peaked precisely during the weeks which followed the Tsar's concessions.
The second congress of the All-Russian Peasants Union, meeting in November, dismissed the Manifesto out of hand, and the announcement that redemption dues were to be phased out altogether made little impact.
Troops had to be used on a wide scale in the countryside and peasant disturbances continued through 1906 and into 1907.
The proletariat was hardly more impressed by the Manifesto.
With moderate unions leading a return to work, there was a brief respite in the strike movement, but in the weeks that followed the government faced an unprecedented challenge to its authority, centred on St Petersburg and Moscow.
On the very day of the Manifesto a central strike committee in the capital proclaimed itself the St Petersburg Soviet (Council) of Workers' Deputies.
With remarkable speed this novel organization gained the confidence of the capital's work-force.
Its formation may have owed something to the traditional structure of the peasant commune; its unity and authority were enhanced by the absence of firmly entrenched separate trade unions; and its electoral procedure was drawn directly from the experience of the Shidlovsky Commission.
An Executive Committee was formed and individual members of the socialist parties — especially the Mensheviks — played prominent roles: Trotsky briefly held the post of chairman.
But the deputies — whose number reached 562 — were elected directly at factory level and were subject to immediate recall.
The system of direct  democracy made the Soviet immediately responsive to the mood of rank-and-file workers.
Similar soviets had emerged in other cities earlier in the year, but that of St Petersburg took on unique importance.
It helped to inspire the creation of soviets elsewhere — among peasants and soldiers as well as workers — and it attempted to liaise between them.
Moreover, the functions it took on within the capital — including the setting up of an armed militia, the publication of an uncensored newspaper, the imposition via the printers' union of its own form of censorship, and above all the coordination of strike action — gave it the appearance of rivalling the authority of the government itself.
At the end of October, egged on by rank-and-file demands for an eight-hour day, the Soviet endorsed renewed strike action.
Early in November it called a second general strike to protest against the repressive measures being taken at the naval base of Kronstadt, in Poland, and elsewhere.
This time the employers' resistance was rigid and the workers' ability to go without pay was soon exhausted.
On 3 December, when the Soviet had survived fifty days, the government felt strong enough to arrest the Executive Committee and over 200 deputies and to destroy the organization.
The immediate sequel was an armed uprising in several cities, headed by Moscow.
The Bolsheviks played a leading role both in the Moscow Soviet and in the December rising.
For over a week government forces were unable to crush guerrilla-style resistance, but the army remained loyal and by the second half of December the workers, movement was clearly on the retreat.
During the first weeks of the new year ruthless reprisals helped restore order to urban Russia.
The drama of 1905 left a profound imprint upon Russian public life.
Both leaders and rank and file at all levels of society — nobility, middle class, workers, and even some peasants — had taken part in open political struggle.
They had established new institutions, new parties, soviets, and unions.
Radicals and conservatives alike had become politically mobilized.
The process had been crowned by the Tsar's undertaking to set up a State Duma, a permanent forum for public participation in the affairs of government.
Yet the moment this promise was made, the polarized structure of society was fully exposed.
Bitter social divisions, briefly overshadowed by the chorus of demands for constitutional reform, came to the fore.
The immediate effect was to swing conservative support behind Nicholas's regime.
The more militant and threatening the pressure from below, the more vigorously the propertied classes supported repressive measures.
Even the Kadets, though deeply committed to major  social reform and full constitutional democracy, were fiercely critical of continued revolutionary activity.
The Octobrists, while regretting official infringement of recently guaranteed civil liberties, heartily endorsed vigorous measures to restore the authority of the government.
On the extreme Right, the threat to order and property found expression in the formation of the Union of the Russian People.
It was composed of disparate reactionary groups, violently nationalist and anti-Semitic in outlook, whose only regret was that the Tsar had issued any manifesto at all.
Before 1905 was out the spectre of social upheaval thus enabled the Tsar's government to regain the initiative.