

FOREWORD
This System Description has been prepared to assist the staff who will control and use the computer system during the period in which the text of the New OED is edited in preparation for the publication of the integrated, paper edition.
The principal purpose of the System Description is to describe the manner in which the various components of the system interact; in this sense it is concerned with the physiology, rather than the anatomy, of the system.
The system itself is expected to be used in the form it is delivered for a period of approximately eighteen months.
It is not suitable for extended use beyond three years, without modification and revision.
The computer system delivered is built to the design approved for Phase 1 of the New OED Project in July 1985.
This document describes only those components and facilities required for the second stage of computer processing for Phase 1.
These provide a means for lexicographers to review and amend dictionary material which has completed the first stage of processing, as well as a facility for the transfer of portions of the dictionary material to a typesetting and composition operator.
The review of material may take place through a computer terminal, or by means of a proof print.
The amendment facilities are necessary to adjust any deficiencies of automatic processing in stage 1 — validation, parsing, integration, conversion of phonetic coding, etc.
This document presents the main features of the system that has been built, and provides a guide to the safe running and control of that system.
It describes the methods by which the integrity and stability of the system can be maintained.
It describes the performance that can be expected of the system.
It prescribes the boundaries within which the system can be safely adapted to meet changes in requirements for facilities or work rate.
The document should be read in conjunction with other material produced for Phase 1 of the New OED Project, including:
Outline System Design for a Computer System
Description of the Processed Text of the New Oxford English Dictionary
A User's Guide to Oedipus 
A Service Agreement for the New Oxford English Dictionary Computer System
A Facilities Management Agreement for the New Oxford English Dictionary Computer System
Operating Procedures for the New Oxford English Dictionary Computer System.
The completion of the computer system for Phase 1 of the New OED Project marks the end of a period of intensive and innovative software development.
In 1984, when work started, it was not clear that the task could be completed.
In the event it has proved possible not only to complete the task, but to do so in a timely and controlled fashion.
This has been a source of satisfaction to the Computer Group, but has been due in part to the assistance we have received from many people.
These have given advice and guidance, and contributed to the construction of items of software.
These contributions are too numerous to list, but at its peak the Computer Group had fifteen members, with secondees from IBM (United Kingdom) Limited and the University of Waterloo, and contract staff from a variety of companies.
We are grateful for their contribution.
The total effort required to design and build the system was of the order of fourteen man years.
Construction itself, and the pre-processing of dictionary material, took approximately two years.
FUNCTIONS
The New OED system has five principal features:
the provision of a duplicated archive of dictionary text
a facility for lexicographers to produce new versions of dictionary entries using a purpose-built editing sub-system
a means of proof-printing the text of dictionary entries in forms suitable for review by lexicographers
a means of transferring the text to an external contractor providing computerised composition and typesetting
extensive reporting of the location and targets of cross-references, and of invalid or ambiguous cross-references.
The dictionary is divided for management purposes into 40 logical ranges of entries beginning a-aozzz and ending wig-zzzzz .
The text of the entries is held in the archive in 40 corresponding files called tables .
These tables contain one or more versions of the text of each entry in the corresponding dictionary range.
A larger version number corresponds to a more recent version of an entry.
The most recent version is known as the current version.
Some of the entries in the archive are marked as being obsolete , either because they represent Supplement entries which have been incorporated into earlier OED entries, or because they have been discarded by lexicographers and are not to be included in the New OED .
Those entries which are not marked as obsolete constitute the active population of the archive.
In order that the system can meet the required standard of availability, and to simplify control of the archive, lexicographers are only presented with a sub-set of dictionary entries at any one time.
This sub-set of entries is held in a smaller database known as the Working-Set .
Entries in the archive are transferred to the Working-Set according to the instructions of the lexicographers.
The normal unit of transfer, and therefore also of work for the lexicographers, consists of the current versions of all active entries in one table in the archive.
Up to three tables may be present in the Working-Set at any time.
Lexicographers will create new entries, discard others, and create new versions of existing entries.
When work is complete on any given tables the most recent versions of the text of new or modified entries are returned to the archive.
In addition, the archive is updated to reflect the current status (which may change without modifications being made to the text itself) of each entry in the completed table.
Entries are transferred to the typesetting contractor in table units also.
The transfer medium is magnetic tape.
Transfer will normally occur shortly after editing the material in the table is complete.
The system also provides the facility to transfer small numbers of entries chosen from any part of the dictionary to the typesetting contractor and to the Working-Set.
The lexicographic sub-system is known as Oedipus .
It provides a tool for the review, creation, proofing and manipulation of dictionary text.
The text may be presented in a variety of styles.
The system provides the lexicographic community with a means of access to the pool of entries in the Working-Set.
Provision is made for a range of access rights, entry ownership, organisation and work management.
A log is maintained of entries created, changes made to entries, the people who made the changes, times and dates etc.
In addition integrity checks are performed on the text of individual entries and the integrity of the population of entries as a whole is ensured.
A comprehensive guide to the capabilities of Oedipus is to be found in the document A User's Guide to Oedipus .
Proofs of dictionary entries have two principal forms.
The first simulates (though not exactly) the intended appearance of the material on paper.
No attempt is made to hyphenate, justify or show the final page layout.
Other layout features (e.g. the numbering and paragraphing of associated groups of quotations) are added to assist lexicographic work.
The second form is used to give unambiguous information about the markup of text.
Proofs are produced in bulk by the Computer Group on request.
Lexicographers may produce proofs of individual entries through the editing sub-system.
Whenever substantial changes are made to dictionary material it is desirable that lexicographers be aware of cross-references targeted on material which is to have its address or its meaning changed.
Similarly, cross-references which were not satisfied or were found to be ambiguous during the earlier stage of computer processing may need to be corrected or updated.
A substantial volume of information about cross-references is held by the system.
It would be unhelpful, inflexible, and impractical to present this material as a single report.
Instead, a facility for selective reporting of cross-references by source, target, and by status, has been built.
Initial reports on cross-references by major exception conditions were provided on delivery of the system.
Subsequently, reports will be produced on request.
This part of the system will be managed by the Computer Group during the early stages of interactive integration.
DATA
Introduction
The system provides a machine-readable dictionary (MRD) marked up with generic tags.
Procedures defining the processes appropriate for each element are held separately, reducing the dependence of the MRD on the particular implementation used in Phase 1 of the New OED Project.
Since structural information was only partially contained in the text captured by the keyboarding contractor, structural markup has been generated and inserted by the computer system in the first stage of processing.
In addition, end tags have been added to complement all start tags.
This form of markup provides the flexibility to select different display styles for the text because it does not anticipate the typography of the New OED .
It also provides a good base for later phases of the New OED Project.
A detailed description of the text is to be found in the document:Description of the Processed Text of the New OED.
A principle of design is that dictionary material is structured in such a way that:
its original sequence can be reproduced
it is amenable to editorial inspection and amendment
it is made available to lexicographers in logical and useful units.
The data representing the dictionary in the system consists of dictionary text and information essential for the processing and management of the text.
The data is stored in a relational database.
The database management system is SQL/DS.
Conceptually, the data is organised as a set of structures called tables .
Each table has a specific number of columns or attributes and any number of unordered rows or records.
Every row in a table has a unique combination of attribute values which may therefore be used to identify the row.
Databases
The system makes use of three discrete databases.
The Main Database contains an archive of all the dictionary text.
It is organised as 40 tables, each table containing approximately th of the total text.
Access to entry text is controlled by the Entry and/or Lemma tables which enable the required entry and its current version to be identified, and by the Range table, which specifies in which of the 40 Text tables the material is to be found.
Also held in the Main Database are a number of other tables used for the management of the text and for reporting.
The Copy Database provides double redundancy to improve the standard of availability.
It may be used if the Main Database is damaged.
It is a direct copy of the text and most of the other tables contained in the Main Database.
The Main and Copy Databases are only accessed by batch processes and are not available directly to the lexicographers.
The Working-Set database contains the current units of work taken, by request of the lexicographer, from the Main Database.
It can contain up to three tables of dictionary text plus up to 250 individual entries taken from across the whole dictionary range.
Other tables contained in the Working-Set provide access to text, and control of the lexicographic work.
Tables
Main Database
Table : Columns (Fields)
Text : entry entity number/version number/sequence number/text
The Text table contains the full text of all versions of all entries from whatever source,OED ,Supplement , NEWS (New Words to be added for 1989), or those entries created directly by lexicographers.
Up to 252 characters of text will be stored in any row and the last text character is followed by a pair of ‘£’ characters.
All rows (except possibly the last for any entry) will contain 252 characters of text.
The sequence number field orders the rows and provides a mechanism for checking that all rows of the text were stored or read.
For entries still current after automatic processing in stage 1, or subsequently created by lexicographers, the current version number is stored in the Entry table (WEntry in the case of the Working-Set).
Entry : entity number/print sequence number (PSN) /dictionary flag/current version number/history flag 1/history flag 2
The Entry table specifies the relative order in which dictionary entries are to be printed, and provides a key of access to the Text table (entity and current version number).
In addition historical information about the current status as well as the automatic processes applied to the text are contained in the history flag fields.
The dictionary flag served to distinguish between OED and Supplement and between New OED and NEWS entries at earlier stages of processing.
Once the stage of lexicographic activity is complete all current entries should belong to the New OED .
Range : table number/first print sequence number (PSN) /last PSN/first lemmatised form/last lemmatised form
The Range table has two principal purposes.
When complete Text tables are being loaded or unloaded the PSN fields are used to specify the range of entries belonging to the Target table.
Second, either the PSN or the lemmatised form may be used to determine in which table the text of an entry is to be found.
The lemmatised form is simply a convenient representation of the headword lemma.
Version : entry entity number/version number/creation date
The Version table records the date on which a new version of an entry was added to the main archive.
The entity number of the entry is invariant.
Cross-reference : entity number/continuation number/cross- reference text/source entry entity number/target lemma entity number/target entry entity number/sense address/status/text
The Cross-reference table contains information about the 600,000 cross-references found in the source material.
During the automatic processing stage an attempt was made to locate the targets indicated by the cross-references, and so validate them, and, where necessary modify them in the light of changes made to entries during automatic integration.
Information about the processing applied to the cross-references and the exceptions which arose is stored in the table.
This table, together with the Lemma table, is used for generating such reports as may be requested by lexicographers.
Lemma : entity number/entry entity number/lemmatised form/first part-of-speech (POS) /homonym number/lemma type/POS map/homonym map/lemma
The Lemma table in the Main Database is used only for reporting purposes.
It contains details of all headword and bold lemmas after the end of preprocessing.
It is not updated as is the equivalent Lemma table in the Working-Set.
For this reason it remains consistent with the information in the Cross-reference table.
Redundant Lemma : Description as Lemma plus date
This table contains all bold and headword lemmas discarded during automatic integration (because the equivalent lemmas already existed in the OED ).
This table will only be used to facilitate the retrieval of obsolete material e.g. discarded Supplement text (which has been incorporated into OED material).
Copy Database
The tables are the same as those in the Main Database except that the Cross-reference, Lemma and Redundant Lemma labels are not present.
Working-Set Database
Table : Columns
Text : columns as in the Main Database
(Headword) Lemma : entity number/entry entity number/lemmatised form/first POS/homonym number/lemma type/POS map/homonym map/lemma
This table is used to build columns in the WEntry table whenever material is transferred from the Main Database to the Working-Set.
This table is updated.
Whenever a new entry is created a row is inserted in this table and whenever an entry is discarded the appropriate row is deleted and a new row inserted in the Redundant Lemma table.
To reduce overheads when making security copies only headword lemmas are placed in this table.
Redundant Lemma : description as Lemma plus date
This table is used to keep track of entries discarded by lexicographers.
WEntry : entity number/PSN/lemmatised form/first POS/homonym number/dictionary flag/lexo status/on-loan flag/date borrowed/lexicographer/current relative version number/history flag 1
The WEntry table is the prime means of access to entry text.
It contains the entry identifiers and information about the current version and status of entries in the Working-Set.
In particular the on- loan flag serves as a lock to ensure that only one lexicographer may modify the contents of an entry at any given time.
It records which lexicographer last changed the entry and when.
User : user/authority
This table is used by the Oedipus system to identify authorised users.
The authority attribute distinguishes lexicographers from other valid users e.g. the Computer Group.
Lexgroup : group/lexicographer
This table determines the group or groups to which lexicographers belong.
Group : group/active flag/level/chieftain
The Group table is used in two ways.
When a table is transferred into the Working-Set the entries are allocated as bundles to groups of lexicographers.
The system determines how many groups are active at the appropriate level for the appropriate table in the Working-Set to which the entries are being transferred, and allocates entries on a roughly equal basis.
Second, the level flag is used to distinguish editorial groups (with the authority to approve entries for printing) from others.
The Chieftain attribute identifies the lexicographer who is permitted to approve the transfer of material back to the main archive, and to reallocate ‘ownership’ of bundles of entries.
Bundle : first PSN/last PSN/group/last assigned PSN/window/first lemmatised form/last lemmatised form
A bundle represents up to 500 contiguous dictionary entries.
Access to these entries is restricted to members of the owning group.
Bundles may be reallocated to another group at a higher level by the chieftain of that group.
The window attribute determines in which of the Working-Set Text tables the entry text is to be found.
The last assigned PSN attribute is used to support queries in which a lexicographer requests the next entry requiring attention.
This field either contains the PSN of the last entry in this bundle assigned on that basis (restricting the range of the search) or contains a negative value indicating that there are no more entries of the kind in this bundle.
Whenever such a request is made Oedipus scans the bundles belonging to the appropriate group in PSN order, updating the last assigned PSN field as appropriate.
Error text : error code/message
This table contains the text of system error messages and is accessed by the appropriate error code.
Trace log : date/time/lexicographer/log code/request details/error code/value 1/value 2/value 3
Whenever a database request is made via Oedipus the details are recorded in the Trace Log.
Next : next entity number This field contains the next unique entity number to be assigned by the system.
During the lexicographic stage this can only be the result of the creation of a new entry.
Summary of Data Volumes
Principal Databases
A cylinder is characters of data.
A volume is cylinders.
Copy Database
Working-Set Database Volumes are calculated on the following basis.
The Lemma, Entry, Range, Version and Bundle tables will be permanently resident in the Working-Set.
The Working-Set will be backed up about twice a week.
This dictates the size of the logs.
Edited entries will be returned to the Main Database on lexicographer request.
Note that only some of the additional text rows created by lexicographic activity in the Working-Set are copied back to the Main Database.
Data Archives
Off-line Archive
Superseded dictionary material is held as an on-line archive in the database.
Since the whole database is regularly copied to tape for recovery purposes the archive will also be secured by the same operation.
When the contents of the database are written to tape for back-up purposes, the previous generation of tapes will be taken off-site to provide additional security.
The original source (ICC) versions are held only on magnetic tape.
On-line Archive
Entries will be held in one or more versions.
Additional versions are created when text is modified by either automatic or manual (editorial) processes.
OED entries which are unchanged after the final integration process may be approved for transfer to the composition system without editorial change, requiring only one version to be kept.
Entries in the Supplement which extend or modify existing OED entries become inactive text after integration.
The material they contain is present in New OED entries, which are considered to be new versions of the corresponding entries from the OED .
Inactive Supplement text has its status marked so that it makes no further demands upon lexicographic time and effort, and is not selected for composition or transfer to the Working-Set.
A change in status may occur without a change of version (since the text itself is unaltered), and represents an investment of editorial labour which should be recorded so that it is not needlessly repeated e.g. after database recovery due to media failure.
Access for editing purposes will be restricted to the current version of any work unit.
Previous versions will be read-only.
Access to them will require the approval of a senior lexicographer and will be controlled by the Computer Group.
Certain status changes may only be authorised by senior lexicographers.
When such changes occur the entry becomes the property of the approving member of the Lexicographic Group.
Data Versions
A distinction is made between temporary versions of an entry, which will have a short life-span in the Working-Set, and permanent versions of an entry which are transferred to the Main Database.
A large entry may require a number of editing sessions before its content is approved.
Each session will create a new version in the Working-Set.
Only the final (approved) version will be returned to the Main Database, other versions will be abandoned.
SYSTEM CONFIGURATION
Equipment
Lexicographer Group Equipment
The list of equipment supplied to the Lexicographer Group is:
The nine 3192 terminals will be used as the standard equipment for interactive editing.
The two page printers located in the lexicographic area are provided for the output of interactive proofs during the day and for bulk proofs overnight.
Computer Group Equipment
The 5371 and 3192 terminals are available for demonstration purposes, as is the 3812 page printer when not in use by the Computer Group.
They will normally be located in the System Display Room.
Of the other equipment available to the Computer Group normally five display terminals will be used for support and operations functions.
Several unused terminals will be held as spares.
The 4250 printer will be used under the Computer Group's control to produce occasional high quality proofs or for other documents that cannot adequately be output on the other printers available.
Central Facility
The central computer equipment is sited in the Oxford Computer Centre.
It is administered by the Computer Services Department under a Computer Facilities Management Agreement .
Software
Primary Applications Software
Oedipus editing and database access system
proofing sub-system for interactive and batch proofing
transfer sub-system for supplying text on magnetic tape to composition suppliers
database control sub-system for transferring entries between the Working-Set and the Main Databases.
XRF cross-reference report program
Secondary Applications Software
policeman program to ensure the integrity between the Main and Copy Databases.
Data Management Software
SQL/DS is used to hold and access the text and other primary data in the system
ISQL (the Interactive Query Language) is used for reporting and printing of queries on the data
SQL/DS Database Services Utility (DBSU) is used to unload and load database tables for archive purposes
Standard Software and Utilities
Document Composition Facility (DCF) which includes SCRIPT/VS and is used to format the marked-up text for proofing
Display Input/Output Facility (IOS3270) used for full screen interactions with lexicographers
PL/1 Optimizing and Checkout Compilers for compiling and running programs
Graphical Data Display Manager (GDDM) to enable the graphics capabilities of terminals on the system
Composed Document Printing Facility (CDPF) for driving the 4250 printer
VM/3812 which drives the 3812 page printers
Emulation Program (EP) to enable the 3720 Remote Controller
VM Batch Sub-system (VMBATCH) for submitting and controlling batch processes under CP
VM/Directory Maintenance for maintaining and controlling the VM system directory
VM/Interactive Productivity Facility (IPF) with Problem Control Facility (PCF) for use in problem management procedures.
Environmental and Resource Management Software
the operating system is Virtual Machine/System Product (VM/SP).
This contains four main components:
the Control Program (CP)
the Conversational Monitor System (CMS) which facilitates terminal to CMS communication by means of commands and system messages.
The interactive line editor, XEDIT, and an interpreter for REXX (which allows command files to be constructed), run under CMS
the Remote Spooling Communications Sub-system (RSCS) used to deliver data to the 3268 local printer the Interactive Problem Control System (IPCS/E) used for analysing operating system faults
VM/370 Performance Monitor Analysis (VMAP) to measure and report on the performance and utilisation of the system
System Measurement Analysis in Real Time (SMART) for measuring on-line system performance.
People
Computer Group
It is anticipated that a Computer Group of four people will be sufficient to support the New OED computer system during the Interactive Editing Phase from July 1987 to November 1988.
The Computer Group will comprise:
the New OED Computer Group Manager responsible to the Head of Computer Development for the provision of computer services for the New OED Project Team, he controls the Computer Group, and coordinates the processing and support functions.
He is charged with leading the team and with day to day liaison with the Lexicographer Group.
He is also responsible for Database administration.
a System Supervisor responsible to the Computer Group Manager.
Maintains the integrity of the software and data in the system.
Liaises with Computer Services to ensure operating procedures are carried out.
Acts as technical support on system software including supervision of the databases.
two Analyst/Programmers responsible to the Computer Group Manager for the support of the applications running on the system.
Also provide technical support to the System Supervisor.
Computer Services Department
Computer Services will manage the central computer facilities.
They will carry out the procedures initiated by the Lexicographer Group on instruction from the Computer Group.
Typically these procedures will cause the current unit of work to be returned to the main archive and replaced by a fresh unit of work.
The production of tapes for the composition contractor and the taking of security versions of current work will also be carried out by Computer Services.
The provision of all these services for the New OED Computer Group is detailed in the Facilities Management Agreement .
METHOD OF OPERATION
Overview
During normal working hours the system is dedicated to the Lexicographer Group using copies of Oedipus .
The Computer Group will confine their activities to producing reports requested by lexicographers and to the production of low volumes of proofs when these are required.
Bulk proofing will be scheduled as evening work.
All other processes will take place overnight.
Primary processes will be triggered by lexicographer request at appropriate notice.
Such requests will also determine the running of associated secondary (security) processes.
Lexicographic Sub-system
Editing and Proofing
A comprehensive description of these facilities is to be found in A User's Guide to Oedipus .
Organisation of Entries for Work Management
When entries are transferred to the Working-Set they are packaged into bundles which are owned by predefined groups of lexicographers.
Associated with each entry is a status flag.
The principal use for this field is:
to provide management reports on the progress of work
to enable entries to be selected on a ‘next requiring attention’ basis.
Those entries which were changed by machine processes have their status preset to the value requires attention .
Other entries are given an uncommitted status.
Lexicographers change these values in the course of their work but the system will not allow them to set the status field to a value set initially by the system.
Whenever a lexicographer obtains an entry for review and/or editing, the entry is marked as belonging to that particular lexicographer.
In this way it is possible to determine which entries are being worked on, which have been examined, which approved, and which discarded as obsolete by lexicographers.
A full description of the meanings and uses of the status flag is given in the User's Guide.
Reports are obtained using ISQL.
When the required work has been performed on a bundle of entries, ownership is transferred to a more senior group concerned with editorial approval and resolving any residual difficulties.
This group aggregates all the bundles from the lower level groups.
When ownership is transferred the system resets the status flag to appropriate values and members of this group need only examine those entries flagged for attention.
Finally, the complete unit of work is approved and the system will make these entries unavailable for editing.
Provided that none of the entries were flagged as requiring attention, the system will permit their transfer to the Main Database.
The system does not permit the aggregation of bundles from different units of work (i.e. the original ranges of entries as stored as tables in the archive).
This ensures that complete tables and only complete tables are approved, or that a single oddball entry and only a single oddball entry is approved.
Expected Workload
The system is required to cope with a turnaround of some 500 entries a day.
It is expected that a lexicographer should be able to process some 75 entries a day doing trivial editing tasks and between 10 and 12 entries a day resolving complex editorial tasks.
Recording and Reporting of Lexicographic Changes
All operations against the database are recorded by the system.
The information, which is recorded in a log, details the specific request made, the identity of the lexicographer's machine, the entry, the time and date.
Where changes to text take place ‘before and after figures’ are given which reflect the change in size of the entry in terms of the quantity of tags.
General reports of lexicographic activity or reports within a specific category (for example, the new entries created are a matter of particular interest) may be obtained by the Computer Group on request by a senior lexicographer, by using ISQL.
Other Primary Processes
Transfers Between Databases and for Composition
The processes will be managed by the Computer Croup but will be initiated at lexicographer request.
Because they are incompatible with lexicographic activity they will be run outside normal working hours.
Three procedures are involved:
return of material from the Working-Set to the Main and Copy Databases
transfer of material from the Main to the Working-Set Database
transfer of material from the Main Database to magnetic tape for composition.
Typically, procedure b) will require procedure a) and either or both of them will be initiated by the same control document.
However, from a computer resource management viewpoint they are two procedures and when both are invoked b) must be queued behind a).
Transfers between databases invoke lengthy processes and have subsidiary backup and archiving implications.
In consequence, therefore, any one of these three procedures will be considered as a normal evening's work.
Lexicographer's requests will be queued and serviced on a first come first served basis.
One working day's notice will normally be required before any request is serviced or added to the Computer Group task list.
Procedures a) and b) will require about three and two hours elapsed time respectively.
A further two hours will be required for associated secondary processes.
Procedure c) will require about one hour for each unit of work and it is anticipated that up to three units will be requested at a time.
At peak times it is expected that two transfers a week between the archive and the Working-Set and vice versa will occur, and that material will be sent for composition twice a week during peak use.
Bulk Proofs
Initial proofs of all entries requiring attention will be delivered to lexicographers before they work on the material for the first time.
It is intended that much of this material be available before the system is handed over.
Should the lexicographers wish to proof ranges of dictionary text before approving it, a request may be made to the Computer Group using an appropriate control document.
Any reasonable request will be satisfied within 24 hours.
Excessive demand for current proofs could, however, only be met by using the system during normal working hours (thus impacting interactive lexicographic work).
Cross-reference Reports
Lexicographers will use a control document to request cross-reference reports.
This facility will be managed by the Computer Group initially to control resource usage.
It is not clear at this stage what the demand for such reports will be.
It is anticipated that the usual request will be for all cross-references pointing to a given range of entries.
Small requests would normally be serviced during the day.
Large prints will be run overnight.
Management Reports
A report will be produced daily for each unit of work, detailing those entries in the Working-Set on which work is in progress or which require attention.
The report will be ordered by group, responsible lexicographer, and entry.
Additional reports e.g. showing approved entries and  responsible lexicographer, will be produced within one working day when required.
Secondary Processes
Secondary processes are those required to guarantee standards of availability, recoverability etc.
The principal secondary processes are those concerned with securing changed dictionary material.
They are performed as a consequence of data transfers between databases and are therefore initiated indirectly by the lexicographers.
An image copy of the Working-Set is made every time a new table is loaded to the Working-Set.
This copy together with the duplicated log files, provides the means of recovering and rebuilding in the event of damage to the Working-Set.
It is anticipated that the logs have sufficient capacity and the transfers will be sufficiently frequent that the need for additional image copies will be obviated.
Such interim copies would be necessary if the logs, which are not serial but wrap-around, were to approach the point of overflow.
The back-up process frees space within the logs for re-use by the system.
This process cannot be managed unattended.
The process will take about half an hour, will require two reels of tape and will be initiated by the Computer Services Department operator at 08.00, whenever a transfer to the Working-Set has taken place on the previous night.
When entry text is returned to the Main and Copy Databases a single copy is made to tape of the changed text table, the entry table and the version table.
This process is automated and requires one reel of tape.
Tapes used for security and backup are recorded in GCR mode at 6250 bpi.
ACCESS RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES
Access to the System
Lexicographers who are permitted to use interactive terminals on the system have an identity which is known to the system and created by the System Supervisor.
Having identified themselves, lexicographers are required to authenticate their identity by use of a password.
Lexicographers are required to change their passwords regularly.
The system will suspend the access rights of lexicographers who do not change their passwords every month.
Suspended lexicographers must apply to the Computer Group Manager for reinstatement.
The system is configured to allow lexicographers access to Oedipus only.
At log-on the lexicographer will be presented with the Oedipus welcome screen.
On completing an editing session the lexicographer will be logged out of the system, and the exit screen displayed.
Access to Databases
The right to access the system databases depends on the appropriate authority being granted by the database administrator.
Access rights are limited to tables and may also be restricted to combinations of read, update, and insert.
Access to the Working-Set using Oedipus
In addition to the requirements above, the use of Oedipus to read or modify the contents of the database is further restricted.
Anyone attempting to use terminals belonging to the Lexicographer Group will be authenticated by the system as: a known lexicographer belonging to one or more established work groups.
Tables of lexicographers and of the group memberships of lexicographers are created and maintained by the database administrator.
Entry text stored in the database is never changed.
Instead, new versions of the text of entries are placed in the database.
New versions of existing entries may not be stored in the database unless they have first been obtained for update by a known lexicographer, who is the only lexicographer allowed to return it.
Obtaining an entry for update or the creation of a new entry requires the lexicographer to be a member of a group which owns the bundle (or range of entries) to which the entry belongs.
The same rules apply to changing the status of entries without modifying text.
Entries which are read from the Working-Set for update are flagged as being on-loan and belonging to the lexicographer who obtained it.
No other lexicographer may now obtain the text of the entry for update, or change its status, until the borrower has returned the entry, at which point the on- loan flag is reset.
Any lexicographer may obtain entry text for read only or for proofing regardless of ownership or the status of the on-loan flag.
Further privileges are granted to those lexicographers identified in the group table as leading the group.
Groups are organised hierarchically.
Bundles of entries may only be transferred to higher level groups and only by the leader of the higher group.
The approval of the entries in a unit of work is the prerogative of the leader of the highest group.
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
Resources Indirectly Controlled by Lexicographers
During the normal working day the demands on system resources will be those generated by the use of copies of Oedipus (for ease of management a single copy of the code is maintained on disk).
The principal resources consumed are:
Use of Space within the Databases
The unit of work for lexicographers is a table of entries.
A typical table contains about 8000 entries.
Lexicographers will normally confine themselves to working on about 1000 of these.
Three tables may be in the Working-Set at any time.
Sufficient space is available for lexicographers to create an extra four thousand entry-versions per table before the available space is exhausted.
It is not anticipated that such a limit would be reached.
The use of a Working-Set database reduces the overall volume of text stored.
When work is complete on a range of entries only the text of the latest version of a new or changed entry is transferred to the main archive.
No text is returned when entries have been modified and subsequently discarded.
After transfer of entries from the Working-Set, the space used for that dictionary range is returned to the system and will be re-used for other tables.
Memory
Each lexicographer is limited to 11 mb of virtual memory.
This amount of memory is adequate for the very largest entry.
Typically, much less memory will be required for editing.
Oedipus will allow lexicographers to keep more than one entry in memory at the same time on the occasions when this is necessary.
A minimum of self discipline should prevent abuse of this feature, and it is anticipated that the system capacity will be sufficient for the nine lexicographers.
However, should individual lexicographers habitually use excessive memory, it is possible for the Computer Group to restrict the virtual memory they are allocated.
This will ensure that the effects of any system thrashing are largely confined to their own work.
(Thrashing is a phenomenon of instability observed in virtual memory systems when programs spend most of their time trying to acquire real resource and doing very little work.
See the section on performance.)
Processor
The operating system allocates processor time to virtual machines on the basis of their operating characteristics, priority, and the load on the system as a whole.
From these values an attempt is made to determine a ‘fair share’ value for each lexicographer.
This value is used to determine the order in which the processor is allocated to each machine.
The principal operating characteristics of a virtual machine are:
the number of virtual memory segments addressed during the time the processor is available to it
the number of virtual memory segments that are resident in real storage at the time it either finishes with the processor or exceeds the time slice allocated to it w
whether or not it is considered by the system to be interactive.
The processor is scheduled in such a way that interactive machines get processor time more frequently than non- interactive (batch) machines, and programs which use short processor time slices are serviced before those that require longer time slices.
To compensate, the latter category are allowed longer slices of time when they are selected to use the processor.
Programs that are forced to wait for the processor have their priorities raised over time to ensure that they are not denied resource indefinitely.
The intention is that over extended periods of time equivalent machines receive an equivalent amount of resource.
A bias is evaluated for each lexicographer so that those that are receiving less than their ‘fair share’ are given priority over others.
All the lexicographers' virtual machines will be given the same lexicographer priority, but those editing smaller entries are likely to be favoured over those editing large ones.
Processes run by the Computer Group will have lower priority than those run by lexicographers.
It will be apparent from the preceding discussion that memory usage is a significant factor in scheduling the use of the processor resource.
In addition, the control program's handling of the virtual machines and their input/output resources is extensive and time consuming.
Other Disk Storage
Entries retrieved from the database are stored on disk for restart and recovery purposes.
Each entry may be stored in two versions, the original as taken from the database and stored unconditionally by Oedipus , and the most recent copy, saved at the discretion of the lexicographer (by employing the protect command).
The disk storage available is defined by the System Supervisor for each lexicographer.
This will be relatively small to ensure that lexicographers return entries to the database promptly, and do not work on several entries at the same time.
Some additional space will be required for proofing.
Since lexicographers can only proof single entries at a time it is not envisaged that providing this space will cause a problem.
3812 Printers
Two3812 printers will be available for use by lexicographers.
One will be used for proofing small entries to ensure efficient turnaround.
Larger entries will be directed to the other printer by the system.
A third printer, normally reserved for use by the Computer Group, may be made available to lexicographers in the event of the breakdown of one or other of these units.
Resources Directly Controlled by the Computer Group
The Computer Group directly controls the virtual machine environments for the Working-Set, and for the Main Database whenever this is being used to generate cross-reference reports.
It also controls the background batch machines used to support proofing.
Additional resource will be used to provide support for lexicographers and to service various lexicographer requests.
The virtual machines used for this purpose will have low priority call on resources to minimise the impact on interactive work.
In effect, the System Supervisor controls all system resources since he determines which virtual machines exist, their sizes, and the relative priority for system resource they can command.
The third 3812 printer and the 4250 printer are used by the Computer Group.
In the event of a failure of one of the lexicographers' printers, the 3812 may be configured for their use.
FAULT REPAIR
Data
Data in the Main Archive
The main archive is duplicated.
Should any part of the text, the version, or the entry tables prove to be unreadable, alternative tables are available to rebuild the data lost.
Additionally, whenever the Main Database is refreshed, the new text table, the entry and the version tables are secured to magnetic tape.
Tables in the Main and Copy Databases are periodically unloaded and compared as a means of:
ensuring that they are readable
allowing errors to be detected and repaired at non-critical periods
as a check on the accuracy of processing.
This procedure is called policing the data and each of the principal tables will be checked at least once every three months.
Data in the Working-Set
An image copy of the Working-Set is taken whenever a new dictionary range is transferred to it from the Main Database.
Subsequent transactions against the Working-Set are logged.
After-images of new and modified blocks are written to twin log files.
Should read or write errors occur, this database can be rebuilt from the image copy in conjunction with one of the log files.
If the primary log file is flawed then the software performing the rebuild operation will switch to the reserve log.
The rebuilt database will reflect all completed transactions at the time the error was detected.
Incomplete transactions will be backed out and may be reapplied.
Transient Files used by Lexicographers
These files are not secured.
Other System Data
Source and object programs, non-executable software etc. are secured to tape weekly.
Currency of Data
All data made available to lexicographers is up-to-date.
Equipment
Problems with equipment should be reported to the Information Systems Help Desk on extension 4747.
Details of the problem will be logged by the Help Desk Staff who will then contact the appropriate agency.
This will usually be a member of the New OED Computer Group or the IBM Customer Engineering Service.
All equipment used on the New OED Project is covered by a maintenance agreement with IBM.
Response time to problems will vary according to their effect on the service provided.
Problems with a terminal or page printer would be considered a lower level problem than a problem with the disk units or processor for which we have no spares.
Software
If a problem is suspected with any programs in the system the lexicographer should invoke the Problem Management Procedures .
A Problem Report Form should be completed and passed to the Computer Group who will ensure that the problem is recorded and progressed in a timely fashion.
The lexicographer will be informed of the results of any investigation and the proposed action.
In the case when the Computer Group diagnose a fault with the system software or standard utilities, assistance will be sought from the appropriate IBM agency.
The Computer Group will be responsible for satisfactory resolution of the problem.
The time taken to resolve problems will depend on their severity and complexity.
PERFORMANCE LEVELS
Tasks Directly Initiated by Lexicographers
The system has been designed to cater for up to nine lexicographers working constantly during the day.
There will also be five secondary-use terminals operated intermittently by the Computer Group, for such tasks as system monitoring and control, and program fault repair.
It is unlikely that more than two of these secondary-use terminals will be in use at any one time.
The standard of service obtained by a lexicographer at a primary-use terminal is determined by various demands made on the configuration of equipment and software.
The demands arise from the particular tasks that lexicographers undertake from time to time, and are predictable only in overall terms.
The main editing tool for lexicographers is Oedipus .
This provides proof-printing facilities as well as general review and editing facilities through the terminal screen.
The following performance levels are anticipated:
terminal response times whilst editing entries will be less than two seconds on average and 95% of responses should be less than three seconds
individual entries displayed on the terminals may be retrieved from the database, or restored to the database on average within ten seconds
proof prints of single entries:
proofs of entries occupying less than three columns of dictionary text may be obtained within ten minutes
roofs of entries occupying more than three columns of dictionary text may be obtained within four hours.
This level of performance is expected to obtain throughout the working day.
If the system is unable to meet this standard at any time, this will be manifest in erratic responses.
Tasks Requested by Lexicographers but Managed by the Computer Group
Some of the functions of the computer system can not be initiated directly by lexicographers.
In general, these tasks will be initiated by the Computer Group at the request of a lexicographer, and will be processed outside normal working hours.
These tasks include proof-printing large numbers of entries, adding new entries to the Working-Set, removing completed entries from the Working-Set, and passing completed entries on magnetic tape to the typesetting operator.
The level of performance expected for these remaining primary functions is:
transfer of a unit of work (a table of about 8000 entries) from the Working-Set within one working day
transfer of a table of entries from the Main Database to the Working-Set within one working day
addition to the Working-Set of individual entries within one working day
return from the Working-Set of individual entries within one working day
proof-printing up to 2,000 contiguous entries within two working days
transfer of a table of entries to magnetic tape within two working days.
Performance levels for other tasks will be determined by negotiation.
AVAILABILITY
The primary interactive facilities for lexicographers will be available at nine terminals for five days a week, fifty two weeks a year, excluding Press holidays.
On such working days the facilities will be available from 08.30 to 17.45.
During working hours the primary interactive facilities will not be impaired by any computing controlled by the Computer Group.
The system will provide access to at least two fortieths, and up to three fortieths, of the dictionary at any time (i.e. from about 16,000 to 24,000 entries at a time).
In addition up to 250 entries individually nominated from the whole dictionary will be available to lexicographers in a separate part of the Working-Set known as the ragbag .
It is recommended, for reasons of control and manageability that the number of individually nominated entries is limited to 50 at any one time.
Software or equipment failures, or processing errors, which do occur in normal working hours will reduce the available time by no more than 17 hours in any continuous three month period.
Thus the system will provide 97% availability of facilities for lexicographers.
Errors which occur in the main archive of dictionary text, through any circumstance, will be repaired at the earliest convenient time without displacing lexicographer activities.
In the meantime, service will be maintained using the Copy Database.
The system provides facilities for lexicographers to take check-point copies of the entry being edited at any terminal.
In the event of error, the system will restore the latest check-point copy.
The frequency with which such copies are taken will be determined by each individual lexicographer, but in any event the system will copy the entry when it is first called from the Working-Set.
Using the check-point copying facility a lexicographer can ensure that no more than fifteen minutes of work are lost through processing error or power failure at any stage.
No more than the current proof-print will be lost in the event of failure occurring during the proof-printing of single entries.
For all other primary tasks performed by the system no more than the results of one working day of processing will be lost in the event of processing error or power failure.
Time Loss after a System Error
In the event of equipment failures or software errors  occurring , the lexicographers will lose no more than 17 hours of available time in any continuous three month period as a result of extra processing required to correct data damaged by the errors.
Thus the system will provide 97% accuracy of processing for lexicographers.
Time Loss after a Power Failure
The system is not protected against interruption of the power supply.
The time lost by such failures will be determined by the duration of the interruption to the power supply.
Once the power supply is restored, the time required to correct data damaged will not add to the time required for recovery from systems errors described above.
Currency of Data
Text and other data available to lexicographers will be up- to-date.
The only circumstance in which a particular entry will not be available to a properly authorised lexicographer is if that entry is being edited by another lexicographer.
TOLERANCE TO CHANGE
Qualitative Changes
The general effect of change on relatively stable and proven software configurations is to introduce a measure of uncertainty and risk into a previously well understood situation.
The effect of multiple changes can be catastrophic.
Changes to any part of the system may make it necessary to change other seemingly unrelated components.
Thorough testing is required to ensure that no unwanted side effects or errors result.
For this reason the costs and benefits of change must be accurately assessed.
An additional problem is that the resource requirements for the necessary development work may result in a degraded service to lexicographers and may displace the interactive work of lexicographers from time to time.
All these considerations make changes to the functions performed by the system, and the alteration of processing features, undesirable.
Lexicographic Sub-system
Base Editor and Screen Formatter
This consists of a kernel routine and a collection of routines written in either PL/1 or REXX which effect the commands issued by the lexicographer.
Changes to these routines would be inadvisable.
The addition of extra  facilities (by creating new commands and corresponding routines) would require exceptional benefits to justify the effort.
Database Access Routines
A change to these routines would normally have implications for the database control sub-system.
In addition, performance aspects would need to be watched closely.
The code itself, however, is relatively simple and maintainable.
These routines are unaffected by changes in the volume of entries per table.
Database Control Sub-system
This consists of a collection of programs concerned with transferring data between databases and associated housekeeping and security tasks.
Although these routines are relatively simple, are well documented, and maintainable, changes in this area would imply system wide modification.
The routines will tolerate changes in the volume and number of text tables.
Transfer Sub-system
This deals with the conceptually simple task of transferring data from one storage structure and medium to another, and providing control information.
New features are likely to involve ‘massage’ of textual data to facilitate composition.
Such requests could be met by providing new processes rather than by changing existing routines.
Proofing Sub-system
The proofing sub-system consists of a number of linked processes.
Text is unloaded from one or other of the databases, massaged to simplify formatting and font handling, processed by the DCF package and printed.
Change could only be considered viable in the massage routines and the in-house APF macros which determine the appearance of the dictionary material on the page.
Quantitative Changes
General
The system may be characterised as a collection of resources with limited capacity.
A simple model of the New OED computer system in normal working hours consists of two types of software running on the 4341 computer.
The first type comprises nine copies of Oedipus (the editing sub-system), and the second type is one copy of the environmental control sub-system (the operating system, the database, proofing routines and general purpose software).
These ten programs contend for a limited number of real and symbolic resources.
The real resources are memory, processor, input-output devices, etc.
The symbolic resources are such things as exclusive rights to access parts of the database, operating system locks, and so on.
Programs spend time both using the resources and queueing for them.
Given an identical task, any of the nine copies of Oedipus will use the same quantity of resources and spend the same amount of time doing so.
However, the time spent queueing for resources may vary substantially from one occasion to the next, according to the competitive demand from other copies of Oedipus .
As a general rule, when the demand for a resource is such that it is allocated for two thirds of the available time, then programs spend twice as long waiting for the resource as using it.
As a result the response time of a program in the real, competitive system can be three times longer than that achieved on a single lexicographer machine.
All the direct demand for resources will be created by lexicographers using Oedipus .
They will also create indirect demand for resources through the operating system, which is both itself a resource and a consumer of resources.
It does work in order to resolve conflicts between the nine copies of Oedipus .
The greater the demand generated from these, the more work the operating system does.
The effect is non-linear.
Processor
The New OED system makes heavy demands on the processor.
This is because of the complex storage management required to build and maintain the internal data structures used to manipulate dictionary entries for editing and display purposes.
We can assume that in a normal working session a lexicographer will spend a relatively long time thinking as opposed to manipulating text.
However, each editing process that is undertaken is demanding to the system.
In addition, initial parsing of a retrieved entry is very demanding.
For example, some seven seconds of processor time are required to create the data structure for the entry ‘eight’(twice the time taken to retrieve the entry from the database).
In practice this means that response times will become longer as demand increases, and they will also become more variable.
Memory
A critical problem during design was how to optimise the allocation of memory to Oedipus .
The basic version of Oedipus occupies 0.77 mb of memory.
The particular data structure it is manipulating occupies about six times as many bytes in memory as its length as a string of text.
For example, the entry for ‘eight’ is stored as 0.017 mb on disk, but requires 0.12 mb in memory.
The largest entry occupies 0.66 mb on disk, and about 4 mb in memory.
Programs typically reference the same limited areas of storage for relatively long periods of time.
For example, initialisation is performed once only, exception routines are addressed very infrequently.
This property, called locality of reference , is stronger the better designed and written the program is.
The rationale of virtual-memory systems is that they can allocate memory on the basis of the actually observed demands for storage rather than on the potential, or worst case estimates, for the execution of a program.
For any given program there is an optimum or efficient memory usage for an environment in which many programs are competing for the limited available real memory.
The effect of addressing a location which is not available in real memory is to interrupt the operating system, which will then retrieve the required page of virtual memory (by reading it from disk, making room for it in main memory, and if necessary writing some other page in main storage to disk).
This lengthens the response time.
The final design is a compromise made between maximising the use of real memory and minimising the disk operations to retrieve pages from virtual memory.
Operating System
The operating system is too complex a resource to describe in a simple way.
However, its effect on overall system performance can be significant at high levels of demand.
Database Transactions and Locks
The time taken to retrieve or return an entry is dependent firstly on its size.
In addition, when a lexicographer either requests a new entry, or attempts to return one, a series of subsidiary data retrievals are made from the database.
These are concerned with authenticating the lexicographer and his right to access or return an entry.
The system is also designed so that when the text of an entry is retrieved from the Working-Set, a copy is written to a (CMS) security file before the lexicographer can edit it.
The system uses database locks to safeguard data integrity.
The effect they have on performance is to increase the time taken for transactions on the Working-Set database.
Working-set transactions are lengthy, and we anticipate that queues will increase rapidly with demand.
Entry service times will increase correspondingly.
Other Capacity Limitations
The logical limits inherent in programs are designed to cater for larger entries than any that currently exist or could conceivably be produced during the design life of the system.
Batch processes are designed to cater for five times as many entries as are currently stored in tables.
The physical limitations of the processor and memory in the existing configuration are reflected quantitatively in the performance of the system.
The effect of doing more work or adding extra lexicographers will be to degrade individual response times.
This limitation is elastic to a degree.
A non-elastic limitation is the available disk storage capacity.
If the anticipated growth of the number of entry-versions of text were to prove inaccurate by more than 15%, then the system would become more difficult to manage.
This is because the space available for transient use will diminish.
If the actual number of entry-versions exceeds the design assumption by more than 25%, the system will be unmanageable.
The system will require changes to programs, or a reduction in concurrent batch tasks, before the system can become manageable again.
Other Factors
There are no significant additional demands on the input-output sub-system arising from use of the Working-Set above those already identified.
There are no significant additional demands on the input-output sub-system arising from the control of memory above those already identified.
The demands made by terminals on channels and lines are very unlikely to exceed their capacity.
Effects of Change of Use
Additional Lexicographers, Workload Remaining the Same
Longer and more erratic system responses will result from the addition of new lexicographers because of the additional memory requirement.
Effect of Additional Workload
Increasing workload within the same length of working day: this would again produce poorer responses for lexicographers but in addition batch processes would be requested more frequently and this would require either that they run during normal working hours or that Computer Services staff would need to work more unsocial hours.
Increasing the length of the working day: this would require the Computer Group and the Computer Services Department to work more unsocial hours.
There would also be less time available for running more batch processes.
Acquisition of More Resources
Acquisition of a faster processor or larger memory would involve replacement of the mainframe.
The benefits are difficult to quantify but qualitatively they would mean faster and more predictable service for lexicographers.
A larger disk configuration would ease the task of managing the system, providing data was also reconfigured to take advantage of additional space.
Additional tape decks would allow more concurrency when running secondary processes, providing operating procedures were also changed to take advantage of the additional decks.
MONITORING SYSTEM OPERATION
The method for monitoring and controlling the system during production is as follows:
a User Service Agreement exists between the New OED Computer Group Manager and the New OED Project Director.
This identifies what aspects of lexicographer are to be measured, and sets targets for service levels based on the System Requirements document
a Facilities Management Agreement exists between the New OED Computer Group and the Computer Services Department for the provision of a computer operating service.
During the whole period of interactive integration, service levels will be recorded on a regular basis by the Computer Group.
Reports summarising service levels achieved versus targets will be issued weekly and monthly by the New OED Computer Group Manager.
These will be called the Weekly/Monthly New OED Computer Service Reports .
The weekly reports will be sent to the New OED Project Director and to the Director, Information Systems.
The monthly report will be written in the form of a memo to the Director, Information Systems, with copies to the Head of Computer Development and the New OED Project Director.
It will serve as a discussion document for a monthly Lexicographer Service Meeting between the Computer Group Manager and the New OED Project Director.
At this meeting the reported service levels will be confirmed by the New OED Project Director, any system or operational problems will be identified, and action plans for resolution agreed.
The rest of this section gives detailed consideration to the aspects of controlling the computer system identified in the System Evaluation Criteria document.
System Performance
Regular reports on system performance will be obtained from the VM/370 Performance/Monitor Analysis (VMAP) program.
These reports summarise the demands made on the computer system over time, and indicate how well the system met those demands.
For instance, they show lexicographer activity, CPU and main storage utilisation, and paging and input/ output activity.
They will be used primarily for tuning purposes and to give early warnings of potential capacity problems.
From the lexicographers' point of view, however, system performance will be judged mainly in terms of system availability, terminal response times, and turnaround of print requests.
VMAP reports will give an indication of response/turnaround times for certain transactions, and these may be useful for showing trends which highlight potential problems.
They will be of limited use as evidence that system requirements are being met.
Other methods of monitoring response and turnaround times are therefore needed.
A summary of the methods proposed for measuring availability, terminal response times, and turnaround of print requests is given below:
System Availability
System availability will be reported as a percentage of required available time over a rolling three month period.
Down times and system incidents will be logged by the facilities management operator in a diary kept in the Computer Room.
Each week, the operator will use this diary to produce a report of system down times, by day of the week, on a pre-printed form, which will be given to the New OED Computer Group Manager.
This report will be called the Weekly New OED Computer Service Report .
It will contain space for reporting reasons for down time and system incidents (such as a fault in a terminal or printer) causing degraded service.
The New OED Computer Group Manager will use these weekly reports to produce figures on average availability over the last three months for the monthly service report mentioned earlier.
The system down times recorded will be the times during which there is a total loss of service due to a problem with the central system.
A service degradation, such as a local loss of service due to a defective terminal, will not be counted as system down time.
Service degradations will however be noted, with reasons, in the monthly service report.
Terminal Response Times
Response times for interactive processes will be monitored periodically during production by manual measurements from the terminal.
Measurements will be performed by the system operator on a representative set of interactions agreed with the Lexicographer Group.
To ensure that different days of the week are covered, the measurements will be done on every twentieth working day.
Moreover, to ensure that ‘worst case’ situations are encountered, only measurements during peak periods of use will be taken.
Response times will be measured from the instant the operator strikes a key to the instant the reply from the system begins to appear on the screen.
The objective is to confirm that all response times are less than the agreed target, and that response times for identical processes are consistent.
The results of the measurements will be summarised by the New OED Computer Group Manager in the monthly service report.
Turnaround of Print Requests
Turnaround of print requests (both interactive and batch) will be monitored in a similar way to terminal response times.
A representative set of print jobs of different sizes will be agreed with the Lexicographer Group, and measurements will be performed manually by the system operator every twentieth working day.
Turnaround will be measured from the time a request is entered at the terminal to the time printing is logged as being completed by RSCS or the batch monitor.
Results will be summarised in the monthly service report.
Timely Processing of Batch Jobs
Batch processes, such as the production of tapes for the composition contractor, archiving, and back-up, will be run by the facilities management operator according to agreed procedures to instructions given by the New OED Computer Group Manager.
The facilities management operator will confirm that jobs have been run according to the schedule in the Weekly Service Report.
A summary will be included by the New OED Computer Group Manager in the monthly service report.
Currency of Data
The current version of text is identified by a field in the dictionary data structure.
The system will, by default, access to the current version.
Correct operation of this process has been verified during development testing, and will be confirmed by proof-reading of the processed text.
It is therefore not considered necessary to provide an additional process for regular checking of data currency during production.
Reports showing the status of given dictionary entries will, however, be available on request.
Accuracy of Processing
There is no proposal for measuring accuracy of processing of dictionary text during production.
Confidence in accuracy of processing has been established during development by prototyping and rigorous testing and by the Acceptance Trials.
Proof-reading of the processed text will provide final verification.