

CONTRACT AND LEGAL THEORY HUGH COLLINS
Teachers of the law of contract ponder an intriguing dilemma.
When organizing an exposition of the subject, we can draw upon a vigorous intellectual tradition which established a unified law of contract based upon a remarkably small set of interlocking principles.
This classical law of contract, as it is often called, represents one of the acmes of legal formalist scholarship by virtue of its clear rules and their clusters of logical derivatives.
Like any closed system of classification and rule-bound rationality, the classical law suffers from omissions, contradictions and absurdities, but these problems have been masterfully overcome by generations of scholarly hair-splitting and judicial creativity.
Yet the time has come when many doubt whether it remains sensible to persevere in recycling the classical law in order to incorporate all the new challenges to its doctrinal system.
Though few proceed so far as Grant Gilmore in awarding a death certificate to the classical law of contract, as exceptions to the rules multiply, most writers at least acknowledge that novel principles destroy the crispness and generality of such doctrines as consideration and privity.
The Critical Legal Studies Movement even perceives a counter-vision of the law of contract emerging from the exceptions and novel principles, so that, in effect, the movement welds together a new doctrinal synthesis.
Given this degree of disenchantment with the classical system, teachers of the law of contract must recognize that the organizing principles are shifting.
Yet we hesitate to take this step — and here is the source of the dilemma — for the modern law of contract appears so uncertain in its scope and mysterious in its moral vision.
In sharp contrast, inside the tidy framework of the classical law, we sense intuitively the liberal principles which inspire the legal rules and determine the province of contractual obligations.
Plainly the prevailing legal principle of freedom of contract mirrors the liberal's adherence to the ideal of liberty of the individual.
More specifically, the classical requirement of consent or agreement for the creation of contractual obligations provides a justification for the obligation, which appears compatible with respect for individual liberty, and, at the same time, the need for consent preserves that liberty from unwanted imposed obligations.
In contrast to this robust concern for liberal ideals in the classical rules, modern developments in the law of contracts rest upon uncertain and doubtful moral and political principles.
What is the purpose, for example, of awarding compensation to a person who has acted to his detriment in reliance upon another's words or conduct when the parties have not reached an  agreement?
Does this incursion upon individual liberty without consent serve a worthwhile purpose or rest upon some important principle?
Similarly, why do courts discuss the inequality of bargaining power of the parties and the unreasonableness or unfairness of the terms of the contract and then sometimes refuse to enforce agreements on those grounds?
On what basis does the modern law deprive the parties of their freedom to choose the terms of their bargain?
Finally, as the division between contract and tort loses its significance in modern decisions such as Junior Books Ltd v.
Veitchi Co.
Ltd , we begin to wonder whether any of those pillars of classical doctrine will escape destruction by the acid rain of modern legal values.
Such questions as these receive quite disparate answers, ranging from claims that all these legal practices can be explained by a new principle, such as the protection of reliance, through to denials that anything significant has happened.
Until we have resolved our uncertainty about what values these modern legal developments represent, our hesitation in embarking upon a radical break with established legal doctrine is surely justified.
In order to comprehend the direction and scope of the modern law of contract, it is therefore helpful to return to some first principles of political and moral philosophy.
Normally, like planets circling a star, political philosophy and the law of contracts affect each other 's path without their orbits ever coinciding.
In the face of the current crisis in contract doctrine, however, recent studies have partially overcome this disciplinary isolation.
Lawyers and philosophers have reappraised the moral significance of promises, each interpretation of the modern law discovering confirmation in alleged moral practices.
Similarly, the objectives of judicial controls over the terms of contracts in the name of fairness and reasonableness have received illuminating philosophical examination.
Much work remains to be done, however, building upon these important first steps towards an understanding of the values and direction of modern contract law.
As a contribution to this agenda for legal scholarship, this essay endeavours to identify the principles which determine the substance of modern contract law.
N brief, I suggest that we can best understand the form of modern doctrines by situating them in a broader dialogue within liberal political philosophy concerning the relation between the citizen and the state.
The background of liberal philosophy shapes the opposing interpretations of the modern law of contract presented in recent books and articles.
Yet I shall argue that, behind this dialogue within liberalism, there lurks a deeper controversy between rival schemes of moral virtue and distributive justice which seek to define a legitimate market order.
This deeper controversy sustains the debate between liberal interpretations of the modern law of contract, but paradoxically at the same time demonstrates its pointlessness.
I LIBERALISM AND CONTRACTS
The gravitational force of liberal values exerts its influence at the core of contract doctrine, namely the justifications for the enforcement of contracts.
In response to the related questions of why do we enforce contracts and what contracts should  we enforce, liberal philosophy points towards two kinds of answer.
Both interpretations of liberalism take as their starting-point a commitment to the value of individual liberty.
They diverge in their justifications for the subjection of individuals to the exercise of state power during the enforcement of contractual obligations.
In order to grasp the principal attributes of these two interpretations of liberalism, we must examine the nature of the problem which they address.
Indubitably liberalism parades under many guises and has spawned a multitude of distinctive political theories.g Yet two threads run through all these diverse patterns of liberal thought: the commitment to respect both the equality of citizens and the autonomy of individuals.
In the name of equality, liberals reject all claims of an inherent right to govern or possess superior wealth based upon caste or status.
For the sake of individual autonomy, liberals attempt to establish a political system which defers to each person's chosen way of life rather than one which imposes a conception of the virtuous life upon everyone.
The constitution should guarantee respect for equality and autonomy, yet leave individuals to pursue their own interests as they wish.
As Rawls remarks, liberalism insists upon the priority of ‘the right’ over ‘the good’, that is, it upholds the right to choose whilst remaining agnostic on the question of the best path to follow.
The priority accorded to ‘the right’ by liberalism is reflected in the considerable freedom of contract permitted by Western legal systems.
In general, under the classical law, a person may choose whether or not to enter a contract and may select the terms which constitute the substantive obligations of the transaction.
By respecting these freedoms, the law upholds the right to choose a particular way of life.
But once we progress beyond the formation of a contract to its enforcement, a difficulty in reconciling liberalism with the law of contracts emerges.
Given that individual autonomy comprises a fundamental tenet for liberalism, legal enforcement of contracts demands a careful justification, for legal sanctions inevitably place fetters upon a person's freedom of action.
As soon as a contract becomes legally binding, performance ceases to be optional, thereby curtailing individual autonomy.
Since this restriction arises from an exercise of state power, liberal theory requires a justification to explain what permits the state, which is created to protect individual autonomy, to become an instrument of constraint.
At first sight the paradox that liberalism requires not only freedom of contract but also freedom to breach any contract is quickly resolved.
It is alleged that, far from contradicting the value of respect for individual liberty, the justification for the enforcement of contracts derives logically from that value.
Fried states this claim most clearly:
In order to be as free as possible, that my will have the greatest possible range consistent with the similar will of others, it is necessary that there be a way in which I may commit myself….
The restrictions involved in promising are restrictions undertaken just in order to increase one's options in the long run, and thus are perfectly consistent with the principle of autonomy and the autonomy of others.
But this purported resolution of the paradox, as Fried concedes, only demonstrates the compatibility of uninhibited freedom to enter contracts with respect for  autonomy; it ‘does not show that I am morally obligated to perform my promise at a later time if to do so proves inconvenient or costly’.
The duty to perform a contract cannot be derived from the principle of respect for autonomy.
Another, more complex, attempted resolution of the above paradox, which suggests, similarly, that the justification for enforcement can be derived from the principle of respect for individual autonomy, returns to liberalism's definition of ‘the right’ or the constitution of society.
In order to express their concern for equality and individual autonomy, liberals often insist that certain rights should be fundamental to the framework of society.
These fundamental terms of the ‘social contract’ ensure the freedom to choose a way of life by providing such constitutional guarantees as freedom of the person, freedom of speech and the right to privacy.
Can the right to enforce a contract, with its correlative duty to perform it, be regarded as one of these constitutional guarantees?
If so, the paradox is resolved.
But this proposal must also be rejected.
Each of the other fundamental rights reveals an aspect of the value of private autonomy, whereas, in contrast, a right to enforce a contract involves an assertion of the justice of commandeering state power to curtail economic liberty and restrict autonomy.
In a more formal way we can state that fundamental rights which protect individual autonomy comprise immunities against state interference whereas the right to enforce a contract asserts a claim to harness state power to control the actions of another.
Again, therefore, we conclude that the right to enforce a contract cannot be derived from the liberal principle of respect for individual autonomy.
This failure to explain the enforceability of contracts as a logical derivation from liberal principles foreshadows the emergence of the two interpretations which dominate current discussions of the substance of the modern law of contract.
These rival proposals for reconciling the legal enforcement of contracts with a fidelity to liberal principles do not purport to derive a justification for enforcement from the value of individual autonomy, but rather they assert a justification which minimizes the conflict with individual autonomy.
It is a central thesis of this essay that the attempt to reconcile the enforcement of contracts with liberal principles has led to the formation of two dominant views of the content of the law of contract.
I shall outline these two interpretations of the law in the context of their formal justifications for the exercise of state power to enforce contracts before examining each one critically.
The more traditional analysis of contracts, which figures widely in classical law as well as in modern texts, explains and justifies the imposition of contractual obligations on the ground of a special exercise of choice.
Where a person has voluntarily chosen to undertake an economic transaction, he is legally bound to complete it.
The requirement of choice ensures respect for the freedom of individuals to select their market opportunities.
But the exercise of choice must be a special one, for it must alert the parties to the fact that they are about to enter a binding commitment from which they cannot simply opt out.
At this point within this traditional interpretation of the principles of liberalism, any number of definitions of the special exercise of choice thrive.
Some say that any serious promise should count, whilst others insist that there should be an intention to enter legal relations; meanwhile other theorists prefer the language  of agreement and consent to that of promises and intention.
Although these differences of terminology amount to more than semantic predilections, for they support — perhaps even generate — rival conceptions of the limits of contractual obligations, the generic idea remains a special exercise of choice by an individual, through which he deliberately incurs a binding legal responsibility.
A popular modern interpretation of liberal ideas argues that private autonomy should be lost not through a special exercise of choice but rather through causing harm, or the risk of causing harm, to others.
Under this modern view, contractual obligations may only be justified in order to deter or compensate some harm to the interests of another person.
The argument runs that individuals should enjoy the liberty to pursue their own interests and preferences, provided that in so doing they avoid harm to the interests of others.
Where a person's actions either cause direct physical and economic harm to another, or cause another to incur wasted expenditure, then a legal duty arises to compensate the other for the harm done.
By an extension of the argument, the duty is imposed in advance to deter acts which will potentially cause harm to the interests of others.
Again this generic theory of legal obligations is expressed in a variety of forms such as a duty of care, rules about fair competition, and the protection of the reliance interest.
In the last resort, the key to these interpretations of liberalism lies in the requirement of harm to the interests of others, for individual autonomy may only be curtailed in order to preserve the liberty of others.
Considerable practical implications derive from a selection between these rival explanations of the enforceability of contracts.
Whilst choice theories firmly limit the range of legal obligations to the parties to an agreement, the ‘harm to interests’ theory envisages a broader range of obligations owed not only to persons who have chosen to enter an agreement together but also to anyone whose interests are subjected to the risk of harm.
In other words, the ‘harm to interests’ theory suppresses rules about privity of contract and the distinction between contractual and tortious liability.
In other respects as well, choice theories confine the scope of legal liability more narrowly than do the ‘harm to interests’ theories.
During negotiations leading up to an economic transaction, choice theories insist that no legal obligations should arise since the parties have not yet reached an agreement.
In contrast, the ‘harm to interests’ theories decline to make any sharp break between contractual and pre-contractual liability; consequently, many duties of care and other forms of liability such as promissory estoppel arise as soon as negotiations commence.
On the other hand, in some respects choice theories imply a more rigorous attitude towards legal obligations.
Choice theories frequently insist that a person's duty under a contract is to perform his obligation and that accordingly the courts should use every available means to secure compliance with that duty, including threats of fines, penal damages and imprisonment for contempt of court.
Against this vision of debtors' prisons, ‘harm to interests’ theories merely require a person in default to pay monetary compensation for any harm which he has caused to protected interests.
We can glimpse from these brief illustrations that the rival interpretations of liberalism constitute more than idle philosophical speculations about the rationale for the existing law of contract.
Using these frames of reference, lawyers advocate particular legal doctrines and mould the fundamental principles of the law of obligations.
Of course, these two theories of contractual obligations mirror a broader concern among liberals about the relation of the citizen to the state.
Given the initial insistence upon the autonomy of the individual, each exercise of state power which places limits upon freedom of action requires a justification.
Choice theories correspond to a libertarian strand in liberal political theory under which state power may only be legitimated by consent of the individual.
Hence libertarians normally justify state power by reference to a ‘social contract’ or a series of contracts.
The ‘harm to interests’ theory reflects the analysis of J. S. Mill concerning the relation between the citizen and the state.
In his famous discussion of the legitimate province of state power, Mill argued that power could only be rightfully exercised in order to prevent one individual from harming another.
Although philosophers have seldom tried to generate an entire political philosophy from that elementary principle, in the law of contract the ‘harm to interests’ theory dominates modern legal thought.
In summary, I suggest that the debates about the prognosis for contract law can be conveniently reduced to two liberal perspectives on the fundamental question of the enforceability of contracts, which parallel broader debates about the relation between the citizen and the state.
The choice theory picks up the libertarian strand, which insists that all state power must be legitimated by consent, whereas the ‘harm to interests’ theory taps the slender source of Millian liberalism to defend a broadening of the scope of contractual obligations.
In both theories, however, the guiding vision and uniting theme remains a fidelity to the liberal ideal of individual autonomy.
II RESPONSIBILITY AND OBLIGATION
Before we examine these two interpretations of liberalism which prevail in modern contract theory, we must draw one further distinction because it will assist us in assessing the merits and implications of the two theories.
This distinction is more familiar in connection with the criminal law.
In developing a celebrated liberal position, H. L. A. Hart argues that criminal laws can only be justified where they deter harm or offensive behaviour to others, or, in limited instances of ‘legal paternalism’, where the laws discourage serious harm to oneself.
He also insists that a breach of legal duty occurs only when a person chooses to violate a criminal law, this requirement of choice being signified legally by the doctrine of mens rea .
Notice that Hart's liberal theory of the criminal law adopts both of the theories of legal liability put forward to justify contractual obligations.
He selects a version of the ‘harm to interests’ principle to set the scope of the obligations of criminal law, and then adopts a choice theory in order to determine the issue of personal responsibility.
This combination of theories in relation to the criminal law suggests that much of the debate between the rival liberal justifications of contractual obligations may be misplaced.
Hart's analysis of the criminal law separates two questions: the first considers what kinds of obligations the state should impose upon citizens; and the second examines when a person is responsible for a breach of an established duty.
He answers the first question by reference to the ‘harm to  interests’ theory, and the second by requiring a choice to incur the legal duty.
Once we have separated the question of obligation from that of responsibility, we naturally begin to wonder whether the debate about the scope of contractual obligations has been confused by an inappropriate amalgamation of the issues.
Our surmise is plainly correct, at least in many cases.
Advocates of each conception of contracts have failed to recognize that they may not be so much disagreeing as attempting to answer different questions.
For example, Fuller and Perdue, who argue that the generic principle of the law of private obligations should be compensation for harm to the reliance interest, pay scant attention to the issue of personal responsibility.
They recognize that not every instance of misplaced reliance deserves compensation, but fail to devise an adequate theory of personal responsibility which distinguishes between compensable and unprotected invasions of the reliance interest.
Yet, as this example illustrates, few expositions of the rival conceptions of contract entirely miss the division of questions which we have identified.
Their errors stem instead from exaggeration of one dimension of the problem of justifying the enforcement of contractual obligations.
In the following two sections we will redress the balance of the choice and ‘harm to interests’ theories of the basis of contractual obligations.
In effect, we will complete each theory by articulating both their criterion of responsibility and their test for the limits of obligations, so that they may face each other as fully prepared contestants for the honour of being liberal theories of contract law.
Our refinement of these theories will reveal, however, certain defects in their interpretations of the liberal ideal of private autonomy.
It is the unwillingness of theorists of contract to recognize and come to terms with these defects which suggests that in fact the rival interpretations of liberalism rest upon concealed visions of the legitimate market order.
III CHOICE THEORY
Choice theories of contract primarily direct their attention to the issue of personal responsibility.
The core of these theories maintains that contractual obligations may only be incurred by voluntary consent.
Instead of defining the state of mind which represents the required concept of voluntary consent, choice theories follow the normal pattern of common law reasoning and resort to an ‘extrovert’ approach.
This method of reasoning identifies the conditions or circumstances which negative voluntariness or vitiate consent.
The law compiles doctrines such as fraud, mistake, duress, undue influence and incapacity, which share the task of specifying the occasions when the normal presumption that a person acts voluntarily may be rebutted.
Provided that none of these tests are satisfied, personal responsibility arises by virtue of a voluntary choice to undertake the obligation.
Although I shall cricitize this theory of responsibility below, we should next complete this outline of choice theories by examining how they deal with the question of what kinds of obligation should the state enforce.
In answer to that question, choice theories find it hard to resist the temptation to jump to the conclusion that all voluntary undertakings should be binding.
Of course, choice theories acknowledge some limits upon this principle in order to avoid the enforcement of illegal or immoral acts.
Leaving aside these qualifications, however, many choice theories introduce a further general limitation upon legal enforceability.
Theorists feel compelled to do so for two reasons.
In the first place, as we noted earlier, in order to justify binding legal obligations, choice theories must isolate those cases of a special exercise of choice where a binding legal commitment is consistent with respect for private autonomy.
In the second place, some choice theorists, working within the traditions of the common law, feel compelled to acknowledge the existence of a limitation upon the enforcement of promises and agreements in order to account for the common law's doctrine of consideration.
We will briefly consider how choice theorists have tackled the latter problem before examining the defects of the main thrust of this liberal interpretation of contractual obligations.
The doctrine of consideration provides that a promise will bind the promisor only if it is given as the price for another's promise or as the price for an action which involves a detriment to the promisee.
On its face, the doctrine of consideration limits the types of voluntary undertakings which are legally enforceable by excluding donative promises.
Some choice theorists attempt a reconciliation with this legal doctrine by purporting to show that consideration provides a test of the deliberateness of a choice rather than an imposition of a paternalistic or economically motivated control over the scope of enforceable voluntary obligations.
The two main variants of this approach are, first, that the requirement of consideration restricts voluntary obligations to those created by an agreement establishing an exchange relation because such agreements are in all probability moments of careful deliberation; and secondly, consideration functions like a formality, such as notorization or a seal, in order to ensure the seriousness of the promise.
Neither interpretation of consideration provides a convincing account of the doctrine, for an inevitable distortion arises if one attempts to reduce this substantive requirement of an economic exchange to a test of the deliberateness of an exercise of choice.
In particular, the first theory fails to encompass examples of consideration in unilateral contracts, where there is no agreement but simply an offer which is contingent upon the performance of an action involving detriment to the promisee.
The second variant fails both because the requirement of consideration may be satisfied casually by an informal exchange of promises and because the courts invoke another doctrine, the requirement of an intention to enter legal relations, when they wish to claw back certain informal promises made in social and domestic contexts from the realm of contractual obligations.
In short, consideration does not ensure the seriousness of a promise, and if this were the aim of the doctrine, it would surely be more straightforward to devise an explicit test of seriousness.
Not every choice theory defers to the practice of the common law courts.
Found and Fried criticize the doctrine of consideration as an unjustifiable impediment to economic freedom.
They urge that the law should enforce every promise.
Yet, once the doctrine of consideration has been abandoned, the central dilemma of choice theories becomes even more obvious.
They cannot reconcile the liberal precept that private autonomy should be respected as far as possible with the practice of legally enforcing all promises.
On the contrary, economic  liberty requires the ability to withdraw from undertakings, as for example in an employee's right to strike.
Choice theories verge upon a serious contradiction with liberal philosophy to the extent that reliance is placed upon the principle that promises ought to be kept.
For liberalism prides itself on its rejection of moral paternalism, that is the imposition of a particular scheme of the virtuous life upon all citizens.
Liberalism insists that merely because a moral belief is generally held, that fact provides an insufficient reason to enforce that moral belief through law.
Each person should be permitted the maximum liberty consistent with the enjoyment of a similar degree of liberty by others.
Unless the principle that promises ought to be kept can be shown to be compatible with the appropriate respect for liberty, it offends liberalism by imposing a kind of moral paternalism.
We have good reason to doubt the compatibility of these moral aspirations, for an absolute restriction on the power to withdraw promises imposes a constraint upon liberty without necessarily promoting the liberty of others or oneself.
We find on close examination that those choice theorists who invoke the principle that promises ought to be kept in order to complete their account of contractual obligations ultimately concede that they are engaging in a form of moral paternalism.
They allege that the advantages of a society in which promises are kept outweigh the proper concern for liberty.
They present these advantages either in terms of utility or in the intrinsic moral worth of a community in which individuals may place trust and confidence in others.
Whichever way the argument is presented, however, it violates the priority accorded to private autonomy by liberalism.
In summary, though choice theories appear to take as their point of departure the priority of individual autonomy, when we step beyond their criterion of personal responsibility, as defined by the concept of voluntary consent, to the question of the kinds of obligation which the state will enforce, we find that choice theorists admit that they introduce a style of moral paternalism at odds with liberal values.
The exercise of choice turns out to be sufficiently special to justify the imposition of contractual obligations because it meets the criterion of a moral principle that promises ought to be kept.
IV INTERESTS THEORY
The alternative candidate for the honour of being the liberal theory of contracts insists that obligations should only arise in order to discourage and compensate harm to the interests of others.
At first sight, by following the route charted by J. S. Mill, this theory appears to avoid the temptations of moral paternalism by restricting legal intervention to calculable harms which violate the autonomy of others.
Under the interests theory, obligations arise in order to protect economic liberty, not curtail it.
Obligations figure as side constraints upon economic activity which respect the inviolability of other persons.
Yet, when we dig a little deeper, we find simply another style of moral paternalism lies buried beneath the surface.
We should first note, however, that the ‘harm to interests’ theory, as we have stated it, remains radically incomplete, for it lacks a theory of personal responsibility.
The question is when should a person be under a duty to compensate others for harm to their interests.
This question is as important for interests theories as it is rarely discussed, for harm to interests may be caused by remote actors.
Unless everyone who participates in a lengthy causal chain is to be held responsible, the interests theory needs a criterion of personal responsibility.
Consider the following case: I miss my dental appointment, because the bus is late, because the driver was late for work, because his alarm clock failed to ring, because of a manufacturing defect.
Who should pay for the wasted time of the dentist?— I? the bus driver? the bus company? or the clock manufacturer?
In order to break these lengthy causal chains and thus put a cap on liability by devising a test of personal responsibility, interests theories invoke such criteria as a voluntary act, consent, acquiescence, a duty of care and foreseen or foreseeable consequences.
These criteria represent answers to the question of personal responsibility, but, in another sense, they provide no answer at all, for they conflict with each other by drawing the boundaries of responsibility in a series of concentric circles.
Interests theories lack any uniformity in their criteria of responsibility.
At best, we can discern a pattern in the cases and views expressed about them.
The scope of personal responsibility expands and contracts in inverse proportion to the extent of the protected interests.
Thus where the protected interest is only physical harm, the criterion of personal responsibility will be drawn as loosely as all foreseeable consequences.
In contrast, where we expand the protected interests to include loss of profits, as in the example of the dentist's wasted time, the test of personal responsibility is likely to require consent or knowledge of the probability of loss.
This pattern of criteria for personal responsibility adopted by interests theories reveals that, under this explanation of the basis of contracts, liberty is a relative concept: one is less free to cause physical harm to others than to reduce their profits.
Similar reasoning occurs in the criminal law; for example, liability for death is much stricter than liability for theft.
In the theory of criminal responsibility, however, this variety of tests of responsibility is challenged on the ground that the stricter tests of responsibility deviate from the principle of individual liberty which the doctrine of mens rea is designed to respect.
Similarly, in the context of economic transactions, we should doubt the compatibility of such a variety of tests of responsibility with a liberal respect for personal autonomy.
Indeed, we must suspect that under the interests theory the criterion of personal responsibility is no more than a function of social policy: the more highly the interest is regarded, the closer we are drawn towards unlimited personal responsibility.
This relative concept of liberty undermines the claim of interests theory to don the mantle of a liberal theory of contract.
Even if this flaw can be explained away, however, a further examination of the concept of protected interests should deprive interests theory of the title of a contender for the proper articulation of a liberal theory of contract.
For when we ask which interests should be protected, we immediately become engaged in a debate about distributive justice rather than an examination of the  concept of personal autonomy.
This debate surrounds the reliance theory of contracts, for example.
Here advocates suggest that the principal fact generating legal liability should be an invasion of the reliance interest.
This interest comprises the out-of-pocket expenses resulting from misplaced reliance upon another, including wasted expenditure in preparing for the performance of a transaction, or partly performing it, losses arising from damage to property, and missed opportunities.
A sharp contrast is drawn between the reliance interest and the expectation interest, for the latter includes profits expected from the undertaking and any quantifiable pleasure anticipated from completed performance.
Advocates of the reliance theory insist that the proper scope of legal obligations should be confined to invasions of the reliance interest rather than the expectation interest.
The reason why reliance is more deserving of protection than expectations is that the former involves merely a resto-ration to the position once held, whereas the latter entails a transfer of wealth or the enrichment of one party at the expense of the other.
Advocates of the reliance theory approve Aristotle's view that the purpose of justice is the maintenance of an equilibrium of goods among members of society.
They argue that the protection of reliance fits into this corrective model of justice, whereas to award damages for harm to the expectation interest involves an inappropriate redistribution of wealth.
Leaving aside for a moment the question of the cogency of this argument, on its surface it reveals a decisive break from liberal principles.
Instead of the definition of interest to be protected depending upon a balance between the economic liberty of individuals insofar as they conflict, the justification for protection of the reliance interest comprises appeals to the conservative distributive consequences of selecting an interest for legal protection.
Whilst it is not inconsistent for liberals to hold a theory of distributive justice, for in a sense any advocacy of the free market implies certain distributive consequences, the ‘harm to interests’ theorists cannot deny that their theory of obligation rests entirely upon a cryptic theory of distributive justice rather than an extrapolation of fundamental precepts of liberalism.
Further investigation would demonstrate that all interests theories depend, in the last resort, upon principles of distributive justice which identify those interests that deserve protection.
Indeed, to speak of interests at all provokes confusion, for it suggests that these interests pre-exist the determination of the question where liabilities ought to be created according to distributive principles.
In fact, the term ‘interest’ is applied to a claim in order to distinguish it from other claims, usually with the implication that the claim labelled an interest deserves a remedy.
The adoption of this form of reification in legal reasoning tends to conceal the distributive aim behind a rhetoric which is superficially compatible with liberalism.
In summary, our examination of interests theories demonstrates their fundamental inconsistency with liberal ideals.
Their criteria of personal responsibility enjoy the fluidity necessary to achieve social policies rather than the rigour demanded by respect for individual autonomy.
The ‘harm to interests’ test for the kinds of enforceable obligation conceals rival conceptions of distributive justice rather than a balancing of economic liberties.
V CONTRACT AND MARKET
The preceding discussion reaches the conclusion that neither of the dominant theories of contract achieves its aims of being an exposition of liberal philosophy.
Choice theory rests its justification for the enforceability of contracts upon moral paternalism, which seriously detracts from the principle of respect for personal autonomy.
Interests theories degenerate into the pursuit of patterns of distributive justice instead of circumscribing the scope of protected autonomous action by reference to the need to respect the liberty of others.
Yet despite these fundamental flaws, both theories continue to attract supporters who regard them as ‘a fair implication of liberal individualism’.
I will suggest in this section of the essay that the reason why the antithesis between liberal principles and contract theory is so frequently overlooked lies in a second level of debate which the discussion of liberalism masks.
On this second level of debate, the dispute between choice and ‘harm to interests’ theories concerns rival conceptions of the market and the patterns of distributive justice determined by it.
The importance attached to these distributive ideals both explains the heat of the argument and the willingness to qualify the principles of liberalism.
The clue to the identity of the conception of the market and the corresponding theory of distributive justice implicit in choice theories lies in their concept of voluntariness.
We have seen how law and theory unite to provide a list of excuses which rebut the normal presumption of voluntariness.
The ensuing doctrines of fraud, mistake, duress, undue influence and capacity reflect in their details a particular view of the appropriate operation of the market.
This vision of the market comprises individuals who trade with each other, but they lack many of their normal characteristics.
These traders are presented in a form in which they are disembodied and unsituated.
This amounts to a view of the person which ignores basic needs such as food, housing, security and work, and also suppresses differences in knowledge, skill and wealth.
The hypothetical trader who lacks these needs and characteristics is used as the benchmark for normal market trading.
If this person would have agreed to the contract, then there was a voluntary act which qualifies for the imposition of contractual responsibility.
In other words, none of the recognized legal excuses will permit the individual to avoid the contract.
In addition, choice theories complete their concept of voluntariness by positing a concept of the ordinary market.
If the transaction takes place in the context of market conditions normal for such commodities or services, then the transaction is presumptively voluntary, even though competition is absent.
If, on the Other hand, there is a violent distortion of the market in a particular case, as for example when only one tug-boat is available to save a ship from foundering on a reef, then the element of voluntariness is missing.
This two-pronged analysis of voluntary acts, composed of the disembodied, unsituated self and the distinction between the ordinary and aberrational market explains the range of excuses acknowledged by the classical law of contract.
This definition of voluntariness exhibits a particular ideal of distributive justice.
Relations of power and wealth established between disembodied, unsituated  traders within an ordinary market appear perfectly legitimate, for they are bound to satisfy the standard of Pareto optimality.
By excluding from view the potentialities provided by wealth and knowledge for securing power through contracts, the choice theory ignores precisely those matters which might render organizations of power established by contracts suspect.
By restricting the realm of contractual liability to the ordinary interplay of market forces, it is the invisible hand of the market which judges the fairness of the resulting distribution of wealth, and the law purports to remain neutral.
The values which the choice theory represents are the values of a strong laissez-faire conception of the market.
Indubitably this vision of distributive justice satisfies the demands of liberal philosophy, because it respects both formal equality and individual autonomy.
Yet the importance attached to this scheme of distributive justice by advocates of choice theory encourages them to ignore the contradiction which we noticed above between the liberal ideal of individual autonomy and the moral paternalism of the principle that promises ought to be kept which lies at the heart of their theory of contract.
We can compare this concept of distributive justice found in choice theories with an equivalent pattern found in interests theories.
We noted above how advocates of the reliance theory, a leading example of interests theory, proclaim the conservative implications of their distributive scheme.
In fact, a similar vaunting of a purely restorative aim occurs within all interests theories, since the purported objective is to compensate a person for an invasion of his interests in order to make him whole.
Yet when we examine this restorative process in operation, we observe considerable redistributive exercises taking place.
Whenever the courts enforce a promise on the ground that another has relied upon it, a transfer of wealth occurs.
Whenever damages are paid for harm to property in breach of a duty of care, a transfer of wealth takes place.
Sometimes the plaintiff will be better off than before, but the defendant is always worse off.
Interests theories justify a redistribution of wealth and, like choice theories, they are premised upon a particular conception of the market order.
The key to an understanding of the distributive scheme of interests theories is to notice the tension between a fostering of the economic interdependence in an advanced division of labour and the aim of economic efficiency.
In order to appreciate how this tension determines the pattern of interests theories, we must first examine the web of economic relations in an advanced capitalist society.
Whereas choice theories imagine a market full of independent traders, who make isolated purposive exchanges, interests theories recognize that in the twentieth century the division of labour has become much more fragmented.
Modern economic transactions assume forms of complex association between a number of parties, not all of which can be described as agreements or exchanges.
Look, for example, at the web of relations surrounding the sale of an automobile.
In addition to the consumer who plans to buy the car, there is a dealer who runs a franchised retail outlet, a property owner from whom he leases the premises, a finance company which provides the consumer purchasers with credit, and a manufacturing company which supplies the dealer with automobiles under a requirements contract and probably a credit arrangement as well.
The manufacturer may provide the consumer with a warranty of quality  either directly or through a third party.
Finally, insurance companies may bear the risks of some or all of the parties.
Because the interdependence of these parties forms a complex pattern which cannot be reduced to exchange relations alone, breakdowns of trust and reliance can jeopardize the existence of the entire retail operation.
Such a breakdown occurred in Lusk-Harbison-Jones Inc .
v.
Universal Credit Co .,
where the retailer failed to insure automobiles which had been repossessed after the consumer had missed payments on the credit arrangements provided by a finance company.
The dealer omitted to insure the automobiles in reliance on a pamphlet distributed by the finance company which said that the finance company would arrange insurance protection for the dealer's interest, which would continue in force until the loan was liquidated.
Unfortunately, when the cars were destroyed by fire, the dealer discovered that no insurance coverage had been arranged by the finance company.
Notice that the relation between the dealer and finance company was not based upon agreement or exchange, even though they co-operated in securing sales.
Nevertheless, the Supreme Court of Mississippi found that the finance company was liable to the dealer for compensation for damage to the automobiles, because his failure to insure was caused by reasonable reliance upon the promise of the finance company.
This case provides a commonplace illustration of how the division of labour in an advanced capitalist society cannot be grasped in terms of agreements and exchanges between autonomous traders, and so the security craved by such relations of interdependence must be satisfied by the wider conception of contractual obligations envisaged by the interests theory.
In this context of an advanced division of labour, interests theories specify the legitimate range of economic interdependence.
But each version of interests theory moves cautiously towards the protection of such economic relations for fear of dampening the growth of these relations by imposing too heavy a burden of liabilities.
The courts certainly wish to avoid a reduction in the market for automobiles which would happen if finance companies were forced out of business as a result of imposing liabilities upon them to all and sundry.
At one time courts hesitated to render manufacturers liable for all losses arising from defective products.
Now that such liability is firmly established, the question becomes whether persons who give advice or perform services should be liable to all persons who may foreseeably rely upon their work being properly performed with all due care.
It has even been speculated that a community which has grown up around a manufacturing plant may have a claim for compensation against the owners, if the latter decide to close the plant, in order to compensate for the diminution of land values and the destruction of the local economy.
In response to each of these challenges, interests theories try to support the growth of an advanced division of labour by protecting persons within relations of interdependence without at the same time destroying those relations by imposing unbearable liabilities in the event of mishap.
At bottom, interests theories define the scope of loss redistribution which the law imposes as a tax upon economic relations.
Like any progressive tax, liability increases where the pocket is deeper.
Businesses and government agencies are more vulnerable than private individuals to liability because they can afford it.
Similarly, configurations of insurance against liability enlarge the ability to pay this tax and tend to attract legal obligations.
It must be admitted that the common law courts lack any discernible scheme for this redistributive pattern.
Judges present decisions behind the veil of abstract principle which often conceals the naked face of consequentialist considerations of loss distribution.
But we glimpse from time to time those considerations at work when courts examine the insurance position of the parties and reflect upon the implications of unlimited liability to an indeterminate number of plaintiffs.
In summary, behind the rival interpretations of contract law provided by the choice and interests theories, we find two distributive schemes and conceptions of the legitimate market order.
On the one hand, the choice theory advocates the distributive consequences of a free market under which obligations can only be incurred through exchange relations between independent traders.
These exchanges must be fair because the traders presumptively enjoy equal bargaining power.
On the other hand, the ‘harm to interests’ theory redistributes losses arising within complex relations of economic interdependence, whilst avoiding destruction of this advanced division of labour by excessive liabilities.
In order to legitimate this conception of the market, this legal process is mis-leadingly described as purely corrective justice.
Neither scheme rests upon a simple extrapolation from liberal precepts, but should be judged on its merits as a theory of distributive justice.
Viewed from this perspective, we must observe that choice theory signally fails to respond to the hardship suffered by unsuccessful participants in the market.
Furthermore, by refusing to generate obligations outside exchange relations, it favours uninhibited development of the forces of production without regard to the social costs imposed by injuries to third parties, pollution, health care and unemployment.
Interests theory comprises a response to these social costs.
It generates either a law of tort alongside a law of contract confined by choice theory, or, more dramatically, forces a reconstruction of the law of obligations which eliminates these traditional categories.
Whatever the legal concepts employed, interests theory promotes communitarian values in its theory of distributive justice.
It constitutes an economic order which encourages trust and responsibility for the interests of others — a form of solidarity.
Yet these virtues of trust and solidarity remain imperfectly realized by current understandings of interests theory.
Even on the most expansive views of what interests should receive compensation, serious omissions stand out.
In particular, both the interest in receiving information about an economic transaction and the interest in receiving a fair exchange of values are generally discounted.
Only a more thorough duty of disclosure (perhaps achieved indirectly through a doctrine of unilateral mistake) could satisfy the former interest, for the common law generally limits its protection — in line with a narrow conception of the reliance interest — to reliance upon false statements.
Similarly, a fair exchange of values can only be realized by either a broad doctrine of unconscionability or a reversal of the rule that a court will not assess the adequacy of consideration.
Without the protection of these interests, the market order legitimated by interests theory countenances too many opportunities to trick and exploit others to live up to the virtues of trust and solidarity.
VI CONCLUSION
I hope that these reflections upon the justifications for the enforcement of contracts place the difficulties experienced by teachers of contract law in a clearer perspective than before.
We have vindicated the suspicion that modern legal developments cannot be encompassed by the classical scheme of contract doctrine.
That scheme rests upon an interpretation of liberal ideals and the justice of the market order for the distribution of wealth and power which has been overshadowed by a rival interpretation of liberalism and a redefinition of legitimate market relations.
The modern legal doctrine embraces a conception of the market which emphasizes the heavy interdependence of economic actors in an advanced capitalist society.
In order to sustain this market, the law encourages trust and responsibility for the interests of others.
Accordingly, contractual obligations are not limited to agreements, but extend to cases of mutual reliance and financial dependence.
In order to regulate this market to prevent domination and exploitation, the terms of contractual obligations cannot be freely chosen by the parties but are shaped by a concern for trust, solidarity and fairness.
Nevertheless, the modern law of contracts tenaciously clings to the liberal ideal of individual autonomy.
For example, the law still insists that before responsibility is incurred, an individual should signify, if not his consent, at least his acquiescence in the creation of the obligation.
Even so, the grip of liberal ideas upon the law of contract is weakening, because, as I have tried to show, the legal doctrine is ultimately shaped not by fidelity to liberal precepts but by a particular scheme of distributive justice and a vision of the legitimate market order.
That is not to say that the element of voluntariness will cease to provide the distinguishing mark of contractual obligations.
Voluntariness will be understood, however, not as the decisive act by which an individual surrenders private autonomy, but rather as a deliberate entry into market relations under which certain obligations will arise in order to sustain and regulate an advanced division of labour.
These reflections upon the character of the new vision of contracts may assist teachers in organizing their teaching of the modern doctrine.
Yet it must be confessed that obscurities persist at the centre of this vision of the law.
The balance between efficiency and social cost requires a more exacting standard of measurement before legal doctrine can be reformulated in a coherent pattern.
Similarly, the details of laws encouraging disclosure of information and requiring fairness in an exchange depend upon a more rigorous development of the communitarian political philosophy which values trust and solidarity.
These are tasks which confront legal theory and political philosophy together.
We may even suggest that the theory of contracts presents an ideal terrain for an examination of these fundamental issues of political philosophy, for the law of contract lies at the intersection of the market and the state, using the coercive power of the latter to reinforce the discipline of the former.
COMPANY LAW AND LEGAL THEORY MARY STOKES
Students of company law very often complain that the subject is technical, difficult and dull.
This is not without some justification.
The reason can perhaps be found in the fact that company law as an academic discipline boasts no long and distinguished pedigree.
The result is that company lawyers lack an intellectual tradition which places the particular rules and doctrines of their discipline within a broader theoretical framework which gives meaning and coherence to them.
One object of this essay will be to suggest such a theoretical framework.
The framework aims to provide a tool for analysing and explaining many of the fundamental rules of company law.
It will be argued that one of the central features of the business company is the way in which it centralizes the authority to manage the capital which it aggregates from its investors in the hands of corporate managers.
Clearly the nature and extent of the power thus vested in the management of a company vary according to the type and size of the company.
But whatever its extent the power of corporate managers poses a problem of legitimacy.
This essay will seek to explain the nature of that problem.
It will also endeavour to illustrate how much of company law can be understood as a response to the problem of the legitimacy of corporate managerial power.
Thus the theoretical framework takes the legitimation of corporate managerial power to be one of the underlying and unifying themes of company law.
More concretely, those areas of company law which are best viewed as a response to the problem of the legitimacy of corporate managerial power will be examined.
Thus it will be shown how the changing popularity of a number of theoretical models of the company can be linked to the need to offer an explanation for the power which the company vests in corporate managers.
Similarly, the rules allocating power between shareholders and directors and those imposing fiduciary duties on directors will be analysed in terms of the need to confer legitimacy upon the power of corporate management.
A second object of this essay will be to show how the law's attempt to justify the power vested in corporate managers has failed.
This in turn will lead us to an examination of how corporate law scholars have sought to offer new ways of legitimating corporate managerial power and how these too prove to be unequal to the task.
Finally, some fresh methods by which managerial power might be justified will be explored.
THE PROBLEM OF THE LEGITIMACY OF CORPORATE MANAGERIAL POWER
The reason why company law should have been so concerned to legitimate the power of corporate managers is that this power potentially threatens the political-economic organization we associate with a liberal democracy.
We make a distinction between public and private power.
This distinction reflects the separation of the state from the individual in a liberal society.
Liberal democracy has been concerned most explicitly with legitimating the power of the state, or public power.
This is because the assumption is made that all important power in society is concentrated in the hands of the state.
The arguments used to justify public power are very familiar.
They are that the system of representative democracy gives authority to the legislature to make law, and that the power conferred upon all administrative or public bodies is legitimate as it is derived from the legislature.
However, in a liberal society a democratic system of government is not considered sufficient by itself to legitimate public power.
Liberalism is hostile to the existence of centres of unbridled power, believing that power unless limited and controlled may threaten the liberty and the equality of the individual which are the two fundamental tenets of liberalism itself.
Thus it is sought to subject public power to the Rule of Law.
At its broadest the Rule of Law aims to impose limits, controls and checks on the exercise of power.
Power must be prevented from being used arbitrarily.
Arbitrariness is a difficult concept to define.
It will be used to mean the exercise of power for purposes alien to those for which it was conferred.
Notice the structure of the argument legitimating public power.
It breaks down into two parts.
We are concerned, firstly, to provide a justification for power being vested in the state; and then, secondly, we seek to demonstrate that there are constraints upon the exercise of that power which prevent it from being used to infringe the liberty or equality of individuals.
As we have seen, the power vested in the state is justified by a system of democratic government; and the assurance that the state's power is subject to constraints which prevent it from being used arbitrarily is found in the adherence to the ideal of the Rule of Law.
The structure of this argument is important because we find it repeated when we look at the traditional ways in which it is sought to legitimate private power.
Although the theory is that all important power is concentrated in the hands of the state, this has not meant that the individual has been regarded as powerless.
It has always been acknowledged that a system of private property ownership confers upon the owners of property private economic (and perhaps political and social) power.
Indeed, one of the justifications of private property takes as its premise the idea that property ownership confers power.
This provides a necessary bulwark against the danger of an all-powerful state invading the individual's liberty.
In other words private property serves to protect the individual's freedom.
Private ownership is also justified because by permitting individual property owners to pursue their own self-interest in a competitive market it is argued that we achieve an optimal allocation of society's resources.
It is not enough simply to suggest justifications for the existence of private ownership.
If private property is to be legitimate within the framework of a liberal society it is also necessary to show that there are constraints which prevent it from becoming a source of power which threatens the liberty of the individual or rivals the power of the state.
Two arguments are used for this purpose.
Firstly, it is claimed that the economic power associated with the ownership of property does not threaten liberty because it is not concentrated in the hands of an individual or small group of individuals.
Everyone is entitled to own property.
It is true that the actual distribution of property in society is far from equal; but it is not so skewed as to give any individual a monopoly of economic power.
The power of each property owner is checked by the corresponding power of each other property owner.
Thus the distribution of property is not so unequal that it can threaten the liberty of the individual.
Private economic power differs in this respect from the public power of the state.
The state has a monopoly over the use of coercion which is perceived to be legitimate only because those exercising such power have been democratically elected or derive their authority from a democratic legislature.
A second argument has traditionally been used to reassure us that the economic power derived from the ownership of property is subject to constraints.
It is claimed that economic power is constrained by the competitive market.
In a competitive market the bargaining power of the owner of a particular commodity is limited.
Because many others own identical commodities or commodities which are close substitutes which they are willing to sell, the owner will not be free to charge any price he chooses for his commodity.
Rather the price will be determined by the demand for and the supply of that commodity.
In addition, if a property owner is manufacturing and selling goods in a competitive market he will be obliged to produce any given level of output of those goods at the lowest cost possible.
And the quantity of goods which he produces will be such that the marginal cost of production is the same as the price of the product.
If he fails to follow these simple rules the consequence will be economic failure.
This flows from the assumptions made by the model of perfect competition that the individual entrepreneur maximizes his profits, that there is a price taker and that there is freedom of entry and exit from the industry in which he is producing goods.
It is true that this model does not purport to describe accurately the way in which the market economy actually functions.
Nevertheless, the model of economic theory is often taken to embody in an ideal form many of the characteristics of the actual market economy.
Because this market controls and disciplines the economic power associated with property ownership it serves to legitimate that power within the framework of liberalism.
An analogy can here be made between the market and the Rule of Law.
The market is the mechanism which has traditionally been invoked to limit, control and thereby legitimate private power, whereas the mechanism by which it has been sought to control and justify the exercise of public power has traditionally been the ideal of the Rule of Law.
Both mechanisms can be viewed as part of the liberal response to the threat to freedom which it is believed is posed by the existence of untrammelled power, be it public or private.
The economic power of the company was not thought to pose any particular difficulty within this framework of legitimation.
Although the corporate form together with limited liability enabled large sums of capital to be aggregated for a common purpose, this was not perceived as problematic.
Economic theory assumed that the company, like the individual entrepreneur, behaved as a profit-maximizing unit.
It was obliged to do so if it was to operate within a competitive market where there were a sufficient number of firms producing the same or a substitutable commodity so that each firm was incapable of influencing the price of the commodity by adjusting its output.
Thus the firm in economic theory behaved identically and was subject to the same constraints whether it took the form of an individual proprietorship, a partnership or a company.
Theory was, however, divorced from reality.
The reality was that the growth of corporate enterprise shattered three of the assumptions which underlay the belief that economic power of the company was regulated and thereby legitimated by the competitive market.
Firstly, the growth of corporate enterprise falsified the theory that in any given industry there were numerous small firms so that each firm had no market power but was obliged to accept the market price for its products.
The company facilitated the aggregation of vast sums of capital from numerous small investors and this together with changes in technology and organizational techniques led to a vast expansion in the size of the firm and a reduction in the number of firms operating in any particular industry.
As a result the market structure very often ceased to be purely competitive, becoming monopolistic or oligopolistic.
The consequence was that the company no longer had to accept the market price for its products but could affect that price by varying the output of the product.
Secondly, the assumption that the company behaved as a profit-maximizing unit of production just like an individual entrepreneur or a partnership was manifestly open to doubt.
One of the central features of the company is that it separates out the functions of ownership and management.
Those who manage the company do not own the company, If the managers of the company display the characteristics which economic theory credits to all other individuals they will be concerned to maximize their own utility rather than the profits of the company.
Adam Smith himself understood this problem.
He was hostile to the joint-stock company as a medium through which to carry on business enterprise.
Of course, it was the oligopolistic character of product markets which gave those who ran the company discretion to pursue goals other than profit-maximization.
In a world of perfect competition it would not be possible for managers to deviate from the profit-maximization norm for any length of time even if they were tempted to pursue their own rather than the shareholders' interests.
The failure of the market due to imperfect competition to regulate the company as an  economic unit is thus indissolubly linked with the increased and potentially unconstrained power of corporate managers.
It is for this reason that we can treat both imperfect competition and the separation of ownership and management as creating a problem for the legitimacy of corporate managerial power.
Thirdly, one of the cardinal features of the market model of legitimation was that economic power was exercised through exchange transactions in the market.
Yet as the company grew in size it was plain that much economic activity was being withdrawn from the sphere of the market and being replaced by a hierarchical, bureaucratic organization within the company.
The invisible hand was being replaced by the visible hand.
The effect of these three changes brought about by the growth of corporate enterprise was that the market could no longer be viewed as regulating and thereby legitimating the exercise of corporate power.
The power conferred upon corporate managers by the business company was potentially unchecked and hence illegitimate within the framework of liberal democracy.
At a deeper level the concentration of economic power brought about by the growth in the size of companies and the oligopolistic nature of product markets undermined some of the traditional justifications for private ownership itself.
The concentration of power in the hands of the managers of the largest companies could not be seen as a necessary bulwark against the power of the state.
Nor could it be argued that private property ensured an efficient allocation of resources since the market no longer resembled the model of perfect competition.
THE RESPONSE OF THE LAW TO THE PROBLEM OF THE LEGITIMACY OF CORPORATE MANAGERIAL POWER
How did the law respond to this crisis of legitimacy of the business company?
The first reason why the market could no longer be perceived as limiting economic power was that the structure of the market ceased to correspond even loosely with the model of perfect competition which required numerous firms operating in the same industry so that no firm was capable of affecting the price of its product by varying the level of the output of that product.
Ultimately the law has responded to this problem by intervening to try to ensure that the market resembles as closely as possible the paradigm of perfect competition, outlawing monopoly and trade practices that deviate from that paradigm.
Although it can be argued that the ultra vires doctrine in company law was originally used to try to prevent concentration in industry this task has fallen primarily to competition law.
Company law has instead focused its attention on the problems created by the second characteristic of corporate enterprise which undercut the ability of the market to regulate the exercise of economic power: the separation of ownership and management.
This feature of the company together with the increasing substitution of the organization of economic activity within the company rather than through the markets suggested that there had been an enormous growth in the power of corporate management.
Both characteristics also suggested that  that power was relatively uncontrolled by the market.
There are two ways in which company law set about tackling the problem of legitimacy of corporate managerial power which was thus posed.
Firstly, company law sought to explain and justify why broad discretionary authority was conferred upon corporate managers.
And, secondly, company law set about the task of demonstrating that the power of corporate managers was not unlimited but was subject to checks and controls which ensured that it could not be used for the manager's own purposes or for any other arbitrary end.
The discussion of the methods by which company law has sought to legitimate the power conferred upon corporate managers and an assessment of their efficacy will be broken into parts to reflect these two strategies.
The two strategies echo the structure of the argument which we have already seen used to legitimate public power and private power associated with the ordinary ownership of property.
This suggests that there has always been an underlying awareness that company law doctrine was engaged in a discourse about the legitimation of power.
I will also seek to show how many parallels can be drawn between the arguments used to legitimate corporate managerial power and the arguments used in administrative law to explain, control and legitimate the power conferred upon administrative bodies.
Given that the market has ceased to be an effective mode of regulating the exercise of the economic power of the company it is hardly surprising that arguments employed to regulate the exercise of public power should have been drawn upon to regulate the private economic power of corporate managers.
Before proceeding with an elaboration of the two strategies invoked by company law to legitimate the power of corporate managers, I will give an overview of the traditional model of the company with the object of showing how its development is characterized both by an increasing centralization of the authority to manage the company in the hands of the directors of the company and by a concern to justify this vesting of broad discretionary power in corporate management.
THE TRADITIONAL LEGAL MODEL OF THE COMPANY
The traditional legal model of the company originally treated the directors of the company as agents of the company.
This meant that their authority was rather limited since it could at any moment be revoked by the shareholders.
Furthermore, the shareholders as the principal were entitled to issue specific instructions to the directors which as agents they were obliged to implement.
The beginning of the twentieth century saw the abandonment of this theory of the relationship between the shareholders and the directors.
Instead of being perceived simply as agents of the shareholders the board of directors came to be viewed as an organ of the company which for many purposes could be treated as the company.
Directors were given the exclusive right to manage the day-to-day business of the company.
Shareholders were precluded from intervening in the ordinary business of the company, no longer being entitled to issue instructions to the directors as to how to exercise their powers.
The courts justified this vesting of managerial autonomy over the everyday business of the company in the hands  of the directors by arguing that it flowed from the construction of a company's articles of association which formed a contract between the members of the company.
Although the shareholders no longer exercised the direct control of principals over the directors as their agents, the model nevertheless asserts that any danger that the directors might use their considerable discretionary powers to manage the business in their own interest is precluded.
It is precluded because the model gives power to the shareholders to appoint and dismiss the directors and power to supervise them once they are in office.
A system of indirect control and accountability is thereby established over the directors as those responsible for the management of the company.
This system of indirect control through the internal division of power between shareholders and directors is strengthened by providing that the assistance of the courts can be called upon to enforce it.
The legal model has one further method by which it attempts to balance the desirability of going to the managers of the company substantial discretionary power so that they have sufficient flexibility to act effectively, whilst at the same time minimizing the danger that the existence of such discretion creates, which is that it will be used arbitrarily.
This further method is found in the imposition upon directors of fiduciary duties.
Directors are treated as being in a position analogous to that of trustees, so powers conferred upon them are given to them in a fiduciary capacity.
This means that directors are under a duty to act in the best interests of the shareholders.
They cannot place their own interests above those of the shareholders.
The fiduciary duties of directors are not merely abstract injunctions to act only in the interests of the shareholders for they are once again enforceable in the courts.
In the following two sections the two strategies employed by this model to legitimate corporate managerial power will be examined more closely.
Firstly, the justification given by the model for vesting substantial managerial power in the hands of the directors will be investigated.
Secondly, the nature of the controls imposed on management so as to assure us that their power cannot be used arbitrarily will be analysed and criticized.
THE LEGAL MODEL'S LEGITIMATION OF THE VESTING OF BROAD DISCRETIONARY POWER TO MANAGE THE COMPANY IN THE HANDS OF THE DIRECTORS
In trying to analyse the reasons for conferring upon the management of the company substantial power to run the company the law has relied heavily on a variety of conceptions of the company.
There is a tendency among corporate law scholars to dismiss the debate about the nature of the company and corporate personality as too rarefied and speculative an enquiry better left to properly qualified jurisprudential writers.
This is a mistake.
For the different theoretical conceptions of the company have been intimately embroiled in the effort of company law to justify the vesting of substantial power in corporate management.
Before trying to link the legal model of corporate managerial power to a particular conception of the company a sketch of three conceptions of the company  which have vied at different periods for dominance in corporate law doctrine and scholarship will be given.
The first and traditional conception of the company might be labelled the fiction/concession theory.
This theory treats the company as an artificial entity whose separate legal personality is granted as a privilege by the state.
It was a privilege which the state guarded jealously and which was made available to business enterprises whose purposes aimed to benefit the public in general as well as enrich the corporators.
Thus many of the early joint.stock enterprises which were granted the privilege of corporate identity were concerned with building and operating canals and railways.
What gave legitimacy to these companies was the theory that as creatures of the state they were supervised and regulated by the state.
In the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries the theory found its doctrinal expression in the ultra vires rule.
The ultra vires doctrine was used by the courts to keep corporate bodies within the narrowly defined powers granted to them by the statute or charter of incorporation conferring corporate identity upon them.
Clearly there is a very strong resemblance between this method of legitimating corporate power and that which still prevails today in respect of administrative bodies.
Their powers are granted to them by the state and the courts ensure through the ultra vires or jurisdictional principle that they do not act outside their powers.
However, the fiction/concession theory came under tension once incorporation became freely available on compliance with some simple formalities, for it no longer made sense then to treat the incorporation as a special privilege or concession from the state.
We have seen that the more modern legitimation of corporate power, which has prevailed since the demise of the fiction/concession theory, is based upon the discipline which the competitive market exerts over the economic power of the company.
The second theory of the nature of the company is the contractual one.
The company is a form created by the free agreement amongst the shareholders, much like an extended partnership.
This view has long been linked with those who have argued that the company should not be specially regulated by the state since it owed its existence to nothing more than a contract between individual property owners.
It is unsurprising that the lawyers in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries should have been attracted by a contractual analysis of the company.
Contract was once the greediest of legal categories intent on devouring as many areas of the law as possible (e.g. quasi-contract) and indeed was even invoked to explain the nature of the state itself.
This contractual vision of the company focuses on the internal relation of the members within the company.
It does not say anything explicit about the legitimacy of corporate power in relation to society generally.
This is because the more modern justification for corporate power is assumed.
That justification is, as we have seen, that the competitive market disciplines the economic power of the company.
So the company is regulated both internally and externally by contract.
The third view of the company is one which has prevailed in the academic literature rather more forcefully than in company law doctrine itself.
It is that the company is a natural or real entity which exists separately and distinctly from the shareholders.
In Dicey's words it meant that ‘whenever men act in concert for a common purpose they tend to create a body, which from no fiction of law but from the very nature of things, differs from the individuals of whom it is  constituted.’
Sometimes the natural entity theory has been called a ‘group person’ theory.
This posits that the company or any group of individuals acting together for a common purpose creates a living organism, or a real person, capable of willing and acting through the people who are its organs just as a natural person wills and acts through their brain, mouth and hands.
It was a theory originally popularized by the German realists who were not slow to make the connection between a natural-entity theory of the corporation and a theory of the state.
It was enthusiastically adopted by academic writers in this country at the beginning of this century.
Quite clearly the conception of the company explicitly adopted by the legal model is the contractual one.
The company is simply treated as an organization constituted by the contract between its members.
That contract confers power on the directors of the company to manage the company.
This contractual analysis formed the basis of the early theory that the relationship between the shareholders and the directors was that of principal and agent.
It also forms the key to the courts' justification of managerial autonomy in the model which superseded the agency theory at the beginning of this century.
For the conclusion that the powers vested in directors are to be exercised exclusively by the directors is arrived at by a careful analysis of the wording of the article giving to the directors of the company general managerial powers which is found in the constitution of most companies.
By adopting a contractual conception of the company the legal model gives as the reason for the vesting of centralized authority to manage the company in the board of directors the contractual agreement of the owners of the company.
Thus by invoking the idea of the freedom of a property owner to make any contract with respect to his property the power accorded to corporate managers appears legitimate, being the outcome of ordinary principles of freedom of contract.
It reassures us that the hierarchy created within the company does not threaten individual liberty because it is the outcome of a voluntary consensual arrangement.
This model of the company is one which has proved very attractive to some commentators.
Some of the features of the legal model which we have depicted such as the power of the shareholders to dismiss the directors and the fiduciary duties imposed upon the directors are provided for by the law rather than by the articles of association.
Nevertheless, commentators have argued that the function of these legal rules is to provide a standard set of terms to govern the relationship between the shareholders and the directors, the object being to reduce the transaction costs involved in the parties negotiating a private bargain.
In other words these legal rules simply reflect the agreement the parties would have reached if bargaining on these questions had taken place at arm's length.
The use of the contractual conception of the company to give legitimacy to the vesting of managerial power in the directors of the company encountered two difficulties.
The first was that this contractual conception of the company conflicted with the theory prevailing in the case-law that treated the company as an artificial entity, separate and distinct from its shareholders.
This traditional fiction/concession theory had been embraced by legal doctrine in order to make the limited liability of the company seem a natural and inevitable incident of corporate personality.
Clearly this would only be the case if the company was  perceived as an entity distinct from its shareholders so that it followed that the company and not the shareholders would be liable for any debts.
If, by contrast, the company was viewed as no more than a contractual association between the members much like a partnership, it was difficult to explain why each shareholder should not be liable for the full extent of any debts, as was the case in a partnership.
In other words what had happened is that legal doctrine had drawn upon conflicting conceptions of the company to legitimate limited liability and to endorse the power conferred upon directors to manage the company.
Legal doctrine was in danger of appearing incoherent unless some reconciliation could be found between these two visions of the company.
The second difficulty which arose as a result of the legal model's reliance on the contractual conception of the company was the increasing artificiality of this analysis as the size of companies grew and the shareholders became increasingly passive investors.
Any notion that the internal division of power within a company was the result of a consensual arrangement between the shareholders seemed purely fictional.
The difficulties associated with the contractual model of the company led academics in the early decades of this century to adopt instead in their writing the natural-entity conception of the company.
The natural-entity theory had several advantages compared with the contractual and the fiction/concession models of the company.
Firstly, it viewed the company as distinct from its shareholders and therefore, unlike the contractual model, it could be seen to support the theory that it was the company which was liable for any debts.
The limited liability of the shareholders then appeared as a sort of concession to the creditors of the company rather than an arbitrary limitation on the normal liability imposed on partners in a business association.
Secondly, the fiction/concession theory could have supplied an image of the company as separate and distinct from its shareholders which would also have supported the institution of limited liability, but there were strong reasons for preferring the natural-entity model of the company.
The fiction/concession theory saw the company as entirely the creature of the state and therefore potentially accorded to the state the power to regulate and control the company as it saw fit.
These implications of the fiction/concession theory were neither compatible with the reality of free incorporation on compliance with some simple formalities nor congenial to academics who did not favour state intervention in corporate enterprise.
By contrast the natural-entity theory fitted perfectly a world where there was free incorporation and where the general belief was that there was no particular need to regulate the business company.
Thirdly, and most importantly for our purposes, the natural-entity theory overcame the problems of the artificiality in the case of large companies of analysing the directors' managerial power as being derived from the contractual agreement of the shareholders.
Its conception of the company as a real person or living organism suggested that the corporate managers could be treated as the brain of the organism formulating the policy of the company and directing its implementation by corporate executives.
The fact that the shareholders within the large company were increasingly becoming passive investors, irrelevant within the company  except for their function in supplying the capital of the company, was entirely consonant with this image of the company.
They could be viewed as the organ within the living organism whose task it was to supply the basic necessity of capital without any need to accord them a fuller role within the enterprise.
The natural-entity theory thus legitimated the fact that in the large public company, as we shall see, the shareholders no longer controlled corporate management, so that control as well as management came to be separated from ownership.
The enthusiasm for the natural-entity model of the company can be linked with a new justification given for the vesting of very extensive discretionary power in corporate management which is independent of the contractual justification which appears so clearly in English case-law.
This justification is that the managers of the company have the time, information, organizational skills and other expertise to manage the business, which the shareholders themselves lack.
It is this expertise of the managers which justifies their being treated as the brain of the company, formulating corporate policy to further the ends of the enterprise.
This modern justification of the discretionary power of corporate managers has a parallel in administrative law where we find that one of the arguments used to legitimate conferring discretionary power on administrative agencies has been their expertise and special competence in a particular field.
THE LEGAL MODEL'S ATTEMPT TO LEGITIMATE CORPORATE MANAGERIAL POWER THROUGH SUBJECTING IT TO CHECKS PREVENTING IT FROM BEING EXERCISED ARBITRARILY
The discussion thus far has focused on the reasons given in legal doctrine to support the legal model's centralization of the power to manage the company in the hands of the directors of the company.
I have argued that company law in its attempt to establish the legitimacy of corporate managerial power has been concerned also to show that the power conferred on managers is subject to controls which prevent it from being used arbitrarily.
These controls are necessary if the business company is not to threaten the traditional liberal distrust of unconstrained power normally encapsulated in the adherence to the Rule of Law.
As we have seen the legal model adopts two mechanisms for ensuring that the directors of the company are subject to the control of the shareholders.
The directors are, firstly, made accountable to the shareholders by structuring the internal division of power within the company so that the shareholders have the power to appoint and dismiss directors and to supervise them whilst in office.
Secondly, directors are treated as fiduciaries required to act in the best interests of the shareholders.
These mechanisms share in common the following features.
Both mechanisms accept and endorse the separation of the management of the company from its ownership.
They accept that it is no longer plausible to assume that those operating the business have their freedom of action constrained by the competitive market or their own self-interest.
It is more probable that the managers will seek to pursue their own goals rather than subject their decisions to the norm of profit-maximization.
Thus the common aim of both legal  mechanisms is to force managers to maximize profits for their company and prevent them from maximizing their own utility.
If this can be done successfully the company will once again correspond to the profit-maximizing firm of economic theory.
Corporate managers' discretion will be legitimated since their power will be severely limited by the requirement that all their decisions must aim simply at profit-maximization.
The efficacy of each of the mechanisms will be examined in turn.
the Internal Division of Power within the Company as a Means of Controlling Managerial Power
The traditional legal model divides power within the company between the directors and the shareholders.
The object is to organize the internal structure of the company so that, whilst the directors as the managers of the company are given ample discretionary power to operate the company effectively, they are nevertheless obliged to exercise that power in the interests of the owners of the company.
The legal model of the company is often treated as establishing a basic constitution for the company, defining the powers of the different organs of the company and regulating the relationship between them.
An analogy is drawn between the company and the state.
The argument is that just as direct democracy is ruled out by the size of the modern state, so too once companies grow beyond a certain size it is no longer possible to involve all their members directly in the decisions concerning the running of the company.
In both cases therefore a system of representative democracy is adopted.
This system relies upon the ability of the electorate to elect and dismiss leaders at periodic intervals.
It is this which establishes the control of the people over their political leaders or of the shareholders over their directors.
Thus the shareholders in the company are treated as the electorate, and the directors are regarded as the legislature.
The legal model envisages the board of directors as actually carrying on the day-to-day business of the company so that there is no separate executive organ within the legal model.
But once the size of companies expanded further it was very easy to accommodate the fact that whilst directors remained responsible for the formulation of the overall policy of the company the ordinary management was entrusted to executives.
For the corporate executives could be viewed (as their name suggests) as executives implementing the broad objectives set by the directors as the legislature.
The comparison drawn between the company and the state in no way detracts from the contractual conception of the company, which we have seen was originally adopted to legitimate the vesting of broad discretion to manage the company in the hands of the directors.
The two are entirely compatible if it is remembered that one of the popular theories of the nature of the state itself has always been that it was founded on a contract between the individual members of a society.
The powers conferred by the legal model on the shareholders can be analysed neatly in terms of the analogy between the constitution of a company and the constitution of a nation-state.
Shareholders as the electorate are given the power to elect and dismiss their leaders, the directors.
They are also given power to  vote on fundamental structural changes to the company, such as altering the memorandum and articles of association or merging with another company or dissolving the enterprise which are thought to resemble constitutional issues.
In addition the received legal model of the company gives powers to the shareholders to ensure that the directors once in office do not use their powers for their own self-interest.
Thus the law insists that a director who wishes to enter into a transaction where there is any possibility of a conflict between his own interest and his duty to act in the best interests of the company must disclose the transaction to the shareholders in general meeting and obtain their consent to it.
The shareholders are thereby given the power to judge for themselves whether the directors are using their managerial powers for their own benefit at the expense of the company and if this is so to veto the transaction or at least hold the director liable for any profits thereby made.
How effective is this constitutional structure of the company in ensuring that directors do not use their powers arbitrarily?
The constitutional framework makes the shareholders responsible for monitoring and supervising the directors of the company.
Its efficacy in providing adequate controls over the directors therefore depends on the shareholders performing this task.
Yet the reality is that it is only in companies where each shareholder has a sufficiently substantial stake in the company to make it worth his or her while performing the tasks of monitoring and supervising the behaviour of the directors that this constitutional framework can hope to provide an adequate control on the behaviour of directors.
In the large public company it is now accepted as part of conventional wisdom that the shareholding is so widely dispersed that each shareholder does not own a significant enough proportion of the company to perform any of the functions of monitoring and supervising the directors that the legal model casts upon him.
The consequence in the terminology of Berle and Means is that there is a separation between ownership and control.
The managers become a self-selecting body and cease to be effectively monitored by the shareholders once in office.
Control is vested in their hands rather than the shareholders'.
The legal model or the company which separates ownership and management but still asserts that ultimate control resides with the owners of the company no longer corresponds to the realities of the modern large public company.
Yet company law doctrine has failed to acknowledge this.
Indeed the obstinacy with which company law has clung to the traditional legal model of the division of power in the company between the managers and the shareholders has sometimes had the effect of concealing from us the fact that company law regulates a variety of different sorts of companies.
It is only by looking outside legal doctrine itself that we are made aware that neither the small closely held company (where there is no separation of ownership and management) nor the large public company (where there is a separation of ownership and control) conform to the legal model.
Because company law fails to differentiate in any consistent fashion between these different sorts of companies all are treated as regulated by the traditional legal framework which we have been examining.
The result is that there is a tendency to assume that corporate management are adequately controlled by the shareholders in all companies, including the large public company.
The problem of legitimacy posed for liberalism by the fact that in reality the managers  of a large public company wield power which is unconstrained by the shareholders is quietly ignored by legal doctrine itself.
This point can perhaps also be illustrated by some of the recent legislative reforms of company law.
The Companies Act 1980 (now consolidated in the Companies Act 1985) has extended the occasions when the consent of the shareholders to a transaction is required, so that, for example , before directors enter into long-term service agreements with their company, or substantial property transactions with their company, they must disclose the details of these transactions and obtain the consent of the shareholders.
What these legislative reforms seem to be suggesting is that all is basically well with the traditional model where the directors of the company manage the company but are supervised in that task by the shareholders who, if given the requisite powers, can be relied upon to ensure that directors do not use their powers for their own purposes.
All that is needed is to specify clearly those occasions when there is a strong danger that directors may be tempted to act in their own self-interest and then to make the shareholders' consent necessary in those circumstances.
But the attempt to assure us that directors are controlled by their shareholders must fail, for no matter how far the law goes in strengthening the powers conferred upon shareholders to monitor the managers of their company the reality is that where each shareholder only holds a tiny proportion of the share capital of the company none of the shareholders will avail themselves of the powers given to them to monitor the management.
The attempt to revitalize shareholder democracy in this fashion is doomed to failure in the large public company.
Efforts to do so are misplaced and can positively mislead us into believing in the efficacy of the internal organization of the structure of the company as a means of legitimating corporate managerial power.
Outside legal doctrine itself there has been a greater willingness to accept that in the large public company the shareholders may not perform the task of monitoring and controlling the management of the company, so that the managers are potentially left in a position of unchecked power.
Several attempts have been made, however, to breathe new life into the traditional model which relies on structuring the internal organization of the company appropriately to ensure that controls are exercised over corporate managers.
It is sometimes argued that the rise of institutional investment and the decline of individual direct investment in large public companies means that the traditional model of the shareholder controlling the directors of the company is once again a realistic one.
Although each institutional investor may still only own a very small percentage of the issued share capital of the company, nevertheless, they have the requisite skills to monitor management effectively, and can act collectively to exert pressure on the managers of the company, thereby overcoming the problem that there is little incentive for the individual shareholder to spend the necessary time and money to inform himself of and perhaps challenge the actions of the directors as the managers of the company.
The empirical evidence suggests, however, that the supervision which institutional investors exercise over the management of a company is minimal and cannot be regarded as a sufficient control over the managers of large public companies.
Others have argued that the traditional legal model overlooks a significant development which has taken place in the large public company.
The legal model  assumes that the board of directors manages the ordinary business of the company.
Yet the truth is that the board of directors will only very rarely be involved in the day-to-day running of the company which is instead usually entrusted to the officers and executives of the company.
Even the policy-making functions will generally be carried out by the executives rather than the board itself.
The role of the board within the company needs to be re-examined.
Since it is not involved in the management of the company it is in a position to monitor and check the performance of the executives actually managing the company, to ensure that they act only in the interests of the shareholders.
This role can best be fulfilled by the board if the majority of directors are independent of the executive over whom they exercise a supervisory, checking function.
This model of the internal structure of the company acknowledges that the shareholders do not control those who manage the company and instead entrusts this task to a reconstituted board.
As a means of assuring us that the management of large public companies do not wield arbitrary power it is unsatisfactory.
Firstly, it represents no more than a proposal for reform of the internal structure of the public company and not an accurate description of how the board at present functions in such a company.
Secondly, even if implemented, the question would arise as to whether adequate checks existed to prevent the reconstituted board from exercising its powers in an arbitrary fashion.
Without such checks the old problem arises of who is to be responsible for monitoring and supervising the supervisors.
The conclusion that must be drawn is that corporate management in the large public company are not controlled by the shareholders exercising the powers accorded to them by law to appoint, dismiss and monitor the directors of the company.
Unless there are other effective ways in which the managers of the public company are constrained, it would seem that the power of corporate management threatens liberalism's ideal that all power should be limited or subjected to checks.
Fiduciary duties as a Mechanism for Controlling Managerial Power
The second mechanism for controlling managerial power which was singled out in the legal model was the fiduciary duties imposed upon the directors and officers of the company.
These duties can be formulated as three distinct rules.
Directors owe a duty of care and skill; a duty of loyalty; and a duty to act bona fide in the best interests of the company and not for any improper purpose.
One analysis of the function of these duties is that they ensure that the directors of the company have sufficient discretion and flexibility to be able to manage the company efficiently, whilst precluding them from exercising this discretion contrary to the interests of the shareholders.
Much the same problem has arisen in administrative law.
Here the problem is one of balancing an administrative body's need for substantial discretion to make choices between different courses of action and the desirability of giving the courts power to intervene to prevent the discretion being exercised contrary to the intention of the legislature.
Judicial review of the exercise of discretionary powers by administrative bodies has been self-consciously based on the need to ensure that the intention of the legislature is implemented and that discretionary power is subjected to some sort of control  in the name of the Rule of Law.
The review of directors' managerial decisions can be viewed as being motivated by a similar desire to ensure that directors exercise their powers only in accordance with the will of their constituents (the shareholders) and that they are subjected to the controls often associated with the Rule of Law to prevent them from using their power arbitrarily.
The idea that there is a strong parallel to be drawn between judicial review in administrative law and company law is further strengthened by the similarities between the standards of review used in these two fields.
Where broad discretionary powers have been conferred upon public authorities the courts take it upon themselves to review the exercise of those powers to ensure that the body does not make decisions which are so unreasonable that no reasonable body could have come to such a decision; to ensure that the decision-makers are not biased and that decisions are not made mala fide or for any improper purpose.
It can be suggested that the fiduciary duties imposed on directors subject them to similar standards of review by the courts.
Thus the duty of care prevents directors from acting wholly unreasonably; the duty of loyalty ensures that their decisions are not biased; and the duty to act bona fide in the interests of the company and not for any improper purpose is almost identical in its formulation as a standard of review to the administrative law test striking down decisions which are taken for an improper purpose.
In administrative law the theory is that the courts are simply implementing the will of the legislature by subjecting the exercise of discretionary power to these standards of review.
In company law it can equally be argued that by casting trustee-like duties on directors so that they are required to act only in the interests of the shareholders the law aims to ensure that the will of the shareholders is implemented.
If this is the object of imposing fiduciary duties on directors it fails.
This is because in considering what are the interests of the shareholders the directors are not obliged actually to consider what the subjective desires of the shareholders might be.
The interests of the shareholders become an objective standard to govern the actions of the directors.
Yet it is an objective standard which the directors themselves define, and not one that is imposed upon them by the courts, who regard it as illegitimate to substitute their own view of what constitutes the best interests of the company or the shareholders for that of the directors of the company.
So the injunction to directors is that they must act bona fide in what they, and not the court, thinks are the best interests of the company.
In conclusion, the argument that the duty of directors to act only in the interests of the shareholders operates to ensure that the will of the shareholders is implemented by the management of the company is fundamentally flawed because the directors have considerable discretion in defining exactly what the interests of the shareholders are.
Sometimes it is argued that the interests of the shareholders can provide the directors of the company with a purely objective standard on which to base their decisions if the interests of the shareholders are equated with profit-maximization.
Apart from the fact that this ignores the possibility that shareholders may have other objectives in investing (such as opposing investment in countries practising apartheid, or opposing the manufacture of armaments or cigarettes, etc.) the profit-maximization norm does not provide a hard guideline  as to how directors should exercise their discretion.
They still have discretion to determine whether it is long-term or short-term profitability that they should be striving to achieve and discretion as to how to go about realizing that goal.
Thus even if we accept that the duty of directors to act in the best interests of shareholders can be equated with a duty to maximize profits this does not provide us with any real assurance that the wishes of the shareholders are being executed by the directors or that we have a satisfactory way of controlling the discretion accorded to directors in the name of the Rule of Law.
Another analysis of the function of imposing fiduciary duties on directors is that these duties are designed to ensure that directors act only within the ambit of their special expertise.
It has been seen that the modern justification for conferring broad discretionary power upon both corporate managers and administrative agencies is their special expertise.
Not only is expertise the justification for giving broad discretionary power to both corporate managers and administrative bodies, it also supposedly limits and controls the exercise of their power.
The theory is that the range of decisions open to managers and administrative agencies is limited because a set of criteria derived from their expert background and training governs their decisions.
The function of fiduciary duties is to provide the courts with standards of review that enable them to guarantee that corporate managers do not act outside the limits of their special competence.
Once again a similar argument exists in administrative law-namely that the function of judicial review is to ensure that public bodies only take decisions which are within the scope of their expertise.
Thus it can be argued that although the courts proclaim that in reviewing the decisions of an administrative body they are merely attempting to keep the body within the jurisdiction conferred upon it by Parliament, in fact they do sometimes explicitly justify their decisions by reference to the expertise or lack of expertise of the body whose decision it is sought to review.
There is an ambivalence in the expertise theory.
There are two views of the purposes for which corporate managers will use their expertise.
One view is that the expertise of the managers will ensure that they use their broad discretionary power to maximize the profits of the company in the interests of the shareholders.
By preventing management from straying outside their competence fiduciary duties act as an alternative mechanism to the internal organization of power within the company for forcing managers to maximize profits.
The common aim is to bring the company back in line with the profit-maximizing firm of the model of perfect competition.
An alternative to this view is that corporate managers use their expertise to help define and implement the broad purpose of the organization, which is assumed to be that of furthering the public interest.
This view is part of the corporatist vision of the company which will be examined more fully later.
The contrast I wish to draw here is between an image of the corporate manager as an expert profit-maximizer and an image of him as a trained public servant.
It is the former image which the courts have tended to have before them when reviewing the decisions of corporate managers.
Both these versions of the expertise theory assure us that the special expertise of directors at once justifies conferring upon them the discretion to run the business and imposes a restraint on how they exercise that discretion.
Directors  will only act according to professional standards of behaviour and the range of decisions available to them will be indicated by their own expertise.
In theory it would be possible to rely simply on the professional background and training of corporate managers to act as a self-imposed limit on their discretion.
Instead, however, we rely on the courts to review managerial decisions as a means of double checking that the directors are acting professionally (that is impersonally and for ends related to that of their organization).
The courts' own role in reviewing managerial decisions is in turn defined by their own expertise.
They are not competent to make business judgments but they have a special skill in detecting and thwarting management self-dealing.
Hence they will not substitute their views as to the proper management of a company but they are prepared to articulate standards of review which are designed to catch self-dealing on the part of managers.
The duty of loyalty has generally been invoked to prevent directors from having a personal financial interest in a decision, whilst the duty to act not for any improper purpose has sometimes been invoked to rule out decisions where directors have some other sort of personal but not directly financial interest in the decision.
The difficulty encountered by the expertise theory in trying to demonstrate the legitimacy of corporate managerial power by showing that there are restraints on the discretion of the managers stems from its attempt to combine a deference to the judgments of business managers with an insistence that corporate managers are subject to fiduciary duties that prevent them from exercising their power for their own purposes or for other non-corporate ends.
The problem is that there is no satisfactory way of drawing a line between decisions of corporate managers which ought to be respected because they are based solely on the expertise of the directors and those which should be challenged as based on personal considerations or other non-corporate purposes.
This is well illustrated by the controversy in the case-law about the legitimacy of a company's board of directors taking defensive action against a threatened take-over bid by issuing shares to someone who can be relied upon to support the incumbent management.
The Canadian position is that the board of directors, provided it is acting in what it considers to be the best interests of the company, must have the discretion to take defensive measures against an imminent take-over.
The assessment of the bidder's capacity to run the target company is, in other words, something which lies within the range of the directors' expertise.
By contrast, the position ultimately reached in the English cases is that if the primary reason for issuing new shares is to fend off a potential bidder for the company then the decision of the directors will be one that the courts can overturn even if the directors are acting bona fide in the best interests of the company.
It can be argued that the English courts have concluded that the danger that the judgment of the directors might be swayed by their own personal interest in retaining control of the company takes the decision outside the province where we should defer to their skill and judgment.
Thus there is enormous difficulty both in defining precisely what we mean by expertise and in marking out what decisions will be considered to be taken for personal or other non-organizational ends.
This difficulty in drawing a line between those decisions that are based on expertise and those that are influenced by personal or other non-corporate considerations means that  we become suspicious of legal argument.
Arguments based on deference to the judgment of corporate managers or those based on the finding of a personal interest or a non-corporate purpose on the part of the directors have the appearance of mere slogans to justify either judicial restraint or intervention.
This in turn can lead us to query the legitimacy of judicial review, since it appears to be an ad hoc affair rather than a process governed by any firm and coherent standards.
There is one further practical consideration which suggests that fiduciary duties are ineffective in constraining the discretion of directors.
Fiduciary duties depend for their enforcement on the shareholders taking action against the wrongdoing corporate managers.
Yet we have seen that due to the dispersion of shareholding in the large public company they have no incentive to inform themselves of the actions of their managers or to seek a remedy against them.
We can conclude that so far the law's quest to subject the power conferred on corporate managers to controls to prevent it from being exercised arbitrarily has not been successful.
The internal organization of the company does not provide an adequate safeguard against the power of the managers being used for their own ends; and the imposition of fiduciary duties does not ensure that the discretion of the managers is only exercised either in accordance with the wishes of the shareholders or in accordance only with the expertise of the managers, since both these concepts prove impossibly difficult to define.
Added to this is the doubt whether, because of the wide dispersion of shareholding in the large public company, shareholders can be relied upon to invoke the legal remedies at their disposal.
The legal model's attempt to equate corporate managers with ordinary entrepreneurs acting so as to maximize the profits of the company should be recognized for what it is — a failure.
IMPLICATIONS FOR THE STUDY OF COMPANY LAW
There are two types of response which can be made to the failure of company law to legitimate corporate managerial power.
Firstly, renewed efforts can be made to constrain the power of those who manage the large public company.
Two basic strategies are employed for this purpose.
Either attempts can be made to ensure that corporate managers behave as profit-maximizers by making them responsive once again to the market; or, alternatively, new life can be breathed into the legal model of the company so that managers are once again forced to act in the interests of the shareholders.
The market which is envisaged as capable of disciplining managers may be the product market; the market for corporate control; or the market for managerial talent.
Or it may be that the internal organization of the firm is such that it replicates a capital market so that middle managers are obliged to profit-maximize.
In recent years much energy and ingenuity has been poured into the task of showing that such markets do in fact exist and can be made to force managers to profit-maximize.
It is suggested that the aim of constraining the managers of the large public company by organizing the internal division of power in the company  appropriately can be achieved in a variety of ways.
Faith is very often placed either in institutional investors or in redefining the role of the board of directors as that of monitoring executive management.
Both the hunt for new forms of market constraints on corporate managers and the search for appropriate ways of revitalizing the internal structure of the company to limit the ability of managers to pursue goals other than those of profit-maximization clearly accept that the traditional method of legitimating corporate managerial power has failed.
That method depended, as we have seen, on managerial power being limited in two ways.
It was limited because the company and hence the managers running the company were seen to exercise no greater power than any other ordinary individual participant in the product market in which the company operated.
This had the effect of limiting the power of corporate managers both vis-à-vis their shareholders within the company and externally vis-à-vis society in general.
If the market could not always be relied upon, due to its increasingly imperfect character, to constrain the powers of corporate managers there was a second way in which corporate managerial power was limited.
The legal model which allocated powers to manage to the directors but vested ultimate control in the shareholders ensured that managers were adequately constrained.
The failure of the product market and the legal model of the company to impose any real limits on managerial power has been the point of departure of the two avenues of corporate law scholarship already outlined.
Nevertheless, both avenues of research do not seek to break out of the basic structure adopted by the traditional method of legitimating the authority of corporate managers.
Instead they prefer simply to tinker with the particular mechanisms advocated for controlling corporate managerial power.
Thus alternative external market constraints on managerial behaviour are isolated; or proposals are made reasserting the potency of the internal structure of the company as a means of preventing abuse of the discretion exercised by corporate managers.
A second approach to the problem of the legitimacy of corporate managerial power might begin by showing that the response outlined so far is fundamentally misguided.
It is misguided in believing that a solution to the problem of the legitimacy of corporate managerial power can ever be found by looking to either the market or the ordering of power within the company.
The search for such solutions fails to draw out the full implications of the criticisms of the traditional method of legitimating corporate managerial power.
I will illustrate this by looking, firstly, at the claim that some form of market can legitimate the power of corporate managers, and, secondly, at the argument that the internal structure of the company can be so designed and used as to legitimate corporate managerial power.
The idea that some form of market will act so as to restrain corporate managers from abusing their discretion by failing to serve the interests of the shareholders is flawed in two ways.
Firstly, if the argument is that any of the suggested markets — be they for products, corporate control or managerial talent — at present actually operates to constrain corporate managers, this is not something which is empirically demonstrated, and given the present nature of these markets it seems an implausible claim.
Take, for instance, the market for corporate control.
It is said to function through the mechanism of the take-over bid so as to allocate  the assets of companies to those managers who can put them to their best use, thereby disciplining managers to maximize profits or face the threat of a take-over bid ousting them from their jobs.
However, the rules which regulate take-over bids are so riddled with occasions when the managers of a target company can affect the outcome of the bid that the take-over bid ceases to act as the potent threat to self-serving or inefficient corporate managers which it is supposed to be.
Secondly, if, instead of being treated as a claim about the actual functioning of the suggested markets, the argument is taken to mean that it is possible to design a set of rules such that the proposed markets do operate to restrain corporate managerial power, it encounters an overwhelming obstacle.
It overlooks the fact that the very notion that the market is capable of legitimating power is widely acknowledged as being open to serious doubt today.
There is no one institutional set of arrangements which implements the abstract ideal of the market.
That ideal of a multiplicity of individuals bargaining freely is translated into social practice through the rules of property, contract, tort and criminal law.
But those rules can take an almost infinite variety of forms.
The market cannot be seen to be a neutral, fair process whose structure simply permits participants to exercise free choice in negotiating and concluding exchange transactions.
Rather the rules which constitute the market structure people's available range of choices and consequently themselves help to define the distribution of wealth and power in society, for which an independent justification is required.
Thus, for example, the way in which it is proposed to structure the rules regulating take-over bids simply reflects a judgment about how far acquiring companies should, through the mechanism of the take-over bid, be given the opportunity of dislodging the managers of the target company — a judgment which cannot be justified simply by appealing to the ideal of a free market.
This is not to deny that it is possible for the market (of whatever kind) to impose some form of restraint on corporate managers.
The difficulty is that it is impossible to draw the line, by appealing to any abstract ideal of the market, between the degree of constraint and the degree of discretion which will be accorded to corporate managers through, for example, the device of the take-over bid.
Equally flawed is the idea that it is possible to legitimate the power of corporate managers by structuring the internal division of power in the company so that the managers are prevented from deviating from the narrow path of profit-maximization.
It has already been shown above that the argument cannot be taken to mean that either institutional investors or the board of directors do in reality constrain corporate managers to profit-maximize.
This, as we have seen, is simply not borne out by the facts.
Even if institutional investors could be persuaded to exercise the responsibilities of ownership by playing an alert and activist part in monitoring corporate managers, difficulties would remain.
Who would monitor the management of financial institutions?
Equally, if the board of directors could be restructured so that it effectively monitored the executive managers of the company, who would monitor the board itself?
The second response to the problem of the legitimacy of corporate managerial power thus rejects the traditional strategies of company law for legitimating corporate managerial power.
Neither the market nor the internal structuring of power within the company is accepted as a viable means of constraining managerial  power.
As a consequence this response breaks with the traditional obsession of the mainstream of corporate law scholarship.
It abandons any attempt to design market or internal controls over managers to ensure that their discretion is only exercised in the interests of shareholders.
The problem of how to legitimate managerial power must be tackled from an entirely new perspective.
This perspective takes as its point of departure the discrepancy between the law's assertion that shareholders control corporate managers and the reality of their more or less total failure to exercise any of the responsibilities of ownership.
Instead of viewing this development with hostility it celebrates the way in which the modern public company has reduced the shareholders to passive property owners, thus freeing the managers from having to act purely in the interests of shareholders.
Equally the way in which economic activity has increasingly come to be organized within the company rather than through the market is something to be celebrated instead of feared.
At the level of legal reasoning these developments cannot be accommodated within the traditional contractual conception of the company.
Instead a means of legitimating the power of corporate managers can be found by drawing upon and transforming the deviations within current legal thought.
The rejection of the ruling mode of dealing with the problem of the legitimacy of corporate managerial power (through market constraints or the internal structure of the company) does not necessarily lead one into an inconclusive political debate about the merits of the capitalist system.
This style of deviationist doctrine seeks to ‘integrate into the standard doctrinal arguments the explicit controversies over the right and feasible structure of society’.
The seeds of such an approach are already present within corporate law scholarship.
They are found in the corporatist model of the company.
It provides a countervision to the traditional contractual model, dominant within legal theory.
Three important characteristics of this model need to be singled out.
Firstly, it is accepted that the modern public company has become an organization whose significance almost rivals that of the state.
It is the primary institution for organizing and employing much of our capital and labour resources and the primary supplier of goods and services in our community.
The rise of the corporate economy is said to lead to a ‘gradual approximation of the state and society, of the public and private sphere’.
Society comes to resemble ‘a constellation of governments, rather than an association of individuals held together by a single government’.
The second characteristic of the corporatist vision of the company takes up the theme of the obliteration of the distinction between state and society and between public and private to supply a normative vision of the role of corporate management.
The more or less complete independence of corporate managers from their shareholders enables managers to pursue goals other than those of profit-maximization in the interests of the shareholders.
Released from the constraints of both shareholders and any market, managers are free to become public servants, ‘a purely neutral technocracy, balancing a variety of claims by various groups in the community and assigning to each a portion of the income stream on the basis of public policy rather than private cupidity’.
Thus the power of corporate managers vis-à-vis society is legitimated because they are perceived as experts wielding power for the benefit  of society generally.
The third characteristic of the corporatist vision is that it views the company as an organic body which unifies the interests of the participants into a harmonious and common purpose under the direction of its leaders.
Within the company the power of the managers is legitimated because they are seen simply to help formulate, articulate and execute the common purpose of shareholders, creditors, employees and the community.
Traces of this countervision of the company can be found embedded in the legal materials.
At the level of legal theory the natural-entity model of the company attempts to encapsulate many of the features of the corporatist countervision.
The company is viewed as an organic body, bound together by a common purpose under the direction of its expert managers.
At the more concrete level of legal rules, we find that many of the difficulties which the law has faced in defining the duties of directors to act in the best interests of the company stem from a conflict between the traditional contractual model of the company and the corporatist countervision.
The traditional view was that the interests of the company meant the interests of the shareholders.
But increasingly the view is that the interests of the company include not only the interests of the shareholders but the interests of the company's creditors and employees.
And if these groups' interests must be considered, why not also require the directors to consider the interests of the local community, the environment and consumers?
Insofar as English law requires the directors to take into account the interests of groups other than the shareholders it adopts the position that these interests do not fundamentally conflict with those of the shareholders and that it is therefore possible to arrive at a decision that balances all the relevant interests, subsuming them under or subordinating them to the vaguely defined collective goal of the organization.
Thus s.309 of the Companies Act 1985 does not regard the interests of the employees and the shareholders of the company as irrecon-cilably opposed, expecting the directors to be able to take the interests of the employees into account whilst performing their duties to the company, including the shareholders.
To this extent the law can be considered to have endorsed the corporatist perspective.
The tendency of legal doctrine to permit and even require the directors of a company to weigh the interests of groups other than those of the shareholders is closely allied with the claims that a revolution is occurring in the goals which corporate enterprise sets itself and that corporate managers are assuming for their companies' social responsibilities.
Their sole concern is no longer the maxi-mization of the company's profits.
This goal is tempered by the pursuit of other social goals, such as donating corporate funds to charity, supporting community projects, promoting the welfare of employees and taking steps to prevent pollution beyond those required by straightforward compliance with the law.
It is because the shareholders no longer control the management of a large public company and the product market is no longer perfectly competitive that the management are free to use their discretion for these socially worthwhile ends.
The argument is that provided they do use their power for the benefit of the public rather than for their own personal gain that power is legitimate.
This vision of the company as socially responsible can be interpreted as being very closely linked if not identical to the corporist vision.
The corporatist countervision argues that corporate managers are obliged to weigh the interests of a whole range of different constituents.
In so doing it rejects the classical vision of the company which defines the interests of the company as those of the shareholders, who are the only members of the company.
The reason why the corporatist vision takes a different stance on the question of whose interests corporate managers ought to further is because it pursues to its logical conclusion the implication for the classical view of the company of the separation of ownership and control in the large public company.
The classical view of the company is that shareholders as the property owners are entitled to all the profits of the enterprise and hence that the company should be run in their interests alone.
That view rested, however, on the assumption that the shareholders exercised ultimate control and responsibility over their property, even if the function of managing the property had been delegated to corporate managers.
Since shareholders controlled the company they should be entitled to the profits and the managers obliged to act in their interests, for this ensured that the shareholders had the incentive to exploit wealth-maximizing opportunities.
In other words one of the traditional defences of private property which states that an optimal allocation of resources results from owners (who it is assumed control their property) pursuing their own self-interest could be invoked to justify insisting that the company was run in the interests of the shareholders alone.
Clearly that justification collapsed once it became clear that shareholders in large public companies no longer exercised any real control or responsibility over their property.
Once the link between property ownership and control is severed there no longer seems to be any compelling reason why the shareholders should receive all the profits of the company or why corporate managers should run the company in their interest alone.
Indeed if the aim is to provide those who control corporate assets with an incentive for putting those assets to their best use it should be the managers who receive the profits of the company and in whose interests it should be run, a conclusion which no one has as yet advocated seriously.
Once it has been demonstrated how the logic behind the traditional fidelity to the interests of the shareholders is flawed in the context of the large public company, we are free to examine exactly the nature of the stake which shareholders and others have in the company.
Clearly the shareholders' interest tends to be a purely financial one; employees have an interest in the security of their jobs and the type of life they lead within the workplace; consumers have an interest in the type and quality of the goods and services produced; and the local community has an interest in the company as a supplier of jobs and livelihoods and as a potential threat to the local environment.
Having freed ourselves of the shackles of the classical conception of the company and its assertion that it is only the interest of the shareholders as property owners that the law should seek to protect, it becomes evident that a whole web of relationships of interdependence exist around and within the company.
Although some of the relations between the company and these other groups are contractual it is clear that the formal contractual relationship does not always define and protect all facets of the relationship.
The issue for company law is whether the law should recognize and how far it should protect these non-contractual expectations and relationships of trust and dependence.
The corporatist view suggests that the interests of all  these groups must be balanced against each other by the managers.
They are placed in a position analogous to that of a government agency and must ultimately reach a decision on the basis of the public good.
It has been suggested that we have contradictory ideals of human association informing three areas of our lives which are kept separate and distinct from each other.
The relationship of the citizen to the state is informed by the democratic ideal; contract and impersonal technical hierarchy are the principles which govern our work and exchange relationships; and the ideal of community informs and structures relations between friends and within the family.
The corporatist view, by perceiving the company as a unit which welds together the interests of its participants into a harmonious common purpose defined as the public good, seems to draw on the ideal of community and seeks to inject it into an area which the dominant legal ideology regulates through contract and hierarchy.
The ideal is attractive.
Nevertheless, powerful objections can be made to it.
The ideal of community can become warped in its actual implementation in the context of the family.
The family becomes a structure of ‘power ennobled by sentiment’.
Undoubtedly a similar danger exists if we seek to implement the corporatist goal of community in the corporation.
We may find that the corporatist vision of the company is legitimating a structure of hierarchical managerial power by appealing to the purposes for which that power is exercised.
The purposes are assumed to be the public good.
Yet there is great difficulty in defining what we mean by the public benefit.
In a liberal society we assume that it cannot be objectively defined.
Permitting management to use their discretion to run a company for the public benefit may be tantamount to encouraging them to run it according to their own moral and political views about what constitutes the public benefit.
That this can be dangerous is illustrated by the facts of Medical Committee for Human Rights v.
SEC .
The management of Dow Chemical Company resolved during the Vietnam war to continue to manufacture napalm in order to support the US government's involvement in Vietnam.
They believed that this course of action was morally and politically desirable despite the fact that the manufacture of napalm did not generate much profit, that the company's manufacturing facilities could have been more profitably employed in the manufacture of some other chemical, and that the company's public image and recruitment activities were being damaged by the continued manufacture of napalm.
Is it really self-evident that the manufacture of napalm to be used in war is something for the benefit of the public?
Even if we believed that the public interest could perhaps be equated with goals supported by a broad social consensus so that the spectre of management indulging its own personal moral and political preferences under the guise of pursuing socially worthwhile goals no longer haunted us difficulties would still remain.
It is unlikely that corporate management has the information available to it to determine what social goals are supported by a broad consensus or what their order of priority might be.
For example, how is management to determine whether the object of minimizing pollution to the environment or supporting scientific research establishments are objectives supported by a general social consensus and if so which of these should take priority?
By ignoring these sorts of objections it is clear that the corporatist vision of the company is attempting to break with some of the basic assumptions of liberalism.
If it is to be successful in this objective it needs to articulate much more clearly the rival communitarian philosophy which one senses underpins its practical proposals.
If we are troubled by the fact that the corporatist countervision we find hinted at in the legal materials might become simply a mask behind which corporate managers exercise unconstrained economic and social power, an alternative avenue for research is available to us.
We have seen how the corporatist vision of the company draws upon the ideal of community which within our present legal system and our everyday thinking is generally allowed to operate only within the realm of family and friendship.
A different vision of the company might draw upon the democratic ideal which inspires the relation of the citizen to the state.
The democratic ideal asserts that those who are substantially affected by the decisions made by political and social institutions in our society should be involved in the making of those decisions.
If we take that ideal seriously there seems no good reason why it should be excluded from an important area of our lives, our relations within and to the workplace.
Within company law doctrine this idea has no real impact.
But it often provides the guiding principle for a series of proposals for putting representatives of employees, consumers, environmentalists and the neighbouring community on the boards of companies.
These proposals can also be seen as a response to the weakening of the claims of the shareholders as property owners due to the separation of ownership and control in the large public company.
The framework for legitimating corporate managerial power is a novel one.
It justifies managerial power by showing that those who are affected by it are involved in making managerial decisions.
A framework for justifying such transformations in the power structure of the company could be developed from the available set of legal ideas.
In distributing power between the shareholders and the directors it will be remembered that the legal model invoked a powerful comparison between the company and the state.
That comparison is made even more potent given that the large company tends to collapse the distinction between private and public power.
The company can thus plausibly be viewed as a miniature state.
All those affected by its decisions are citizens of that state and should therefore be involved in making those decisions.
Whether this view should lead us to endorse a fully participatory style of democracy or to rest content with some form of interest-group pluralism should be one of the key issues on the agenda for corporate law research.
CONCLUSION
In teaching and thinking about company law one of the themes which we cannot afford to ignore is the way in which legal doctrine and scholarship provide a mode of legitimating corporate managerial power which draws on a set of background assumptions of political theory.
The inadequacy of the current strategies of legitimation needs to be acknowledged so that company law scholars can focus their efforts on rethinking the legitimation of managerial power.
Two  potential avenues for this enterprise have been suggested: the corporatist and the democratic ideal of the company.
It is suggested that these are not merely speculative lines of enquiry but can be developed from within the current body of legal materials.
At the same time these avenues depend for their inspiration on a more abstract set of values of community and democracy which can be found in political theory.
FAMILY LAW AND LEGAL THEORY KATHERINE O'DONOVAN
I INTRODUCTION
The view that family law is not really law seems to be gaining credence.
This is not a new version of the Austinian denial that international law is law properly so called.
Rather this view asserts that law cannot deal with family disputes and behaviour, and that law's instrumental functions of conflict-resolution and behaviour-guidance are not applicable to personal and family life.
Law's inability is explained by reference to unenforceability or to unsuitability; attempts to deal with family problems are said to bring law into disrepute.
In another version of this theme family law stands accused of having so far departed from principle and precedent as to be arbitrary, thereby losing its claim to guide conduct.
This, it is alleged, undermines the rule of law.
These criticisms of family law express beliefs about law which are tacitly underpinned by legal theory.
Through examination of the denial of the title ‘real law’ to family law this paper seeks to explore the theoretical positions which inform such criticisms.
It would be possible to set about this exercise with the assumption that legal regulation of family and personal behaviour is law insofar as its pedigree passes the appropriate test.
Or one might look to the content of specific rules and judicial pro-nouncements to see whether they conform to certain moral standards for family behaviour laid down by community or authority.
The outcome would probably be that much, or even most, of what we call family law would pass these tests.
The question pursued here is different.
It asks the following: what is it about family law that gives rise to challenges to its authenticity as law?
Does that tell us anything about theories of law?
Beliefs about law, whether they are held by lawmakers or legal subjects are different from law itself.
Yet the two are connected, for if law's authority is held to depend on its reputation and predictability then this presents a challenge to what Simpson calls the ‘school-rules concept’ of law.
And if certain areas of life and behaviour are deemed suitable for morality, but not law, this suggests a view that law has internal limitations which do not relate to its pedigree.
II LAW'S DEFECTS IN THE FAMILY ARENA
The assertion that law is unsuitable or unable to deal with family and personal behaviour has a long history.
Expressions of this belief can be found in legislative  debates, judicial opinions and academic writings of many periods.
Lurking behind this are views about law and about the family.
Questions about what law can or cannot do raise wider issues about people, behaviour and social theory.
Empirical investigation may provide some answers.
But the pervasiveness of the belief that personal matters are ‘not the law's business’ suggests that we are up against something deep-rooted in social consciousness.
It is clear that if this point is to be elaborated the notion of personal matters must be defined.
For present purposes family behaviour is identified as personal; however the conception of the personal is broader than, and does not necessarily involve, the family.
Legal withdrawal in the recent past from regulation of personal matters such as sexuality and birth control suggests that the uneasiness about law's role in relation to the family may be explained in part by looking at the history of the debate on law and private morality.
Arguments advanced to show law's defects in dealing with the family fall into three groups.
The first set posits inability.
Law cannot tell people how to behave in their own homes; they will not obey; such rules are unenforceable because the necessary information is unobtainable, unless you put ‘a spy under the bed’.
What is being expressed here is a statement about the limits of law's hortatory function.
It goes something like this: ‘It is all very well to exhort people to behave properly in their personal relationships but law on such matters is unenforceable.
Therefore it is better not to legislate.’
The second set of arguments propose unsuitability.
Law is the ‘wrong, mechanism for dealing with personal behaviour, emotions, feelings; it is cold, antagonistic, adversarial and alienating.
Families are about love and trust; law is the guarantor of distrust.
What is being expressed here is a statement about the limits of law in the resolution of disputes.
Against this version of criticism of law is set a vision of another mechanism of dispute resolution which is cosy and friendly, in which there are no winners and losers.
The third set of arguments points to the bad effects of using law on the family.
Law is only a negative force which destroys what it intends to help.
Its entrance into the family arena escalates existing disputes.
This viewpoint has been expressed as follows: ‘the mere hint by anyone concerned that the law may come in is the surest sign that things are or will soon be going wrong.’
Again, this suggests a theory of the limits of law as a method of dealing with conflict.
Behind these three sets of arguments about the limits to law's powers in dealing with family matters may lie a fourth argument about law itself.
Is it too pure to be sullied by the messiness of domestic life?
Certainly the argument that law will be brought into disrepute if it enters areas where it is unenforceable is motivated by a concern to protect law's reputation.
Arguments about law's limits in its exhortatory and dispute-resolution functions present a strong case and are widely advanced.
What is less widely recognized is that, whatever their claims to empirical evidence in support, these arguments reflect a particular intellectual tradition, that of liberal political philosophy.
This is where the recent history of law's withdrawal from the regulation of private morality provides a useful perspective.
John Stuart Mill's definition of the limits of law to curtail individual freedom laid down a simple principle: ‘that the sole end for which mankind are warranted, individually or collectively, in interfering  with the liberty of action of any of their number, is self-protection.
That the only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over any member of a civilised community, against his will, is to prevent harm to others.’
The application of this principle in the Sexual Offences Act 1967 following upon the publication of the Wolfenden Report in 1957 is well known.
So too is the debate between Hart and Devlin on law and morality.
Whatever the merits of Devlin's position, of the crimes in private between consenting adults which he wished to retain, homosexuality, abortion, incest, pornography and prostitution have either been partially decriminalized or some proposals therefor have been put forward.
This suggests that the privatization of personal morality is well on its way.
In relation to family behaviour one could argue that since this matter has been little regulated no privatization can take place.
The point is, however, precisely that.
This is an area of personal relationships which is private, into which law does not venture, whether for the instrumental reasons suggested above, or out of concern for its reputation for purity.
III LAW'S DEPARTURE FROM PRINCIPLE
The philosophical case against law's intervention in the family stems from the liberal tradition.
From academic and practising lawyers has come an argument bewailing what is identified as family law's departure from true legal character.
This arises from the conferral on the judiciary, and on administrators, by Parliament of discretion in deciding matters of custody, childcare, divorce, maintenance, matrimonial property and inheritance.
Discretion permits the individualization of justice according to the particular facts of each case.
Criticism of this laments the loss of law's hortatory function in laying down rules for the future, lack of predictability, universality or generality of the law, the undermining of the moral authority of the judiciary, and the expansion of litigation as each case seeks its individual adjudication.
As expressed by Atiyah the ‘weakening belief in the importance of the hortatory effect of the judicial process has been accompanied by, and has surely been part cause of, a change in the sense of justice itself.
Individualized justice is a response both to a twentieth-century tendency to view consequences in the short term, and to greater diversity of moral beliefs.
Discretion enables the concealment of the values which inform the judicial decision.
Atiyah recognizes that there is no longer a consensus on the moral, religious or aesthetic ideals which supported the legal rules and principles of the nineteenth century.
Discretionary standards and the redefinition of certain concerns as private mask both the values which are still implicit in legislation and in judicial decisions, and the lack of consensus on matters identified as personal.
Open-ended standards in legislation confer discretion permitting a wide variety of factors to be taken into account in adjudication.
Atiyah's doubts about this trend in late-twentieth-century family law relate to his own model of law as serving conflict-adjustment and hortatory functions, and to his concern for ‘the generality and universality which the very nature of law seems to require’.
His ideal rule  of law is characterized by generality, neutrality, uniformity, predictability and autonomy.
It is his hope that with a return to what he calls principles law may yet recover its hortatory function.
But correct as the analysis may be it is limited to pragmatic instrumentalist legal theory, and the prescription fails to take account of social theories which may help to explain the changes in the rule of law over time.
What does this mean for family law?
The response to the recognition of law's instrumental limitations, and to the growth of discretion, has been contradictory.
There has been a strong movement in favour of delegalization and privatization of family and personal matters; but when moral panic breaks out law continues to be invoked as ‘binding on everyone in society, whatever their beliefs…the embodiment of a common moral position’, despite the recognition that ‘in our pluralistic society it is not to be expected that any one set of principles can be enunciated to be completely accepted by everyone.’
Thus the tension persists between the liberal position, which advocates non-regulation or delegalization of matters identified as personal or private, and the absolutist position which advocates regulation on the outbreak of moral panic.
IV DELEGATION
Arguments in favour of delegalization of family law stem from dissatisfaction with law as an instrument for dealing with family relationships; law is seen as the ‘wrong’ mechanism.
And there is also concern expressed by lawyers of various kinds about what family law is doing to the ideal of the rule of law.
So the removal of family behaviour and disputes to some other arena is regarded as advantageous for instrumental purposes and for the preservation of law's purity.
Delegalization takes various forms.
It ranges from conciliation of divorcing spouses in the settlement of custody and property matters, mediation, the family court, informal negotiation and bargaining, to contractual agreements for personal relations.
The common thread linking arguments favouring these methods is the claim that they are new, and are alternatives to legal regulation.
Whether either of these claims can be sustained is doubtful.
In an earlier part of this paper the arguments criticizing law's effectiveness in dealing with the family were summarized.
It is time to investigate further.
It has already been postulated that the intellectual origin of these criticisms lies in liberal political philosophy; however, confirmation has come from empirical research.
In the expansion of academic legal scholarship that has taken place in the past 20 years family law was one of the first of the traditional areas of study to be ‘broadened’.
Empirical research on custody and divorce, on the personal experiences of divorcees both as solicitors' clients and as consumers of the judicial process, and on the experiences and attitudes of registrars and lawyers added up to proposals for legal reform from an instrumental perspective.
The outcome was a search for a ‘nicer’, informal, that is non-legal, way of handling these trouble-cases.
Arguments based on a combination of liberalism and empiricism are cogent.
With the addition of a third element of expediency it is not surprising that  informalism or delegalization is the fashion in family law today.
The expediency argument arises partly from the development of individualized justice.
Since each matrimonial property or custody dispute is to be decided according to judicial discretion the result is that litigation abounds.
This has proved expensive in terms of court costs and judicial time.
Delegalization offers the promise of financial savings, even if the divorce rate remains high.
Because family law has remained stuck in its empiricist mode the limitations of this approach have not been appreciated by academic family lawyers.
If the answers to problems are sought only in empirical research the ‘broader perspective’ remains unrealized.
The categories used pre-determine empirical investigation as the ‘facts’ produced are within the structure of concepts used.
Researchers may be unaware of their uncritical acceptance of categories and consequent results.
In order to provide coherent explanations for developments in family law general and abstract perspectives must be introduced.
These can be labelled ‘theory’.
Much of the writing on family law lacks any stated theoretical position, although it is generally underpinned by a welfare approach.
But theory is implicit in the academic activities of research and writing and in the political acts of legislating and judging.
Our understanding of the world around us is based on theory.
We can choose between accepting the categories already defined, in which case theory remains implicit; or we can ‘commit ourselves to working out critical and explicit theory’.
Welfare as a discretionary standard contains contradictions and thus provides little guidance to the disposition of trouble cases.
It needs to be informed by explicit theory.
The espousal of informalism as the answer to critiques of the effectiveness of judicial methods of handling family disputes is likely to give rise to disappointment.
In order to understand the limitations of law as an instrument to the family arena, and the rise of discretion, one must have theoretical or abstract perspectives not only on law but also on the family in its present social context.
For this we can turn to social theories.
An example is available from Unger's study of modern law.
With a broad sweep of his brush Unger has painted an explanation for the replacement of rule with discretion.
His thesis is that in Western societies today state involvement in redistribution of the benefits and burdens of citizenship, and state planning and regulation in public law, has led to an abandonment of concern with formal justice and a turning to procedural and substantive justice.
This gives rise to discretionary decisions by adjudicators and administrators, undermining generality and discrediting the ideal of the rule of law.
But, as the realists had earlier pointed out, the ideals of the generality, neutrality, uniformity, predictability and autonomy of law have never been a reality.
So, Unger argues, the quest for substantive justice in what he terms ‘post-liberal society’ openly corrupts legal generality and leads to the dissolution of the rule of law.
A return to formalism is highly unlikely given popular expectations of individualized justice.
Unger's view is confirmed by the transformation of divorce from a judicial to an administrative process.
The divorce stage no longer requires a court appearance, except for the children's appointment in chambers, at which the petitioner attends.
Financial and child custody disputes are dealt with informally by the Registrar.
Yet the trend towards bureaucratization has not been uniform.
Contests over children's entrance  into and exit from the care of the state are moving from administrative to judicial control.
Explanations for these apparently contradictory tendencies will not be found by taking an instrumental approach to family law.
Although delegalization in one area is justified by the search for a ‘nicer’ way out, judicialization of child-care hearings, with separate representation of the interests of the child, is the result of disillusion-ment with a process which does not provide traditional legal procedural safeguards.
This relates to conceptions of justice embodied in the rule of law in a procedural sense, as exemplified in the work of Lon Fuller.
Administrative decision-making on deprivation of parental rights and the coming and going of children into and out of the care of the state is perceived by many as an abuse of legal process.
As Neil MacCormick has observed: ‘It remains a contested issue whether an aspiration to justice is to be treated as essential to or definitive of the legal enterprise in all its manifestations, or is to be distinguished as a specially urgent demand issued in the name of critical morality.’
MacCormick suggests that it matters little, when faced with ‘possible unjust exercises of the power of modern states organised under and in the name of ‘law’…whether or not these represent a corruption of law in its ideal essence or simply an abuse of public power.’
Yet it is clear in references to natural justice that our conception of law is bound up with ideas of notice, fair hearing, representation and open judgment, aspects of which have been denied in the admission of children to the care of the state, and particularly in parental rights resolutions by local authorities.
The choice then appears to be between informalism, in which individualized solutions to disputes are worked out and accepted by the parties, and the formal judicial process.
In instrumental terms there is much to be said for the informal approach.
It induces parties to submit their disputes voluntarily to conciliation or administrative decision and, in some areas such as divorce and custody, it involves them in working out a private solution, thus enhancing their acceptance of the outcome.
Formal justice as an alternative offers openness, ostensible neutrality, and rules.
One response to this choice might be to suggest that it depends on the type of dispute in question.
Formal justice and procedural safeguards are best for child-care cases, whereas informal methods suit divorce and custody disputes.
This can be raised to a higher level by suggesting that personal disputes be settled informally and those between state and citizen formally.
But fundamentally the instrumental approach fails to reconcile and explain contradictory tendencies.
Furthermore, the evidence is of the proliferation of informal administrative agencies in the modern welfare state with discretion to determine the claims of citizens.
For instance, in other areas of law concerning children, such as fostering, adoption and parental access to children in care, social workers as agents of the state have developed informal rules for decision-making.
There is no appeal against these to the courts.
These rules cannot be placed in the category of formal law; but neither do they fit into my previous description of informal justice.
There is no voluntary acceptance of the decision, rather it is imposed, often without discussion, and with no possibility of judicial review.
So informalism pervades bureaucratic law.
It has already been suggested that informal methods of dispute-resolution in the family arena are not new, nor are they alternatives to legal regulation.
The  assumption that they are reveals a very limited conception of law.
This relates to the limitations of instrumentalist legal theory.
Informal methods are merely other forms of social control allied to law in a corporate state.
To understand this point one has to ask how the family has been internally regulated, given that law has claimed no hortatory function over family behaviour and has limited itself to dispute-resolution when things go wrong.
I suggest that the answer to this can be found by looking to theories of the family and to legal structures.
V A THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK FOR FAMILY LAW?
Hitherto the instrumental approach to law has been criticized as inadequate to provide a coherent explanation for contradictory tendencies in legal developments.
This criticism is not that instrumentalism is untheoretical, but rather that its hidden assumptions when made explicit are revealed as limited.
Before proceeding to an analysis of the inadequacies of instrumentalist legal theory it is important to clarify the point that statements about law, whether in instrumental, therapeutic or welfare terms, are based on beliefs about law.
These beliefs in turn are informed by theory, that is, by general and abstract perspectives.
In the case of family law, views about people, their relationships to each other and to the world are contained in legal statements.
Theories that inform these beliefs must be exposed and examined.
The purpose is to clarify and test and, ultimately, to understand and explain.
My position therefore is that even seemingly untheoretical statements about family law of a common-sensical and pragmatic mode are based on theory.
One strategy in theorizing family law is to uncover hidden assumptions concerning both family and law.
Bringing these out in the open and subjecting them to scrutiny and analysis will yield fruitful results.
To some extent this work is under cultivation.
I suggest that, important as such analysis is, there are more fundamental issues which have to be tackled first.
This can be illustrated by a deepened critique of instrumental legal theory.
Instrumentalists believe that law in essence is a means to serve certain goals.
This is sometimes described in terms of social engineering, and the resources that law brings as machinery are distinguished from its social goals.
Robert Summers has identified five different forms of legal techniques for implementing these goals.
These range from private arrangements to penalty.
Allied to this are views about the limited efficacy of law.
One believer in the limits of law puts it like this: ‘laws are often ineffective, doomed to stultification almost at birth, doomed by the over-ambitions of the legislator and the under-provision of the necessary requirements for an effective law, such as adequate preliminary survey, communication, acceptance, and enforcement machinery.’
This judgment of law according to its perceived limits is based on a miscon-ception of the nature of law.
In posing law as an external force to those it purports to control the judgment fails to recognize law's part in constructing experience of the world; how knowledge is possible only through categories and symbols of language; how meaning is produced out of legal ordering of supposed differences.
An early question relates to ways of thinking about claims that people make on each other within families and the expression of these in law.
I have already pointed out that law has imposed on itself a self-denying ordinance in its relation to the personal.
In the ritual legal opera only certain kinds of song can be performed; only certain persons can sing.
Less powerful characters may not be allowed on stage.
This point goes to the formulation of ideas, their presentation in language and their legitimacy in law.
Elsewhere this has been described in terms of semiology.
Law is a powerful mechanism for recognizing or hiding the desires and perspectives of those whose lives it governs.
In its legal forms it legitimates or ignores the voices under its control.
But it goes further than that.
Its structure and language may prevent not just the voice from being heard, but feelings from moving to ideas and into speech.
Thus some may remain forever the audience without the power to express their point of view.
Points of view could be said to be central to the formal legal enterprise.
This is certainly the belief of liberals for whom the heart of the law is ‘the open hearing in which one point of view, one construction of language and reality is tested against another.
The multiplicity of readings that the law permits is not its weak-ness but its strength, for it is this that makes room for different voices….’
This presupposes that all voices have an equal possibility of speech and hearing.
Bernard Williams defines the respect that is owed to all persons as an effort of understanding, ‘to see the world from his point of view’.
For him this is an essential component of the idea of equality.
As an ideal of law this is attractive, and in going deeper than instrumentalism it raises a number of issues.
If equality before the law is to be an equality of voices then there are issues about formal procedures and the extent to which these are accessible to all.
There are further issues about the availability of language and concepts to the silent.
Where lies the power to identify and define points of view?
In legal procedures personal and family relations have been deemed to be beyond law's limits.
The location of certain family members, in particular women and children, in the private domain in which ‘the King's writ does not seek to run, and to which its officers do not seek to be admitted’ ensures their silence.
This is taken as natural but is a cultural definition of law's limits produced by those with the power of speech.
And, more evidently, formal equality before the law is limited.
As Anatole France explained: ‘equality of the laws…forbids rich and poor alike to sleep under the bridges, to beg in the streets, and to steal…bread.’
Power in the family is not just concerned with the formulation and definition of points of view and the claims family members make on one another; it also affects internal regulation.
Instrumentalists should ask themselves the following: in the absence of law who controls the family?
Answering this question is a complex matter but I suggest that empirical and theoretical investigation is long overdue.
Traditional family law sees no problem of the legitimate exercise of power between spouses because of beliefs in the formal equality of the sexes.
Yet it is precisely because this ideology is not lived up to in private, and because the state is involved both in its promulgation and its violation, that feminist theory can take a highly critical moral stance.
Looking to internal power and control within the family is one consequent strategy.
A second is based on the constitution of the family by structures external to it.
Social theory of the family has a long history of debate on structural explanations, that is on whether family types adapt as appropriate to the social and economic world.
What has been less recognized is that legal structures constitute the family and roles within it.
If we look to laws external to the family we can begin to develop a body of substantive analyses guided by theory.
The economic world in which the family has its being is not just the market, for it is also affected by state allocation of the benefits and burdens of citizenship according to its own criteria.
Investigations of public law on taxation and social security reveal how internally the family is constituted by legal structures external to it.
The roles of wife and husband are defined in legislation in which the state is concerned with economic redistribution.
Legal forms not only constitute gender relations but represent ways of seeing roles and relations.
Discussions about structures must not be limited to rather arid chicken-and-egg problems.
Much more fundamental issues are raised.
Recent work on the history of the family uses structural explanations for family form as an expression of a particular culture and as a mechanism for creating personality types consonant with that culture.
This, Lawrence Stone argues, is done through the structuring of relationships, and through methods of children-rearing.
We should be asking ourselves about the character of individuals which are being produced by the family forms that we have today and about law's part in creating the domestic group.
Thus questions about structure can raise deeper issues of phenomenology, whose contribution has been ‘to show the ways in which ways of living a life work themselves into complex ways of thinking’.
The preceding discussion of law's self-imposed limits and the consequent silence of those whose lives are largely lived in private is intended to criticize instrumentalism for failing to take account of ideology, ‘the sum of the ways in which people both live and represent to themselves their relationship to the conditions of their existence’.
More difficult is the point made earlier about the lack of language and concepts to enable the silent to speak.
The contribution of Saussure's theory of language has been to point out how personal identity and subjectivity are constructed through differentiation.
Experience of the world is mediated and made intelligible through discourse.
But language and interpretation assume a structure of values of which they form a part.
Thus the available language is imposed.
How can other viewpoints be expressed?
If we are to go beyond nihilism we shall have to devise a strategy to examine this.
My conclusions are that work which looks to family law as instrument is inadequate; the ‘school-rules concept’ of law overlooks law's part in representing and naturalizing ‘the way things are’; law's self-denying ordinance in relation to the personal and the private is a cultural construct and not an inevitable element of ideas of law or justice.
The alternative approaches which have been outlined above will lead to a deepened analysis.
No doubt there are other ways to criticize the legal opera; these I leave to other critics.
CRIMINAL LAW AND LEGAL THEORY RICHARD URE
I CRIMINAL LAW AS GRIST FOR THE JURISPRUDENT'S MILL
Criminal law appears to be regarded in legal education as something of a Cinderella subject, being widely regarded as suitable for beginners in the study of law to cut their teeth on before tackling the real business of legal study, viz. contract, tort, trusts and land law.
It is, however, difficult, for a number of reasons, to accept the ‘introductory’ status of criminal law and its isolation from the mainstream of law teaching.
First, criminal law relates closely to other branches of law both substantively and theoretically.
Thus criminal law seeks to determine the illegitimate modes of the acquisition of property and therefore is, in part, an integral part of the law of property.
Again, the law of the supermarket reveals that the rules of criminal law and of contract interrelate very closely.
Theoretically, it is taken as axiomatic in criminal law that intention is ‘subjective’ whereas contract lawyers by and large accept that intention is ‘objective’.
It is, at the very least, remarkable that the common law should be so schizophrenic concerning so central a concept.
Crime and tort relate closely as well, not only obviously by virtue of the same facts giving rise to different legal consequences but also, more interestingly, since the corning into effect of s. 35 of the Powers of the Criminal Courts Act 1973, by virtue of the criminal courts pre-empting the civil courts in the matter of compensation, perhaps even in circumstances where no private right of action otherwise obtains.
Secondly, criminal law involves complex institutional arrangements, for example, magistrates, Crown Courts, juries, the Court of Appeal, Criminal Division (which remarkably retains a power to overrule its own decisions, see R v. 
Gould ), and the House of Lords (of which it has been asked whether we can continue to afford it as a court of ultimate resort in criminal law, a question prompted less by economics than by an expositor's desire for consistency).
Unique lawmaking devices such as‘applying the proviso’ or the ‘Attorney-General's reference’complicate the operation of the criminal law.
One has also to contend with the contribution of the Criminal Law Revision Committee, about which much could be said not least on the remarkable sortie into the defences of intoxication and mistake in its 14th Report.
The Law Commission, too, is heavily involved in a long-term codification project with which it now has the  assistance of a powerful Society of Public Teachers of Law group.
The right of private prosecution (now under threat), the role of the police in prosecution as against the comparative advantages of public prosecutors, the function of the DPP, the involvement of the Attorney-General in the question of injunctions against criminal activity, and the prerogative of mercy all add to the institutional complexity.
Beyond all these institutional complexities lies the prison, the probation service and mechanisms for dealing with the convicted offender.
Fully to appreciate the operation of the substantive rules of criminal law requires some appreciation of this complex institutional framework.
Thirdly, criminal law is conceptually demanding.
The major area of academic industry has been analysis of central mental concepts such as intention or recklessness.
This necessitates a philosophy of mind and action.
Given that we have no privileged access to the minds of others we must proceed on some hypothesis about mental events or mental states.
In this regard criminal law shares a problem with contract law, which adopts the ambivalent posture of holding both that the devil himself cannot know the mind of man and that the state of a man's mind is as much a question of fact as is the state of his digestion.
The problem is dealt with mainly by presumptions about normal people.
Both criminal law and contract exhibit a tendency to convert such presumptions into irrebuttable rules of law.
Herein lies the crux of the debate between the honest subjectivist and the reasonable objectivist.
Lord Diplock was right in Caldwell about one thing, namely the obsessive interest of academics in solving all legal questions by the exhaustive application of one or other of these principles.
In practice, given the institutional necessity for the tribunal of fact to reach decisions on past states of mind, a synthesist approach is called for.
This is best brought out by Gordon's analysis of the reasonable man as a test and the reasonable man as a standard.
Conceptual analysis may, of course, focus on issues other than the central concepts of mens rea .
Defences such as duress or provocation may be analysed in the expectation of laying bare the rules which apply.
However, there is a danger here of what I call the definitional fallacy, that is a tendency to seek to present the law as if everything was completely cut and dried, whereas such ‘defences’ may be better understood as ‘excuses’the primary function of which, from a (negative) utilitarian point of view, is simply to minimize the amount of punishment actually imposed without jeopardizing the credibility of the general system of threat through which, arguably, criminal law realizes its prescriptive function.
I believe it possible to analyse the role of equity in contract as functionally analogous to the role of excuses in crime.
In both areas of law there is a collective system of general prospective rules concerned with the guidance of conduct and it is necessary that the credibility of such rules be preserved if the system is to perform its central social function.
Thus, as Kelsen observes, ‘the legal norm obliges the debtor not only, and, perhaps, not so much in order to protect the creditor, but in order to maintain a certain economic system.’
However, the other side of the coin is the application of the rules to particular cases.
Here there is a tendency in contract to do justice and in crime to be merciful.
These tendencies would ultimately subvert the collective system unless no one could rely upon his case falling under equity in contract or excuse in criminal  law.
The nature of excuses in crime and of equity in contract is, however, so particularistic and so dependent upon the facts of the case that it strains credulity to imagine someone seeking in advance to bring his case under such categories.
Excuses and equity function retrospectively in particular cases rather than as general prospective rules seeking to guide conduct.
If these intuitions are justified it follows that some exhaustive analyses of the concepts of excuse misconceive the social function and thereby distort the nature and operation of the criminal law.
Another concept which sometimes falls to be analysed in such all or nothing fashion is ‘dishonesty’ as it impinges upon the definition of theft and a cluster of deception offences under the Theft Acts.
Some argue for an exhaustive definition of what is in effect a moral excuse.
Such, if established, would narrow down the range of circumstances under which a court (and as things stand that means, in principle, a jury) could acquit.
Whether a particular accused should be acquitted because his conduct was not dishonest appears to me to be a moral question.
Therefore, by closing down the range of possible moral excuse, the definitionalist is imposing his morality upon the law and breaking the vital nexus between the current standards of ordinary decent people and the content of the criminal law.
No one, suggested a judge in a leading case, should be held to be guilty of theft by reason of conduct to which no moral obloquy could reasonably attach.
These considerations suggest that conceptual analysis in criminal law is complex, turning upon philosophies of mind and action, theories of the social function of law or upon moral philosophy.
Fourthly, criminal law, in common with all branches of substantive law, presupposes a complex body of procedural rules and the law of evidence.
As to the impact of procedural rules upon substantive law, I turn to the doctrine, now partly exploded by Caldwell , of specific and basic intent.
The academic establishment refused to entertain the possibility that this doctrine was of any wider significance to criminal law beyond the local issue of what is to be done with the drunken offender and, within that narrow compass, that the doctrine was coherent or justifiable.
I believe that a formidable case can be made out in support of Lord Simon's conviction that ‘the concept of ‘crime of basic intent’ is a useful tool of analysis’.
The arguments in support of my belief cannot be detailed here but the point of departure in common with Lord Simon in Morgan is that the distinction between crimes of basic and crimes of specific intent can only be appreciated against the backdrop of the probative-evidential dialogue which characterizes the criminal trial.
Only by ignoring the procedural context can the expositor present criminal law in a way that makes nonsense of the sophisticated doctrine of crimes of specific intent.
Again, the academic establishment in criminal law has pursued subjectivism with evangelical zeal.
Consequently, decisions of the House of Lords have been hailed as great subjectivist triumphs, e.g. Morgan and Camplin or as subjectivist disasters, e.g. Caldwell .
This I refer to as the ‘Nottingham Forest Approach to law’.
Mistake, which has been the central football in this tournament, may however be analysed in a way which is neither exclusively subjectivist nor exclusively objectivist by adopting the synthesist approach immanent in Gordon's ‘reasonable man as a test’.
On such a view the reasonableness of a belief is not a substantive necessity but an evidential requirement.
This requires appreciation, again, of our lack of privileged access to the minds of others and the necessity of assumptions as to evidence of states of mind.
(Gladstone) Williams , which is hailed as a goal for Nottingham Forest, may in reality simply be an affirmation of the synthesist line visible in Mark and in Kenlin v.
Gardiner , where the judge was careful to speak in terms of justification rather than insist that a belief be both honest and reasonable.
Fifthly, it is evident that criminal law is in some sense of the term a subject which calls for interdisciplinary study.
There is a need not only for some ‘sociological’ appreciation of the institutional framework and the social function of law and punishment but also for some philosophy of mind and action and a moral philosophy.
Beyond this, especially as one proceeds into issues of criminology and penology, account must be taken of psychology and arguably of medical science.
Consequently the complete criminal lawyer is no narrow expositor of black-letter legal rules and exhaustive conceptual analyses.
Although a full, detailed and accurate exposition of the law is an essential prerequisite to jurisprudential activity in the field of criminal law as in others, it is not and cannot be the limit of the concerns of those who teach and study criminal law.
Nonetheless there is a tendency within the academic establishment to regard the exposition of the black-letter law and the exhaustive analyses of concepts as the totality of the concerns of the academic criminal lawyer; indeed one may speak of an attempt, conscious or otherwise, to distort the data to fit the expositor's ideal.
Nowhere is this more obvious than in the ideological distinction between real crimes and regulatory crimes, whereby law-school curricula can be restricted to a limited number of crimes calling for proof of a mental element as a condition of conviction.
The large number of strict-liability offences, at least 3,750 of 7,200 separate and distinct criminal offences listed on the basis of the 1975 edition of Stone's Justices' Manual (that is, more than half), are then dismissed from serious study.
Such eclecticism fosters a false picture of criminal law and more seriously deflects criticism of the circumstance that for most individuals contact with the criminal law is contact with an objectivist regime of strictly liability.
If the mens rea principle and the principle of proof are objectives worthy of a rational and humane system of criminal law they ought to be used critically to assess the achievement of the total system rather than circularly to select an acceptable portion of the criminal law.
Given these observations upon the complexity of criminal law as a social and moral phenomenon it follows that it can exist as an ‘introductory’ subject only through its radical distortion, simplification, amputation and eclecticism.
This is condemnation indeed, but more crucial is the circumstance that in its diminished state, criminal law remains for some students the first impression of serious legal study.
Consequently the attitude of students to legal study is predetermined by their exposure to a substantive body of law designed more to develop their memories than to expand their minds.
The remedy may not be to delay criminal law teaching to a later stage in curricula, because the observations already made might well apply to whatever introductory course in substantive law one selects.
Rather one must teach criminal law jurisprudentially and the circumstance that criminal law throws up so much grist for the jurisprudential mill fits it rather well for the role of an introductory course.
However, constraints of time and the intellectual range of those who have the teaching of criminal law in charge  counsel pessimism, and unless and until the four-year degree is established legal education in general will suffer through the narrowing effect of criminal law as it is now taught.
II CRIMINAL LAW AND LEGAL THEORY
‘Legal theory’ is sometimes taken as being synonymous with ‘jurisprudence’and is sometimes regarded as concerning itself with a narrower range of questions — in particular, What is the nature of law?
Juxtaposing criminal law and legal theory offers a number of intellectual enquiries.
First, rather in the style of Simpson's ‘The Common Law and Legal Theory’(chapter 2 above), one might take criminal law as a test of some version of legal theory, thereby confirming or refuting the theory in question.
That should not be too difficult an exercise.
Thus, for example, all versions of positivism which rely upon an exhaustive sources thesis might be refuted by the undoubted circumstance that criminal law incorporates and generates moral standards.
Consequently the separation of law and morals is rendered suspect, as is the notion that the content of the law can be read off exhaustively given the sources identified by the rule of recognition.
Of course the game can be played the other way round and even crude Austinian positivism might be treated as vindicated by the English criminal statute.
There appears to me to be little intellectual stimulus in such an approach, because it is wholly circular.
One can only use criminal law to test theories of law on the assumption that independently of the theory in question one has in criminal law a genuine instance of law.
That is not an unreasonable assumption, but it is, no matter how tacitly, informed by some other legal theory.
Simpson assumes that the common law is law.
Therefore any theory which denies that it is must be rejected as unacceptable.
Bentham was willing, however, on the basis of his version of the command theory of law to take the heroic step of denying that the common law was law.
Austin took the equally heroic step of denying that constitutional law and international law were law properly so called.
Since most versions of legal theory are at least partial visions of law it is unsurprising that the criminal law will throw up both confirmations and refutations of most legal theories.
Secondly, one might ask just what legal theory can contribute to criminal law.
At once we encounter a problem, namely which legal theory do we contemplate?
If legal theories do not speak with one voice the contribution of legal theory will very much depend upon which legal theory is chosen.
However, it is notoriously difficult to capture and exhibit any legal theorist who unequivocally espouses formalism, that is who insists that the application of the general principles and rules of law to particular cases is a matter of deductive reasoning and nothing else.
Here theorists such as Austin, Hart, Kelsen, Unger, Holmes and even Aquinas, as interpreted by Finnis, speak with one voice in proclaiming that the relationship between rule and decision is more complex than mere deduction.
We should therefore be suspicious of any expository textbook which presents the criminal law as if it could be stated in a finite number of propositions from which all solutions could ultimately be derived without further choices at the point of application.
We should also be very suspicious of any codification  project which attempts to pre-empt or disguise the irreducibly dispositive element in decision-making.
If ‘all criminal laws admit of cases of just excuse’ then it is simply impossible exhaustively to describe the existing content of criminal law beyond a certain level of generality.
Equally it is impossible to prescribe in advance for all factual contingencies.
Consequently, one lesson to criminal law from legal theory is that it should not aim at a comprehensiveness inconsistent with its subject-matter.
One of Kelsen's most puzzling doctrines, namely the alternative character of the norm, is vindicated by the criminal law once it is appreciated that every criminal law allows of cases of just excuse.
Precisely what these cases are cannot be defined in advance but must await the decision of the appropriate organ.
This also vindicates the Kelsenian thesis of the primacy of the principle of delegation over the principle of subsumption.
Consequently, we should not attempt to frame our legal rules with the precision of a logician's statement of the conditions necessary and sufficient for a determination.
The rules of criminal law always end with an undefined and indefinable ‘unless…’ clause.
Another issue within legal theory that has consequences for criminal law is the extent to which, if at all, it is possible to present a value-neutral description of law.
Some, of course, deny that such purity of method is possible but few would argue with the proposition that where a description of law is coloured by the expositor's own values it is a virtue for these values explicitly to be registered.
Thus it is one thing to adopt a radically subjectivist posture towards law reform and another thing entirely to purport merely to be describing the law as it is and then to conclude that it is wholly or even primarily subjectivist.
The latter approach inevitably leads to distortion.
Consider the doctrine of mistake.
Nowhere in one leading textbook is it treated of as a defence.
Rather it is presented as simply a mirror image of the subjectivist principle of mens rea .
However, it is clear that a mistake can relate to two quite different types of circumstance, namely circumstances qualified by mens rea and circumstances not qualified by mens rea.
Morgan illustrates the first type of case and Tolson the other;(David Raymond) Smith shows one type of approach in play,Phekoo the other.
It is significant that in (David Raymond) Smith the Court of Appeal had first to perform some surgery on the relationship of mens rea to the actus reus of criminal damage to reach the desired conclusion and it is therefore unsurprising that adverse comment was expressed by some of their Lordships in Morgan .
In Phekoo by contrast the Court of Appeal went directly to the general principle, asking themselves Brett's question, ‘What would the position of the accused have been if the facts had been as he believed them to be?’
This is the approach adopted by the House of Lords in Albert v.
Lavin and, on my understanding, by the Court of Appeal in (Gladstone) Williams .
It is clear that in cases where the mistake relates to a circumstance qualified by mens rea the outcome will be the same whether one adopts the definitional or the defence doctrine of mistake, that is ‘the prosecution will wither on the bough.
It is by no means clear, however, that the outcome will be the same where the mistake relates to a circumstance not qualified by mens rea .
In order to secure an acquittal, the definitionalist will first have to argue that mens rea runs to the circumstance in question.
That argument succeeded in (David Raymond) Smith but counsel wisely declined the House of Lords’ invitation to  attempt it in Albert v.
Lavin , it being unarguable on the present state of the law that the policemanliness of the victim is a circumstance to which mens rea runs.
It is by no means certain that the courts would always be willing to redefine the mens rea requirement in order to secure an acquittal.
Consequently, the defence account of mistake is of general applicability whereas the definitional account can apply only to a limited range of cases.
Indeed the Court of Appeal in Phekoo expressed the opinion that it only applied to rape but I hope that one might interpret that to mean ‘rape-like offences’, that is all offences where the mistake in question relates to a circumstance qualified by mens rea .
The definitionalist might seek to save his position by arguing for a general principle of law to the effect that to intend an act is to intend it under a full description and that therefore in all crimes where the actus reus contains not only a conduct element but also circumstances and consequences,mens rea is to be taken as being ‘coextensive with the actus reus .’
If such were genuinely a principle of English criminal law then definitionalism concerning mistake would be vindicated.
However, the alleged principle appears to go a long way beyond authority.
It was circumvented by the Divisional Court in Jaggard v.
Dickinson and the only clear authority,(David Raymond) Smith , has been called into question in the House of Lords.
Further, there are so many instances of what I call ‘partial mens rea offences’, that is crimes in which mens rea runs to some but not all of the elements in the actus reus , that the alleged principle simply does not square with the data.
Such crimes include those treated of in Prince, Tolson, Phekoo and Albert v.
Lavin and that created by s. 47 of the Offences Against the Person Act, 1861.
The point of this brier account of mistake is to show that at least one leading textbook of criminal law has distorted its presentation of the data because of a prior commitment to subjectivism.
Such distortion of the data leads on to a misperception of problems.
The current debate between the honest subjectivist and the reasonable objectivist is more illusory than real and has its roots in ideological commitment rather than thoroughgoing analysis.
The criminal law may depend less upon one monolithic principle and more upon a synthesis of conflicting principles.
In the defence of mistake (as in dishonesty, duress, provocation and unwarranted demands) one can see just how the criminal law rests upon a mixture of subjectivism and objectivism.
In particular, the subjectivist's charge that the defence doctrine leads to the harsh objectivism of the reasonable man as a standard can be refuted by treating the reasonableness requirement as not being a second and subsequent question which must be answered in the affirmative in order to secure an acquittal, but as an integral part of the first question: Did the accused hold the belief he claims to have held?
As an evidential rather than a substantive doctrine ‘reasonable’ cashes out as ‘credible’.
Once it is accepted that the reasonableness of a belief is merely evidence of its actually being held and if it is allowed that other cogent evidence may be admitted to prove the existence of the belief, there seems to be no difference at all between the honest subjectivist and the reasonable objectivist.
On either account, of course, a judicial tendency will remain to pre-empt jury decision on the question whether the accused actually held the belief claimed.
This is well illustrated by Pappajohn , wherein the Canadian Supreme Court, purporting  to apply Morgan , held that the direction on mistake need only be put where there was some evidence beyond the mere ipse dixit of the accused to support it, as indeed there was in Morgan .
The issue of judicial control over juries with a view to pre-empting decisions of fact, however, is neutral as between objectivist and subjectivist approaches to mistake.
Thirdly, one might ask what criminal law can contribute to legal theory.
Here I raise three issues:(1) judicial lawmaking;(2) normative positivism;(3) moral luck.
As to judicial lawmaking, the practice of prospective overruling has attracted my attention as a hard case for those theories of judicial process which involve a strong commitment to coherence, consistency and institutional fit.
I have, elsewhere, identified a functional equivalent to prospective overruling in the English legal system which I have christened ‘gross obiter dicta’.
I relied heavily upon Hedley Byrne as illustrative.
Since then both Woodar v.
Wimpey and National Carriers v.
Panalpina have been handed down by the House of Lords.
Such cases illustrate the capacity of English judges prospectively to make law and reveal a sharp bifurcation between the decision in a particular case and the rule of law which it supports.
Criminal law illustrates just such bifurcated prospective lawmaking.
I have already referred to the Attorney-General's reference, a type of public-interest action on behalf of the criminal classes, which is one example of the technique which I have in mind.
A recent illustration of the technique occurs in R v Tan .
Miss Tan had advertised in ‘contact magazines’ as follows:
Humiliation enthusiast, my favourite pastime is humiliating and disciplining mature male submissives, in strict bondage, lovely tan coloured mistress invites humble applicants, T.V., C.P., B., D. and rubber wear.
12 noon to 7 p.m., Mon. to Fri.
Basement Mat, 89 Warwick Way, Victoria SW1.
The law report records:
The services provided at…[the[ premises were of a particularly revolting and perverted kind.
Straightforward sexual intercourse was not provided at all.
With the aid of a mass of equipment, some manual (such as whips and chains), some mechanical and some electrical, clients were subjected, at their own wish and with their full consent, to a variety of forms of humiliation, flagellation, bondage and torture, accompanied often by masturbation.
Miss Tan could not be charged with running a brothel because she worked alone in her basement flat.
She was charged with and convicted of running a disorderly house, sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment and subjected to a property confiscation order in respect of the apparatus.
In order to secure this conviction the trial court itself had to massage the current legal definition of a ‘disorderly house’ which hitherto has always involved some element of concurrent multiplicity of parties.
The jury were directed:
a single prostitute who provides services in private premises to one client at a time without spectators is guilty of the common law offence of keeping a disorderly house if it is proved that the services provided are of such a character and are  conducted in such a manner…that their provision amounts to an outrage of public decency or is otherwise calculated to harm the public interest to such an extent as to call for condemnation and punishment.
On appeal, the Court of Appeal upheld the new definition of a disorderly house, upheld the direction to the jury, upheld the property confiscation order but reduced the custodial sentence to six months which is, as it happens, the statutory maximum for running a brothel, a consideration which influenced the same court in R v.
Payne .
Then, in open recognition of the novelty of the charge and the conviction, and the circumstance that Tan genuinely believed herself to be operating within current criminal law, the Court of Appeal suspended the custodial sentence for two years with, however, a stern warning that others offending in like manner would receive immediate and substantial custodial sentences.
Legal theory has long been bedevilled by a sterile debate between positivists and natural lawyers.
The debate has been sterile because each side has begged the question by assuming itself to be correct.
But of course natural law is false judged by positivist assumptions just as positivism is false judged by natural law assumptions.
Since no further theory is available whereby the competitors might be assessed, legal theory appears to have reached an impasse.
Here I can merely indicate how an alternative theory might be constructed.
I shall attempt to demonstrate that a synthesis of positivism and natural law is possible and that what I shall call ‘normative positivism’ is consistent with the account of criminal law which I favour.
That conceives of law in general and criminal law in particular as a socially valid positive moral order.
Ideal-typically, positivism may be characterized by such notions as ‘fact’, ‘will’, ‘power’, ‘instrumentalism’, ‘discretion’, ‘mala prohibita ’, etc.
The dialectical contraries to these notions are ‘value’, ‘reason’, ‘authority’, ‘legitimacy’, ‘deduction’, ‘mala in se ’, etc.
These characterize natural law thinking.
If positivism and natural law, ideally conceived, represent the end points on a spectrum, ‘normative positivism’ might occupy a middle position.
Various authors can be placed notionally at different points on the spectrum depending on how closely their accounts of law approach the ideal models of positivism or natural law.
The idea can be illustrated diagramatically:
Of course actual authors are dialectically difficult to classify and my examples are fairly arbitrarily drawn, the diagram being illustrative rather than an exercise in exegesis.
For present purposes it suffices to concentrate on two important aspects of the diagram, the discretion-deduction spectrum and the nature of the ‘ought’.
Natural law thinking is characterized by two major problems.
First, the identification of its fundamental principle or principles and, secondly, the correct application of such principles to fact situations.
I shall allow my hypothetical ideal natural lawyer his fundamental principle or principles and enter no objections as to the difficulties of conflicts between and priorities amongst fundamental principles where more than one is in question.
All such principles are general and abstract and even if there was complete agreement as to the principle the problem of application to particular and concrete facts would remain.
John Finnis criticizes positivists for attributing to natural law thinking a wholly deductive methodology such that given the fundamental principle as major premise and a statement of fact as minor premise the one right answer pops out auto-matically.
Finnis remarks that the relationship between principles and decisions is too complex to be characterized as pure deduction and nothing else.
This is no new thought and many theorists, although moving from quite different assumptions, could readily give assent.
Holmes, for example, held that ‘General propositions do not decide particular cases’.
Hart exhorts us that ‘we should not cherish even as an ideal a rule so detailed that no new choices arise at the point of application’ .6 Unger remarks that ‘language is no longer credited with the fixidity of categories and the transparent representation of the world that would make formalism plausible in legal reasoning or in ideas about justice’.
Kelsen insists that ‘every law applying act is only partly determined by law’ and presents actual legal systems as a synthesis of formal, static deduction and informal, dynamic determination.
It is, therefore, difficult to find a pure deductivist.
Finnis explains that Aquinas regarded law as consisting in part of rules which are ‘derived from natural law like conclusions deduced from principles’ and for the rest of ‘rules which are derived from natural laws like implementations [determinationes ]of general directives’.
Finnis observes in a footnote that there is no happy English equivalent of determinatio but suggests that ‘implementation’ is more elegant than Kelsen's ‘concretization’.
What Finnis does not comment upon is the remarkable similarity between this doctrine and the Kelsenian account of the legal norm or rule as a ‘frame’ within which a range of determinations is possible.
Thus it would appear that Kelsen and Aquinas agree that law sometimes involves applications of general rules by way of subsumption of the particular under the general, that is a deductive process, and sometimes concretization by way of delegation.
Kelsen distinguishes, as ideal.
types, ‘static’ and ‘dynamic’systems.
A static system is one in which the content of all individual applications of the rules is at least tacitly contained within the general rules and principles and is discoverable therefore by a purely intellectual process.
By contrast, a dynamic system involves delegation to the lawmaker of the determination of the content of the decision.
For Kelsen, the dynamic principle is characteristic of legal positivism which understands law to be in some sense a product of human acts and decisions rather than a deduction from timeless and immutable principles.
However, he also acknowledges that any actual legal  system synthesizes the static and the dynamic principles.
Kelsen further holds, in one of his most mysterious doctrines, that the primacy of the principle of delegation means that even a determination outside the frame is valid and binding unless and until set aside by a higher decision.
Thus for Kelsen, as for legal positivism in general, law can have any content.
Clearly these Kelsenian doctrines go well beyond what Finnis would concede on behalf of Aquinas.
However it is difficult to see how, having once admitted determinations into his system, Aquinas can hold the line against such Kelsenian conclusions.
Finnis illustrates the notion of a determination by the example of an architect's instructions to an artificer to put a ‘doorway’ in a wall of a building.
Clearly there are minimum and maximum dimensions outwith which no opening in a human habitation can count as a ‘doorway’.
Equally clearly once the doorway is installed it must have precise dimensions.
Since these dimensions cannot be read off intellectually from the concept of doorway, the artificer, by decision, determines the general and abstract instruction in its particular and concrete application.
The important thing to note about this example is just how favourable it is to the general natural law case which Finnis, I take it, is at pains to defend.
All that has been conceded so far is that law, consistent with natural law methodology, can have, within limits, a variable content.
It does not follow that law can have any content.
However, ‘doorway’ is a concept exhibiting what I shall call ‘middle-order generality’, that is a concept the descriptive content of which is relatively clearly defined.
Clearly not all determinations of the artificer could reasonably be regarded as doorways and even more clearly should he step outside the ‘frame’ and install a window no one could reasonably regard that as a determination of the architect's concept.
However, another example given by Finnis is somewhat more problematical.
He observes that ‘if material goods are to be used efficiently for human well-being there must be a regime of private property’.
He acknowledges that precisely what rules of property there should be is undetermined by this ‘general requirement of justice’ and he also concedes that the choice of rules will be to some extent arbitrary.
Even so, Finnis remains committed to the proposition that in determining the concept of property the legislator's choice cannot be regarded as wholly unfettered or arbitrary.
With respect, this is altogether less plausible with ‘property’ than with ‘doorway’.
Even allowing Finnis his large claim that private property is a general requirement of justice, it must be evident that a remarkably wide range of possible determinations present themselves to the legislator.
Once the legislator's choice is admitted as a source of content it is entirely possible that two positive legislators will not only determine a concept differently but will determine a concept in a contradictory fashion.
It is one thing to concede, as Finnis does, that the determination of the general requirements of justice leaves open a variable content but it is quite another should that concession logically entail that, given determination,any content is possible.
Indeed, if it could be shown that any content is possible consistent with the general requirements of justice, then ‘justice’ or ‘natural law’would be stripped of their critical function whereby that which does not exhibit conformity of content with ‘justice’or with ‘natural law’is disqualified as law or, at least, is in some way a law less compelling upon conscience.
It seems to me possible to demonstrate that some of the general requirements of justice are compatible with any determinations including contradictory determinations.
The quintessential formulation of justice is ‘live honestly, harm no one and render to each his due’.
This is not the doctrine adopted by Finnis and I would have to show that the arguments applied here could be applied equally effectively to the very much more sophisticated account presented in Natural Law and Natural Rights .
However, the classical formulation serves as an initial and simplified target.
Presumably, the lawmaker must determine the content of these general requirements of justice.
Suppose that the lawmakers in England and Victoria have determined the concept of ‘honesty’ not only differently but in such a manner that on identical facts an individual would be dishonest' and therefore liable to conviction for theft in Victoria but ‘honest’and therefore fall to be acquitted in England.
I believe something like this to be very much the case.
Can one accept that both decisions are determinations of the concept of ‘honesty’?
If so, the whole edifice so carefully reconstructed by Finnis is in danger of collapse.
Once a logical contradiction is admitted to a system of propositions any other proposition and its negation can be proved to be true by virtue of the rules of formal logic.
Consequently, Finnis must either deny that one or other of the contradictory determinations is a genuine determination or accept that his account of natural law is, ultimately, consistent with any positive law whatever.
If he admits that his account of natural law is consistent with any positive law whatever he has, in my submission, conceded that natural law, like positive law, can have any content.
Then, of course, any critical function which natural law might be supposed to have in constraining the content of positive law is dissolved and Finnis's natural law with a variable and changing content is revealed as serving the purely ideological function of justification and not an epistemological function in respect of what ought to be.
Similar considerations present themselves as regards‘rendering to each his due’.
Suppose the lawmakers in England and in Scotland have determined differently the question whether a man is entitled to whatever another has gratuitously promised.
Again, I believe something like this to be very much the case.
Are both genuine determinations of a man's due?
If so, natural law is again exposed as consistent with any possible content of positive law and it thereby loses its critical function.
If not, as with ‘honesty’, the onus remains on Finnis to explain what, consistent with his methodology, distinguishes genuine or legitimate determinations from false or illegitimate determinations.
If this burden is not discharged one may conclude that there is very little difference indeed between some versions of positivism and Finnis's account of natural law.
This suspicion is reinforced by another concession whereby Finnis allows that an unjust law may be a law for all that.
Of course if determination is as open-ended as I have argued it is, absent any criterion to distinguish the genuine from the false determination, then no positive law could be unjust because every positive law, whatever its content, being a determination of the natural law, will necessarily be consistent with the natural law and therefore valid.
It follows that it is at least possible in principle to regard some versions of positivism and some versions of natural law as tending towards a middle position on my spectrum.
Both Kelsen  and Aquinas acknowledge the role of determination and subsumption and both regard positive law as normative in the sense that it consists of precepts intimating how men ought to behave under particular circumstances.
Finnis, on behalf of Aquinas, would doubtless be disposed to argue that Kelsen admits and he excludes any content whatever but if the general requirements of justice are indeed so indeterminate as to allow of even contradictory determinations then this objection falls.
Further, the quaint Kelsenian point that the lawmaker can even determine outside the frame cannot offer Finnis much of a target because, if the frame is as indeterminate as to admit of contradictory determinations, then the distinction between a determination within and a determination outwith the frame is meaningless.
As to‘harming no one ’, I have presented arguments elsewhere to the effect that ‘harm’, being a rule-dependent concept, is indeterminate unless and until moral principles or legal rules are brought into play to define with greater or lesser precision the legitimate interests and the general good.
Even death need not necessarily constitute a ‘harm’.
Whether the physical fact of death is a ‘harm’ depends upon circumstances.
Thus to those who favour euthanasia death is not a ‘harm’.
There is therefore no direct inference ticket from physical harm to harm normatively defined.
Thus the general requirement of justice, ‘harm no one’, is utterly indeterminate and can accommodate the content of any positive law whatever insofar as ‘harm’ is not a precondition of a legal rule or moral principle but a consequence of the definitions of legitimate interests and the common good established by such rules and principles.
So far, I have attempted in limited compass to render plausible the claim that an account of law which synthesizes salient features of natural law and positivism is possible.
A detailed exposition and defence would require considerably more ingenuity and effort.
The argument thus far can be fortified by a consideration of the nature of the ‘ought’.
The schematic account suggested that legal positivism first presented itself as a matter of fact whereby theorists sought to reduce law to one or other favoured fact.
Austin thus reduced law to the psychological fact of command and some American Realists are associated with the predictive account of law.
Hart's most significant criticism of both is that they leave no or little room for a normative conception of law.
One cannot, he says, arrive at the normative concept of a rule from the factual elements of commands and habits of obedience.
Thus crude or naive positivism might well be characterized as including no ‘ought’ whatever.
Natural law thinking, however, is overtly normative and therefore includes an ‘ought’.
The ‘ought’ of natural law thinking is, in my view, irreducibly a material ought, that is to say that somehow the ‘ought’of natural law predetermines to some extent what can be the content of an ought statement.
Consider the related concept of ‘good’ as an illustration.
The notion of a ‘good thumbscrew’ is troublesome if the meaning of ‘good’is not exhausted by ‘efficient’and if, but only if, ‘good’necessarily imports some generalized conception of human welfare.
If one operates with such a material concept of ‘good’ then the idea of a ‘good thumbscrew’is a contradiction in terms.
A formal concept of ‘good’ would be wholly indeterminate as to content such that anything, irrespective of its impact upon human welfare, could be characterized as ‘good’.
‘Good’ on  such a formal account is wholly undefinable a priori because, to adopt Moore's reasoning, moral propositions would otherwise be tautologies or self-contradictions.
The argument as to‘ought’ is similar.
Natural law thinking adopts an ought which somehow incorporates some material content such that, for example , the statement ‘You ought to kill’ is not merely immoral but incoherent.
I seek to contrast that material ought with a formal ought which is a necessary element in the theory of law that I refer to as ‘normative positivism’.
Such an utterly formal, undefinable and wholly unanalysable concept of ‘ought’ is necessary if law is to be regarded as normative and if the positivist proposition that law may have any content is to be sustained.
One could then regard law conceptually as a wholly empty series of ought statements to which content is added not by any logical deductions from some fundamental principles or from any material content lurking within the ‘ought’ itself but from the acts and decisions of the lawmakers in a society.
What content the law has would then be entirely a contingent and empirical matter dependent upon the values, beliefs, intuitions, ideals, interests and emotions of whosoever has the lawmaking function in hand.
But even the most detailed body of laws will still themselves require concretization in particular applications, and the final stage of law creation is the actual human conduct that occurs.
In a sense, therefore, one may adopt Hare's significant point that what people do is a matter of some importance.
Not only may law influence human conduct but human conduct may influence the content of the law.
It follows, too, for anyone who refuses to believe that universalizability is a necessary element in the meaning of ‘ought’ as opposed to the meaning of ‘all’, that such a normative system, replete with content flowing from the ‘millenary labour’of many heads, hearts and hands, constantly in flux, but also sufficiently determinate to guide conduct, may be regarded as a socially valid positive system of morality.
If so, ‘normative positivism’ legitimates the view that law is necessarily in the business of upholding moral values.
With a formal ought it seems possible to move from the anormativity of crude, fact-based positivism to a position short of the material ought of natural law.
Thus, as we saw in regard to determination so with the ought, a theory occupying a middle position between classical positivism and classical natural law appears possible.
The formal ought may look rather too like an artificial construct brought in to make the theory work and some might well wonder how the special functional legal ought could simultaneously be regarded, as I purport to regard it, as a moral ought.
On this point I pray Kelsen in aid: ‘in this relative sense, every law is moral; every law constitutes a — relative — moral value.
And this means; the question about the relationship between law and morals is not a question about the content of the law but one about its form.’
Hart's account of law may be interpreted in similar fashion.
Others have observed that, for a ‘positivist’, he makes significant concessions to natural law thought.
But it is not merely the minimum content of natural law which supports such a view.
Consider Hart's account of what it is for a social rule to exist and his distinction between the internal and the external points of view.
The crucial point about rules, as opposed to habits, is the critical reflective attitude which justifies hostile reactions and, ultimately, sanctions.
In a ‘healthy’ legal system the citizens and the officials alike exhibit such an  internal attitude.
Even in a healthy society it is enough that the officials accept the secondary rules of recognition, adjudication and change and that the citizens acquiesce.
Since ‘acceptance’, for Hart, involves a critical, hostile attitude, his concept of law comes very close to being the morality of the legal officials of the society or even the morality of the ‘ruling class’.
Normative positivism asserts what legal positivists deny, namely that there is a necessary connection between law and positive morality.
At the same time, by refusing to adopt a material ought, normative positivism radically separates itself from any suggestion that there is a necessary connection between law and any critical morality.
On pain of committing the naturalistic fallacy, all critical moralities, utilitarianism just as much as natural law, rest upon an unproved and unprovable axiom.
Mill's famous ‘proof is unpersuasive, as all such proofs must be, given either the infinite regress of supposed justifications higher than the ultimate justification or the viciously circular proposition that the ultimate justification is, illogically, its own justification.
Insofar as the criminal law reflects and generates a common positive morality, criminal law invites the legal theorist to reconsider the established types of legal theory and to think again about the nature of law.
One objection, however, is so obvious that I cannot leave the matter there.
The criminal law of England (it might well be argued) is shot through with inconsistencies and irrationalities, and, however a subjectivist may present it, exhibits a considerable amount of objective liability.
This last may be a source of considerable disquiet and one might not at first see how such obviously ‘immoral’ content could be defended as part of a system of morality.
However, one could invoke the concept of ‘moral luck’, discussed by both Nagel and Williams.
Academic criminal lawyers seem divisible almost without remainder into pure subjectivists or pure objectivists.
Both groups purport to find their principle validated within the criminal law but both tend to assume that they have found the master principle and seek to defend it at every turn.
Ultimately, therefore, such academics abandon the rigorous analysis of the current content of criminal law and substitute criticism for legal exposition.
Subjectivists look primarily to the state of mind of the accused and deny the appropriateness of a conviction in the absence of mens rea .
They oppose with greater or lesser emphasis any ‘objective’ substitutes for mens rea , especially the reasonable man, though intoxication is treated as an exception.
Objectivists, though not necessarily denying the importance of subjective mental states in the attribution of responsibility, refuse to give the mens rea principle exhaustive sway and look also to ‘harmful consequences liability’ as a basis for conviction.
There are plenty of examples in English criminal law of crimes which appear to include harmful consequences as a definitional element irrespective of any actual state of mind referable thereto: s. 47, Offences Against the Person Act 1861; s. 51 (1), Police Act 1964; s.
I (2), Criminal Damage Act 1971 (since Caldwell ), etc.
Subjectivists regard such instances as anomalous, contrary to principle and therefore as objects of reform.
However, if ‘moral luck’ is a feature of conventional morality, no less than the ‘emphatic sexual taboos’taken by Hart to justify the exclusion of ‘rationality’from the criteria of the ‘moral’, then there is a moral basis for objective, harmful consequence liability in the criminal law.
What, then, is ‘moral luck’?
Nagel observes that ‘it is intuitively plausible that people cannot be morally assessed for what is not their fault, or for what is due to factors beyond their control’.
Of course this makes sense in the case of insanity, automatism or involuntary movement but the range of factors over which one has no control is obviously wider than such clear instances of total lack of control.
Nagel identifies four classes of situation in which the agent might plausibly be regarded as lacking control.
These are constitutive luck — the kind of person one is; contemporary circumstantial luck — the kind of circumstances in which one is placed; antecedent circumstantial luck — the kind of circumstances which led up to the situation one faces; and consequential luck — the way things turn out.
These categories of luck threaten the very notion of moral responsibility in that if the precondition of control is consistently applied we would be disbarred from making the wide range of moral judgments that we find it entirely natural to make.
Nagel offers several examples:
whether we succeed or fail in what we try to do nearly always depends to some extent on factors beyond our control.
This is true of murder, altruism, revolution, the sacrifice of certain interests for the size of others — almost any morally important act.
What has been done, and what is morally judged, is partly determined by external factors.
However jewel-like the good will may be in its own right, there is a morally significant difference between rescuing someone from a burning building and dropping him from a twelfth storey window while trying to rescue him.
Similarly there is a morally significant difference between reckless driving and manslaughter.
But whether a reckless driver hits a pedestrian depends upon the presence of the pedestrian at the point where he recklessly passes a red light.
Such examples lead on to Nagel's definition of moral luck: ‘Where a significant aspect of what someone does depends upon factors beyond his control, yet we continue to treat him in that respect as an object of moral judgment, it can be called moral luck.
In such circumstances actual results influence judgments of responsibility and culpability even though the agent did not contemplate the result which occurred.
The traditional response of moral philosophy has been to narrow down each act to its pure and innermost core, an act of pure will that, alone, is susceptible of moral assessment.
This is how Kant, for example, dealt with morality.
Nagel's profound point is that even where the agent is at the mercy of fate, and though it seems irrational upon reflection, our ordinary moral attitudes would be unrecognizable without attributing to the agent responsibility and culpability in a wide range of cases of moral luck.
Nagel refers to Adam Smith whom he takes to be advocating, as a matter of reason, the restriction of moral judgment only to that which the agent has done in a narrow sense because to attribute responsibility for that beyond the agent's control seems irrational and is akin to strict liability.
However, Nagel is well aware that Smith himself had doubts as to the social validity of the subjective principle and he cites a passage from The Theory of Moral Sentiments :
In this paper I have argued that criminal law is an extremely sophisticated, demanding and complex subject which can be presented as an ‘introductory’ course in legal education only by serious amputation and therefore distortion.
Further, the current mode and role of criminal law teaching has consequences for legal education in general.
I have not, however, argued that criminal law should not be one of the first subjects studied.
Rather I have argued that, properly taught, it is a highly suitable place to begin serious legal study.
Turning, then, to the relationship of criminal law and legal theory, I asked what legal theory might contribute to criminal law and I dealt with two central issues; first, the limits of exposition imposed by the nature of legal rules which, I argue, are essentially incomplete and therefore incapable of a final, exhaustive statement; and, secondly, the nature of methodological purity, where I argue against a tendency to distort data to fit a favoured critical principle.
Finally I asked what criminal law might contribute to legal theory.
Here I directed attention to three issues.
First, the circumstance that criminal law exhibits some particularly interesting judicial techniques of lawmaking which must be relevant in any account of judicial process which purports at least in part to be descriptive, rather than purely normative.
Secondly, I assumed, partly on the basis of other work, that the criminal law can be understood as a socially valid positive moral order and that, if so, some revision of legal theory might be called for.
I therefore proposed an account of law, ‘normative positivism’, which I take to synthesize salient features of positivism and natural law thinking and which seems to me wholly to fit the nature of criminal law.
Thirdly, and consequentially, I argued that the elements of harmful consequences liability which are exhibited by the criminal law do not disqualify it from the status of positive moral order, because conventional morality (as opposed to the critical morality of Kant or Smith, for example) incorporates a notion of moral luck and indeed our ordinary moral attitudes would be unrecognizable without some such idea.
Consequently such apparently irrational attribution of responsibility exhibited by criminal law strengthens rather than weakens the claim that criminal law may be understood as positive morality.