

‘Put human right first’, say African communicators
Christian communicators representing 14 African countries have issued a strong and uncompromising call to governments and churches throughout the continent to do all in their power to uphold human rights, including the freedom of information and expression.
The call came in the form of ‘The Windhoek Declaration on Communication and Human Rights’(see enclosed Special Report), which was drawn up by participants at a conference organised by WACC's African Regional Association (WACC-AR) in Windhoek, Namibia, 9–15 September.
‘Political instability is tearing our continent apart.
Everlasting peace can only be founded on the observance of, and respect for, human rights,’ the participants declared.
In the Declaration they stressed that ‘participatory communication between the leadership and the people is a prerequisite to a just and democratic social order in which effective accountability is the norm rather than the exception.’
They said that as communicators and Christians their responsibility is to uphold human dignity and people's participation in communication and the development process.
‘We commit ourselves to work with other concerned institutions and individuals so that the African people's human dignity and rights may be restored and preserved,’ they added.
In the Declaration, participants challenged their continents' churches and governments to take urgent steps to put democracy and respect for human rights at the forefront of their agenda.
They urged the churches to provide literature in local languages on human rights issues and to teach human rights in schools and colleges.
Other recommendations to the churches include documenting human rights situations in Africa; promoting education on human rights through alternative communication such as drama, music and community news sheets; encouraging people's participation in decision-making at all levels in church structures, and exposing church leaders to WACC's Principles of Christian Communication.
Turning their attention to African governments, the participants focussed on the need for the freedom of information and expression.
‘We call for explicit guarantees of media and press freedom in the constitutions of all African countries as stipulated in Article 19 of the United Nations' Declaration on Human Rights,’ they stressed.
Among their other recommendations were: the inclusion of human rights issues at all levels of education; the promotion of genuine participatory democracies; the setting up of regional courts for human rights as part of a network to promote human rights in Africa.
Specific recommendations to WACC's African Regional Association included: setting up networks for the exchange of information on human rights issues; helping develop leadership and resources for media literacy education; ensuring participatory communication by ensuring fair representation of denominations, gender, professions, nations and languages.
The conference was held immediately prior to WACC-AR's assembly, and both the conference and the assembly were hosted by the Council of Churches of Namibia.
The opening worship and addresses were given by WACC's President, Rev Randy L Naylor, and Namibia's Deputy Minister of Information and Broadcasting, Daniel Tjongarero.
Five key papers were presented at the conference by Professor Paul Ansah of Ghana, Dr Kwame Boafo of Kenya, Dr Bernard Muna of Cameroon, WACC's General Secretary, Rev Carlos A Valle, and Rev Daniel Ntoni-Nzinga of Angola.
For further information, contact the WACC-AR Secretary, Robert Kizito, Africa Church Information Service, PO Box 14205, Nairobi, Kenya.
Tel (2) 62601, 62959 or 62974.
Telex 22175.
In the Middle East
Documentation network formed
The Middle East Council of Churches (MECC) has agreed to help coordinate a newly created network of Christian documentation centres in the region after sponsoring a seminar on the theme ‘Documentation for Effective Information Sharing’ in Cyprus, 28–31 August.
The seminar, which was supported by WACC, was attended by 30 representatives of Christian documentation centres in Cyprus, Egypt, Jerusalem, Jordan and Lebanon.
Discussions focussed on the inter-related elements of documentation, information and communication.
New technology figured prominently as participants found ways of matching regional information and research needs with fast-paced advances in computer technology.
A roundtable discussion on the question ‘What type of information do we need in the Middle East?’ dealt, among other things, with attitudes to information in the region, in view of the perception that information means power, and that access to it should therefore be restricted.
The social and political implications of freer information-sharing in the region was a recurring theme at the seminar.
While the focus of the seminar was on Christian documentation, participants also emphasised the importance of cooperation with other centres in the region, including Muslim, secular and academic networks.
First steps in cooperation will include the exchange of acquisition lists and publications, and visits among participating centres.
Communication Department, The Middle East Council of Churches, PO Box 4259, Limassol, Cyprus.
Tel (5) 321535.
Fax (5) 324496.
Telex 5378 OIK CY.
Courses & Conferences
The right to communicate — an Indian perspective
The Christian Institute for the Study of Religion and Society is hosting a seminar on ‘The Right to Communicate’, to be held in Delhi, India, 3–5 November.
Leading scholars, communicators and educators from different social and cultural backgrounds have been invited to present papers for discussion.
Topics include ‘Language and Communication as a Right’, ‘State Policy and Communication as a Right’; ‘Communalism’; ‘Communication as a Right and the Indigenous People's Perspective’; ‘Muslim Community and Communication as a Right’; ‘Technology and Socio-economic Order and Communication’; and ‘The Christian Tradition in India and Communication as a Right’.
WACC is supporting the seminar as part of its international Study and Action Programme.
The Coordinator of WACC's programmes in Asia, Dr Pradip Thomas, and the Director of Studies and Publications, Dr Michael Traber, will take part in the event.
The Christian Institute for the Study of Religion and Society, 14 Jangpura B, Mathura Road, New Delhi 110014, India.
Tel (11) 619821.
Communication planning and strategy
The Department of Communication of Cornell University, USA, will hold its annual four-week course in Communication Planning and Strategy on 3–30 June 1992.
This international course will emphasise organisation of communication and non-formal education programmes that are designed for various sectors of society ranging from policy-makers to villagers.
Topics to be covered are: Developing a Communication Strategy, Analysing Audiences, Media Selection, Mass Media and Small Group Communication.
The course will include a field trip to the Washington, DC, area to meet with agencies in development communication.
Cornell University also offers a large variety of short courses on specific themes, held during the summer session.
These include video production, development communication and introduction to mass media.
Department of Communication, Cornell University, Kennedy Hall, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA.
Tel (607) 255 6500.
Fax (607) 255 7905.
Telex 6713054.
Jury revisits Moscow
The Soviet film ‘A Piebald Dog Running at the Edge of the Sea’ received the Ecumenical Award at this year's Moscow Film Festival, which is held every two years.
The Ecumenical Jury, which was present for the first time in 1989, included members of the Russian Orthodox Church, OCIC, and Interfilm.
Christian satellite TV planned for Europe
‘The Churches in Europe need to organise themselves to meet the challenges that lie ahead of them’.
This was Rev Eric Shegog's reaction to the news that the Morris Cerullo World Evangelism organisation plans to launch a 24-hour-a-day European Christian satellite TV network.
Eric Shegog is Director of Communication for the Church of England and Vice Chairperson of the European Regional Association of WACC.
‘A network such as Mr Cerullo's was to be expected once broadcasting opened up in Europe after 1992’ he added.
‘It also raises the concern that those with the most money will dominate the airwaves’.
A spokesman from the Cerullo organisation's UK headquarters confirmed that negotiations are underway with satellite management bodies to bring the network to air in the early months of 1992.
The network will be funded by donations from benefactors of the Cerullo organisation in Europe and also from donations worldwide
‘The programming of the ‘24 Hour Inspiration Network’ will be aimed at Christians of all denominations and be intended for family viewing,’their spokesman added.
In the USA the Cerullo organisation has already launched a network similar to the one now planned for Europe.
Once the European network is firmly established Dr Cerullo hopes to bring 24-hour Christian  satellite broadcasting to the African continent.
Morris Cerullo World Evangelism, PO Box 277, Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire HP2 7DH, UK.
Indian women form media lobby
A women's media group has been set up in Delhi, India, to lobby for a more balanced national media policy and to raise public awareness concerning the portrayal of women in the media.
The initiative for the women's group came out of a seminar on ‘Women and Mass Media’, which was organised by the Joint Women's Programme, 22–24 August.
The Joint Women's Programme, which is a corporate member of WACC, is deeply concerned about the wrong portrayal of women in the media, particularly since this often leads to violence against women and emphasises their inferior status.
The seminar had three main aims: to examine the impact of Indian mass media on women and society; to analyse the projection of women and women's concerns in the mass media; and to study the role played by the mass media in covering special concerns such as communal and family violence.
The seminar participants, who included social activists, media professionals and government officials, agreed on the need to create a ‘media watch’ network and also stressed the importance of providing skills to analyse the use of the mass media.
In addition, the participants emphasised the vital role of alternative media, such as street theatre and traditional song, and agreed that these should also find an outlet through the mainstream media.
For further information, contact Jyotsna Chatterji, Associate Director, Joint Women's Programme, 14 Jangpura B, Mathura Road, New Delhi 110 014, India.
Tel (11) 619821.
Telex 3174016 IRIS IN.
Sri Lankan newspaper stands its ground on human rights
In the midst of the political, and often violent, turmoil experienced in Sri Lanka in recent years, the Lanka Guardian is one of the few independent newspapers that have consistently taken an ethical, non-partisan stand on national and international issues.
For more than 13 years the Lanka Guardian has held a unique position.
In a media environment where the press has tended to voice government or opposition propaganda, the Lanka Guardian has expressed its convictions in a non-partisan way.
It strives to live up to its name as ‘guardian’ of the Sri Lankan people's right to independent news and comment.
Throughout the internal conflict and external aggression suffered by the Sri Lankan people, the Lanka Guardian has remained consistent in encouraging the pursuit of peaceful solutions.
It works closely with different religious organisations involved in social work and human rights activities.
Under the leadership of its founder and editor, Mervyn de Silva — a journalist of international experience and repute — the Lanka Guardian concentrates mainly on covering the socio-economic, political and cultural issues affecting Sri Lanka and South Asia.
Recent articles have examined the aftermath of the assassination of Indian President Rajiv Ghandi, the effects of the Gulf War, and various aspects of Sri Lankan politics.
In a special three-year programme, supported by WACC, the Lanka Guardian aims to help restore the moral values, human rights and spirituality which, in the past, have been the foundation stones of Sri Lankan society.
An integral part of these objectives is the restoration of Sri Lanka's previous position in the South Asian community.
Sri Lanka had been at the forefront of Asian intellectual thinking and had gained a good reputation for human rights and civil liberty before these recent years of violence and oppression.
The Lanka Guardian plans to provide opportunity for information and discussion under a new section in the newspaper entitled ‘South Asian Forum’.
The editors are seeking new writers to cover trends and events throughout the region.
In addition, they are organising a promotional campaign to expand the Lanka Guardian's readership.
The Lanka Guardian is published fortnightly and is available from Lanka Guardian Publishing Company, 246 Union Place, Colombo 2, Sri Lanka.
AV plan launched in L America/Caribbean
A group of leading communicators, scholars and representatives of cultural organisations from throughout Latin America and the Caribbean have proposed a six-year plan to promote the production and use of locally-produced TV, film and video programmes.
The plan falls within the aims of the UNESCO's World Decade of Cultural Development (1988–1997) and is designed to stimulate and develop Latin American/Caribbean culture through the appropriate use of audio visual media.
The idea for the plan grew out of a meeting organised in Mexico earlier this year by WACC-member IPAL (Latin American Institute) in conjunction with the Mexican Film Institute and the Mexican National Council for Culture and the Arts.
Sponsored by UNESCO, the meeting followed up initiatives that sprang from the Third Consultation of Ministers of Culture of Latin America/Caribbean in September last year.
The six-year plan makes recommendations to governments, social organisations, media training centres, non-government organisations, researchers and media critics.
It proposes a series of measures which include increasing the production and distribution of AV programmes, making more people aware of their potential for education and nation-building, offering more training in AV skills, and modifying communication legislation in order to provide more democratic access to audio visual media at all levels of society.
The full report of the meeting, with detailed recommendations, is available from IPAL (Instituto para América Latina), Apartado Postal 270031, Lima 27, Peru.
Tel (14) 617949.
Fax (14) 617949.
Telex 21002-PE-CESAR.
WACC'S STUDY AND ACTION PROGRAMME (PART 3)
This is the third part of WACC's international Study and Action Programme, which will guide the association's work and objectives during the next five years.
This section covers the themes Communication, Culture and Social Change, and Communication Education.
The final part, to be published next month, covers Women's Perspectives.
Communication, culture and social change
These three terms signal one of the central concerns of WACC, linking the Forum Sector with the Project Sector in a special way.
It is primarily this area of work which has prompted many supporting agencies to identify with WACC and give it financial resources.
Studies of the relationship between communication and socio-economic change and political transition have been conducted by WACC for a long time.
Some of them have already been mentioned.
Others have been published in the different book series which WACC supports, or in theme after theme of Media Development over the past 15 years.
WACC's thinking on this has been expressed in several official statements, including the Statement on Communication and Development of 1985.
In the conceptual plan now proposed, the culture factor should figure more prominently in the debate.
Though its importance has always been assumed, culture should now feature more strongly and be studied more vigorously.
From development communication to people's action
Various theories of DevCom have been evaluated over the years.
In theory, but not in practice, we have shed instrumentalist notions on the relationship between communication and change and have reassessed the roles of technology.
New theoretical paradigms have emerged that are centred on people's actions, networking among grassroots organisations, the cultivation of a popular movement, the creation of new ‘languages’ and symbols by the people themselves (thus enlarging their cultural space), and a reclamation of the change process.
These new insights have been developed mainly by researchers and activists in Latin America and the rest of the Third World, and WACC has played its part in that development.
WACC should now pursue this theme with renewed vigour both on the theoretical and practical level.
It is one of the Forum tasks to popularise the theoretical insights and illustrate them with practical examples.
This should strengthen WACC's commitment to group media/communication.
Non-western paradigms of communication
Some new thinking on non-western communication theories has emerged, particularly from Asia.
But a recent survey has also indicated that the study of communication theory in journalism or mass communication institutions, except in Latin America, is based on works from the West.
Significant works which have appeared in Latin America have not yet been translated; and the Asian studies published are still provisional and have thus not contributed either substantively or ideologically to communication studies in the South.
While philosophical anthropology may play its part in the study of such paradigms, new research should be initiated into interpersonal communication in non-Western cultures and, particularly, into communication patterns of traditional media.
The danger, however, is that the study of new paradigms remains a purpose in itself.
It should be clearly linked to the developmental process.
It could thus make an additional contribution to the development debate as such, in which at present the cultural dimension is seen from perspectives emanating from western paradigms.
Culture and environment
The environment is another new dimension in the development debate.
It has been in the forefront of the WCC's conciliar process on Justice, Peace and Integrity of Creation.
But little attention was paid to the cultural and communication dimensions related to this process.
There is a need to study this inter-relationship within our larger understanding of, and responsibility towards, both nature and culture in the context of our faith.
WACC's Manila Declaration underlined this point.
‘The total human environment is made up of two interlocking spheres: nature and the human-made environment of culture, energised by communication.
Underlying all the problems is the urge to exploit, which has poisoned both the cultural ethos and the natural environment.
To change this, communication has a decisive role to play.’
The process of taste transfer
Why do people in so many cultures enjoy watching Dallas or Dynasty?
Why is pop music so important for youth almost everywhere on the globe?
What are the mechanisms by which people come to demand Western styles of mass media?
There is very little we know about these processes although several studies are being carried out at present.
This issue leads to many others, including the creation of political dependency and the role of communication technology, issues which will have to be tackled by resorting to various disciplines of social science.
Any progress to be made in this almost uncharted area would be of great significance to communication and those who apply it.
Ethno-religious conflicts and the role of group identity
Ethno-religious conflicts have sprung up all over the world in recent years.
This has been attributed to mere manipulation of the masses by irresponsible politicians, or explained by theories of economic and class conflicts.
Yet such interpretations do not sufficiently account for them.
It is the complex factors underlying these conflicts which the Forum Programme wishes to explore, together with the relevance, both negative and positive, which communication has in such conflicts.
One factor, doubtlessly, is the need for group or national identity, in which religion seems to play an important role.
But identity is an elusive concept and will have to be defined further and concretised.
Communication and personal change
Both personal and social transformation are also the goal of the churches.
Personal conversion and the coming of God's Kingdom require change, often profound change.
To what extent can the experiences and theories of communication and development be applied to the religious sphere?
Or, alternatively, in what way can the religious experience of conversion, both personal and in its ramifications for social change and conversion of community, shed light on the process of profound socio-political transformation?
Or is change from a religious perspective a process which is sui generis?
These questions cut across several themes developed in this Forum Programme.
Communication Education
For many years WACC has had a programme entitled ‘Communication Education’.
Its focal points were (a) Curriculum Development, particularly curricula for training in ‘alternative media’;(b) Professional Education, i.e. the practical training and theoretical grounding of media workers, often in courses such as rural reporting;(c) the Training Assistance Programme (TAP) which helped practitioners and academics to further their education in institutions of learning sympathetic to WACC's aims and goals, and (d) the Animation Programme, to establish a network of consultants and communication specialists, thus tapping the region's own resources.
A new dimension of communication education was added by Central Committee in 1989, namely, Media Awareness Training, also known as Media Literacy, Media Pedagogy, Critical Reading or, as it is now usually called, Media Education.
The Manila Declaration, subsequently endorsed by WACC's Central Committee, put great emphasis on this Forum Programme (see paragraph 12 and recommendation 22).
Media education
Like all other media studies, media education must be seen ‘in and across different cultures’(Manila Declaration, paragraph 22).
The reason for this is obvious.
But three practical considerations should be noted.
First, exposure to media in a specific continent or sub-continent varies greatly.
Television, for example is the most important medium for the majority of
people in the Americas, Europe and South
East Asia.
But in sub-Saharan Africa, for example, television is only for the privileged few, whereas radio surpasses all other media in terms of audience.
Media education, therefore, should respect the concrete reality of the media situation in each region or sub-region.
Secondly, media education is conditioned by the roles which the mass media play in the perception of viewers, listeners and readers.
That role varies from sub-region to sub-region, often from country to country.
For example, both radio and television may be perceived first and foremost as entertainment; or a particular national newspaper may be considered to be primarily the voice of the government rather than a general organ of information.
What people think of the media in general and each medium in particular and the role or roles they perceive them to play in their lives and in society are important preliminary considerations which have to be studied.
Thirdly, there are certain aspects of mass communication which are sometimes overlooked in media education.
One example is advertising.
It uses all media, and most media depend on it financially.
In addition, it uses a host of other devices, such as billboards, displays in shops and the packaging of products.
Awareness of advertising, and its scrutiny and demystification are an important part of media education.
Another example is pop music, emanating from radio, audio cassettes, etc., and geared to a specific age group.
Pop music and its link with youth culture should be an important field of study in media education.
Media education as a process
It is only after a careful analysis of the situation and after a general assessment
of the field of study that an action-oriented goal can be formulated.
It may at first be limited to one target group (for example, secondary school teachers) and one or two different media (e.g. press and radio).
Experience has shown that the aim of developing an entire curriculum of media education is not a starting point but the end of a long process.
A media education programme therefore presupposes that a group of people will continue to work together for several years.
Professional education: alternative approaches
The professional education of media workers is of course a vast field, and a great variety of organisations are concerned with it.
But there are two specific aspects which WACC has pursued and should continue to pursue: the development of regional resources for the teaching of communication, and training in alternative media work.
It was almost taken for granted until fairly recently that western, and particularly American, textbooks should be used in professional education in the Third World.
Latin America was the first region of the South to change all that, partly because of the influence of their regional organisation of communication institutions (FELAFACS).
The situation has also improved greatly in South East Asia, but to a much lesser degree in South Asia.
Africa, the Arab world and the South Pacific are still at the beginning of working out their own teaching resources.
WACC is cooperating in this respect with the Professional Education Section of the International Association for Mass Communication Research (IAMCR) and their partners in the South.
WACC has been responsible for the conceptualisation of training programmes in ‘alternative journalism’ and has given the impetus for the implementation of a series of practical workshops.
Contrary to the rules of mainstream journalism, the people worth media coverage are women, children and manual labourers, and this should be reflected in training.
A great deal more could be done in this respect, including workshops in ‘alternative’ religious broadcasting.
In addition to all this, WACC should continue to provide input in professional education in the training centres in Africa with which it has been associated traditionally.
Significance of Training Assistance (TAP) and Animation Programmes
The provision of grants for the purpose of furthering practical training and theoretical insights in communication is part of the Forum Sector Programme.
It is, in fact, an important strategy for implementing WACC's principles on professional education.
It is therefore necessary to identify institutions of teaching which understand WACC and its concerns.
It also means that WACC enters into a partnership with such institutions, both in developed and developing countries.
A second and important strategy is WACC Animation Programme, it underlines the fact that a regional association cannot operate in a vacuum but is part and parcel of the wider world of communication, both regionally and internationally.
While communication education may remain the priority of the Animation Programme, it is hoped that it may take on board also other concerns of the Forum Sector, while not excluding assistance with projects.
Charter of TV viewers' rights
The following is a declaration of the rights of television viewers drawn up by the French Association of Television Viewers.
Although written from a French perspective, the essence of the Charter is relevant for all cultures and it reflects the values promoted by WACC through its worldwide programme of media awareness seminars and workshops.
The Charter was first published in English in Educommunication News.
1
All viewers are born free and equal in dignity and rights without distinction of origin, social status, opinion, sex and age.
2
All viewers have the right to freedom of expression regarding television channels whether these are publicly or privately owned, regional, national or transnational.
3
All viewers have a right of access to a variety of programmes, at prime viewing time, which respond to their requirements concerning information, culture and entertainment without any other restriction than payment of a fee.
No one should be subjected, in the exercise of this right, to additional charges.
4
All viewers have the right to refuse any violation against their person, their private life or their image through the broadcasting of debilitating, impairing, violent or sexist programmes.
Programmes of a racist nature, in keeping with existing legislation, are prohibited.
A code of conduct designed by television professionals and viewers will be drawn up.
A right of reply will be instituted for viewers to combat media aggression.
5
The cultural identity of all viewers will be respected.
Foreign or French minorities residing in France have a right to regular  programmes expressing their particular cultures and life-styles.
All children have the right to choose appropriate programmes representing the diversity of all world cultures.
6
All viewers have a right to be informed about the programming policies of television networks.
They have the right to know why a particular programme has been interrupted or cancelled.
7
All viewers have to right to see original programmes.
Films and videos should neither be edited nor coloured except by permission of the individual writers or producers.
8
Viewers should be clearly warned at the beginning and end of all advertising breaks.
Changing sound volume during advertising breaks is prohibited.
Fraudulent advertising is banned in keeping with legislation.
Sponsored programmes should be clearly announced as such.
9
News and information programmes should be free of all forms of discrimination and these programmes should be accessible free of charge to all.
No such programme should be termed exclusive, especially sports programmes.
Televised information is based on a code of ethics established in the Journalists' Charter.
10
Pre-recorded laughter and applause should be banned.
Recourse to subliminal techniques is prohibited.
11
All viewers have a right to inspect audience surveys, especially regarding the methodology and techniques used.
A viewer satisfaction rating will be created.
12
All viewers have a right to television awareness education from primary studies to university level.
Education in audio visual techniques should be considered as disciplines in their own right.
13
All viewers should be informed on how government television taxes are redistributed and used.
Taxes should be used mainly to develop creative programming on French television.
14
All viewers, regardless of geographical situation, have the right to receive existing and future national Hertzian stations.
15
All viewers residing in areas which are cabled have a right to be connected free of charge to a service which provides them with a minimum of public channels, a local channel, an educational channel and a community channel with a studio which is available to citizens and associations.
16
All viewers have the right to express their views on television either personally or within the framework of representative organisations.
This will be guaranteed by regular programmes screened at prime viewing time.
17
Television channels should recognise television viewers as fully-fledged partners.
Viewers and their association are guaranteed representation in a way which remains to be defined, both with the legislating authority and with public and private channels.
A democratic process of elections should ensure a fair level of representation.
Books & Resources
Creole Passion cassette reflects daily life in Argentina
The Institute for Higher Theological Education (ISEDET) in Buenos Aires, Argentina, has produced an audio cassette of a unusual musical composition of the Passion of Christ.
Entitled ‘La Pasión Criolla’(‘Creole Passion’), the recording consists of twelve songs which take their inspiration from the scenes and activities of ordinary daily life in Argentina.
La Pasión Criolla was first performed in 1983.
Its composer, the Argentinian Alejandro Mayol, sought to express the Christian faith in a language which everyone could understand — at all levels of society.
The young musician Diego Huerin has kept this same vision in mind in his new arrangement of La Pasión.
It was recorded with ISEDET musicians, including Rev Pablo Sosa and Rev Osvaldo Hirschmann, and produced with the assistance of the World Association for Christian Communication.
‘La Pasión Criolla’ is available in Spanish only from the Instituto Superior Evangélico de Estudios Teológicos (ISEDET), Camacuá 282–1406 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Mexican journal promotes NWICO ideals
‘The ideals of the New World Information and Communication Order (NWICO) are more relevant today than ever before’.
This is the headline of a lead article in a recent edition of the Revista Mexicana de Comunicación (Mexican Journal of Communication).
The article is written by Dr Rafael Roncagliolo of the Latin American Institute (IPAL) in Peru, and follows up on some of the convictions expressed at a meeting of Latin American communicators which was organised by IPAL and WACC last year.
The concern for a communication order that would reflect the ideals of the NWICO is reflected in many of the articles published in the journal.
Recent topics include: modern communication technology and cultural  resistance ; a history of Mexico's ‘dissenting’ press; and communication and development.
Regular columns cover different aspects of communication, and there is a bibliography which includes new books, journals and communication research.
A three-page section features Latin American communication organisations, with a description of their aims and activities.
There are also details of meetings, conferences and workshops.
Revista Mexicana de Comunicación is available in Spanish only from Apartado Postal 1784, Administración de Correos No 1, México, DF, CP 06700.
Telephone and fax (5) 2084261.
European human rights
The British  Institute of Human Rights has published its annual Human Rights Case Digest for 1991.
Produced in six bi-monthly parts it gives an up-to-date, comprehensive summary of all decisions on human rights cases heard at the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg.
Human Rights Case Digest costs £32 a year and is available from The Director, the British Institute of Human Rights, School of Law, King's College, London WC2R 2LS, UK.
African magazine seeks local writers
The Vanguard, a Christian magazine published in Nairobi, Kenya, is seeking talented writers from throughout Africa.
Distributed at present in Kenya, Uganda and Zimbabwe, it aims to be a pan-African magazine, appealing to a general readership.
The Vanguard brings a Christian perspective to subjects which affect the lives of individuals, families and communities in Africa.
Recent topics include career guidance, parenthood and the AIDS epidemic.
In addition, the magazine carries short news items from around the world, interviews with community leaders, biblical reflections and film reviews.
It is a joint publication of the independent Christian media consultancy, Pentaline Services Ltd, and Transworld Media Graphics.
The Vanguard is available from Pentaline Services Ltd, PO Box 67290, Nairobi, Kenya.
Tel (2) 723512 and 561382.
Fax (2) 561382.
Calling all Christian cartoonists…
Inspirational Comics is published by a Canadian cartoonist with the aim of providing a forum for all cartoonists whose work reflects a Christian viewpoint.
Bob Wierdsma of Peterborough, Ontario, invites cartoonists to submit copies of their work for publication, along with a short description of the context of their work, their hopes and objectives.
The newsletter also carries information on international cartoon competitions and exhibitions.
Inspirational Comics is published three times a year and costs US $2.50 (USA subscribers) or US $5 (for subscribers outside the USA) per year.
It is available from Bob Wierdsma, PO Box 1324, Peterborough, Ontario K9J 7H5, Canada.
Christians in Indonesia seek deeper involvement in society
Participants at the Second Indonesian Consultation on Theology and Communication agreed that, so far, theological training has been more successful in creating an exclusive elite than in initiating a popular movement.
The Consultation, which was supported by WACC and held in Yogyakarta on 4–8 August, attracted some 50 church leaders, theologians, communicators and educators.
Their central concern is to reach more people at all levels of society and to become more deeply involved in their lives.
‘Sometimes we get the feeling that Christians don't want to get involved in the world unless they are in control of it,’ said Fr Mangunwijaya, who led a discussion on ‘The church under the present condition of a diaspora situation’.
‘The important question is, how can Christians become an inspiration to people of good will in all religions?’,
Fr Mangunwijaya asked.
Other subjects of concern to participants included the role of culture in theological studies, the challenge of modern media to teaching methods, and the need to use symbolism to communicate more effectively.
Discussions on these and other subjects, which started at the first consultation two years ago, will be developed further next August at the Third Indonesian Consultation on Theology and Communication.
For further information, contact R P S Padmobusono, Chairperson of the Second Consultation on Theology and Communication, Penerbit Kanisius, Jl Cempaka 9, Deresan, Yogyakarta 55281, Indonesia.
WACC-Africa elects new officers
Julienne Nyirankusi-Munyaneza was elected Chairperson of WACC's African Regional Association (WACC-AR) during its fifth assembly which was held in Windhoek, Namibia, 15 September.
Mrs Nyirankusi-Munyaneza is Director of the Communication Department of the Protestant Council of Rwanda and the first woman to head the association.
She succeeds Rev Samuel Dossou, the Director of the Communication Service of the Benin Methodist Church.
The new Vice-Chairperson is Rev Emmanuel Bortey, General Manager of ASEMPA Publishers which is owned by the Christian Council of Ghana.
He replaces Rev Ubial Siteke, Director of Communication of the Church of Christ in Zaire.
Robert Kizito of the Africa Church Information Service in Nairobi, Kenya, was appointed Secretary of WACC-AR, replacing James Kangwana of the All African Conference of Churches' Training Centre, also in Nairobi.
The new Treasurer is Ann Mumbi, who works with the Mindolo Ecumenical Foundation in Kitwe, Zambia.
She succeeds Rev Emmanuel Bortey.
Representing WACC-AR as members of WACC's annual Central Committee are: Rev Samuel Dossou, James Kangwana, Rev Daniel Ntoni-Nzinga of Angola (currently studying in England), and Nancy Mwendamseke, director of the East Africa Venture Company of Dar-es-Salaam, Tanzania.
People
Professor Jan Antonie Hes, former Director of the Netherlands Film Institute (NFI), died in Blaricum, the Netherlands, on 15 September.
He was 66.
He had retired from the NFI in August 1989 after 40 years of employment.
Prof Hes is best known among the WACC membership in his capacity as General Secretary of the international ecumenical film organisation, Interfilm.
He will also be remembered for his participation in WACC's Central Committee meetings, and for his tireless contribution to the work of WACC's European Regional Association.
He leaves his wife, Heleen, and three children.
Anneli Janhonen of Finland is the new Director and Editor-in-Chief of the Office for Communication Services of the Lutheran World Federation.
She was formerly Director of the Information Centre of the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland.
Rev Bernhardur Gudmundson of the National Church of Iceland joins the staff of the Lutheran World Federation in October as Secretary for Communication Consultancy in the Department for Mission and Development.
Eeva Kemppi has returned to her native Finland to join the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland as Consultant for International Affairs.
Ms Kemppi was previously Senior Press Officer in the News and Information Office of the World Council of Churches' Communication Department.
SPECIAL REPORT
The Windhoek Declaration on Communication and Human Rights
A group of Christian communicators representing 14 African countries met in Windhoek, Namibia, 9–15 September, for a conference on ‘Communication and Human Rights: Implications for Development in Africa’.
The conference was organised by WACC's African Regional Association (WACC-AR).
During the meeting, participants issued a strong call to governments and churches in Africa to take urgent steps to protect and uphold human rights.
They expressed their concerns in the following ‘Windhoek Declaration on Communication and Human Rights’:
We, Christian communicators from 14 African countries, are committed to the proclamation of the Kingdom of God to the whole of humanity through mass media and other means of communication, following the example of God Himself as a communicator Who has revealed Himself in His Son, Jesus Christ.
We have discussed, reflected and considered on the one hand, the impact of the lack of democracy and respect for human rights in our countries, and on the other, the restrictions of the free flow of information and access to media whereby the majority of African peoples are deprived of opportunities for self expression and full participation in the development process and nation building.
We have also explored our responsibilities as communicators and churches in upholding human dignity and people's participation in communication and the development process.
We realise that political instability is tearing our continent apart and that everlasting peace, which is a condition for development, can only be founded on the enjoyment of, and observance and respect for, human rights.
We realise also that a participatory communication between the leadership and the people is a prerequisite to a just and democratic social order in which effective accountability is the norm rather than the exception.
We are aware of the opportunities before us through our different communication professions and institutions.
We rededicate and commit ourselves to the highest standards in communication as we endeavour to work for a more just, viable and sustainable society now, and in the future.
In particular we commit ourselves to working with other concerned institutions and individuals so that the African people's human dignity and rights may be restored and preserved, and our leaders may be more accountable to a people whose conditions permit effective mobilisation.
This conference therefore makes and hereby adopts the following recommendations to encourage churches, communicators, governments, and the public at large to support the cause for human rights and the wind of democratic change blowing over the continent of Africa.
1.
To the Church
We celebrate the valiant role of certain Christians and church leaders in the struggle for peace, justice and democracy in Africa.
However, we recognise that the church has not always been democratic and that at times we have been insensitive to violations of basic human rights even within the church.
We therefore call on all churches in Africa as a must to put human rights at the forefront of their agenda and mission by:
a
taking the initiative in providing materials on human rights charters and conventions in local languages and in different appropriate places, institutions and fora;
b
incorporating human rights as biblically derived, in Christian education curricula for schools and training colleges at all levels;
c
incorporating human rights training and awareness in the curriculum of theological colleges and seminaries;
d
undertaking research and documenting human rights situations in Africa, and sharing the information among themselves and with other parties among them all reputable national and international human rights watchdogs;
e
finding ways to acquire and set up sustainable and free media institutions, and requesting, as a right, allocation of adequate air time on government controlled radio and television media.
Existing media programmes, projects and facilities of churches, including the use of airtime on state media, should move away from simply being an extension of catechism classes or a restaging of normal Sunday worship, to address human rights, development, and other socio-economic issues;
f
encouraging alternative communication including drama, music, art and popular press and the use of audio and video cassettes to promote socio-political education on developmental issues and human rights;
g
studying ways of influencing media objectives, goals, and practices so that they could become more democratic and responsive to our peoples' aspirations;
h
setting up examples in the exercise of democracy in church structures by encouraging popular participation in decision-making at all levels and incorporating indigenous cultural values in the Church's mission;
i
encouraging the evolution of a Christian understanding of development, which, as Christianity itself, is people-centred, and providing appropriate communication models and structures to support such development;
j
exposing church leaders to the ‘Principles of Christian Communication’(as formulated by WACC) and the ‘Manila Declaration’(from the first WACC Congress, Manila 1989), and other theories of mass communication in order to help church leaders appreciate the importance of media in development, democracy and human rights;
k
better equipping church media training facilities to meet the communication needs of churches, NGOs and other grassroots organisations;
l
setting aside a particular Sunday of their choice annually as Human Rights Day, for prayer and reflection on human rights issues.
2.
To Governments
Democracy is the right of people to participate in running and determining their own destiny.
Therefore, the people have the right to choose, the right to express themselves, and the right to demand accountability from those entrusted with governance.
We appreciated the current wind of democratic change blowing over the continent.
However, we deplore the obstacles that are employed in certain sectors to frustrate the march of the masses towards realising a truly democratic society.
Political constraint is one of the problems that undermine the capacity of the mass media to appropriately and effectively fulfill their function of building democratic societies and protecting and defending human rights in Africa.
Therefore, we call for:
a
explicit guarantees of media and press freedom in the constitutions of all African countries as stipulated in Article 19 of the UN Declaration on Human Rights.
Such guarantees must not merely be provided for in constitutions but must be seen to be honoured;
b
respect of the right of the media to express critical opinions on all issues;
c
the incorporation of human rights issues in education curricula for schools and training colleges at all levels in collaboration with other institutions and individuals concerned with education and with human rights;
d
respect of the inalienable right of the people to exercise their democratic right of freely choosing who should govern them;
e
a genuine participatory democracy that involves the masses in all decision-making processes from the grassroots levels; particularly the right of the people to determine for themselves what developmental processes best fulfils their aspirations;
f
a rejection of all foreign models of development which tend to be materialistic, dehumanising and which fail to recognise the creative developmental efforts of our own people as the requisite basis for a sustainable developmental process;
g
the reform of judicial and penal systems so that only criminals are sent to prison, and ensuring that while they are there, their basic human rights are strictly respected; and
h
the setting up of continental (or regional) courts for human rights are part of a network(s) to promote human rights in Africa.
3.
To WACC's African Regional Association
a
WACC-AR should set up, and where necessary support, networks that will facilitate the exchange of information and experience between Christian communicators on the continent on human rights and evolving a human rights culture in Africa:
b
WACC-AR should make an inventory and directory that will enable communicators in Africa to have a better knowledge of the existing communication and human rights organisations, institutions and resources in Africa;
c
WACC-AR in planning future activities should ensure participatory communication by involving representation of all groups that form the movement and also take into account confessional, gender, professional, geographical and linguistic representation;
d
WACC-AR should develop leadership and resources so as to create a more critically aware consumer media, thus achieving a level of media literacy parallel to that of reading literacy;
e
WACC-AR should provide leadership in setting up funds to care for the families of people who are victimised because of their commitment and faithfulness to the principles of the communication profession, and finally
f
we call on WACC-AR to take practical steps which will help us realise the implementation of all these recommendations in our continent.
4.
Human rights in Namibia
We note with appreciation the existence of democracy in an independent Namibia, and the government's commitment to human rights and a free and unrestricted press.
It is our prayer that the prevailing  progress on human rights will be sustained.