

Welcome to the friendly world of Amsterdam
Amsterdam is said to be Europe's most surprising city and we would certainly not disagree.
The Dutch is indeed one of Europe's most beautiful and friendly cities, well worth visiting any time of year.
Where else can you find skaters gracefully gliding over frozen canals in the winter and on those same canals see tourist boats and water bikes gently sailing past historic gabled houses and under attractive curved bridges in the summer?
Where else can you find the peaceful old world charm of a beautiful 17th Century inner city so well complemented by the modern efficiency of an exciting cosmopolitan metropolis?
And where else will you find world famous diamond houses alongside colourful second hand flea markets?
Scores of museums, theatres and cinemas offer a multitude of cultural possibilities.
At night the city has many distinct districts — all with their own special, unmistakable identity and charm.
The village like atmosphere of the Leidseplein; the hustle and bustle of trams, canal boats, street musicians and organ players outside the Central Station; the energetic buzz of the mildly naughty Rembrandtplein; the peace and calm of the traditional Jordaan area and for the very brave the decidedly naughty but small red light district.
Amsterdam certainly has it all with the city's most enduring attraction being the Amsterdammers themselves who will instantly make you feel at home and help you enjoy this marvellous city to the full.
WHY CHOOSE AMSTERDAM TRAVEL SERVICE?
As part of the UK's leading group of specialist tour operators to Europe's most beautiful cities, we have over 36 years experience in providing value for money city breaks.
Moreover, as our name would suggest, we aim to provide that extra bit of care and attention, recognising that every customer has individual needs.
We can therefore offer you choice, value, service and quality second to none.
CHOICE
ACCOMMODATION:Ranging from relatively modest one star hotels for a budget break to top of the range five star hotel luxury for that very special occasion.
TRAVEL:By air, rail, coach and car offering flexibility of time and date of travel as well as choice of departure points.
Our reservations staff will be pleased to quote alternative departure times, departure points and routes on request.
DURATION:You certainly can not hope to see all that Amsterdam has to offer on a two night stay so either be selective or maybe stay longer.
Many hotels offer discounts for stays of 3 nights or more, especially in the low season.
Please refer to the hotel pages in the brochure.
SERVICE
STAFF:Our staff are friendly and efficient having been thoroughly trained to offer you personal help and advice.
Every one of them knows and loves Amsterdam and will be pleased to answer any specific query you have.
REPRESENTATION:We have our own centrally located reservations and reception office in Amsterdam where staff are available daily to provide help and information.
Our holidays all include a special invitation to join us for coffee at our Saturday morning welcome party.
TRAVEL PACK:We send you comprehensive travel documentation including with your tickets and hotel vouchers a colourful city map, luggage labels, detailed itineraries and the exclusive Amsterdam Travel Service ‘Passport to Amsterdam’.
The Passport includes sightseeing and places of interest, restaurant guide, shopping information, museum guide, excursion trips, emergency telephone numbers, a comprehensive menu translation guide and a host of additional information.
VALUE
PRICE:Our excellent reputation and years of experience coupled with our overall size allows us to negotiate the best possible rates which of course, we pass on to our customers resulting in outstanding value without sacrificing any quality.
SPECIAL OFFERS:With the co-operation of our hoteliers we are able to offer exceptional value at many hotels on certain dates — 3 nights for the price of 2, a free meal for weekend holidays, a special ‘package’ in low season.
Please refer to the individual hotel descriptions for full details.
WHEN TO BOOK
The peak periods in Amsterdam are mid-March to the end of May and September.
For these periods we would recommend you book early to avoid disappointment.
However we realise that the decision to book an Amsterdam short break is often taken at the last minute and as we are specialists in arranging holidays at very short notice all bookings made within 7 days of departure are given ‘PRIORITY STATUS’.
Amsterdam Travel Service guarantees to confirm all your holiday requirements within 1 hour!
HOW TO BOOK
You have probably been given this brochure by your local ABTA Travel Agent.
Go back to him and discuss your choice.
He will help you with free advice, contact us on your behalf for any additional information, help you complete the booking form and deal with payments and any queries.
Alternatively you may telephone us direct if your wish on 0920 467444 to check availability of your chosen holiday and discuss any specific query you have.
You can of course also book by telephone using your credit card 
We do not charge more if you pay by credit card — any Mastercard or Visa and American Express are accepted.
CANAL BUS PASS
included with all Amsterdam holidays
As Amsterdam is made up of a criss-crossed network of canals, one of the best ways to get around the city is by boat.
Canal Bus operate modern 52 seater motor launches on a regular service along the city's wealth of waterways stopping at various centrally located moorings.
You may start from any point and get on and off at any of the central moorings allowing you time to visit museums and shopping areas as you wish.
The Buses run daily every 30 minutes from 10 a.m. until 6 p.m.
The boats connect all major tourist attractions allowing you to enjoy the beautiful sights of Amsterdam on the way.
Additional routes on which your pass is valid will start in 1992 including a special Rembrandt cruise running for the duration of the Rembrandt Exhibition (1st January-1st March 1992).
Amsterdam Travel Service includes a one day unlimited Canal Bus Pass with all Amsterdam holidays.
Use the pass on the day of your choice as often as you like between the places of interest, and your will find that it is the most enjoyable way of seeing arguably Europe's most exciting city!
Guaranteed No Surcharges
The price of your holiday is fully guaranteed and will not be subject to any surcharges after you book.
In the event that any increase in brochure prices becomes necessary you will be advised at time of booking.
Keukenhof Gardens
Introducing Amsterdam
Amsterdam, capital of the Netherlands is a beautiful and indeed unique city that leaves a life long impression upon the visitor.
As the U.K.'s leading specialist to the city, Amsterdam Travel Service want to help you get the most out of your short stay and share our love of this wonderful city.
On this page we have tried to give you as much help and information as possible to help you discover the real Amsterdam, with excursion and holiday ideas in the city.
CANAL EXCURSIONS IN AMSTERDAM
The horseshoe shaped canal network is criss-crossed by over 1,000 pretty bridges turning the city into a kingdom of mini islands.
The quaint 17th century patrician and merchant houses line the canals with their elegant facades and variety of gables which remain a striking characteristic of Amsterdam.
By far the best way to see the city is to take a canal cruise.
All Amsterdam Travel Service holidays to Amsterdam include a full day unlimited Canal Bus Pass.
AMSTERDAM DINNER CRUISE
Code: A Duration 3 hours Price: £42 
Operates daily from April to October at 8 p.m.
(Rest of year Tuesdays and Fridays at 7 p.m.).
A truly special way to enjoy Amsterdam.
As you cruise the waterways on a luxury motor launch feast your eyes on the illuminated city and feast yourself on a delightful 4 course dinner — aperitif, wine and liqueur included.
A perfect blend of the pleasures of Amsterdam.
OLD AMSTERDAM BY CANDLELIGHT
Code: B Duration 2 hours Price: 13.20 
Operates daily from April to October at 9.30 p.m.
(Rest of year Monday, Wednesday, Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m.)
This romantic and relaxing evening cruise is a memorable experience, and a popular choice for visitors to Amsterdam.
Cruise through the romantic illuminated waterways to a background of soft music.
During the cruise, wine and Dutch cheese are served.
EARLY EVENING CENTRAL AMSTERDAM BIKE TOUR
Code: BT Duration 2–½ hours Price: £10 (including cycle hire Operates every Sunday at 5 p.m. from 5th April to 1st November.
A good way to work up an appetite and enjoy an evening in Amsterdam will be to join our fully escorted city bike tour.
A leisurely route will show you exactly why Amsterdam is referred to as an over-sized village.
The route will take you over old wooden drawbridges, past beautiful Dutch merchant houses and  Holland's most famous landmark, a restored windmill.
During the tour your guide will give you the history and points of interest about the neighbourhoods you cycle through.
CANAL BIKE TRIP
Code: CB Duration 1 hour Price: 7.50 (up to 2 persons)
Operates Daily.
10.50 (up to 4 persons)
The Canal Bike is a fun way to explore the famous waterways of Amsterdam.
The stable, dry pedal boats can be picked up and dropped off at any of 5 moorings in the heart of the City.
A detailed brochure with map and route descriptions point out places of interest on your way.
Whilst the hectic street traffic passes over your head, you can take time to enjoy the delightful sights of 17th century Amsterdam.
By night when the canals are beautifully illuminated, canal biking becomes extremely romantic.
WALKING TOUR IN CONJUNCTION WITH YOUR CANAL BUS PASS
Code: CWS Duration 4 hours.
Price: £9* 
Operates every day Sunday at 10 a.m. from 5th April to 1st November.
This unique escorted walking tour combines the best ways to see Amsterdam, by foot and by boat using your Canal Bus Pass included in your Amsterdam Travel Service holiday.
Disembarking at certain points from a leisurely cruise, your guide, Bernie Dunn, arguably the best guide in Amsterdam will take you through  Amsterdam's most enchanting neighbourhoods by foot.
See the Jordaan area with its hidden courtyards and lovely restored houses.
Visit old Amsterdam and learn about the 700 year old history of this Medieval city.
Other places of interest you will be able to visit include the famous Waterlooplein Fleamarket and the unforgettable Begijnhof courtyard.
*If you do not wish to use the Canal Bus Pass included in your holiday with the Walking Tour Dfl 12.50 will be added (payable locally).
Please note, your pass will still be valid for unlimited use on the Canal Bus network for the rest of the day after the walking tour.
Canal Bus Pass included in all Amsterdam Holidays
The Rijksmuseum
CITY OF ART AND CULTURE
Amsterdam is also renowned for the wealth of art and culture with one of the world's largest concentrations of museums, art galleries, theatres and music venues.
Amongst the most famous is the impressive Rijksmuseum, home of the famous ‘Night Watch’ by Rembrandt and the Van Gogh Museum, the city's only museum dedicated to a single artist.
Then there are the intimate, human scale museums such as the Anne Frank House, Second World War hiding place of the fated Jewish girl made famous through her diaries or the Amstelkring Museum, a church attic in a 17th century canal house.
Amsterdam museums are sure to have something that interests everyone.
AMSTERDAM MUSEUM PASS
Code: AMP Available all year Price: £6.60 
To enable you to visit a selection of the most famous or unusual museums in the city.
Amsterdam Travel Service has created a unique Museum Pass which entitles you to entrance into 5 specially chosen museums: Valid for one entry per museum — any day throughout your holiday.
ANNE FRANK HOUSE.
The hiding place of the famous 2nd World War diarist, eventually deported by the Germans.
STEDELIJK MUSEUM.
Amsterdam's leading Modern Art Museum with a marvellous modern and impressionist collection including works by Picasso, Degas, Chagall and Warhol.
AMSTELKRING MUSEUM.
Beautiful museum of a 17th century Catholic Place of Worship.
AMSTERDAM HISTORICAL MUSEUM.
Fascinating museum outlining the development of the city as we know it today.
REMBRANDT HOUSE MUSEUM.
The restored home of Holland's most famous painter, containing over 250 etchings and paintings.
REMBRANDT EXHIBITION
4 DECEMBER 1991 — 1 MARCH 1992
The Rembrandt Exhibition is the major exhibition of 1992.
Rembrandt spent a great part of his life in Amsterdam and many of his works were painted in the city.
One of his most famous paintings, The Night Watch, was commissioned in 1642 by a company of civil guards to hang in their meeting hall.
Rembrandt chose to paint the picture in a medieval tower with a superb view down the Kloveniersburgwal canal, the tower is now part of the Doelen Karena hotel featured on page 13.
The Rembrandt Exhibition will be held at the Rijksmuseum, the home of the Night Watch, and will consist of 40 superb paintings by the master and a large selection of drawings and prints.
As the number of tickets available at the museum is limited it is recommended that you purchase your tickets before you travel.
To obtain an order form for your tickets before you travel.
To obtain an order form for your tickets please contact the Netherlands Board of Tourism in London (telephone 071–630 0451).
Rembrandt spent his last years in Amsterdam and the building in which he died now houses the Rembrandt House Museum.
The museum will be holding exhibitions of Rembrandt's work throughout the year and of the work of Pieter Lastman, Rembrandt's art tutor.
The Rembrandt House is one of the museum's included in our unique Museum Pass.
REMBRANDT CRUISE
Daily 1 January 1992 to 1 March 1992
Canal Bus are running a special Rembrandt Cruise with a detailed commentary every day during the exhibition.
You can use your included Canal Bus Pass to hop on and off the Rembrandt cruise.
The boats depart from Central Station every 30 minutes from 9.30 a.m. and the full cruise takes 1–½ hours.
The boats stop at places which were important in Rembrandt's life where you can disembark and then continue the tour on a later boat.
The stops are at the Rijksmuseum, Rembrandt House and Westerkerk, the church where Rembrandt is buried.
The Canal Bus Pass included in all Amsterdam Travel Service holidays can be used for the full duration of this special cruise or combined with a full day of visits to other places of interest.
Excursions Further Afield
With so much to see and do in your short time in Amsterdam why not book your excursions before you travel?
Then you can plan your time to get the most from your visit?
AMSTERDAM CANAL CRUISE
Departs daily every 30 minutes.
Amsterdam Travel Service gives you more.
Book any of the excursions C to J before you travel and enjoy, with our compliments, a fully escorted cruise on the canals of Amsterdam.
See the city from a different viewpoint as you glide past the churches and gabled houses in your comfortable custom build Holland International cruise boat and follow the fascinating commentary pointing out the places of interest and telling you of the history of Amsterdam.
GRAND HOLLAND TOUR
Departs daily at 10 a.m.
The leisurely drive takes you first to Aalsmeer, the centre of the flower producers where you will visit the flower auction (closed Saturday and Sunday and replaced by a visit to the Panorama Mesdag Museum).
Then off to Delft, a beautiful 17th century town and visit the famous ‘Delft Blue’ pottery works.
Continue on to The Hague and see the Houses of Parliament and Peace Palace, visit the miniature village of ‘Madurodam’ and see Scheveningen — a North Sea beach resort.
WINDMILLS AND EDAM
Visit the small community of ‘de Zaanse Schans’ just north of Amsterdam where there once were 700 windmills though only 5 remain.
There you will have the opportunity to learn about clog making and cheese preparation.
The tour continues to the nearby medieval town of Edam.
KEUKENHOF AND BULBFIELDS
This excursion offers the opportunity to see the breathtaking spectacle of Holland's fabulous bulbfields.
We include a visit to the Keukenhof Gardens, landscaped to present a picture of unforgettable beauty and a visit is also made to the Frans Roozen Nursery.
Entrance included.
MARKEN AND VOLENDAM
Visit Volendam, an old and picturesque village on the shore of the former Zuiderzee, then onto Marken, joined to the mainland by a dyke.
Traditional Dutch costumes are still worn by many of the inhabitants of both villages.
DELFT, THE HAGUE AND MADURODAM
This excursion takes you to Delft to see how the famous blue pottery is made and then continues to The Hague to see the Houses of Parliament, the Peace Palace and other  notable sites.
Next is a visit to the miniature village of Madurodam and then to see the picturesque harbour at Scheveningen.
SUNDAY MORNING DRIVE
Departs every Sunday at 10 a.m. throughout the year.
This tour drives along the tranquil Vecht River with  its stately mansions and castles and then meanders among the Loosdrecht Lakes.
After coffee (included) travel through attractive woodland scenery to the fortified city of Naarden with its star shaped ramparts preserved after a history of bloody  sieges .
Then go onto new land reclaimed from the Zuiderzee.
‘FLORIADE’, The Greatest Flower Show on Earth and Historical Gouda
Departs every Saturday, Sunday, Monday and Wednesday at 10 a.m.
Visit the horticultural sensation of the decade, Floriade 1992, and see some of the superb displays at the 260 acre  site of floral beauty (entrance included).
After lunch (not included) visit the Medieval town of Gouda, famous for its cheese but with a lot more to discover such as St. Jans Kerk which contains over half of Holland's antique stained-glass windows, the Gothic City Hall dating back to 1430 and a collection of fascinating museums.
For details of ‘Floriade’ inclusive holidays see pages 16–19.
Skinny Bridge
So many things happen in Amsterdam that it is impossible to give you more than a taste of the events for 1992.
Our calendar below lists some of the more important events and public holidays around which you may wish to plan your trip.
Exact details of events will be confirmed on request — telephone 0920 463900.
Underlining the city's proud cultural tradition are a host of theatres, concert halls and museums.
For full details of performances the fortnightly publication ‘What's On’ is available from most hotels and the Tourist Board in Amsterdam.
Keukenhof Gardens
Travel to Amsterdam
The widest choice ever of Air, Rail and Coach travel to Amsterdam All year round
By Rail or Road
AMSTERDAM RAIL EXPRESS
FROM £85 (Day or Overnight Service)
TRANSPORT: Train/Ferry/Train.
ROUTE:London, Liverpool Street to Amsterdam, Central Station via Harwich and the Hook of Holland (by Sealink Stena Line).
JOURNEY TIME:London to Amsterdam approximately 11 hours (day service), 13 hours (night service).
Amsterdam Rail Express, the superb value route to Amsterdam.
With special train services and large modern ships, St. Nicholas on the day service and Koningen Beatrix on the night service, this is a comfortable way to travel.
Both ships offer a fine selection of restaurants and bars as well as a cinema, casino, night club/disco and shops.
Cabins are also available (supplement below) so you will be sure to arrive fresh and ready for the delights of Amsterdam.
** Star Service — Restaurant, cafeteria and lounge bars on the ferry.
*** Star Extras — Cabins available on the ferry.
Prices are per person in cabin one way.
2 berth inside £20 4 berth inside £11
2 berth outside £22 4 berth outside £14
Route Code ARE offers excellent value for passengers travelling on the day service both ways (see price panel on page 9).
HOVERSPEED CITY SPRINT
FROM £88 (Day Service)
TRANSPORT:Coach/Hoverspeed/Coach.
ROUTE:London, Victoria Coach Station to Amsterdam, Stadionplein via Dover and Boulogne or Calais.
JOURNEY TIME:London to Amsterdam 10 hours approximately.
** Star Service — Additional courtesy drop off at Leidseplein in Central Amsterdam.
** Star Value — Exclusive Free £2 Duty-Free Discount Voucher.
NORTH SEA FERRIES
FROM £139 (Overnight Service)
TRANSPORT:Ship/Train
ROUTE:Hull to Amsterdam 16 hours approximately.
** Star Value — Price includes — 5 course dinner, full breakfast and a reclining seat both ways.
** Star Facilities — Lounges, bars, cinemas, children's playroom, duty free shops, Casino and disco on board ship.
** Star Extras — Cabins with washbasin (Basic) or shower & w.c.
(Special) available.
Prices are per person in a 2/4 berth cabin one way.
Inside Basic £10.
Inside Special £20 Outside Special £27 
TAKE YOUR OWN CAR
FROM £69
TRANSPORT:Car/Ferry/Car.
ROUTE:Hull to Amsterdam 15 hours approximately (time on ferry 13 hours).
JOURNEY TIME:Hull to Amsterdam 15 approximately (time on ferry 13 hours).
** Star Value — Price includes — 5 course dinner, full breakfast and a comfortable rest chair.
TRANSPORT:Car/Ferry/Car.
ROUTE:Ramsgate to Dunkerque by Sally Line or Dover to Calais with P&O European Ferries and Sealink Stena Line.
JOURNEY TIME:Ramsgate/Dover to Amsterdam 6 hours approximately (time on ferry 1–½ hours to Calais, 2–½ hours to Dunkerque).
** Star Facilities — Lounge, bars, restaurants and shops on the ferry.
Also available (supplements on request) Harwich-Hook van Holland with Sealink Stena Line.
Sheerness-Vlissingen with Olau Ferries.
Dover-Calais, Boulogne or Ostend with P&O European Ferries.
FOR FULL DETAILS ON SELF-DRIVE HOLIDAYS SEE PAGE 21.
By Air
All our flights to Amsterdam are to Amsterdam Schiphol — one of Europe's most modern and efficient airports.
It is connected directly to the City Centre by a fast and frequent, special rail service.
(Departs every half hour — duration 17 minutes).
Light refreshments/meals are served on all flights according to the time of day.
AMSTERDAM AIR EXPRESS
FROM £129
TRANSPORT:British Airways, British Midland, Air UK or Dan Air.
Escorted coach transfer to hotel and return.
ROUTE:London, Heathrow, Gatwick or Stansted direct to your Amsterdam hotel via Schiphol Airport on selected services.
JOURNEY TIME:U.K. to your Amsterdam hotel 1 hour 45 minutes approximately.
** Star Value — Our best value route, by air, to Amsterdam.
** Star Service — Our representatives will meet you at Schiphol and take your direct to your Amsterdam hotel by coach and escort you back to the airport on your return.
Holiday duration.
Thursday 2 nights, Saturday 3 nights.
SCHEDULED FLIGHTS FROM GATWICK
FROM £137
TRANSPORT:Dan Air Bae 146 or Transavia Boeing 737.
Train to central Amsterdam.
ROUTE:London, Gatwick to Amsterdam, City Centre via Schiphol Airport.
JOURNEY TIME:Gatwick to central Amsterdam 2 hours approximately.
** Star Value — Rail ticket from airport to central Amsterdam and return included.
SCHEDULED FLIGHTS FROM HEATHROW
FROM £146
TRANSPORT:British Airways, KLM (Royal Dutch Airlines) and British Midland Airbus, Boeing 757 or 737, DC9.
Train to central Amsterdam.
ROUTE:London, Heathrow to Amsterdam, City Centre via Schiphol Airport.
JOURNEY TIME:Heathrow to central Amsterdam 2 hours approximately.
** Star Value — Rail ticket from airport to central Amsterdam and return included.
** Star Service — British Midland offer ‘Diamond Service’ on all their flights.
SCHEDULED FLIGHTS FROM STANSTED
FROM £137
TRANSPORT:Air UK BAe 146/Train to central Amsterdam
ROUTE:London, Stansted to Amsterdam, City Centre via Schiphol Airport.
JOURNEY TIME:Stansted to central Amsterdam 2 hours approximately.
** Star Value — Rail ticket from airport to central Amsterdam and return included.
Short Breaks and longer Holidays
Amsterdam is such a lovely and compact city that if two or three days is all you have you will be able to get around the city and all the major sights without difficulty — but you will have gained only a glimpse of all the attractions on offer.
The city's architecture captures the memory of the 17th century wealth of a seafaring and predominantly trading nation.
The charming gabled houses, the thousand bridges, the gently curving canals, the organ players, the bicycle riders, the street musicians, the brightly and cheerfully decorated tram cars, the flowers pots on barges and window ledges, the house boats and canal boats…all conspire to make you feel at home and welcome, in this colourful, fun loving city.
TRAVEL CHOICE
Choose from our wide selection of coach, rail, car and air holidays.
Travel from your chosen departure point at a time that suits you.
Remember also that our star services — Amsterdam Rail Express from London and Amsterdam Air Express from London Heathrow, Stansted and Gatwick offer exceptional value with top quality service on designated services.
Full details of all the travel options available are features on pages 6 and 7.
EXCURSION CHOICE
As the leading Amsterdam specialists we can offer you the widest variety of pre-bookable excursions at very special prices.
Turn to pages 4 and 5 for Amsterdam holiday ideas or excursions to other areas of Holland.
DISCOVERY HOLIDAY
For a fully inclusive Holiday Itinerary why not choose our exclusive Discovery Holiday — Full details on page 15.
GUARANTEED NO SURCHARGES
The price of your holiday is fully guaranteed and will not be subject to any surcharges after you book.
In the event that any increase becomes necessary you will be advised at time of booking.
GROUP BOOKINGS
Amsterdam Travel Service is delighted to help with bookings for groups.
Our group bookings specialists are always pleased to assist the discerning traveller who requires quality, service and value second to none.
Drawing on our knowledge of the city we can tailor make all the arrangements to suit your particular requirements.
As the Amsterdam specialists we know the best things to do and see in and around Amsterdam, simply tell us the type of holiday your group requires and leave all the planning to us.
We are always happy to offer advice or suggestions and with our Amsterdam Office we are able to arrange virtually anything you could want.
So whether your group consists of friends or colleagues travelling for pleasure or maybe as an incentive prize or any other reason you can think of we are here to smooth your path and speed you on your way.
All we ask you to do is enjoy yourself.
If you wish to make a booking for 10 or more please call our Group Bookings Department on 0920 465023.
HOTEL CHOICE
For budget grade one star hotels to top quality five star luxury, our hotels are very carefully selected to offer maximum value and choice to suit every taste.
Remember also that many hotels offer added value at certain times of year.
Full details of our AH grading system and hotel selection with special offers is featured on pages 10–14 of this brochure.
AH1:Budget grade rooms with hot and cold water washbasin in one or two star hotels.
The offer relatively modest standards but always clean and well managed accommodation.
N.B. Up to 6 floors and no lift.
AH2:Rooms with private facilities with bath or shower and w.c. in one or two star hotels as above.
They offer relatively modest standards but always clean and well managed accommodation.
No lifts.
AH3:Rooms with private bath or shower and w.c. in better two or three star hotels in residential and fashionable areas with generally better standard of decor and furniture than AH1/2 grade.
Lift.
AH3X:Rooms with bath or shower and w.c. in recognised 3 and 4 star hotels — telephone, radio and TV in rooms (except for Canal House Hotel), bar or bar service, lounge.
Night porter available.
Lift.
For weekend breaks only, the Holiday Inn Hotel is also priced at this grade even though it is a 5 star hotel.
AH4:Rooms with bath or shower and w.c. in 4 star hotels, telephone, TV, usually also hair drier, bar lounge, night porter and most with their own restaurant.
High level of comfort in pleasant surroundings.
AH5:Top of the range.
Luxury hotels where comfort is the key, with everything you need for a really relaxing weekend.
REDUCTIONS
Join tour at Harwich: £8.00
CHILD REDUCTIONS
All children under two years of age pay a nominal £10 on all holidays plus a cot supplement of £5 per night.
Please note that not all hotels have cots and we therefore advise you to take a travel cot where possible.
Children aged 2 to 11 years inclusive benefit from the following reductions which are only available when sharing a room with 2 adults.
Travelling by Coach — £25
Travelling by Air Express — £30
Travelling by other Scheduled Air — £30
Travelling by Rail — 2 to 4 years £41, 4 to 11 years £20, 12 to 13 years £10.
(No reduction on Route Code ARE).
SUPPLEMENTS
Single Rooms:
Supplements from £5.00 are individually priced under the hotel descriptions on pages 10–14.
Bank Holidays:
There is a supplement of £10 per person for travel over a Bank Holiday which is applicable for outward travel on or between the following dates in 1992:
First Class Travel:
Prices available on request for Club Class travel on Air Holidays.
For 1st Class rail travel on route code LPS add £35 (one class ship).
North Sea Ferries:
There is a supplement for travel on route code NSF in July and August of £9 per person.
Prices shown in panel include 5 course dinner and reclining seat.
Cabin supplements shown on page 6.
PRICE INCLUDES:
Your travel tickets from London or your chosen local airport to Amsterdam & return.
Rail tickets from Amsterdam Schiphol Airport to the city centre and return with all air holidays.
Air Express includes return escorted coach transfer from airport direct to your Amsterdam hotel.
Hotel accommodation with Dutch breakfast at your selected grade of hotel: all service charges are included.
One  day's unlimited Canal Bus Pass (see page 3 for details).
Services of our Amsterdam Office and an invitation to our Saturday morning ‘Welcome Party’ for weekend travellers.
Your ‘Passport to Amsterdam’ including a guide to the principal places of interest, general information on getting around Amsterdam, emergency telephone numbers addresses, recommended reasonably priced restaurants and information on what is happening in Amsterdam during your stay.
Invitation to a famous Diamond Factory to learn the craft of diamond production and to have your own jewels cleaned and valued — free of charge.
Ticket wallet containing your detailed itinerary, luggage labels, travel information, etc.
Free full colour street map of Central Amsterdam.
SELF DRIVE HOLIDAYS
A full range of self drive holidays is featured on page 21 recommending hotels offering their own parking facilities.
Our Amsterdam Hotels
A selection of hotels in budget and tourist guides.
Choosing the right hotel for your holiday is a most important decision and it needs careful consideration even if you are staying only a few days.
Holland is one of the few countries which practices a hotel grading system ranging from 1 to 5 stars.
Unfortunately, even with the practice of awarding half a star over the minimum grading the system is not entirely satisfactory as standards and even prices very enormously in each star grade.
Drawing on our years of experience in contracting hotels in major European cities Amsterdam Travel Service AH system simply classifies these hotels in value and comfort terms.
For example AH1 offers the very minimum standards but exceptional value, while AH3 and above offers superior standards which are correspondingly higher priced.
AH1
Budget grade rooms with hot and cold water washbasin in one or two star hotels.
They offer relatively modest standards but always clean and well managed accommodation.
N.B. Up to 6 floors and no lift.
AH2
Rooms with private facilities with bath or shower and w.c. in one or two star hotels as above.
They offer relatively modest standards but always clean and well managed accommodation.
No lifts.
AH3
Rooms with private bath or shower and w.c. in better two or three star hotels in residential and fashionable areas with generally better standard of decor and furniture than AH1/2 grade.
Lift.
A3X
Rooms with bath or shower and w.c. in recognised 3 and 4 star hotels — telephone, radio and TV in rooms (except for Canal House Hotel), bar or bar service, lounge.
Night porter available.
Lift.
For weekend breaks only, the Holiday Inn Hotel is also priced at this grade even though it is a 5 star hotel.
AH4
Rooms with bath or shower and w.c. in 4 star hotels, telephone, TV, usually also hair drier, bar lounge, night porter and most with their own restaurant.
High level of comfort in pleasant surroundings.
AH5
Top of the range.
Luxury hotels where every comfort is the key, with everything your need for a really relaxing weekend.
SPECIAL OFFERS
Amsterdam Travel Service is able to offer you even more value for money by negotiating some very special offers at certain hotels.
Look out for the following symbols under selected hotel descriptions:
During specific off peak periods you can benefit from either an extra night's FREE accommodation or a special midweek reduction.
Our cupid symbol indicates that we can recommend a special room for either a special room for either a honeymoon holiday or simply for a romantic celebration break.
At some of our higher category hotels, our customers staying 3 nights or more are invited to a meal at their hotel.
Hotels showing this symbol offer an exciting ‘package’ of entertainment & attractions or an excursion at certain times of the year FREE of charge to customers staying 3 nights or more.
AMSTERDAM TRAVEL SERVICE No one offers you more.
All our hotels in Amsterdam are carefully selected and represent good value within their grade.
As Amsterdam is such a compact city they are all centrally situated and within easy reach of all the main sights.
They all serve the traditional hearty Dutch breakfast.
It is worth remembering that below AH3 Plus grade these are small family hotels converted from the old burghers houses with no more than 15 to 20 rooms which are often reached by long and unusually steep staircases so characteristic of the narrow canal houses.
Large double beds are rare in Amsterdam as hoteliers prefer the flexibility of separate beds which can be pulled together if desired.
All rooms with private shower or bath always have a w.c. too.
Rooms without these facilities in our grade AH1 have free access to a w.c. too.
Rooms without these facilities in our grade AH1 have free access to joint facilities seldom shared by more than 2 or 3 rooms.
N.B. Photographs of hotel rooms in this brochure generally depict rooms for double occupancy.
Single rooms are always smaller.
HOTEL KING (AH1)
The Hotel King is run by the charming Mehra family.
It is a delightful, typically Dutch hotel and is centrally located near the Leidseplein.
This authentic canal house lays claim to being the home of Mata Hari.
The rooms are of average size, clean an good value for money.
Single Room Supplement per person per night £5.
Third night free for stays of 3 nights or more arriving on a Saturday.
This offer is only applicable for holidays taken between 1st January to 26th March and the months of November and December.
HOTEL KOOYK (AH1)
Individual attention is promised at this small hotel delightfully situated overlooking one of Amsterdam's main canals — The Singelgracht.
Close to the Leidseplein, an excellent area for shops, restaurants and bars day or night.
Mr. and Mrs. Moonen are always on hand to help with your holiday plans and ensure your stay is comfortable.
The rooms are all very clean, light and airy with some very large rooms which are ideal for families.
Third night free for stays of 3 nights or more.
This offer is only applicable for holidays taken between 1st January to 26th March and the months of November and December.
APPLE INN (AH1/AH2)
This hotel, recently acquired by the very experienced hotelier family, the Mehra's, is situated in the Vondelpark area within walking distance of the Rijksmuseum and Van Gogh Museum.
All rooms are of an average size and the AH2 rooms are with shower and toilet only.
HOTEL VULLINGS (AH/1AH2)
A very small 2 star hotel, run by the industrious and unassuming Mr. Vullings and his daughter.
Hidden behind a plain exterior is a gem of a hotel, with clean and cosy accommodation.
Most of the rooms have been expertly modernised by Mr. Vullings.
The hotel is situated in a busy shopping street close to many attractions including the Leidseplein, Vondelpark, and Rijksmuseum.
The staircase is typical for a canal house — narrow and steep.
AH2 rooms are with shower and w.c. only.
Breakfast room.
HOTEL ENGELAND (AH1/2)
This exceptionally well run hotel is situated in a small side road behind the Leidseplein and close to the Vondelpark, the stylish shopping street P.C. Hoofstraat and all the main attractions.
The rooms are of a reasonable size with traditional Dutch furniture (most have large double beds).
The hotel is of a very high standard for its grade and is highly recommended — particularly for the care and attention paid to all the guests by the owners Leo and Bert and their small staff.
Bar/Breakfast room looking out on to a small patio.
Third night free for stays of 3 nights or more.
This offer is only applicable for holidays taken between 1 January to 26th March and the months of November and December.
Not valid for guests staying over a Friday or Saturday night.
HOTEL GROENHOF (AH1/AH2)
This family hotel consists of three buildings.
The bedrooms are fairly large, the bathrooms (AH2 rooms) are all with shower and toilet only.
The breakfast room doubles as a reception/bar where you can get soft drinks or a beer.
There are some large 4 bedded rooms suitable for a family or friends.
Good central location.
Third night free for stays of 3 nights or more.
This offer is only applicable for holidays taken between 1st January to 26th March and the months of November and December.
HOTEL WILHELMINA (AH3)
A family run hotel situated in the Vondelpark area, within walking distance of the famous Rijksmuseum and Van Gogh Museum.
All our rooms in this comfortable 2 star hotel have television and radio.
HOTEL ACRO (AH2)
A conveniently situated hotel, close to the fashionable shopping street P.C. Hoofstraat and the major museums and also close to the Leidseplein and Vondelpark.
A classic Amsterdam facade hides a modern hotel.
There is a pleasant bar area and breakfast room.
Lift.
HOTEL PRINSEN (AH3)
Centrally located in a delightful residential area, close to the Leidseplein, this hotel overlooks pleasant gardens to the rear.
The owner, Bob Bruynse has recently completed the renovation of the public areas.
Rooms vary in size, but all have TV, telephone and hairdryer.
The hotel has a bar/television lounge & attractive breakfast room.
SPECIAL OFFER: All guests of Amsterdam Travel Service are offered a typical Dutch Welcome Drink upon arrival during the low season period.
HOTEL TERMINUS (AH3)
Centrally located between Dam Square and Central Station this large 3 star hotel is close to all the attractions and main shopping area.
This hotel has some large rooms which are ideal for groups of friends or families.
All the rooms have colour television.
There is a large foyer with pleasant lounge area and an intimate bar and a restaurant.
HOTEL EDEN (AH3)
This hotel is in a lovely location near the lively Rembrandtsplein area, overlooking the Amstell Canal, opposite the Muzeiktheater (opera house) and near the floating flower market.
The recently extended hotel has modern spacious bedrooms, all with telephone, radio and hairdryer.
There is also a large reception area, lounge and a bar/restaurant the ‘Captains Table’.
HOTEL CONCERT INN (AH3)
A charming modern three star hotel situated close to the main museums, the Rijksmuseum, Van Gogh and Stedelijk, and the Concert Hall.
The owners, Fred and Mia Bruynse, take pride in the service and their hotel offers.
Rooms vary in size and come equipped with hairdryers, television and telephone.
The hotel has its own garden terrace that all guests are welcome to use.
VONDELHOF HOTEL (AH3)
Situated near to the Leidsplein in a tranquil residential area, this charming, small, tastefully decorated hotel has its own garden with terrace and a sauna/solarium.
The owner, Petra Zuidinga prides herself in the decor which is her own design and you are guaranteed a warm welcome and comfortable stay.
All rooms have telephone, TV and minibar.
The hotel has a lift and an excellent lounge/breakfast room.
Special Offer: All guests of Amsterdam Travel Service are offered a free sauna during their stay.
AMSTERDAM CLASSIC HOTEL (AH3)
This is a modern, recently established hotel, set in an historic listed building which formerly housed a famous local distillery.
The location is in a small cobbled pedestrian street behind the Nieuwe Kerk & just off the lively Dam Square near our Amsterdam Office.
The hotel owner, Peter, has personally overseen the comfortable design of all 33 rooms to include telephone, TV, radio.
Public rooms include a spacious reception with comfortable lounge and bar area and a fresh, spacious breakfast room.
Third night free for stays of 3 nights or more arriving on a Sunday, Monday or Tuesday.
This offer is only applicable for holidays taken between 1st January to 26th March and the months of November and December.
HOTEL MAAS (AH3)
This is a superbly decorated hotel for its grade and the location is ideal overlooking the Singelgracht canal.
The rooms  meticulously clean and superbly appointed with TV, tea/coffee making facilities, mini-bar, telephone and hairdryer.
Breakfast is an excellent Dutch buffet and the enthusiastic owners Mr. and Mrs. Van der Vorst take personal care to ensure that every guest enjoys their stay.
This modern 3 star hotel has proved very popular with our guests and is well recommended.
Third night free for stays of 3 nights or more.
This offer is only applicable for holidays taken between 1st January to 26th March and the months of November and December.
For that very special celebration, the Hotel Maas offer large rooms with a waterbed available at a supplement of £9 per person per night, or luxury room with waterbed and whirlpool bath supplement of £15 per person per night.
Air Transfer Service
All guests staying at the Hotel Maas are entitled to make use of their special hotel limousine service.
A return journey from Schiphol Airport to the hotel can be prebooked by us and is payable direct to the hotel.
This service is exceptional value at Dfl 80 return per party (maximum 4 passengers).
HOTEL HESTIA (AH3)
A small, quaint, traditional Dutch family 3 star hotel situated in a quiet street behind Leidseplein, Vondelpark and close to all the attractions.
The hotel is run by a very nice young couple who have put a lot of personal touches to the decor and general cosy atmosphere.
The meticulously clean rooms are of medium size, nicely furnished and decorated with telephone and T.V. The breakfast room is of a good size and looks out onto a small garden.
There are some large four and five bedded rooms available for families or a group of friends.
Lift.
Third night free for stays of 3 nights or more.
This offer is only applicable for holidays taken between 1st January to 26th March and the months of November and December.
Middle Grade Hotels
Our middle grade hotels are the most popular choice for the majority of our customers.
The high standards of accommodation combined with the surprisingly moderate prices is the perfect recipe for your short break holiday.
When you first choice hotel is full you will be offered an alternative.
A3X Grades:
This is the most popular grade comprising of 3 star hotels, mostly with a restaurant, bar and lounge and all rooms have private facilities, TV and telephone.
HOLIDAY INN (A3X)
Modern 5 star hotel opposite the Amsterpark about 10–15 minutes from the centre of Amsterdam.
Excellent facilities include delightful restaurant and Clock bar with live piano music nightly.
The bedrooms all have facilities, T.V. with in-house films, telephone, mini bar and hospitality tray.
The out of centre position is made up for by the excellent rates Amsterdam Travel Service have specially negotiated at this hotel.
Available weekends only.
HOTEL ROODE LEEUW (A3X)
This traditional 3 star hotel is centrally located near Dam Square in the heart of Amsterdam's entertainment area.
All the bedrooms have private facilities, telephone, radio, television, hairdryer and tea & coffee making facilities.
The hotel's award winning restaurant specialises in Traditional Dutch cuisine, if you would prefer a quick snack there is a beautiful covered terrace overlooking Dam Square.
For that special occasion, the Hotel de Roode Leeuw have an extra large honeymoon suite available at a supplement of £7 per person per night.
To add extra sparkle to your stay, why not also add their romantic package of champagne & flowers in your room upon arrival and festive breakfast served on your first morning in the room at an additional cost of £46 per couple.
For stays of four nights or more the hotel invite you to a three course lunch or dinner in their award winning restaurant (drinks extra).
For five nights the hotel also offer a bottle of house wine per couple.
This offer is valid for arrivals on Sunday, Monday or Tuesday only.
MERCURE HOTEL ARTHUR FROMMER (A3X)
This well established three star hotel is part of the international Mercure chain and is situated in a quiet street in the heart of the city, built around a private courtyard.
A few minutes walk away is the famous floating flower market on the Singel Canal, the energetic Rembrandtplein & the impressive Rijksmuseum.
All bedrooms in the hotel are of a high standard with private facilities, television, telephone & minibar.
The public facilities within the hotel include a cosy Dutch ‘Brown Bar’ and a gift shop.
This hotel comes recommended as a pleasant contrast of modern comfort and convenience with gracious and typically Dutch old world charm.
Third night free for stays of 3 nights or more arriving on a Saturday.
This offer is only applicable for holidays taken between 1st January to 26th March and the months of November and December.
CANAL HOUSE HOTEL (A3X)
Located on the grand Keizers canal, this delightful hotel is set in two beautifully restored merchant houses dating back to 1630.
The American owners, Len and Jane Irwin have successfully re-established an elegant 17th Century canal house atmosphere where you will instantly feel at home.
Public rooms include a cosy old fashioned bar and a magnificent antique salon with piano, overlooking the garden.
All rooms are individually designed to include private facilities and telephone (no television).
Centrally located in a quiet residential area, 5 minutes from Anne Frank House and 10 minutes from Dam Square.
Single Rooms are not available.
For that very special celebration holiday, the Canal House can offer you a special ‘honeymoon’ room available at a supplement of £7 per person per night.
Map Reference: 2D.
MEMPHIS HOTEL (AH4)
The Memphis is part of the prestigious Ryan Hotel Group and has recently undergone complete refurbishment.
Situated in a delightful residential neighbourhood, the hotel is within strolling distance of Amsterdam's celebrated Concertgebouw music hall and near to the principal museum area.
Every guest room is equipped with private facilities, direct dial telephone, mini bar, hairdryer, trouser press, colour television & radio.
Other facilities within the hotel include a comfortable lounge area, an elegant bar & delightful breakfast room serving a superb buffet breakfast.
PARK HOTEL (AH4)
This is a well established 4 star hotel, ideally located opposite the Singel Canal and close to the internationally famous Rijksmuseum.
All bedrooms have private facilities, telephone, radio & television.
The public rooms include an airy, marbled reception complimented by the large adjoining lounge and bar, tastefully decorated in traditional Dutch style and full of character.
The hotel has it's own restaurant ‘The Stadhouders’ featuring typical Dutch fare.
SWISSOTEL AMSTERDAM ASCOT HOTEL (AH4)
Situated at a superb vantage point close to the Royal Palace on Dam Square and Amsterdam's famous shopping areas, the Ascot offers exceptional standards of comfort and service for  its 4 star rating.
Behind the historical gabled facade are 110 large, well appointed rooms with private facilities, phone, multi-channel TV, mini bar, radio, air-conditioning and hair dryer.
Additional facilities include a cocktail bar featuring Dutch specialities & international classics and a cosy French restaurant ‘Le Bistro’ serving everything from a quick lunch to a sumptuous haute cuisine dinner.
Third night free for stays of three nights or more arriving on a Saturday.
This offer is only applicable for holidays taken between 1st January to 26th March and the months of November and December.
For that very special celebration holiday the Ascot can offer you a romantic honeymoon suite available at a supplement of £20 per person per night.
AMAS HOTEL GROUP (A3X/AH4)
Hotel Beethoven and Hotel Lairesse AH4
Hotel Terdam, Museum, Trianon and Holland A3X
The AMS hotel group consists of six delightful 3 and 4 star hotels and are all members of the renowned Best Western chain.
All bedrooms are with private facilities, television, telephone and radio.
Every hotel in the group has a pleasant lounge and bar open until late for hotel guests and (with the exception of the Hotel Holland) they all have a well recommended restaurant serving very reasonably priced food.
The Museum & Holland are located in the famous PC Hoofstraat, Amsterdam's most prestigious shopping street, and the Terdam is located nearby in the museum area and close to the lively Leidseplein.
The Trianon is located in a quiet residential area near the heart of the city.
The four star Beethoven hotel is situated in a quiet area close to the city centre.
The brand new four star Lairesse is located close to the Concerthall, the museums and Amsterdam's upmarket shopping street P.C. Hoofstraat.
Both AMS four star hotels are of a generally higher standard with larger rooms and more luxurious decor.
The AMS hotels are all highly recommended and are a very popular choice for our clients.
KARENA HOTEL GROUP (AH4) Caransa Karena, Doelen Karena, Rembrandt Karena and Schiller Karena
Each of these four centrally located well established 4 star hotels offers individual style and atmosphere but quality and warmth is common to them all.
The Caransa and Schiller are both situated on the famous Rembrandtplein with its lively terraces and enclosed park.
The Rembrandt hotel is centrally located on the grand Herengracht canal and consists of four beautifully restored 16th century canal house buildings.
The Doelen is Amsterdam's oldest hotel and is the very place where Rembrandt painted his most painting ‘The Night Watch’.
It is ideally situated along a charming stretch of canal, near to the Waterlooplein.
All four Karena hotels offer traditional rooms with private facilities, television, telephone, radio and a hospitality tray.
Each hotel has a cosy bar, comfortable lounge and breakfast room and, with the exception of the Rembrandt they all have their own restaurants.
All guests of Amsterdam Travel Service staying for four nights or more are invited for a welcome drink & a three course dinner (drinks with meal are extra) in one of the Karena Hotel restaurants in Amsterdam.
SPECIAL OFFER: Winter Season pay A3X price 1 January to 17 March and 1 November to 31 December.
Map references: Schiller Karena 6F Doelen Karena 5F Caransa Karena 6F Rembrandt Karena 6E.
AH4 Grades:
Highly recommended, comfortable 4 star hotels, offering a higher standard of facilities.
Bedrooms have private bathrooms, TV, telephone etc and are generally more spacious.
High Class Hotel Selection
Amsterdam Travel Service recognise the growing demand for High Class hotels and the collection of top quality four and five star hotels on this page has been carefully selected for an ideal blend of style, quality, comfort and location — the perfect recipe for a magical holiday.
SAS ROYAL HOTEL (AH5)
Opened in 1990, this 5 star hotel is situated in the historic heart of the city.
The building itself, set behind the facades of typical Amsterdam merchants' houses, has an impressive 7 storeyed atrium with a Japanese ‘garden terrace’ and waterfall.
All bedrooms are tastefully decorated and have luxury bathroom radio, colour television (with movies), telephone and mini-bar.
The hotel boasts a wide selection of facilities: the 18th century vicarage which has been preserved and is now the ‘Pastorie’ bar within the Atrium, 2 restaurants —‘De Palmboom’offering an assortment of dishes all day and an à la carte restaurant, ‘LaxenOxen’, specialising in beef and fresh salmon dishes.
The hotel has its own health club with saunas, solarium and work-out equipment available at a small charge.
Single room supplement per person per night: £32.
Club suite supplement per person per night £13 (minimum 2 persons)
SPECIAL INVITATION
The SAS Royal Hotel invites all Amsterdam Travel Service guests staying 3 nights or more to a free 3-course dinner in the Palmboom Restaurant (excluding drinks).
For that extra special celebration why not take the Royal Suite arrangement at the SAS Royal Hotel.
This includes accommodation in the spectacular Royal Suite (it even has its own private sauna), flowers and champagne upon arrival, breakfast in bed and free taxi transfer from the hotel to Schiphol Airport or Central Station.
Supplement per person per night £135 for the first night, £105 each additional night (minimum 2 persons).
HOTEL AMERICAN (AH5)
Traditional luxury and style sums up the American.
Throughout the hotel you will feel its unique atmosphere.
The bedrooms have all been individually redesigned with comfort in mind and offer the best in modern facilities with colour TV (with satellite), telephone, radio and minibar combined with traditional elegance.
Other facilities that the hotel has to offer include a health club (no swimming pool) and The Night Watch cocktail bar which has a covered terrace, an ideal spot to enjoy a relaxing drink or snack.
An excellent hotel for any special occasion.
The famous Café American is part of the hotel with its original Art Deco style and its long standing reputation as a meeting place for Amsterdam's writers, artists and intellectuals; it was even chosen for Mata Hari for her wedding reception.
The style and atmosphere is matched by the high standard of cuisine and service and their special Gateaux are considered a superb finale to any meal.
SPECIAL INVITATION
The Hotel American invites all Amsterdam Travel Service guests who stay 3 nights or more to a free dinner.
Simply book your table on arrival (wine and other drinks are charged).
JULY AND AUGUST SPECIAL
If you choose to travel during July and August in addition to your dinner invitation you are also as an Amsterdam Travel Service guest, offered a welcome drink in the famous Night Watch Bar.
SCANDIC CROWN VICTORIA HOTEL (AH5)
This historic hotel is situated in the heart of the city near Central Station and the famous Dam Square.
Behind the stately Victorian facade are luxurious public rooms including the popular Tasman bar with live piano music, the Fresh Seasons Restaurant with Scandinavian decor and beautiful pot plants, marbled corridors and souvenir shop.
The comfortable bedrooms are decorated in delicate shades of pastel and all offer private bathroom, minibar, television, telephone, room service, hairdryer and trouserpress.
Within the hotel there is also a swimming pool, sauna and health club (available at a small charge).
SPECIAL INVITATION
All guests of Amsterdam Travel Service staying 3 nights or more are invited to a 3 course dinner at the hotel's restaurant with a welcome genever aperitif (other drinks extra).
RAMADA RENAISSANCE HOTEL (AH5)
(Formerly The Amsterdam Sonesta Hotel)
This 5 star hotel, situated in the centre of Amsterdam, combines old world hospitality with contemporary comfort and luxury.
All the bedrooms have private bathroom, colour TV (with movies), stereo, mini-bar and telephone.
As well as a patio bar the hotel has a traditional Dutch pub, the Koepel Café, where light meals and snacks are served.
For more substantial meals the hotel has a restaurant, the Brasserie Noblesse.
For a small charge you can use the fitness club, Splash, with features such as aerobic classes, exercise equipment, sauna and massages.
In the evenings why not try the ‘Boston Club’, the  hotel's popular disco.
Third night free for stays of 3 nights or more.
This offer is only applicable for holidays taken between 1st January to 26th March and the months of November and December.
Newly-weds can take advantage of the Honeymoon package at the Ramada Renaissance Hotel.
Stay in a superior room with flowers and champagne on arrival at a supplement of £35 per person per night.
HOTEL GOLDEN TULIP BARBIZON CENTRE (AH5)
This very smart modern 5 star hotel offers a high standard of comfort and service.
The management have achieved an excellent balance between service and relaxed atmosphere which is felt throughout the hotel.
The public rooms are spacious and light include lounge area, cocktail bar complete with piano, Café Barbizon where you can obtain tempting snacks and afternoon tea and cakes whilst their restaurant offers a high standard of service and cuisine specialising in both local and international dishes.
Another feature is a superb health spa which includes sauna, Turkish Bath, solarium, whirlpool, fitness room and weight training facilities.
Available at a small charge and with special supervision given, the spa can provide you with a healthy breakaway in Amsterdam.
All bedrooms are extremely well appointed with mini bar, phone, radio, T.V. with in house movies, electronic safe and the bathrooms have hairdryers.
Overall this hotel is highly recommended for its facilities, value and position, close to the Leidseplein, convenient for sightseeing and shopping.
SPECIAL INVITATION
The Golden Tulip Barbizon Centre invites all Amsterdam Travel Service guests staying at their hotel over a weekend, to a free buffet dinner in their famous Cafe Barbizon Restaurant (wines and other drinks are extra).
Discovery Holiday
To help you get the very best from your short visit to our favourite city we have created the Surprising Amsterdam Discovery Holiday.
This is a collection of holiday ideas which can be added to any Amsterdam Holiday to introduce you to the real Amsterdam.
The Discovery Holiday is very popular with first time visitors to Amsterdam as there is so much to see and do in the City, it is sometimes difficult to know where to begin.
To turn your trip to Amsterdam into a Discovery Holiday choose your travel route and accommodation and simply add £30 to the price shown on pages 8–9.
Our comprehensive Discovery Holiday (supplement £30) includes a fascinating range of visits to make the most of your trip to Amsterdam, yet allows you the flexibility to choose the itinerary that suits your individual taste.
SUGGESTED ITINERARY Tour Code: DHC
DAY 1:Travel by your chosen route to Amsterdam and settle into your centrally located hotel.
This evening, before dinner, visit a Dutch Tasting House.
Originally every distillery had it's own tasting house where customers could sample the products before deciding which to buy.
We have arranged for you to sample a free Dutch Genever (Dutch Gin) Cocktail at De Drie Fleschjes Tasting House.
DAY 2:Breakfast in your hotel and then (Saturday only) join our representatives for coffee and a short presentation on what Amsterdam has to offer.
This morning see the city the easy way and cruise the canals in a modern motor launch.
Then using your personal copies of our special guides entitled ‘Between the Canals’, ‘Arts and Antiques’, ‘The Beautiful and The Chic’ and ‘Open Air Markets’begin your discovery (on foot) of this fascinating city.
Included too is your Museum Pass for many of the  principal museums.
For this evening we have arranged a 3 course typically Dutch meal at a centrally located, award winning restaurant.
DAY 3:Today, why not use your Canal Bus Pass included with your holiday.
The Canal Bus tour the city and you can hop on and off whenever and wherever you like.
You are invited to our Diamond House to see a little of the art of the diamond cutter, have your own ring valued and cleaned if you wish and maybe even purchase a ring or stone at very attractive discounts on UK prices.
You are also invited to visit a clog factory to watch the craftsmen at work.
DAY 4:Time for last minute shopping or perhaps a visit to the Rijksmuseum to see the Night Watch by Rembrandt or the Van Gogh Museum to see a vast array of the  master's work.
All too soon it is time to say goodbye to Amsterdam and return home.
PRICE INCLUDES:
Canal Cruise — the perfect way to see the city at its best.
Set of four specially produced shopping/sightseeing guides with maps and recommended routes.
Pass for one  day's unlimited travel on the Canal Bus Service.
Our exclusive Museum Pass which entitles you to free entrance to a selection of Amsterdam's popular and interesting museums.
Typically Dutch, 3 course meal at an award winning restaurant (drinks not included).
Invitation to a tasting house with free Genever Cocktail.
Visit to a Diamond Factory with optional free valuation and cleaning of your rings.
Visit to a clog factory.
Services of our resident representatives.
Our exclusive ‘Passport to Amsterdam’ including a guide to the principal places of interest, general information on getting around Amsterdam, emergency telephone numbers, museum guide, recommended restaurants and bars and language guide.
Comprehensive ticket wallet including luggage labels, exclusive full colour street map of Amsterdam and detailed travel itinerary.
All That Jazz
Holland is a mecca for Jazz enthusiasts.
Outside the USA it is one of the most renowned centres for playing and hearing Jazz in all its many forms.
The Dutch love music and anything that swings is sure to meet with their approval.
The Pall Mall, Drum and Dixie Jazz Festivals, are just three of the very popular festivals which take place in Amsterdam during the year.
The North Sea Jazz Festival, held annually in July near The Hague, is one of the most comprehensive festivals in the World.
All Jazz styles are represented, from ‘Trad’, Swing and easy to Modern and Fusion Jazz, Blues and Soul.
At Amsterdam Travel Service, we know how difficult it can be to discover who is playing where and when and how tricky it can be to find out how to buy those all important tickets.
At the time of publishing our brochure, most of the dates and artists are still not arranged and to help you find your way through the information maze, we have set up our own Jazz Club ‘All That Jazz’,(membership is free).
Throughout the year members will receive regular up-dates on all the coming Jazz events, in and around the Dutch capital with special holidays being offered to a selection of the major festivals.
To join the club simply send your name and address to us at the address below.
KEEP JAMMING!
Floriade 1992
‘The Greatest Flower Show on Earth’ 10th April to 11th October.
A spectacular World Horticultural Exhibition, festivally named Floriade, is held every ten years in the Netherlands attracting thousands of visitors from all over the world.
Situated next to the delightful city of The Hague, Floriade covers a vast 230 acres of which 168 acres are landscaped exhibition areas providing a breathtaking explosion of colour.
The exhibition park has taken a staggering six years to construct and ‘grow’ using over ½ million flowers, trees and pot plants.
The end result is a sight not to be missed.
With countries from every corner of the globe contributing, the whole exhibition will be split into seven distinct themes.
These are Consumer, Environment, Recreation, Transport, World, Production and Future.
Every theme complements the next as you enter into another part of this magnificent display of living colour.
Floriade also has a lot more to offer than the splendid horticultural displays; there will be varying music festivals including a jazz festival, fashion shows and even an amphitheatre where an assortment of shows will be staged by countries form around the world.
A Childrens Paradise Recreation Park will provide hours of fun and an unforgettable experience for children of all ages.
With such a wide range of displays from around the world in one massive exhibition there is something for everyone of all ages and interests.
In the year of European Unity, Floriade really will be the horticultural event of the decade.
FLORIADE 1992 CALENDAR
As so many things will be happening throughout Floriade it is impossible to give you more than a taste of the events to come.
The calendar below shows the 13 dazzling international exhibitions being held in the 12,000 square metre exhibition hall.
The rest of the 230 acre site will continue to feature a wide variety of displays.
There will also be a wide range of other events from concerts to fashion shows and flower arranging competitions.
The full calendar will be confirmed in November 1991, please do not hesitate to contact us on 0920 463900 for further information.
All items are subject to change without notice.
Choosing Your Hotel
All holidays include accommodation in The Hague area, just a 15 minute coach journey from Floriade and a superb centre close to the main Bulbfield areas.
This delightful city has many different aspects; Royal Residence, Seat of Government, Fishing Port, Yacht Harbour and a charming seaside resort too; Scheveningen; where many of our hotels are situated.
All our hotels have been carefully selected for the excellent value they provide within their grade.
Featured below is a sample selection of the range of hotels available, to give you an overall impression of the high standards offered in The Hague area.
You also have the choice of bed and breakfast or half-board arrangements, taking your evening meal in your hotel or at a restaurant close by.
Hotel Seinduin HH1/2
Situated in a pleasant side street behind the seafront and near to the main boulevard of Scheveningen.
Basic, clean HH1 rooms and HH2 rooms with private facilities.
All rooms have a telephone, television and mini bar.
Hotel Van Zanen HH3
A delightful hotel situated in a quiet residential area only 7 minutes walk from the beach and with good tram connections to the main tourist sights of The Hague.
The hotel is run by the friendly Van Zanen family and all the comfortable rooms have private shower and w.c. telephone and television.
The breakfast room overlooks a peaceful garden and there is a cosy bar.
(No lift).
No single room supplement.
Esquire Hotel HH3
Peaceful location close to all principal attractions of The Hague and Scheveningen.
Stylish rooms with bath or shower & w.c., television & telephone.
Superbly decorated breakfast room, lounge & bar.
Europa Hotel H3X
This four star hotel is located 100 metres from Scheveningen beach & main promenade.
All bedrooms have balcony, full en suite facilities, telephone, radio, TV (with movies).
Other facilities include a bar, an excellent restaurant, swimming pool, fitness room, sauna, solarium & skittle alley.
Parkhotel H3X
This four star hotel is centrally located for all major attractions in The Hague.
Large bedrooms with private bathrooms, TV, radio & telephone.
Breakfast is taken in the Queens Room overlooking gardens of the Royal Palace.
Other facilities include lounge & late night bar for guests.
To make the choice of hotel easier we have devised our HH grading system.
Hotels within the same grade offer a similar standard of accommodation.
HH1 — Simple, clean accommodation in well managed budget grade 2 star hotels.
Wash basin in each room and a bathroom on every floor.
No lift.
HH2 — Family run 2 or 3 star hotels where all rooms have private shower or bath and w.c.
No lift.
HH3 — All hotels in this grade are good 3 star hotels mostly with a bar and lounge and some with lift.
Every bedroom has private bathroom, TV and telephone.
H3X — This is the most popular grade comprising of 4 star hotels, mostly with a restaurant, bar and lounge and all rooms have private facilities, TV and telephone.
HH4 — Highly recommended, comfortable 4 star hotels.
Offering a higher standard of facilities — many with swimming pool & fitness centres.
Bedrooms have private bathrooms, TV, telephone etc and are generally more spacious.
HH5 — Top of the range luxury, all the style and comfort that only the best hotels can provide.
Everything necessary for a fabulous holiday.
These hotels generally have their own pool and leisure facilities.
Carlton Beach Hotel H3X
Situated on Scheveningen Beach close to the famous Scheveningen Dunes.
All rooms have a balcony, full en suite facilities, mini bar, television (with movies), radio & hairdryers.
Hotel features include a comfortable lounge, a luxurious restaurant, a grill bar, a bar & lounge, swimming pool, weights rooms sauna & solarium.
Bel Air Hotel HH4
Conveniently located outside the city centre.
All rooms have private bathroom, TV (with movies), radio and phone.
Other facilities include a restaurant, bar and lounge area, indoor swimming pool, own shops and hairdresser.
Steigenberger Kurhaus Hotel HH5
A touch of luxury in this famous five star 19th century grand hotel with all modern amenities.
Located on Scheveningen Beach, all rooms are spacious & have private bathroom, TV, phone, mini bar, safe, and hairdryer.
Palatial public rooms include, two restaurants, café and bar, swimming pool complex, casino and sauna/bathroom.
Hotel Corona HH5
A superbly run elegant hotel situated in the heart of The Hague close to all the major attractions including the Parliament Building and a very exclusive shopping area.
The hotel has an attractive bar area, an à la carte restaurant currently holding a Michelin Star and a brasserie with patio area.
The quiet, comfortable rooms are beautifully decorated to an individual style and all have private bathroom, television & radio.
Highly recommended.
Springtime Bulbfields
26th March to 8th May.
Every year the Dutch Bulbfields burst into a rainbow of colours and spring suddenly comes alive in a blaze of breathtaking beauty.
It is a superb sight with fields of dazzling Tulips, Narcissi and Hyacinths extending as far as the eye can see in a variegated patchwork of brilliant regimented blocks.
Visit the famous Keukenhof Gardens and marvel at the thousands of flowers displayed with perfect artistry in the greenhouses and beautiful landscaped gardens spread across the 65 acre estate.
Perhaps do a little shopping yourself at the Frans Roozen Nurseries.
You can admire their fascinating information gallery, The Art of Growing Flowers, before ordering some bulbs to be delivered to your home in the autumn ready for planting.
These magical sights are not to be missed, so come and join us on an unforgettable spring holiday to the glorious Dutch Bulbfields.
TURN TO PAGES 18 & 19 FOR HOLIDAY DETAILS AND PRICES 
Your Holiday Choice
4 day (3 night)weekends departing every Friday 27 Mar to 9 Oct 1992. 5 day (4 night)midweek holidays departing every Monday 30 Mar to 5 Oct 1992.
HOLIDAYS BY AIR
First Day (Friday for 3 nights, Monday for 4 nights)
Depart from your chosen airport on morning scheduled flight (see price panel for timings) to Amsterdam Schiphol Airport.
Our representative will meet you and assist with your 30 minute transfer to the Hague by coach or rail.
Upon arrival in The Hague, make yourself at home in your hotel with time to explore this famous city.
BY COACH Fully Escorted from London
First Day (Friday for 3 nights, Monday for 4 nights
Meet our tour guide at 9 a.m. at London's Kings Cross and board our modern touring coach.
Your journey is via Dover to Calais on P&O European Ferries (with time for lunch on board, not included in holiday cost) and the leisurely drive will take you through France and Belgium before arriving in the evening at your hotel in The Hague.
The coach will take you to your hotel giving you time to settle in and then maybe take a stroll, enjoying the atmosphere of this Royal City.
Excursion and Visits — Included in all holidays
27th March to 9th April:Includes full day escorted visit to the Bulbfields plus a full day visit to Amsterdam.
10th April to 8th May:Includes full day escorted visit to the Bulbfields plus a full day visit to Floriade.
9th May to 11th October:Includes full day visit to Floriade plus a full day visit to Amsterdam.
Full day escorted visit to the Bulbfields (entrance included):
A full day excursion by coach to the spectacular bulbfields; ablaze with the glorious colours of spring as they stretch as far as the eye can see.
First stop is a visit to the beautiful Frans Roozen nurseries where you can admire the vast show gardens and learn about the art of growing flower bulbs from their fascinating information gallery.
If you are inspired to emulate the famous displays in your own garden you can even order bulbs to be sent to your home in the autumn ready for planting.
After a stop for lunch (not included) your coach will take you to the famous Keukenhof Flower Gardens where you can spend the afternoon at leisure wandering around the 65 acre estate and marvel at the millions of flowers displayed with perfect artistry in the greenhouses and beautiful landscaped gardens.
Full day visit to Amsterdam:
Depart by rail from The Hague station for the 45 minute journey to Amsterdam Central Station (included on your holiday).
The best way to see the City is from the canals and we have included a ‘Canal Bus’ Pass, valid for the whole day around the famous canals; this pass allows you to get off and on at a selection of stops for you to explore the city.
Visit the Rijksmuseum, the Van Gogh Museum or Anne Frank's House, where the atmosphere can still be felt as vividly described in her World War II diaries.
Wander around the bustling streets and markets or try the yellow trams which are cheap and easy to use and allow time for a leisurely drink at a pavement café or cosy brown bar.
Return to The Hague early evening or stay in Amsterdam for dinner.
Full day visit to Floriade (entrance included):
A day at the greatest flower show on earth, starts with a short journey by rail from The Hague to Zoetermeer (included on your holiday).
The exhibition is spread over 300 acres and you can choose from a vast array of different features to spend your tim.
Not to be missed is the spectacular flower carpet 1200m x 60m made up of millions of bulbs which will be replaced twice during the exhibition by late spring and summer flowers.
As this is a world showcase, over 60 countries are exhibiting including China, Japan and American with the British garden showing four themes — summer garden, pool garden, kitchen garden and a magnificent rose garden.
Large greenhouse displays are also a feature both for vegetables and flowers.
If your passion is for trees and shrubs then you won't be disappointed, over 4,500 trees (including many 40 years old) and 70,000 shrubs have been planted.
Transportation available on the site includes a mono rail and antique trams.
For an overall impression of the site a visit is recommended to the top of the observation tower.
Trade visitors will be able to visit the Trade Centre, where the emphasis is very much on the commercial world, including the latest technology of the horticultural world.
Return to The Hague is at you leisure; the exhibition and restaurants close at 8 p.m.
For the remainder of your stay in The Hague
The Hague offers many historic places — the Parliament buildings, the 13th Century Knights Hall and the Peach Palace.
The Mauritshuis Museum houses many famous Dutch and Flemish paintings including Rubens and Vermeer, the Panorama Mesdag features the largest panoramic painting in the world of Scheveningen as it was in 1880.
Scheveningen offers a complete contrast to the centre of The Hague, with its sandy beaches, wide promenade and boulevard where you will discover restaurants, bars, small terraces and boutiques to welcome you day and night.
Full escorted excursions are also available to Amsterdam and Volendam or The Hague, Delft and Madurodam as shown in our excursion panel.
Last Day
Time for last minute shopping and a last look at the sights, then it's time to bid The Hague farewell and transfer to Amsterdam Schiphol Airport for your afternoon or evening return flights to your chosen airport and home.
N.B. Main departure dates are as described (Friday for 3 nights and Monday for 4 nights).
Independent travel by air is possible with any day travel at the same price.
Last Day
Before you know, it is your final day and time for buying those last presents or a final walk along the promenade before boarding the coach for the journey home.
Duty Free shopping is available on the crossing to Dover before you arrive back at Kings Cross early evening.
N.B. Our fully escorted coach holidays are only available departing Monday or Friday as described.
Independent travel on other days by rail and ship (see price panel).
THE PRICE INCLUDES
Fully escorted coach travel from London Kings Cross to your hotel in The Hague (cross channel P&O Ferries — Dover-Calais) and return or Travel by air from your chosen local airport direct to Amsterdam Schiphol airport with onward travel (by rail or coach) to The Hague.
Hotel accommodation as described on room and breakfast or half board (breakfast and evening dinners) for three or four nights as booked.
Two full day excursions to the Bulbfields, The Floriade and/or a full day visit to Amsterdam as described in the itinerary; according to date.
Full detailed itinerary, colour maps, information on the Bulbfields, Nurseries, Floriade exhibitions, the city of The Hague and its neighbouring resort; Scheveningen.
N.B. Whilst our itineraries are presented for our main departures on Mondays and Fridays, travel by air, rail or car may be on any day of the week.
EXCURSIONS
SPRINGTIME BULBFIELDS & KEUKENHOF GARDENS
Included in holiday price:
Travelling by coach you will pass through the flower carpet fields to the Franz Roozen Nurseries where you will discover the art of growing flowers and perhaps order your own bulbs which will be delivered to you for planting in the autumn.
You will then travel on to the world famous Keukenhof Gardens, where 65 acres have been landscaped to present a picture of unforgettable beauty.
Entrance included.
FLORIADE
Included in holiday price:
Spend a full day at the ‘Greatest Flower Show on Earth’.
See the fabulous displays and cultural shows that will be taking place throughout this ten yearly world spectacular, rail travel from The Hague and entrance are included.
Additional one day entrance ticket & rail from The Hague £8.
AMSTERDAM PLUS VOLENDAM — FULL DAY
No trip to Holland is complete without a trip to the historical capital Amsterdam.
Included in your morning trip to Amsterdam will be a Canal Cruise; the very best way to soak up the atmosphere of this enchanting city.
In the afternoon travel on to Volendam, an old and picturesque village on the shore of the former Zuiderzee, where traditional Dutch costumes are still worn by many of the inhabitants.
THE HAGUE, DELFT AND MADURODAM — FULL DAY
Start the day with a city tour of The Hague, your holiday base.
See the stunning Peace Palace, Houses of Parliament and other  notable sites.
Then travel on to Delft where you will see how the famous ‘Delft Blue’ pottery is made and finally visit the miniature village of Madurodam.
Day Trips to Floriade
‘The Greatest Flower Show on Earth’
OUTSTANDING VALUE
Departures are every Saturday from London Heathrow 11 April to 10 October.
Route Code FDT — Tour Price: £109
Travelling on the stylish British Midland Diamond Service approximately 7.00 a.m. to Amsterdam, why not get the day off to a sparkling start and order Champagne from their complimentary bar.
Upon arrival at Amsterdam Schiphol Airport you will be met by our representative who will escort you aboard our luxury coach for a 30 minute drive to Floriade.
Once there, you will be given a full day to see this incredible display of vibrant colour.
Perhaps visit some of the pavilions showing specialised exhibitions of exotic flowers, trees and plants — a truly breathtaking sight.
Wander around the flora carpeted landscaped gardens and take a leisurely lunch in one of the many restaurants with choices to suit everyone's taste.
Why not visit the Amphitheatre and watch one of the exciting International Shows or perhaps you will find something else to do — there is so much going on from Fashion Shows to Jazz Festivals.
However, all too soon it will be time to leave for your homeward journey.
Your coach will take you back to Schiphol Airport in time to visit one of the  world's greatest duty-free centres before boarding 8.30 p.m. flight back to Heathrow.
On board, the British Midland Diamond Service will include a light meal and a complimentary bar.
So why not have another glass of champagne to put the seal on what will undoubtedly be a truly memorable and colourful day that will live forever!
PRICE INCLUDES:
Return travel by scheduled British Midland Diamond Service from London Heathrow to Amsterdam Schiphol Airport.
Escorted Transfers to Floriade and return by modern coach.
Entrance to Floriade.
Meals — Breakfast on your outward flight and a light dinner on your return flight served with hot beverages and duty-free bar, including champagne.
Ticket wallet containing useful information on Floriade.
Cycling Holidays
In the garden of Amsterdam
Holland is renowned as the cyclist-friendly country with specially designed cycle lanes and paths, beautiful flat countryside and mild climate which makes it no surprise that there are almost as many bicycles in Holland as there are people.
You don't have to be regular cyclist to enjoy a cycling holiday in Holland as the safe, segregated cycle lanes have special traffic lights and signposts for cyclists making it a relaxing and enjoyable pastime for people of all ages; families, couples, or groups of friends.
The Amsterdam Travel Service Cycling Holiday allows you to explore at your own pace the colourful landscape in what is arguably the most beautiful area of the Netherlands —‘t Gooi en Vechtstreek or ‘The Garden of Amsterdam’.
The region lies to the south east of the capital Amsterdam, offering infinite variety with  its lakes, heathlands, rivers, dunes, picturesque windmills, historic towns and pretty villages: the perfect combination for a relaxing and enjoyable holiday.
ITINERARY
Day One:Travel from London Liverpool Street on the 7.30 p.m. boat train to Harwich.
During the overnight crossing to the Hook of Holland you can enjoy the superb on-board facilities.
Cabins available at a supplement (see price panel).
Day Two:Arrival at Hook of Holland at 7 a.m. for an onward rail journey to Hilversum (via Amsterdam) where the arrival at your hotel is approximately 10.30 a.m. collect your bicycle and take a tour of the town to get acquainted with the cycle and the special cyclist paths.
Later choose one of our recommended cycle routes and visit the Castle of Muiden or the village of Bussum (a leisurely 4 hour and 2 hour round trip respectively).
After dinner, take a stroll around Hilversum and visit a bar to sample the famous Dutch Genever.
Day Three:After a hearty Dutch breakfast study the variety of cycle tours available in the Amsterdam Travel Service recommended cycle routes.
Enjoy the fresh green landscape as you leave Hilversum on a leisurely ride through the heathlands and dunes.
A visit to the fortified town of Naarden (2 hour round trip) is a must with it's unique 17th century fort and historic buildings.
Our route descriptions also recommend a variety of restaurants or bars to visit en route for light refreshment.
Day Four:This morning you may wish to take a break from cycling and take a wander around the town of Hilversum.
Visit the modern shopping centre or the broadcasting centre from where most Dutch television programmes originate.
This afternoon you will be eager to get back into the saddle and perhaps visit the beautiful lake district around the picturesque village of Oud-Loosdrecht (a gentle 1–½ hour round trip).
This evening after dinner you might wish to take the train (20 minutes) in to Amsterdam for an exhilarating evening in what is undoubtedly Europe's most surprising city.
Day Five:Have an early breakfast then all too soon it will be time to catch the train back to the Hook of Holland for the crossing back to Harwich and onward rail journey to London, where your arrival time will be approximately 9 p.m.
ACCOMMODATION
Accommodation is in the town of Hilversum, the principal town of t'Gooi which is an ideal base for your cycling holiday.
You can choose between the 2 or 4 star accommodation and stay on either a bed and breakfast or half board basis.
HOTEL DE WAAG (CH1/CH2)
This charming hotel, run by Mr. Lankreijer, is a delightful blend of the old and the new.
A cosy old Dutch café with a welcoming street terrace is combined with rooms furnished in a comfortable bright and modern style.
All bedrooms have colour television and telephone and CH1 rooms are with washbasin only, CH2 rooms with private facilities.
The hotel is centrally situated in the town near to the restaurants and entertainment of Hilversum and is well recommended for its grade.
Single Room Supplement: CH1 — £18, CH2 — £27.
HOTEL LAPERSHOEK (CH3)
The original building of the Hotel Lapershoek dates back to the early 20th century when it was a grand stately home, and it has since been thoughtfully converted in to a very comfortable four star hotel.
Ideally located just outside the centre of town, the Lapershoek is close to the shopping centre and a good base for cycle tours.
The bedrooms are very well appointed with private bathrooms, television, in house videos, radio, minibar and hairdryer.
Public facilities within the hotel include a delightful restaurant, the stylish ‘Lapers’ bar and a specious breakfast room with adjoining patio.
Single Room Supplement: £35.
Half Board Supplement (includes evening meal): £23 per person per night.
Full Board Supplement (includes evening meal and picnic lunch): £33 per person per night.
CYCLE HIRE AND ROUTES
Our cycle holidays all include cycle hire for the duration of your holiday.
The bikes are of a high standard touring bike — some without gears, some with three hub gears, and usually backpedal brakes.
 Children's bikes are also available, but please specify age of child at time of booking as these are subject to availability.
Due to the restrictions imposed by the airlines and the railways, we regret that it is not possible for passengers to take their own bikes.
Included also in all cycle holidays is a detailed area map showing the cycle routes of the region and our exclusive guidebook to cycling in Holland with useful tips to help you get the most of your stay.
The guidebook features a number of recommended cycle routes in the Garden of Amsterdam, each one tried and tested and giving the approximate distance and time you should allow to cover the journey at a leisurely pace.
PRICE INCLUDES
Travel to Holland by your chosen route with direct rail transfer to Hilversum and return.
Three nights accommodation in the hotel grade of your choice in Hilversum with full Dutch Breakfast (see Hotel Lapershoek for half and full board supplements).
Full colour map showing the cycle routes in the Garden of Amsterdam Region.
Bicycle hire for the duration of your stay with pedal brakes & small luggage basket/rack.
The exclusive Amsterdam Travel Service Cycle Route booklet specially compiled with a variety of routes of differing duration covering the  region's most interesting and beautiful places.
Essential information for cyclists in Holland.
Ticket wallet containing your personal itinerary, luggage labels and travel information.
The unique ‘Passport to Amsterdam’ booklet giving a host of useful information for travellers to Holland and specifically for the visitors to the Dutch Capital.
Self Drive Holidays
Holland is a small country with an excellent motorway system, in fact most areas of interest are within two hours journey from Amsterdam.
The freedom of your own car enables your to visit at your own pace, any of the lovely towns and villages that Holland is famous for.
At the same time by staying in one of our centres you have the benefit of all the attractions of a city based holiday.
Start your holiday with a relaxing short cruise on the large and comfortable ships with choice of the following routes Harwich-Hook of Holland with Sealing Stena Line, Hill-Rotterdam with North Sea Ferries or Sheerness-Vlissengen with Olau Line.
The ships on all these routes are modern and well equipped with extensive facilities including cinemas, nightclubs, restaurants, duty free shops, bars, children's playrooms and even casinos.
Travelling both ways on the overnight services, with comfortable reclining seat or cabin accommodation, not only extends your holiday by two nights it also ensures that you arrive rested and refreshed.
If you would prefer a shorter sea crossing from Dover to Calais, Boulogne, Ostend or Felixstowe to Zeebrugge and enjoy a leisurely journey by road to Holland.
YOUR HOTEL
To help you choose, the hotels with their own parking facilities are:AMSTERDAM Holiday Inn, Ramada Renaissance, Park Hotel and The Arthur Frommer (see pages 12–14).
DELFT — The Leeuwenbrug and the Hotel De Ark (see page 23).
THE HAGUE — Bel Air, Corona, Parkhotel, Europa and Carlton Beach (see page 23).
Please note that the individual hotels may make a charge for car parking.
You can of course stay in one of our other hotels featured in this brochure but parking will have to be either on the street or in one of the municipal car parks.
PRICE INCLUDES
Your ferry tickets for travel from your chosen departure port — Sheerness, Harwich, Hill, Dover or Ramsgate and return.
North Sea Ferries include 5 course dinner and reclining seat in all prices.
Hotel accommodation with Dutch breakfast at your selected grade of hotel in Amsterdam, The Hague or Delft: all service charges included.
General information pack on driving abroad.
Information booklet on your chosen resort, including a guide to the principal places of interest.
Ticket wallet containing your itinerary, luggage labels, travel information etc.
Full colour map of Holland to help you plan your route and find your way around the country.
The Other Holland
Whilst Amsterdam is undoubtedly the most renowned short break destination, the Hague and Delft offer a delightful short break alternative.
Maybe you have visited Amsterdam and want to venture further afield, or perhaps you prefer to stay outside the city and just visit Amsterdam for a day excursion.
Whatever you choose, remember that the Netherlands is a small country where everywhere is easily accessible by the smooth and efficient rail transport system: large cities, smaller towns and villages, nature reserves, beaches, artistic and historical centres — Holland has it all!
Delft
De Zaanse Schans
PRICE INCLUDES:
Your travel tickets from your chosen airport to Amsterdam and return (or by rail or self-drive).
Rail tickets from Amsterdam, Schiphol Airport to The Hague or Delft (not self-drive holidays).
Hotel accommodation with Dutch breakfast at your selected grade of hotel, all service charges included.
Our exclusive Travel Pack including your detailed itinerary, travel information, ‘Passport to Amsterdam’ guide with useful information for your stay in The Netherlands.
Street map of The Hague or Delft.
An information pack including recommended restaurants and places of interest to you.
HOW TO BOOK
These Other Holland holidays are all based on flights from the U.K. to Amsterdam, Schiphol airport, or by rail throughout.
The prices are the same as a holiday in Amsterdam.
Simply choose your departure airport, decide on the duration of your holiday and grade of accommodation and find the price on pages 8 and 9.
To find the price, The Hague and Delft hotel grades are equal to Amsterdam Grade:
You can spend part of your holiday in Amsterdam and part in the Other Holland; simply tell us the number of nights you would like to stay in each place and we will make all the arrangements.
The Hague — Scheveningen
The Hague is the seat of the Dutch Government and the official residence of the Dutch monarchy.
A delightful city for a short break, The Hague offers a wide variety to suit every visitor; an abundance of exclusive shopping streets, a diversity of palaces and stately buildings, open parklands and an extensive range of restaurants and two seaside resorts Scheveningen and Kijkduin.
The city also has may famous museums comprising a wide range of art collections: the Mauritshuis with its remarkable range of Dutch Masters including Rembrandt, Vermeer and Jan Steen or the Panorama Mesdag offering a stunning 360 degree artists view of sand, sea and sun.
The seaside resort of Scheveningen is easily accessible (just a 10 minute tram ride) with its wide sandy beaches, lively entertainment, fishing port and yacht harbour.
In brief…a charming and historic Royal city.
Rail journey time from Schiphol to The Hague: approximately 30 minutes.
HOTEL SEINDUIN (SH1/SH2)
The Hotel Seinduin is positioned in a pleasant side street directly behind the seafront and near to the main boulevard of Scheveningen.
This intimate hotel is run by the hard working Mr. Folten who is always at hand to offer advice and information on how to get the most out of your short visit.
For full hotel details see pages 16/17.
Single room supplement: £7 per person per night.
ESQUIRE HOTEL (SH3)
This charming 3 star hotel is located in a peaceful street in the Staten Quarter of The Hague, close to all the principal attractions of The Hague and Scheveningen.
Run by the industrious Mr. Bloomkolk the Esquire Hotel assures every individual guest of personal attention and hospitality throughout their stay.
(No lift).
For full hotel details see pages 16/17.
HOTEL VAN ZANEN (SH3)
Delightful family-run hotel in a quiet residential area, 7 minutes walk from the beach and with good tram connections to the main tourist sights.
Comfortable rooms with shower, w.c., telephone and television.
Breakfast room overlooking the garden.
Other facilities include a cosy bar for your use.
(No lift).
For full hotel details see pages 16/17.
No single room supplement.
PARKHOTEL (S3X)
A friendly and comfortable four star hotel in an attractive street next to the Queen's Palace; breakfast is served in the hotel's stylish Queen's Garden Room which overlooks the gardens of the Royal Palace.
The hotel is very centrally located for all the major attractions of The Hague with many museums, theatres, shops, restaurants and bars nearby and The Hague's seaside resort of Scheveningen is just 10 minutes away.
For full hotel details see pages 16/17.
Single room supplement: £11 per person per night.
EUROPA HOTEL (S3X)
This very well appointed four star hotel is ideally located in Scheveningen, just 100 metres from the long sandy beaches and lively promenade with it's variety of bars, boutiques and terraces.
For full hotel details see pages 16/17.
Single room supplement: £16 per person per night.
CARLTON BEACH HOTEL (S3X)
As  its name would suggest, the Carlton Beach Hotel is situated near the sea and sandy beaches, at the northern end of the main boulevard and close to the famous Scheveningen dunes.
The Hague city centre is only 10 minutes away and close to the hotel is the bustling promenade and boulevard with its infinite entertainment and shopping possibilities.
For full hotel details see pages 16/17.
Single room supplement: £28 per person per night.
BEL AIR HOTEL (SH4)
The Bel Air Hotel is conveniently located just outside the city centre close to all the major attractions of The Hague and just 2 km away from the famous beaches of Scheveningen.
This large and modern 4 star hotel offers excellent facilities.
For full hotel details see pages 16/17.
Single room supplement: £27 per person per night.
HOTEL CORONA (SH5)
A delightful hotel situated in the heart of The Hague close to all the major attractions including the Parliament Building and a very exclusive shopping area.
Highly recommended.
For full hotel details see pages 16/17.
Single room supplement: £34 per person per night.
STEIGENBERGER KURHAUS HOTEL (SH5)
The five star Kurhaus Hotel has the splendour and elegance of a 19th century grand hotel, coupled with the amenities which modern guests expect and typically friendly Dutch hospitality.
The hotel is a  stone's throw from the beautiful sandy beach of Scheveningen with sea views from many of the public rooms.
For full hotel details see pages 16/17.
Single room supplement: £27 per person per night.
Keukenhof Gardens
Delft
The picturesque town of Delft is often said, by the Dutch, to be ‘the prettiest place in Holland’ and it is easy to see why; with a network of canals criss-crossed by charming bridges, in and around the 17th century town centre with gabled buildings lining narrow streets and passages.
Although Delft is most famous for the beautiful blue and white, hand-painted ceramics, which are still made by several studios and workshops which are open to visitors, there are many other things to see and enjoy in the town.
Delft is proud of  its association with the Dutch master painter Jan Vermeer and the old town centre has changed little since the 17th century with drawbridges, tree-lined canals, large churches and narrow medieval streets and the view of this quaint red-roofed town from the 100 metre high steeple of the 14th century Nieuw Kerk is worth the climb.
Delft also has several fascinating museums and many old and attractive buildings and in the summer months you can see the sights without walking, simply catch the horse drawn tram or take a cruise in the canals.
With so many intriguing narrow streets and interesting local markets to explore Delft makes the ideal destination for a quiet relaxing weekend and Amsterdam is only an hour away for a change of pace.
Rail transfer time from Schiphol to Delft: 40 minutes.
HOTEL DE KOK (DH2)
Overlooking one of Delft's many canals, this delightful 2 star family fun hotel has recently been completely refurbished by the owners, Mr. and Mrs. Camijn, giving its rooms a very high standard of comfort and facilities for its grade.
Conveniently situated close to the railway station and a 5 minute walk from the main square.
All rooms are tastefully decorated and are equipped with private facilities, television, mini-bar, telephone and hairdryer.
There is a pleasant breakfast room and bar/lounge.
Two floors (no lift).
Single room supplement: £5 per person per night.
HOTEL LEEUWENBRUG (DH3)
A very warm and friendly 3 star hotel located on one of Delft's historic canals, The Koornmarkt, the hotel is only 3 minutes walk from the main square and 5 minutes from the railway station.
Originally built as a merchant's house the Leeuwenbrug is very well appointed throughout from the cosy breakfast room, bar and lounge to the exquisitely decorated bedrooms all with private bathroom, television, telephone and hairdryer.
Mr. Wuben and his staff pride themselves on the friendly service offered to all guests, they are sure to give you a real Dutch welcome and are happy to help with a wealth of information to help you really enjoy your visit.
Single room supplement: £13 per person per night.
HOTEL ARK (DH4)
Situated on the same canal as the Hotel Leeuwenbrug.
This hotel offers all the comforts of a traditional 4 star hotel with spacious lounge/reception, a character bar ‘De Bark’ and its own superbly appointed restaurant decorated in customary Dutch style, full of atmosphere; the perfect setting for a hearty Dutch breakfast.
All bedrooms have private facilities, television, telephone and hairdryer.
Mr. Richardus, the manager, and all the staff will ensure that your stay at the Hotel Ark will be an enjoyable and memorable one.
Single room supplement: £22 per person per night.
*** Special Invitation — Mr. Richardus would like to offer all Amsterdam Travel Service guests a welcome drink at the bar.
Holiday Insurance
arranged at Lloyd's of London
As one of Britain's leading specialist holiday companies, we have arranged with Lloyd's Underwriters for a comprehensive travel insurance policy.
Your are strongly advised to take advantage of this offer for your benefit and security.
A summary of the limits of cover under the special scheme arranged for the holidays in this brochure is shown below.
Your insurance premium is payable when you make your holiday booking.
The Insurance Synopsis will be sent with your Confirmation and this gives full details of cover and exclusions.
Please read this carefully and make sure you are adequately covered, as no cancellation of insurance can be made later than 10 days after receipt of the synopsis.
PRE-EXISTING HEALTH CONDITIONS AND PREGNANCY — the only exclusions are in respect of any claim where at the time of taking out this Insurance (i.e. making your booking)the person whose condition gives rise to the claim (whether the Insured, the travelling companion or other person not travelling) is either:—
(a)
an in-patient (or awaiting admission or booked to be admitted) in a hospital or nursing home; or
(b)
pregnant and expected to give birth before, or within 2 months following, the last day of the booked holiday.
Children aged under 2 years at the time of departure are covered free of charge, provided all other persons on the Booking Form are insured under this scheme.
CEGA EMERGENCY 24 HOUR SERVICE This Insurance includes the CEGA 24-hour HELP line.
The insurance synopsis gives details of the emergency telephone numbers.
1.
Personal Accident Benefit…£15,000 
In the event of death, loss of limbs or eyes, or permanent total disability from following usual occupation, resulting from an accident  occurring during the holiday.
Death benefit for a person aged under 16 is limited to £2,5000.
2.
Medical and Repatriation…
Up to £1,000,000 
Medical expenses and repatriation costs to the UK (where medically certified as necessary).
Please note that treatment costs in the UK are not included as the are covered under the National Health Service.
3.
Hospital Confinement Benefit…
Up to £400 
Additional to the Medical Expenses a benefit of £20 for each complete 24 hour period of hospitalisation abroad, as a direct result of an illness or injury covered under Section 2 above.
4.
Cancellation…
Up to total Invoices charges 
Loss of deposit or cancellation charges up to the total (excluding the insurance premiums) holiday invoice cost due to Amsterdam Travel Service as a result of cancellation due to illness or injury, etc as specified in the insurance synopsis.
5.
Curtailment…
Up to Invoice cost 
Curtailment of the holiday by your premature return to the UK as a result of a claim under section 1, 2 or the illness or injury of a covered relative.
The costs of the return travel together with a proportionate amount of the total holiday cost for each complete day lost.
6.
Missed Departure…
Up to £300 
Additional accommodation and travel expenses necessarily incurred following late arrival at the UK departure point due to the failure of Public Transport services (or due to an accident or breakdown involving the motor vehicle in which the insured is travelling).
7.
Delayed Travel…
Up to £60 Benefit 
If your travel from the UK for your outward journey or from Holland for the return journey is delayed for over 12 hours (due to strike/industrial action, weather conditions or mechanical breakdown) from the scheduled time, then a benefit of £20 for the first 12 hours and £10 for each subsequent 12 hours up to a maximum of £60.
Alternatively, for the outward journey only, cancellation coverage up to the holiday invoice cost.
8.
Baggage…
Up to £1,000 
Owned, not hired, clothing and personal effects.
Maximum any one article, pair or set is £200.
The maximum for valuables (watches, jewellery, cameras and photographic equipment etc.) is £250 in total.
9.
Delayed Baggage…
Up to £75 
If your baggage arrives at your holiday destination more than 12 hours late, up to £75 to cover the purchase of essential items.
Any payments will be deducted from any claim under section 8 if the goods are totally lost.
10.
Personal Money…
Up to £300 
Loss of personal money, travel tickets, cheques etc.
11.
Loss of Passport…
Up to 100 
Travel and accommodation costs necessarily incurred abroad in obtaining temporary travel documents to replace lost or stolen passport.
12.
Personal Liability…
Up to £500,000 
To cover your legal liability for accidental injury to third parties or accidental damage to their property.
EXCESSES
All sections are subject to an excess of £15 per person per section, except for Sections 1, 3, 9 and 12 which do not have an excess, and Section 4 in respect of Loss of Deposit only claims where the excess is only £5 per person.
CONDITIONS & EXCLUSIONS
The Conditions and Exclusions together with all the other full details are contained in the copy of the Insurance Cover which will be sent with the Confirmation of Booking, and is also available on request.
If yours is a party booking you should ask your party leader for a copy.
The famous Delft Pottery
SUPERCOVER
(Additional insurance premium £9.00 per person).
Some people may feel that the levels of cover offered by our Standard Insurance could be improved, particularly the delay benefits, the limit for baggage and the sub-limit for valuables.
For £9.00 we are pleased to offer a top-up insurance comprising of the following additional cover.
NEW SECTION 13 — Airport/Seaport Delays
If you are kept waiting at any airport, hoverport or seaport because the departure of your scheduled aircraft, hovercraft or ship, is delayed from the time specified in your Amsterdam Travel Confirmation of Booking invoice, then you can claim benefit in accordance with the following scale.
Delay of: Under 6 hours — nil; 6 to 8 hours — £50; 8 to 10 hours — £75; 10 to 12 hours — £100.
This coverage is completely additional to any benefits payable under Section 7.
However, it is only payable in respect of the time that you are actually waiting at the airport, hoverport or seaport and ceases as soon as you board any alternative conveyance, including train or coach.
Increases of limits of coverage to the Standard Insurance:
Section 1 — Personal Accident
Capital Sums Benefit from £15,000 to £30,000 per person.
(Death benefit for persons under 16 restricted to £5,000).
Section 8 — Baggage
Overall limit increased from £1,000 to £2,500.
Section 10 — Personal Money
Overall limit increased from £300 to £750.
Amsterdam Booking Form 1992
GENERAL INFORMATION
PASSPORTS:
These are required for Holland.
If you do not already hold a valid passport, application forms may be obtained from the Post Office.
A ‘British Visitors Passport’, valid for one year only, can also be obtained in person at your local Post Office.
Visas are not required for Holland by holders of EEC passports.
Holders of non EEC passports should check re any visa necessary.
These must be obtained personally and we cannot accept responsibility for them.
Please note: Hoverspeed coach and some self-drive routes travel via France.
Non EEC passport holders must also check on any French Visa requirements on these routes.
TIMINGS:
All timings quoted are approximate and are subject to confirmation at the time of booking.
When advertised departure times are fully booked, alternative times will be confirmed.
CHEQUES:
We regret that for practical reasons we cannot accept cheques less than 7 days prior to date of departure.
Instant payment can be made by credit card at any time.
INSURANCE:
You are strongly advised to take our special holiday insurance.
The premium should be included with your deposit and the policy will be issued on receipt.
Please see page 23 for details.
LUGGAGE ALLOWANCE:
One suitcase per person and one small bag as hand luggage.
SPECIAL REQUESTS:
Amsterdam Travel Service will make every effort to pass on particular requests concerning travel or accommodation arrangements, e.g. adjoining rooms, low floors etc.
However, as we do not have direct control over the day-to-day operation of hotels etc., we cannot guarantee absolutely that special requests can be complied with.
LATE BOOKINGS:
Bookings are taken at any time even up to the day of departure.
For bookings received less than 7 days prior to departure Amsterdam Travel Service offers you a special ‘Priority Booking Service’.
We guarantee to make all your hotel and travel arrangements within 1 hour.
In the case of bookings made less than 6 weeks prior to departure the full amount is payable at the time of booking.
HEALTH REQUIREMENTS:
Please refer to the DHSS leaflet T2 for full details of health requirements for Holland.
These can be obtained from the Post Office, ABTA travel agents or from the DHSS.
BOOKING CONDITIONS
1.
Amsterdam Travel Service Ltd is part of a City Specialist Group that has been arranging holidays for over 36 years and as a Professional Tour Operator undertakes to act with thoroughly professional care in arranging your holiday.
2. (a)
In the unlikely event that we fail to provide you with the services as confirmed to you by us at the time of booking or they are not of a reasonable standard, then we accept responsibility whether caused by our employees, agents or suppliers, save that (i)we shall not accept responsibility or liability for death, bodily injury or illness caused to you or others named on your booking form, except as set out below and (ii)we limit our responsibility or liability in respect of carriage by air, sea or land to that provided for by the relevant international conventions in respect of such carriage.
Copies of these conventions may be made available for inspection at our officer or those of the carrier concerned.
(b)We accept responsibility for death, bodily injury or illness caused to your or others named on your booking form by the negligent act or omission of our employees, agents, suppliers or sub-contractors or of their employees or agent acting within the course or scope of their employment (other than that of air, sea and land carriers performing any domestic internal or international carriage whatsoever where we limit our liability to that provided for by the relevant international conventions in respect of such carriage).
3.
In the event that you or others named on your booking form suffer death, bodily injury or illness arising from an activity which does not form part of the services we have agreed to supply to your, then we shall through our Representatives or Agents offer you every reasonable assistance, including advice and guidance and may, depending upon particular circumstances and at our complete discretion, offer initial financial assistance up to a maximum of £5,000 per booking form.
Such financial assistance should only be necessary in the most exceptional circumstances.
It is no alternative to adequate insurance cover.
4.
Where there is a change or delay of confirmed travel arrangements of more than six hours or cancellation of travel arrangements or change of hotel — notified to you within six weeks of departure, we will pay compensation of £10 per person — notified to you within two weeks of departure or on day of travel or arrival at hotel, we will pay compensation of £20 per person.
You will be offered alternative travel routing or timings or alternative hotel and you have the option (a)to proceed with these revised arrangements or (b)cancel the holiday and receive a full refund if your holiday has not yet begun and in either event receive compensation as above.
5.
Force Majeure Exclusion.
If confirmed transport is cancelled, changed or delayed by more than six hours or hotel is changed or if we are unable to provide you with the services as confirmed to you by us at the time of booking due to war, threat of war, riot, civil strife, industrial dispute, terrorist activity, disaster, fire, flood (including fire or flood in hotels) or bad weather we cannot accept liability or responsibility and compensation is not payable but provided the holiday has not begun we will offer alternative travel routing or alternative travel date or alternative hotel and advise additional cost if any or you may elect to cancel and we will offer a full refund of monies paid.
6.
You undertake to pay a deposit of £30 per person (plus any insurance premium) on booking and the full balance six weeks before your holiday.
If you need to change any reservations we will charge you £10 per person; if you change less than six weeks before your holiday £15 per person; if less than four weeks £25 per person.
If you need to change your date of travel within six weeks of travel full cancellation charges apply.
If you have to cancel your holiday we will charge a minimum of £30 per person (plus insurance premium), if you cancel less than six weeks in advance — 30% of your holiday cost, less than four weeks — 45%, less than two weeks — 60%, less than three days — 100%.
Payment of the Insurance Premium will usually cover these charges.
Money paid to a Travel Agent is held by him on your behalf until your booking is fully confirmed when it is then held for Amsterdam Travel Service Limited.
7.
All brochure prices were calculated in June 1991 (at Dfl 3.22 = £1).
We unconditionally guarantee that there will be no surcharge to your price after you book.
We do however reserve the right to amend our prices at anytime before you book your holiday.
8.
In the event that you have a dispute with us which we cannot amicably resolve is you so wish the dispute may be referred to Arbitration under a special scheme which though devised by arrangement with ABTA is administered quite independently by the Chartered Institute of Arbitrators.
The scheme (details of which ABTA will supply on request) provides for a simple and inexpensive method of arbitration on documents alone with restricted liability on the customer in respect of costs.
The scheme does not apply to claims for an amount greater than £1,500 per person.
There is also a limit of £7,500 per booking form.
It does not apply to claims which are solely or mainly in respect of physical injury or illness or the consequences of such injury or illness.
9.
English law shall apply to any claim made against Amsterdam Travel Service Limited and all proceedings shall be within the exclusive domain of the English Courts.
SHORT BREAKS From other companies in our Group
For the brochure of your choice Telephone (24 hour) 0920 468233
FASTRAK ACCESS CODE: AMS from 1 January 1992