

2
ANGLO-FRENCH CIVILIZATION
2.1 The Legacy of the Angevin Empire
A few days before Christmas 1286, Edward I of England was in his duchy of Aquitaine.
On 20 December he sent six pieces of cloth of gold to the abbess and convent at Fontevrault, which he had recently visited.
These were to be placed upon the tombs of his ancestors who lay buried there — Henry II, Richard I, Eleanor of Aquitaine and Isabella of Angoulême (see plate 2.1).
In 1330 his grandson Edward III continued the practice of his forbears and was still giving alms to Fontevrault, the mausoleum of the Angevin dynasty.
Well before 1330 the Angevin Empire had ceased to be the dynamic and significant political force that it had been in the mid and late twelfth century.
Yet dynastic memory kept it alive as a concept which still exercised a certain influence over the behaviour of the Plantagenets.
In December 1291, Edward I confirmed and renewed all the grants of privilege bestowed by his Angevin ancestors on Fontevrault, and Henry III's heart was dispatched (albeit tardily) for burial there.
An undated letter from the abbess to Edward, probably written at this juncture, wished him prosperity in his affairs and reminded him of the convent's special relationship with the English crown.
By Edward I's reign (1272–1307) the continental possessions of his house had shrunk to a fraction of their former vast extent — by 1290 they consisted solely of the duchy of Aquitaine and comté of Ponthieu — but the notion that  the Plantagenets had a continental role to play remained firmly embedded in their minds and in those of their subjects on both sides of the Channel.
2.1 TOMB EFFIGIES OF HENRY II (D. 1189) AND ELEANOR OF AQUITAINE (D. 1204) AT THE ABBEY OF FONTEVRAULT.
THIS ANGEVIN FOUNDATION WAS PATRONIZED BY THE PLATAGENETS UNTIL THE REIGN OF EDWARD III.
Continental involvement of this kind immediately brought the Plantagenet king-dukes of Aquitaine into contact with the Capetian monarchy of France.
Dynastic sentiment, however strong, could not overcome the realities of thirteenth-century power-politics.
The chronicle of Plantagenet losses in the reigns of Philip Augustus (1180–1224), Louis VII (1224–6) and Louis IX (1226–70) could not be unwritten.
Henry III's heart might, literally, be in Anjou, but ‘by the end of his reign [he]was indisputably an English king and men were beginning to think of the Plantagenets as an English dynasty’.
Such may have been the common view, but it was not shared by the Plantagenets themselves.
A dynasty which had ruled a great network of continental territories, larger in geographical extent than those of the Capetian kings of France, could not easily forget that legacy, nor readily adjust to the changed political conditions of the later thirteenth century.
Their  ambitions and aspirations abroad — to adopt an Anglocentric point of view — are a major theme of this book, and the spectre of Henry II and his sons cannot be easily exorcized.
The implications of this legacy were manifold, leading not only to strains and tensions in the Plantagenets' relations with their English subjects but also to positive benefits for the kingdom of England.
At its fullest extent, the Angevin Empire had comprised most of western France and its Atlantic seaboard.
Normandy, Maine, Touraine, a sympath-etic Brittany, Anjou, Poitou, Limousin, Saintonge, Périgord, Quercy, Gascony and the Agenais formed, Renouard argued, ‘un empire en latitude, en aucun point il ne mord profondément sur le continent’.
This view tends to underrate the eastward extension of plantagenet territories, which pen-etrated quite deeply into Auvergne and the Central Massif at certain points.
But its centres of gravity lay firmly in western France — at Rouen, Tours, Poitiers, Saintes, Limoges, Bordeaux and Bayonne.
None of these cities stood in a direct relationship to the Capetians, and the people of the southern lands were sharply differentiated from those of northern France by language, law and custom.
Yet these divergences did not necessarily mean that the Plantagenet dominions were an incoherent and ‘overextended’ political, economic, geographical and cultural agglomeration.
A measure of unity was provided by routes of communication, on land and sea.
The sea-ports of western France — Rouen, Nantes, La Rochelle, Bordeaux, Bayonne — were linked in common dependence upon England and the Iberian peninsula.
Natural antagonisms and rivalries between their maritime communities were accentuated after the Plantagenet loss of Normandy (1204), the reduction of the Seine valley to Capetian obedience (thereby providing Paris with a direct outlet to the sea) and the dispossession of Henry III at La Rochelle (1224).
But in the preceding half-century it would be possible to speak in terms of an Angevin seaborne as well as land-based empire.
Land routes also defined the geographical shape of the Angevin dominions.
If it had a centre, that lay in the triangle formed by the cities of Angers, Tours and Poitiers.
‘The strip of road which passes…from Tours through Poiters’, wrote Powicke, ‘commanded, throughout the Middle Ages, the whole of north-western France, and was the key to the north and south.’
Further integration of western France under one dynasty was brought to a halt, and the loss of Touraine and the Loire valley was as crucial to the  collapse of the Angevin Empire as that of Normandy.
But imperial ambitions die hard; only in 1259 did Henry III ‘in whose veins the blood of southern nobles mingled with the blood of Rollo [of Normandy]and Fulk Nerra [of Anjou]surrender…his claim to unite Aquitaine, Normandy and Anjou’.
Under Edward I, as we shall see, the surrender of the greater part of the Plantagenet's continental inheritance was a fact of very recent history.
In northern France a similar process was at work.
The acquisition of Artois and the Amiennois through inheritance by Philip Augustus in 1191 brought very substantial gains to the Capetians before the recovery of Normandy.
A 72 per cent increase in the yield of the Capetian royal domain took place between 1180 and 1203, before the annexation of the Plantagenet territories.
Revenues from the forests of northern France and from the ex-tremely valuable tolls on merchandise at Bapaume (Artois) contributed substantially to the war treasury with which Philip Augustus fought Richard I and John.
Just as Paris was to be linked to the sea via the Seine estuary after Philip's conquest of Normandy, so the emergent capital of Capetian France was brought into a closer relationship to the wealth of the Low Countries through the absorption of Artois.
It was on the northern borders of France and the Empire, moreover, that the last act in the drama of John's defeat was to be played out — at Bouvines on 27 July 1214, when the coalition between the Plantagenets, Flanders and the German Empire was routed by philip Augustus's army.
Plantagenet intervention against France in the Low Countries and the Empire was not to be revived until the last decade of the century.
A shift in Plantagenet aims and ambitions on the European stage can be discerned after these setbacks.
The collapse of the Hohenstaufen dynasty in Germany and Italy between 1254 and 1268 created a power vacuum in imperial politics.
Opportunities for intervention arose which Henry III was quick to grasp.
The election of Richard, earl of Cornwall (d. 1272), Henry's brother, as king of the Romans (or German monarch) in May 1257 set the seal on this new direction of Plantagenet policy.
His marriage to Beatrix (d. 1277), daughter of Dirk II, lord of Valkenburg (Fauquemont) in Limburg, was an attempt to integrate the plantagenets into the politics of the Franco-imperial borderland.
As ‘queen of Almain’(regina Allemanie ) Beatrix  was depicted as donor of a surviving stained-glass panel, probably to the Franciscan convent at Oxford where she was buried, wearing the crown of Germany.
Her husband had contributed his symbolic share to the insignia of German monarchy by giving a dove-topped sceptre (in the English style) to Aachen cathedral in 1262.
This was, he decreed, to be used at subsequent coronations of the kings of the Romans, together with a crown, vestments and a gilt apple.
Henry III's schemes — in Germany, Italy and Sicily — ultimately collapsed, to his cost, but they represented a Plantagenet response to the events of 1204–59 which had resulted in the dynasty's displacement from their central and prestigious place in European politics.
An essential precondition for this shift of emphasis lay in peace with France.
Henry III's admiration for and emulation of Louis IX is well known.
At Westminster a second Paris was created, with a great abbey church, a palace and a palace chapel on the French pattern, a cult of the relics of saintly ancestors and a permanent administrative centre.
A new phase in Anglo-French relations had begun.
The transition from a hostile to a pacific relationship between the houses of Plantagenet and Capet took place between 1224 and 1259.
Philip Augustus had concentrated his efforts against Henry II and his sons in northern and central France.
The loss of La Rochelle and much of Poitou in 1224–5, however, reflected a new threat to the survival of the Plantagenet inheritance.
A French attack was mounted on the duchy of Aquitaine, but the day was saved by the able lieutenancy exercised there by Richard of Cornwall, and by large loans to him from the cities of Bordeaux and Bayonne.
‘The fall of La Rochelle’, writes Dr Gillingham, ‘marked the end of the Angevin Empire.’
But the issue still remained in the balance for a further twenty years.
Capetian successes in Poitou and Aquitaine were heavily dependent upon the volatile loyalty of the great magnates and nobles on Poitou.
Hugh X de Lusignan, count of La Marche, had led the French campaigns against Aquitaine in 1224–5 but in 1241–2, influenced by his wife, Isabella of Angoulême, played turncoat and defied Louis IX.22 Louis's successful Taillebourg expedition of that year was perhaps the real turning-point in Capetian-Plantagenet rivalry.
Poitou was now securely in Capetian  hands, given as an apanage to Louis IX's brother, Alphonse of Poitiers, as part of his great southern endowment.
Aquitaine was then surrounded on all sides (except the sea coast) by fiefs which stood in a more immediate relationship to the Capetians than ever before.
Before 1242–3 Henry III had journeyed to France in order to recover his lands by military force.
In 1253–4 he went peacefully to visit Louis IX at Paris and, as duke of Aquitaine, to arbitrate a feud which was dividing his city of Bordeaux into two powerful factions.
The negotiations between him and Louis in the late 1250s heightened the atmosphere of harmony and concord.
When Henry became Louis's vassal for Aquitaine in 1259, there was every sign that what Louis clearly regarded as a family quarrel had been resolved — at least among its leading protagonists.
The alliance between the houses of Plantagenet and Capet, secured and cemented by the treaty of Paris, and by marriage proposals, was intended to bring peace to a strife-torn Europe and the furtherance of a Crusade to recover the holy places.
Yet the subjects of both parties to that alliance were less eager to embrace its terms.
Henry 111 s dependence upon Louis IX for support against his own vassals in England was much resented by them, and Louis was thought by some of his own counsellors to have ‘given away too much’ to his Plantagenet kinsman in 1259.
A community of interest was forming between the ruling houses; but the community of interest between ruler and ruled within England began to crumble.
‘Henry’, argues Dr Clanchy, ‘found himself in difficulties because he was so persistent in giving preference to his overseas inheritance and ambitions than to England itself.’
The spectacle of mutual kingly self-congratulation was not pleasing to some of their subjects.
The close affinities between Henry III's and Louis IX's view of kingship were exemplified in Louis's arbitration of Henry's dispute with his baronage in January 1264.
The ‘Mise’ or Reformatio pacis given by Louis IX at Amiens on 23 January 1264 referred to Henry III as ‘our dearest kinsman’(carissimus consanguineus noster ) and declared that he should have ‘full power and free authority in his kingdom’(plenam potestatem et liberum regimen ) over his subjects.
Louis, after the fullest deliberation, concluded that the baronial provisions of 1258–9  had greatly harmed the ‘rights and honour of the king’(juri et honori regio ) and gravely disturbed the realm of England.
The Provisions of Oxford were thus quashed and declared null and void, while the King was to retain control over his choice of those counsellors, whether native or alien, whom he thought faithful and useful to him.
An identity of interest between rulers was set out here, even though those rulers were now bound together in a ‘feudal’ relationship whereby one was a liegeman of the other.
A similar assumption, that lords possessed common interests against their own men, is found in Edward I's dealings with his troublesome Gascon vassal Gaston VII,vicomte of Béarn in 1277–8.
Edward's envoys told Philip III of France that their lord had been insulted and dishonoured by Gaston, but Edward had placed his trust in Philip and his court to redress his grievances.
On Edward's behalf, Philip was therefore requested to ‘remedy this matter so that it will redound to your honour…and to the honour of monarchy [roiauté ]and of all lords against their men’(a touz seigneurs contre leurs hommes ).
The appeal to kingly honour was to be repeated on several occasions until the Anglo-French breach of 1294 led to war.
The feudal relationship between the Plantagenets and Capetians will be considered at greater length at a later stage, but some discussion of its implications before 1290 is appropriate at this point.
Historians have indi-cated a ‘structural weakness’ in the Angevin Empire which stemmed from the obligations of its rulers to perform homage to the French crown from 1151 onwards for most of their continental dominions.
They never paid homage specifically for the duchy of Aquitaine (in particular, for that part to the south of the Garonne), and this partly explains how their south-western French possessions were able to survive Capetian attacks.
The ancient duchy of Gascony, united with Aquitaine in the later eleventh century, had never been subject to the French crown.
In the registers recording military and other services from their kingdoms compiled under Philip Augustus, Louis VIII and Louis IX, the archdioceses of Bordeaux, Auch and their provinces were not included.
In the south-west, the French kingdom extended no further than poitiers.
The Capetian kings had little conception of what  these remote lands were like, and little connection with the Gascon nobility or towns.
Unlike the great families of the Norman and Poitevin marches, the nobles of Aquitaine were not in the habit of appealing to the king of France's court, as the Lusignans had done in 1202, against the actions and decisions of their Plantagenet overlord.
Perhaps taking Aquitaine as their model, some pro-Angevin writers of the later twelfth century asserted a parity of status between the Angevins and Capetians.
The Draco Normannicus written in 1168 by Etienne de Rouen, a monk of Bec, saw Henry II as a great continental prince, negotiating on equal terms with Frederick Barbarossa and with Henry the Lion, his own son-in-law.
He wrote that the Lion of Saxony: ‘Mandat ne regi Francorum subiciatur, /Cum sibi par virtus, par honor atque thronus, /Non par set major…’.
Honour, virtue and regal dignity made Henry II more than equal to Louis VII in the writer's mind.
The demeaning aspects of the homage ceremony could, moreover, be overcome by such devices as its performance on the frontiers between lordships held by lord and vassal (hommage en marche ).
An element of this notion survived into the fourteenth century, when the French kings were sometimes prepared to accept Plantagenet homage at Amiens or Boulogne rather than Paris.
Richard I had been crowned duke of Aquitaine and count of Poitou in 1172 at Limoges and Poitiers, and the ordo ad benedicendum (coronation order) made no reference to the kings of France.
He was invested with a coronet (circulum aureum ) lance, banner, sword, spurs and ring, and the two ceremonies were ‘a ritual expression of Aquitaine's de facto independence from the King of France’.
Echoes of these symbolic assertions of ducal autonomy were also to be heard at later periods.
Yet the marked expansion in the French kingdom's territorial size between 1204 and 1259 could not fail to have an impact upon such claims to autonomy and independence.
The ability of Philip Augustus and his immediate successors to translate what had for long been no more than theoretical claims into judicial, and sometimes geographical, reality changed the balance of forces.
By offering protection and recourse to royal justice to all, breaches were gradually made in the dykes of princely and seigneural resistance to Capetian authority over their subjects.
The process was very gradual, but the evolution from an essentially contractual relationship between king and magnates to one which acknowledged some form of sovereignty (superioritas ) had taken place by the end of the thirteenth century.
The terminology of French royal ordinances began to change, from the contractual language of c.1200–30 to the maxims and formulae drawn from Roman law of the 1290s.
In 1279 Philip III ceded the Agenais to Edward I, as duke of Aquitaine, ‘saving sovereignty and ressort …to the king of France’(salvis superioritate et ressorto…regis France ), but the inhabitants of the region were to accept and obey Edward as immediate lord.
Although, as Beaumanoir stated at this time, the magnates were ‘sovereigns within their baronies’, they were supposed to execute the crown's ordinances — which often meant that they anticipated royal legislation by legislating in their own name for their own domains.
But the notion of intervention by the crown of France as a result of default or denial of justice by a magnate, even by a peer of France or his officers, had begun to develop.
In 1277, Gaston VII of Béarn had claimed ‘false judgement and…default of justice’ against Edward I's courts in the Paris Parlement.
Philip III was therefore able to intervene as a result of this appeal.
Such actions could only be activated at the request of the immediate lord's vassal and the notion of French royal sovereignty remained largely theoretical and judicial throughout this period.
The French king could act, but only by default.
Philip the Fair's interventions in the 1290s were still guided and determined by the appeals of the allegedly wronged and disaffected vassals of the magnates, the greatest of whom was the king-duke of Aquitaine.
The tenacity with which the king-duke, his officers and agents defended his rights and prerogatives in the duchy of Aquitaine testified to its value.
Not only was it a matter of dignity and prestige that the remaining continental possessions of the Plantagenets should be preserved, but political and material forces were at work to maintain the Anglo-Gascon connection.
England's ‘union avec l'Aquitaine’, wrote Renouard, ‘l'a maintenue integrée dans l'Europe, la faisant participer aux vicissitudes politiques comme à toutes les formes de la civilisation du continent’.
The benefits of the relationship were essentially threefold: political, economic and cultural.
When they were joined, as we shall see, to the constant diplomatic presence maintained by the Plantagenets at Paris after 1259, England's latent iso-lationism was effectively countered.
English historians have sometimes lamented the retention of continental possessions by the English crown in the later Middle Ages, maintaining that they distracted English kings from their  proper purpose: the reduction of the British Isles to obedience and the formation of an island nation state.
This is to misread the preoccupations of England's medieval rulers.
The continental inheritance served too many useful purposes to the abandoned, and claims to territory abroad had important implications for the dynastic and matrimonial policies of the ruling house.
The demands made upon England, in money and manpower, for the defence of the Angevin inheritance are well known and have been intensively studied.
But the line could never have been held in south-west France without the active collaboration and support of its inhabitants.
Firstly, the Angevin government in Aquitaine commanded the support of the most prosperous and populated towns.
Bordeaux was described as a ‘commune, by John in 1206 and it clearly possessed many rights of self-government.
By 1225 the loss of Poitiers and La Rochelle made it the effective capital of the remaining Plantagenet dominions.
But the towns of the south-west were not allowed to move very far towards the autonomous, quasi-republican institutions either of Languedoc or of Flanders.
From about 1205 onwards, the Plantagenets began to exert tighter control over them by granting them the constitutions known as the Etablissements de Rouen .
These northern French prescriptions for town government granted to the isle of Oléron in 1205, Bayonne in 1215 and Bordeaux by 1253–4, awarded them many urban privileges and liberties.
But an essential facet of the Etablissements was the stipulation that the king-duke should appoint a mayor and jurats , or municipal council, in each of the communes.
He was also to receive the military service of the communal militias when he summoned them to his aid.
These were exceptionally valuable and important powers.
The looser structure of many Languedocian and meridional towns, with their consuls and syndics , never developed in the south-west, and from 1261 onwards the  tendencies with Bordeaux showed towards becoming a city-republic were tempered by ducal intervention to appoint its mayor and jurats .
Although somewhat modified by southern customs deriving from the written Roman law of the Midi, the constitutions of Bordeaux, Bayonne and smaller towns such as Libourne, La Réole or St Emilion were primarily northern French in derivation and inspiration.
Such relative uniformity may also have given greater cohesion to the Angevin Empire, for its major towns from Rouen to La Rochelle and Bayonne shared the Etablissements .
The price to the ruler was, at Bordeaux as elsewhere, the grant of extensive commercial privileges.
Exemption of the bourgeois from customs payment on their wine, and the concession of a virtual monopoly whereby the produce of vineyards in the hautpays of the Dordogne and Garonne was held back until Bordeaux wine was sold, were considerable stimulants to the loyalty of the commune.
In 1203–4, 1205 and 1242 these concessions were rewarded by the financial and military support given to the Plantagenets by Bordeaux and other towns against both Castilian and French attacks on the duchy.
A further benefit which England gained from continued possession of the residual Plantagenet inheritance was maritime supremacy.
Control of the sea and of sea-routes was crucial to the economic symbiosis established within the Angevin Empire.
The importance of Bayonne, for example, especially after the loss of La Rochelle in 1224, remained fundamental to a network of communications established from the bay of Biscay to the Tweed.
England's economic and commercial contacts with Spain and with North Africa depended in large measure on the shipping of Bayonne.
The Cinque Ports received an admiral on the pattern of Bayonne's admiral, created in 1295, and ships from Bayonne brought supplies of wine, corn, flour and other victuals to Edward I's army in Wales during March and April 1283.
English ports and the Bayonnais together provided ships in which Bordeaux's wine was carried, and England's reliance on Aquitaine for wine — for both liturgical and secular consumption — helped to give birth to an English mercantile marine.
Gascon vintners and middlemen resided in the Vintry ward of London, and Henry le Waleys served as mayor of London in 1273–4 and of Bordeaux in 1275.
In the early thirteenth century in Bordeaux we can observe the rise of certain bourgeois dynasties whose economic interests lay predominantly in a continuing relationship with England.
Among them  the Colom and the Caillau were the most conspicuous.
These two families were bound to the export trade in wine, although some of their members (such as Gaillard Colom) were general merchants who supplied the king-duke with horses, cloth and spices during the crisis of 1242.
But a ‘new commercial elite had emerged with exceptionally strong English connections.
These were to prove especially valuable to the Plantagenet regime in times of crisis.
The possession of Aquitaine and, after 1279, Ponthieu also gave opportunities for individual advancement in the king-duke's service.
Clerks, nobles, knights and merchants rose in wealth, status and dignity through their service in Aquitaine.
Some of their careers will be considered in later chapters, but they were not essentially different from those Angevin officers, such as Robert of Thornham, who had served as seneschal of Poitou and Gascony during the crisis of 1202–4.
At a higher social level the lives and fortunes of individuals continued to be bound up with the continental possessions.
The Plantagenet dominions played an essential part in the dynastic policies of the three Edwards towards their families.
Henry III had set the pattern by endowing the future Edward I with Gascony in 1254.
Edward I himself employed his closest kinsmen — Edmund of Lancaster and Henry Lacy, earl of Lincoln — in his south-western French lands at critical periods.
Edward II gave Aquitaine to his son, the future Edward III, in 1325.
The provisions made by Edward III for his large family are celebrated, culminating in his creation of a principality of Aquitaine for the Black Prince in 1362.
A recent thesis argues that the similarities between Henry II and Edward III in this respect are striking.
Both bad succeeded to a battered inheritance and both had chosen an expansionist policy in order to quell unrest in England and provide lands for their numerous offspring.
Plantagenet claims to hold more extensive territories in France, which the period 1259–1340 was to do little to quell, are clearly worthy of serious consideration in any analysis of the origins of the Hundred Years War.
As  claimants to French lands and titles, the Plantagenets and their kinsmen and kinswomen were representatives of an Anglo-French civilization, and it is this cosmopolitan political and cultural world common to the courts of England and France which will now be examined.
2.2 The World of the Courts
It is sometimes forgotten that Anglo-French relations in the thirteenth and early fourteenth centuries in many ways resembled a family history.
Sir Maurice Powicke rightly emphasized the domestic character of high politics, when so much depended upon dynastic marriages, connections and alliances within an enlarged family circle.
Henry III, Louis IX, Richard of Cornwall and Charles of Anjou were all kinsmen, French-speaking and French-cultured.
‘It was this cordiality’, wrote Tout, ‘that made easy the mutual renunciations of the treaty of Paris of 1259.’
The world of the European courts was linked by both marriage and kinship ties.
Henry III married into the house of Provence; Edward I was allied by marriage to Castile and then (after 1299) France; Edward II to France; Edward III to Hainault.
It is sometimes argued that ‘however close their links with the Continent, under-lined especially by their marriage ties, the Plantagenet Kings were Englishmen’.
If that were indeed the case their Englishness was certainly no impediment to involvement in a cosmopolitan, international world in which French speech and culture was dominant.
The close ties of kinship between the ruling houses of England and France overrode symptoms of incipient national sentiment at this time.
In April 1305, for example, Edward I requested the English clergy to offer masses and prayers for the soul of Jeanne of Navarre, late queen of Philip the Fair of France, half-sister-in-law of Queen Margaret of England, mother of the future Queen Isabella.
Edward Il acted in a similar manner in December 1314 when he requested masses and prayers for Philip the Fair, and we know that all London churches celebrated masses to this end.
The French monarchy reciprocated at the deaths of their Plantagenet kinsmen and women.
Powicke believed that ‘historians incur a grave danger of misconception if they divorce what are called political tendencies from the interplay of  personal relations’.
Anglo-French affairs were to a large degree regulated by personal connections, not only at the level of the ruling houses.
As relations between Edward II and Charles IV of France deteriorated in April 1324, Queen Isabella was urged to use her influence with the French monarch by asking him to ‘have regard for us and our children who are so close to him, and for the alliances between them, and especially for the alliance made in our own person, which all the world knows was concluded to nourish and sustain peace and love between the two kingdoms, and to prevent wars and disputes’.
Kinship between the Capetians and Plantagenets was a string played upon by many intermediaries and arbitrators, but there is also evidence for genuine expressions of affection.
During the Anglo-French war of 1294–8, Edward I's letters to his kinswomen Marie of Brabant, queen-mother of France, Jeanne of Navarre, queen of France, and Margaret of Anjou assured them that, although the kingdoms were in ‘discord’, he had no quarrel whatever with them (12 August 1295).
After the Anglo-French reconciliation of 1303, Edward wrote to Marie of France thanking her for her letters in which she expressed her desire for a meeting and conversation between him and her stepson, Philip the Fair.
Edward assured her that he also desired to speak with Philip personally and would arrange a meeting (7 April 1304).
Queen Isabella, wife of Edward II, intervened more directly in political matters in 1314 when she petitioned her father, Philip the Fair, to remedy outstanding grievances relating to Aquitaine.
Cases pending in the Parlement of Paris concerning bastides in the Agenais should be resolved because, she said, ‘there should be no pleas between father and son’.
Family relationships could, of course, turn very sour and friction inevitably developed.
But concord and harmony were the professed and accepted norm for the conduct of relations.
Writing to the bishop of Bruges in January 1325, Edward Il told him that Charles IV had attacked Aquitaine, irrespective of the ‘state or condition of kinship and affinity’(statum aut condicionem consanguinitatis vel affinitatis ) between them.
It was a theme that was to be taken up by mediators between the two kingdoms until the outbreak of the Hundred Years War.
It is evident from surviving correspondence and from reports of diplomatic  missions that contemporaries expected relationships between the courts of England and France to reflect the accepted tenets of courtly politesse and courtesy.
Terminology can be misleading and can mask political realities but the emphasis on certain qualities and attributes of courtoisie in the surviving documentation is noteworthy.
Among these débonaireté , with its connotations of patience and good nature, is particularly common.
In a letter, probably written at Stirling in April 1304, Edward I referred to letters from Philip the Fair ‘in which you [Philip]have asked us that we should be débonaires and merciful [merciables ]’ to the Scots who were about to meet him.
He would do so, wrote Edward, ‘out of love for you who are our lord and cousin and our very dear friend’, but only when the Scots obeyed him as their liege lord.
An undated letter, probably sent in the summer of 1297 by Geoffroi de Joinville to Aymer de Valence, discussed the qualities possessed by Raoul de Clermont-Nesle, constable of France and Valence's father-in-law.
The constable had responded to Joinville's requests débonairement et…en bon manere , and had given him a knight as an escort who ‘by his ordinance and advice expedited affairs débonairement' .
A literary usage was reflected here.
The heraldic poem on the Siege of Caerlaverock (1300) spoke of Edward I's leopard-like ferocity to his enemies:
The Triumphant Virtue of Débonereté was one of those personified in the wall paintings (now lost) of the Painted Chamber at Westminster, commissioned by Henry III between 1263 and 1272.
With Largesce, Verité and Fortitude , this Virtue was depicted, birching Ira (Anger) with a switch, in a setting where audiences and councils often took place (see plate 2.2).
These images were inherited by Edward I and his successors, and also reminded them and  their counsellors of the ideal qualities attributed to one of their illustrious predecessors.
The presence in the Painted Chamber of scenes depicting Edward the Confessor's coronation, and his gift of a ring to a St John in disguise, suggests that ‘at Westminster the Virtues represent the ideals of the court and household of Henry III envisaged in terms of the chaste presence of St Edward; Edward is…the debonair king par excellence' ; his arms are also found painted in the block borders beside the figure of Débonereté .
To be duz et débonaire , as the Confessor allegedly was, represented not merely a literary convention but a normal part of diplomatic and courtly intercourse.
The personal and familial connections between the ruling classes of Plantagenet England and Capetian France were conducted, ideally and in practice, in terms of common assumptions shared by a courtly milieu.
The importance of this common culture should not be underrated.
It could not prevent conflict and the outbreak of armed clashes between England and France, but it meant that considerable efforts were made, on both sides, to avert disputes or to seek a speedy reconciliation.
The creation of a fitting environment for the conduct of diplomacy and the negotiation of marriage alliances may indeed have prompted Edward I's campaign of works at Westminster in the 1290s.
The Maccabean histories which were painted there, perhaps between 1292 and 1297, may reflect his desire to provide an impressive setting in which to conduct negotiations for his remarriage.
In this context, the use of kinsmen and women as intermediaries, both formal and informal, was of vital importance.
The closest kinsmen of Edward I, for instance, played important ‘cross-channel’ roles.
Edward's brother Edmund of Lancaster (Crouchback) married Blanche of Artois in 1275 and became governor of the northern French comté of Champagne on her behalf.
The heiress to Champagne, Jeanne of Navarre, was a minor and, until she married Philip the Fair in 1284, the comté was effectively held by Edmund of Lancaster, bearing the courtesy title of count of Champagne.
It was very advantageous for Edward to have his brother in so central a position, adjacent to the Capetian demesne.
A letter survives from Edmund to his brother the king which must date from 1282.
In it he told the king that he  had heard of the outbreak of war in Wales while ‘ordering and attending to the state of my affairs in Champagne’.
He did not yet know whether Edward wished him to bring to Wales any of his nobles of Champagne to serve there.
He had warned many Champenois that they were to be ready to follow when so commanded and, he wrote, ‘they willingly agreed’.
He would bring news of his dealings with Philip III when he arrived in England, and hoped that his English retinue would suffice for Edward's needs until he knew his brother's wishes about the nobles of Champagne.
An ‘English’ magnate was in effect offering the services of men, technically subject to the crown of France, to the king of England in his capacity as king, rather than as duke of Aquitaine.
Edmund of Lancaster, loyal to the end, was to play a major part in the Anglo-French diplomacy of the 1290s and died represent-ing his brother as lieutenant in Aquitaine at Bayonne on 5 June 1296.
His entrée to the court of France was an essential facet of Anglo-French relations.
To buy out Edmund's rights and interests in Champagne after Jeanne de Navarre's marriage in 1284 cost Philip the Fair at least 14,200 livres tournois (l.t.).
The personal interests of an Anglo-French magnate and his wife made the absorption of this great and valuable fief a far costlier operation for the French crown.
Another kinsman who acted as an intermediary between England and France was Jean of Brittany, earl of Richmond.
In 1261, Henry III's daughter Beatrix had married another Jean, eldest son of the duke of Brittany.
A son, aptly named Arthur, was born to them in 1262, described in a familiar and affectionate letter from Blanche, duchess of Brittany to Henry III as ‘mout bon enffant et mout beil, la Dieu merci’.
A second son, Jean, was born in 1266.
Beatrix died in 1275 and Jean was brought up in England, apparently in Edward's household.
His sister Eleanor became a nun at Amesbury and was later elected abbess of the mother house at Fontevrault.
The Angevin connection was thus represented by a close kinswoman of Edward I. Jean of Brittany's talents were more suited to diplomacy than to warfare (although he served against Philip the Fair in Aquitaine, between 1294 and 1297), while his close connections with both the French court and the nobility of western France clearly helped to ease tension at periods of crisis.
He was a valuable go-between.
In 1306, after a career of service to Edward I in Wales, Scotland, France, Ponthieu and  Aquitaine, Jean was given the earldom of Richmond by a king notoriously mean in his endowment of earls.
He survived, unmarried, into the reign of Edward III, returning to Brittany shortly before his death in 1334.
There were few diplomatic encounters between England and France during this period at which he was not present.
Similarities between Jean of Brittany's position and that of Aymer de Valence, earl of Pembroke (c.1270–1324), have been pointed out.
Aymer's father, William de Valence (d. 1296), was one of Henry III's Lusignan half-brothers, and his close ties with his nephew Edward I brought the family to the very centre of power.
Aymer de Valence was therefore cousin to Edward II and played a prominent part in his reign as a defender of the monarchy (see plate 2.3).
His most recent biographer has observed that ‘because Aymer de Valence held the English earldom of Pembroke and spent his entire career in English service it is easy to forget that in origin he was almost entirely French and that he retained very close links with France throughout his life’.
Yet this did not necessarily make him ‘an outsider in English society’, readily employed by Edward II against the magnates.
Pembroke was one of the ordainers of 1310 and his part in the death of Piers Gaveston hardly demonstrated his sympathy for Edward's obsessive relationship with his favourite.
Both his marriages were with French noble-women — Beatrice (d. 1320), daughter of Raoul de Clermont-Nesle, constable of France, and Marie de St Pol (d. 1377) daughter of Guy de Chàtillon, count of St Pol, butler of France.
Aymer thus stood in the midst of a ramified genealogical network relating him to many families within the French nobility.
The connections of the Valence with other continental dynasties are exemplified in heraldic form by the so-called ‘Valence casket’(see plate 2.4).
This enamelled box, made either for Aymer or his father, displays the arms of England, Valence, Brittany (Dreux), Angoulême, Brabant and Lacy.
Further ties bound Aymer de Valence to other ‘Anglo-French’ nobles who will be discussed below — Amaury de Craon and Geoffroi de Joinville.
2.4 THE VALENCE CASKET, PROBABLY FRENCH (LIMOGES), c. 1290–1324.
ITS ENAMELLED DECORATION DISPLAYS THE ARMS OF ENGLAND, VALENCE, ANGOULÊME, BRITTANY (DREUX), LACY AND BRABANT, EMPHASIZING THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THESE FAMILIES.
(LONDON, VICTORIA AND ALBERT MUSEUM, 4–1865.)
The tenure of lands in France strengthened the Valence family's position as intermediaries between the two kingdoms.
It also gave them an additional incentive in their efforts to keep the peace between Plantagenets and Capetians, for they stood to lose lands and revenues through confiscation in time of war.
On his father's death Aymer de Valence inherited the French lordships or Bellac, Ranfon and Champagnac, near Limoges, and of Montig-nac, near Angoulême.
He appointed a seneschal, receiver and auditors to ad-minister his French lands and employed a proctor-general for French affairs to represent his interests at law.
Although he never seems to have performed military service in person for Philip the Fair, he certainly did homage for his French lands in 1300.
A somewhat distant claimant to the Lusignan inheritance — the great comtés of La Marche and Angoulême — he was nevertheless bought out by Philip the Fair for 1000 1.
t. in 1308–9.
The Valencc family were representatives of an earlier dynastic alliance between  the Plantagenets and the Lusignans which had promoted coalitions against the Capetians in Poitou, Limousin and Angoumois.
The dissolution of the Lusignan lands was not to be completed until 1328 when the last claimants were finally compensated by the French crown.
But Aymer, and after him his widow, remained in possession of their Limousin and Angoumois lordships until Charles V of France confiscated them only five years before her death in 1377.
By his second marriage, to Marie de St Pol, at Paris in July 1321, Aymer was related to a family which held lordships in Artois and the Pas-de-Calais very close to the Channel ports at Boulogne and Wissant.
On the other side of the English Channel, the concentration of eleven Valence manors in Kent (at Brabourne, Egerton, East Sutton, Sutton Valence and Wickham, for example) may have facilitated his constant journeying to and fro by providing staging posts on the road to and from the coast.
His father died at Brabourne in May 1296 (see plate 2.5), returning from an embassy to Cambrai.
It is known that Aymer was in France in 1299, 1301, 1302, 1303, 1304, and made at least twelve visits between 1307 and 1324, three of them in 1313.
He died suddenly in France on 23 June 1324, at or near one of his wife's lordships (Tours-en-Vimeu), while on his way to Paris to negotiate Anglo-French differences over Aquitaine.
By 1307 the English baronage included three out of eleven earls who were of ‘foreign’ origin — Pembroke (Aymer de Valence), Richmond (Jean of Brittany) and Cornwall (Gaveston).
The continental links of other baronial families such as Lancaster, Lacy and Warenne meant that Pembroke was ‘by no means untypical of the leading English magnates of his time’.
Most were members of a court society which was essentially cosmopolitan.
They had ‘as much in common with members of their own class in other European states in their interests and assumptions as they did with their feudal inferiors’.
The role of ‘aliens’ in England under John and Henry III as targets for baronial opposition to the crown has perhaps led historians to see too sharp a polarization of attitudes among the English ruling classes at this time.
In the relatively small and somewhat isolated world of the courts, men of ‘foreign’ origin acted as natural and essential intermediaries between England and Europe.
Members of the families of Grandson (or  Grandisson), Joinville (or Geneville), Grilly (or Grailly), Geneva, Fiennes, Valence and Craon served the English crown in diplomacy, administration and warfare, while holding lands abroad.
So did those Gascon nobles who were retained with fees or pensions in the king's household.
In June 1286, there were forty Gascons in Edward I's household, including four knights banneret, three knights bachelor and twenty-one king's esquires.
Among those receiving liveries of robes from Edward III for the winter of 1330, at least seventeen Gascon knights and esquires are recorded as members of his household.
There was therefore a group of ‘aliens’ among the king's familiares which long outlived the political turmoil of Henry III's reign.
2.5 FRENCH CHASED AND ENAMELLED COPPER EFFIGY OF WILLIAM DE VALENCE (D. 1296), HENRY III'S LUSIGNAN HALF-BROTHER.
IT WAS PROBABLY MADE AT LIMOGES.
(LONDON, WESTMINSTER ABBEY, c. 1290–1300.)
The knightly families of French, Burgundian and Savoyard origin who served Edward I and Edward II were especially important in dealings with France.
The Savoyard knight Odo de Grandson (d. 1328) was among Edward I's most trusted lieutenants and missions of the highest significance were allotted to him.
He was, for instance, among those charged to receive Clement V in Aquitaine after his election to the papacy, in July 1305, and ordered the giving of gifts to the French envoys to the new pope when they were at Bordeaux.
These included Louis of Evreux (Philip the Fair's son), the duke of Burgundy and the count of Dreux.
Grandson was with Edward  I during his visit to France and Aquitaine in 1286–9, and was constantly employed by him in business at the courts of France and Aragon during those years.
His nephew, John de Grandisson (1292–1369), became bishop of Exeter in 1327 and before his election had continued the family's role in diplomacy, especially at the papal court.
Odo de Grandson's fellow-Savoyard, Jean de Grilly (d. 1303), was Edward's lieutenant and seneschal in Aquitaine (1266–8, 1278–87) and built up considerable expertise in French and Gascon affairs.
His grandson, Pierre, inherited his Gascon lordships of Benauges and Castillon and married into the captaux de Buch.
The history of their service to the Plantagenets and Lancastrians is well known.
Less familiar is the evidence for service to the English crown, both diplomatic and military, by members of the Joinville (Champagne) and Craon (Anjou) families.
Geoffroi de Joinville, lord of Vaucouleurs (c.1226–1314) was a younger brother of Jean de Joinville, the biographer of St Louis.
By 1252 he had come to England, married Maud de Lacy, and as co-heir to the Lacy inheritance received some of their Irish lands.
He was in Aquitaine with the Lord Edward in 1255 and by 1280 is found as an envoy, with Jean de Grilly, to Paris, engaged in negotiating a Franco-Castilian peace.
In April 1282 he fought in the Welsh war with one knight and one serjeant and in the following year made over his English and Welsh lands to his son, Pierre de Joinville.
He was very active in the events of 1297–9, serving as marshal of Edward I's ill-fated army in Flanders (1297) and with Odo de Grandson and Aymer de Valence in the consequent peace negotiations with the French.
By November 1308 he had apparently renounced the world and entered the Irish Dominican house at Trim, where he died on 21 October 1314.
His son, Pierre, held his father's lands in Shropshire and Herefordshire but died in 1292, leaving three small daughters.
His widow, Jeanne, held the Joinvilles' English lands but, like Aymer de Valence, agreed to renounce her claim to a part of the Lusignan inheritance (1308–10), although she held four Poitevin and Limousin lordships in reversion until her death in April 1323.
The Irish lands of the Joinville descended to  Geoffroi's fifth son, Simon, who served as a ‘strenuous’ knight for Edward Il in Scotland (1315–22) and Aquitaine (1324–5) and was still being summoned to fight the Scots in May 1335.
Another son, Gauthier, in fact assumed the French lordships of the family in Champagne by September 1298, was serving Philip the Fair against the Flemings in July 1302, and died at their hands two years later in the battle at Pont-à-Vendin, near Lens in Artois.
The political crisis of 1294–1303 had undoubtedly enforced a tenurial separation within the family, and during this period Gauthier de Joinville, lord of Vancouleurs, could not serve both the English and French crowns.
The Angevin legacy inherited by the Plantagenets found a late embodi-ment in the career of Amaury III de Craon (lord of Craon and Sablé and the last hereditary seneschal of Anjou, Maine and Touraine) who was seneschal of Aquitaine for Edward II in 1313–16 and 1320–2.
His appointment was in part a result of the amicable Anglo-French gathering which took place at Paris and Poissy in June july 1313 for the knighting of the sons of Philip the Fair.
Outstanding issues between Edward II and Philip were to be resolved and the appointment of a seneschal of Aquitaine from within the Capetian court circle was probably thought to assist the process.
Amaury de Craon was an assiduous and competent officer, and his tenure of a second term of office suggests that he commanded a degree of confidence.
The letters appointing him spoke of the ‘dissensions recently arisen’ in the duchy of Aquitaine where he was to act ‘to pacify the said land’(circa stabilimentum terre predicte ), thereby incurring additional expenses (which were to be recom-pensed) at the Paris parlement and in the duchy itself.
With Aymer de Valence, Jean de Joinville and Elie-Rudel, lord of Pons, he too had a claim on the Lusignan inheritance.
In a series of acts dating from 1317, 1322 and 1328 he was compensated for any losses sustained through the renunciation of that claim.
By the accession of Philip VI of Valois, therefore, the old Angevin and Lusignan fiefs had at last been absorbed by the French crown.
This gradual process was in its way just as significant as the more dramatic  annexations of former Angevin territories.
But it did not eliminate the need for an Anglo-French nobility to mediate between the two powers.
Amaury de Craon wrote to Edward II from Sablé in November 1323 telling him that the ‘great uneasiness of heart that I feel as a result of the dispute between you and your brother the king of France, our lord, and a desire to find ways, according to my humble ability, to prevent it, has emboldened me to write the following things’.
He spoke of the ‘perilous conflict’ between Edward and Charles IV and of his desire for peace between them which, if broken, would put ‘the greater part of Christendom in peril’.
To Hugh le Despenser on the same day, he expressed similar views and put himself at Despenser's disposal as an intermediary with Charles IV.
Amaury de Craon served both Plantagenets and Capetians in many ca-pacities, fighting in Flanders for Louis X in September-October 1315 and January-February 1316 while holding office from Edward II as seneschal of Aquitaine.
He was among the last representatives of this kind of Anglo-French noble before the Hundred Years War, and the peace that subsisted between 1303 and 1324 enabled him to remain loyal to both his overlords.
Besides their encounters in war and diplomacy, English and French nobles and knights met on more specifically chivalric occasions.
Participants from England were found at tournaments in northern France and the Low Countries — at Compiègne in 1278 and at Mons in 1310.
Pierre de Grilly and a ‘Robert l'Englois’(perhaps Robert Clifford) attended the tournament at Chauvency in 1285.
French knights also tourneyed in England.
In October 1279, Edward I wrote to Philip III informing him that Jean de Prie, the French king's knight, had come to England and, hearing of a tournament there, had hastened towards it ‘as a knight should’ although a tournament ban had been proclaimed by Philip.
Jean de Prie also participated in the events at Chauvency.
Similarly in 1290 Jean de Nesle, knight, took part in a tournament staged on the occasion of Jean, duke of Brabant's visit to England for the marriage of his son to Edward I's daughter, Margaret.
English rolls of arms at this time contain a considerable number of coats borne by ‘foreign’ knights especially from northern France, the Low Countries and the Franco-imperial borderlands.
A common chivalric culture — expressed in tournaments,festes , and the cult of Arthurian knighthood — bound the courts of England and France together, adding a further dimension to the complex web of relationships between the two nobilities.
2.3 A Common Culture
The political and genealogical relationships which have already been exa-mined were grounded in a shared culture, itself in part determined by the church.
The pope was the greatest intermediary in western Christendom, and much diplomatic intercourse was in the hands of papal legates, bishops and clerks at this time.
A reflection of clerical involvement in the world of the courts may be glimpsed in the large stained-glass window given to York Minster by Master Peter de Dene, king's clerk, probably between 1307 and 1310 (see plate 2.6).
Dene was employed as an envoy to the papal court in June 1294, charged with certain weighty matters, and was one of eleven masters ordered by Edward II to assist his envoys to Avignon in 1316.
His window at York celebrates his court connections and its profuse heraldic display refers to the alliances of the ruling houses of England and France.
The arms of the Empire, England, France, Provence, the king of the Romans, Castile and Leon, Jerusalem and Navarre reflect the continental connections of Edward I and Edward II.
Beside them the crossed keys of St Peter (for the see of York) express the Church's direct concern with the affairs of secular rulers.
This theme was also found in the embroidered textiles listed in Clement V's inventory of the papal treasury in 1311.
Among the eighty-two items of opus anglicanum were an altar frontal, a bedcover and curtains worked with the keys of St Peter and the arms of England, France and Pope Boniface VIII.
These were assertions of papal and clerical association with, and intervention in, the world of the secular courts.
2.6 PETER DE DENE'S WINDOW IN THE NORTH NAVE AISLE, YORK MINSTER, c. 1310.
DENE WAS A CLERICAL DIPLOMAT WITH COURT CONNECTIONS AND THE CANOPY OF HIS WINDOW DEPICTS FIGURES OF THE KINGS OF FRANCE (LEFT) AND ENGLAND (RIGHT).
The courts of England and France shared common cultural influences and strove to imitate and emulate each other.
The building programmes begun by Henry III, continued under Edward I, at Westminster and the contem-poraneous development on the Ile-de-la-Cité and at the Louvre in Paris under Louis IX and Philip the Fair were similar in intention.
As H. M. Colvin has observed ‘what Reims and St Denis were to the house of Capet, Westminster should be to the house of Plantagenet’.
Influences were  mutual, and Philip the Fair's cult of the sainted kingship of Louis IX may have been partly inspired by Henry III's and Edward I's promotion of Edward the Confessor.
It is known that Edward III another great royal builder, compared Westminster favourably with the apocryphal resting-place of the Three Kings at Cologne.
John of Reading reported that in September 1359, after hearing mass in St Stephen's Chapel, the king said that he would much rather be buried where the Confessor, Henri III and Edward I lay than at Cologne.
A burial place at Westminster among the  aforesaid three illustrious kings was ‘more fitting and more beautiful’.
A cult of Plantagenet kingship, closely comparable to that of the Capetians, with a distinctive ideology and historical focus, was a product of the reigns of Henry III and Edward I.
It would be irrelevant to the purpose of this chapter to conduct a detailed discussion of the purely stylistic aspects of artistic influence and cross-fertilization during this period.
But a brief survey may establish points of comparison and contrast.
The English response to the French Rayonnant style in architecture certainly produced characteristic and idiosyncratic results.
English manuscript illumination, as we shall see, also developed some qualities of its own which were not determined by French models.
But there can be little doubt that French styles and French cultural patterns were a dominant influence on the art forms and patronage of English Gothic.
The incorporation of French-inspired architectural designs and motifs into English wall-paintings, stained glass and illuminated books was evident after about 1250.
There was a clear French model, for example, for Edward I's Eleanor crosses, erected at stopping-places along the route of Queen Elea-nor's coffin as her body was brought to Westminster for burial in 1290.
A ‘recent French court prototype’ was adapted to serve Edward's purpose of commemorating his first wife in a series of cenotaphs.
The crosses erected at stages on the route of St Louis's body as it came from Tunis to Paris for burial at St Denis were ‘freely imitated in the Eleanor crosses of England’.
Although destroyed in 1789, the French crosses bore figures of kings, just as the Eleanor crosses contained a figure of the queen, and the Montjoies of St Louis must have been a formative influence on Edward's decision to act as he did.
In the related field of tomb sculpture, French motifs were increasingly absorbed in England.
Henry III imitated French royal tombs in his own and his queen's effigies, and the introduction of ‘weepers’ on to the side of tomb-chests followed a pattern established thirty years earlier in France.
The English court was eclectic in its import of new techniques and artistic styles from Europe — in wall-painting, the French court's ‘rich applied  polychromy’; in interior- and tomb-decoration, mosaic techniques from Rome and Avignon; and in tomb sculpture, the use of bronze and of Limoges enamel.
Edward I chose essentially French themes to complete the decor-ations of the Painted Chamber at Westminster and a ‘particularly strong French influence’ has been detected in a number of English works dating from the period c.1290–1320.
Imagery drawn from Maccabean sources associates the Westminster paintings of that time with a French, rather than English, stock of images and iconography.
Contemporary preoccupation with the personification of virtues and vices found expression in the illuminations by Master Honoré to the Somme le Roi , written by Laurent, Philip III's Dominican confessor.
Dating from the 1290s, these form part of an allegorical tradition similar to that which determined the representations of the Triumphant Virtues and Vices for Henry III in the Painted Chamber at Westminster, and in the sculptures of the chapter house at Salisbury.
Furthermore, it has been established that the Parisian miniaturist Honoré also illuminated a Book of Hours, now at Nuremberg, for an English patron.
Parallels between it and such English works as the Alphonso Psalter (c.1284–1300) reflect the very close connections between English and northern French manuscript painting and book production from which the so-called ‘court style’ of the decades around 1300 was derived.
These works, including the Queen Mary and Isabella Psalters, have led Dr Binski to conclude that ‘a big French illustrated Old Testament suddenly became known and influential from c .
1290 in England, and that knowledge of it spread to various centres’.
The popularity of the Bible Moralisé , with profuse illustrations, was common to both English and French patrons.
So was the taste among court circles for romances, devotional treatises and service books ornamented with stylistically related images.
Since there was normally free passage between England and France at this time, ‘there was  an intermingling of styles that often make it difficult to determine the place of origin of a manuscript and its artists’.
The Bible of William of Devon (c .
1260–70), the Cuerden Psalter (c .
1270) and the Douce Apocalypse (c.1270) showed marked affinities with Parisian workshop production, and the post-1290 influence of the style Honoré represented a continuation of this tendency.
Direct derivation can sometimes be established.
The miniatures which decorate a volume of French poems and lais by Adenet le Roi, Marie de France and others, made in Paris for Marie de Brabant (1260–1321), second wife of Philip the Fair, in about 1300, appear to have furnished models copied by the English illuminator of the Arundel Psalter, which date from before 1339.
A representation of the Three Living and the Three Dead in both volumes is strikingly similar, and it is known that Amadeus, count of Savoy, bought two panels depicting the same subject when he was in England in 1302–3.
The precise means whereby these contacts and cross-currents were established in individual cases are often unclear.
But the emergence in England of the French ‘broad-fold’ idiom — a ‘style that was undoubtedly coming to transform the appearance of the figurative arts’— in the 1260s might be related to the close and active relationships created between the two kingdoms by the diplomatic and judicial consequences of the treaty of Paris in 1259.
Henry III's rapprochement with Louis IX between 1254 and 1259 had brought the two courts into a closer relationship, while the diplomatic and juridical presence at Paris which it necessitated thereafter strengthened English connections with northern France.
As early as October 1262, Henry III was retaining Englishmen as proctors to represent his interests, as duke of Aquitaine, before the court of France.
A letter dated 11 October 1262 from Roger de Doncaster, king's clerk, to John de Kirkby, the chancellor tells us something about the activities of these men in the French capital.
Doncaster had arrived in Paris on Michaelmas day, where he encountered Roger de Missenden and Thomas de la Ley, king's clerk, seated at dinner ‘jocose, sanos et hillares’.
He waited until the festive meal had ended before giving them Kirkby's letter.
This rather cooled their high spirits, because  Missenden's failure to do what was required of him about some case of ecclesiastical preferment was criticized.
Doncaster, however, absorbed cur-rent rumours and news from the court from them: Henry III, then in Paris, was still convalescing from an illness and was unlikely to move before Christmas.
Less formal matters were then attended to by Doncaster.
He reported his search for a tapestry at Paris, to cover the walls of the chancel-lor's hall at Westminster, but had not yet found one suitable.
All kinds of business — from the lobbying of cardinals at the court of France to the purchase of fine saddles for warhorses or palfreys — could be conducted as a by-product of the ‘peace’ of Paris.
The emergence of the French capital as the greatest centre of learning and the arts in northern Europe was to have an important impact upon Anglo-French relations.
In terms of artistic production the city of Paris reached its apogee between 1250 and 1330.
Artists and craftsmen came to the city, not only from northern France and Flanders, but also from England.
They ‘shared a profoundly similar cultural background’ and the names of some of them are known.
English scribes were to be found living in Paris in the first quarter of the fourteenth century.
A copy of Gratian's Decretum was written there by the English copyist Thomas de Wymondeswold in 1314, who also signed a large two-volume Bible.
He was an accredited bookseller (libraire jure ) for the University of Paris in 1323.
His compatriot Robert Billing wrote the text of another Bible in a beautifully formed hand in 1327 with illuminations by the finest Parisian artist of his day, Jean Pucelle.
Between 1297 and 1330, a number of masons and sculptors of English origin were also working in France.
One of these was probably the carver known as ‘Guillaume de Nourriche’(William of Norwich) in documentary sources.
He executed two statues of apostles for the chapel of St James of Compostella in Paris between 1319 and 1324 and was associated with other English craftsmen working in northern France and for the papal court at Avignon.
They  were integrated into the large body of at least 229 painters and makers of images recorded in the taxation rolls for Paris between 1292 and 1313.
As the largest European city — with an estimated population of 200,000 in 1300 — Paris exerted a magnetic attraction for all those who served the ruling classes and ministered to their needs and pleasures.
The city was a centre of banking, money-lending, textile supplies, goldsmiths' work and many other crafts, including the increasingly popular art of enamelling using the champlevé technique.
After 1313 all works produced by Parisian goldsmiths and enamellers bore a hallmark depicting a fleur-de-lis within a lozenge and these objects were disseminated all over Europe, not least to England.
In 1292, Amadeus V of Savoy bought thirty-six silver cups with silver feet, an almsboat, a set of knives and other plate from a Parisian goldsmith on his way to visit Edward I. Seven years later, the list of plate and jewels bought in Paris for Margaret, Philip the Fair's sister, before her marriage in 1299 to Edward I reads like the contents of Aladdin's cave.
Crowns, circlets, spoons, plates, bowls, hanapers, chalices and crosses of precious metal were supplied by Parisian goldsmiths.
One crown cost 700 1.
t. and a gold cross for her chapel 579 l. 9 s.t .
When Edward III wished to offer an especially lavish girt of twelve table vessels of pure gold, a great cup and ewer, twenty-four spoons, and forks ‘on which to hold meat’ to Pope Benedict XII on the eve of the Hundred Years War in 1337, his agent still bought them in Paris.
Anglo-French diplomacy before the Hundred Years War provided opportunities for ‘cultural’ connections to be exploited and sustained.
Richard de Bury, later bishop of Durham, profited from his diplomatic missions to the French court by buying and exchanging books in Paris.
He was a member of the embassies to France in 1325–6, 1331 and 1336 and he used his position as envoy and representative of Edward III to further his book-collecting activities.
He was at this time an exponent of the benefits of Anglo-French  peace and in the Philobiblon , attributed to him and written in 1344–5, one chapter was entitled ‘the Complaint of Books against Wars’.
Its incipit began with the prayer: ‘Almighty Author and lover of peace, scatter the nations that delight in war, which is above all plagues injurious to books’.
The treatise includes a eulogy of Paris, which tells us that ‘there…opening our treasuries and unfastening our purse-strings we scattered money with joyous heart and purchased inestimable books with worthless coin.’
He was evidently a good customer for Parisian booksellers.
The fact that Paris was so rich a source of books — from de luxe manuscripts to ‘soiled tracts and battered codices’— in part stemmed from its position and reputation as the greatest northern European centre of learning.
Richard de Bury spoke of its ‘academic meadows shaken by the tramp of scholars’.
Some of those scholars, moreover, were Englishmen and some of them certainly served as proctors and representatives of the Plantagenets at Paris.
The affinity between France and England at this time could be illustrated by the fact that the diplomatic representatives of both kingdoms studied at Paris.
The organization of medieval universities into separate ‘nations’ must be taken into account, but study by English clerks at Paris may well have influenced the manner in which legal and diplomatic business was transacted with the French.
There are many examples of Englishmen at the University of Paris before 1340, and some of the king's clerks most active in Anglo-French diplomacy had studied there.
John de Hildesley and Thomas Cobham (later bishop of Worcester) were among them.
In 1309 and 1311, Hildesley was granted licences to study at Paris for two-year periods.
He was an Oxford bachelor of canon law by 1317 and served Edward II and III in France, Gascony and Aragon.
His most important assignment was his appointment as proctor for Edward at the court of France in 1330 and 1331 to discuss Edward's homage for Aquitaine and Ponthieu.
He was still employed on missions to negotiate truces with the French in 1343.
His extensive knowledge, and training at Paris, doubtless served him well.
Master Henry of Canterbury, responsible for many of Edward II's diplomatic memoranda, had also studied law at Paris, and his professional judgement upon Anglo-French affairs was invaluable.
‘Foreign policy’ was partly determined by the appreciation of possibilities, based upon precedents, formed by these experts.
Their function was to advise the Plantagenets on the best means of sustaining their interests as dukes of Aquitaine and counts of Ponthieu before the Paris parlement.
Some were still doing this on the eve of war in 1336.
If these men were often Paris graduates as well as graduates of Oxford or Cambridge, they at least knew the thought-processes and tactics of their French counterparts well.
More will be said in a later chapter about the implications of Plantagenet representation in France at this level.
We should never forget the salient cultural fact that the lingua franca of clerical diplomats was Latin.
Something of this cultural cosmopolitanism may be gauged from the fortunes of the psalter given in 1318 to Cardinal Gaucelme Duèse, papal nuncio to England and nephew of John XXII, by Geoffrey of Croyland, abbot of Peterborough.
This sumptuous and densely illuminated book written entirely in Latin, was then bought by Philip VI of France in c.1328.
It was begun by an illuminator working in the Anglo-French ‘court’ style of c.1300, and was completed by associates who display features of the so-called ‘East Anglian’style of the early fourteenth century.
But a common taste for lavish illumination was evidently shared by an English abbot, a Gascon cardinal and the first Valois king of France.
‘National’ differences pale into insignificance when the predilections of patrons and purchasers of illuminated books are considered.
Secular culture shared in this ‘internationalism’ among those born or trained to rule.
The lingua franca of courtly discourse, imaginative literature, and record-keeping was French, and remained so for most of the fourteenth century.
Analysis of early fourteenth-century letter-collections would show that a form of French, perfectly comprehensible to both Frenchmen and Englishmen alike, was the normal language of secular correspondence.
Of 719 letters issued under the privy seal of Edward, prince of Wales (later Edward II) between 1304 and 1305,676 were in French and the remaining 43 in Latin.
The latter were all addressed to the pope or to foreign prelates.
French was therefore the language used by Edward's officials to address recipients as diverse as English local officers and Italian merchants.
Of 331 letters sent by Philippa of Hainault between 1330 and 1336, 203 were in Latin and 128 in French.
The predominance of Latin in this sample reflects the fact that many letters were addressed to bishops, and that Latin was used for the more solemn and formal instruments emanating from her chancery.
But the language of everyday correspondence was undoubtedly French, and the many news-letters and reports sent to English recipients during the Anglo-French war of St Sardos (1324–5) were overwhelmingly French.
The first surviving letters patent issued in French by the English royal chancery date from 1258.
It was perhaps no coincidence that French was adopted by English departments of state during the Anglo-French rapprochement of that time.
Although much of their business was conducted in Anglo-Norman (which developed a literature of its own) there is little to suggest that ‘English’ magnates were ignorant of the best written French.
The books (especially the romances) in their libraries, and their letter collections, bear witness to that.
Yet a consciousness of Anglo-French differences was already apparent — it was based upon irrational prejudices and linguistic dissimilarities, and had existed since the mid to late twelfth century.
In his verse romance Jean de Dammartin et Blonde d'Oxford , for example, written in the 1270s or 1280s, Philippe de Beaumanoir (knight and author of the Coutumes de Beauvai-sis ) reveals the attitude of a representative thirteenth-century French noble-man towards England and his English contemporaries.
There is no inherent ill will towards Englishmen.
Indeed, the hero of the tale, Jean, son of the count of Dammartin, not only inherits his father's French lordships but the earldom of Oxford as well.
The tale revolves around Jean's career as a young gentilhomme who seeks his fortune in England.
Parallels with Simon de Montfort, the Valence and Joinville families are not entirely inappropriate.
Beaumanoir may indeed have visited England shortly before 1270, and the settings of his romances are in Scotland and England.
Jean de Dammartin, in Beaumanoir's story met the earl of Oxford's retinue on the road from Dover to London on their way to parliament.
His appearance attracted the earl's attention, and Jean   Oxford's linguistic ability is sharply contrasted with that of Jean's rival for the hand of Blonde, Oxford's daughter.
This is the blustering earl of Gloucester, whom Jean again meets on the road.
Gloucester recognizes Jean as a Frenchman because of his tunic, which he thinks means that he was born near Pontoise.
The poem goes on: Gloucester offers to buy Jean's riding horse (palfrey) but, with heavy irony, Jean demands what he most desires from the earl in payment.
Gloucester expostulates  Much amusement was no doubt derived by Beaumanoir's audience from the villain's massacre of the best Ile-de-France French through solecisms and Anglo-Norman constructions.
Yet this was not so very different from the linguistic parodies found in other French narrative verse of the period.
In the Tournoi de Chauvency (1285) there are jokes about Picard French, and very funny and elaborate parodies of Alsatian speech.
The practice of linguistic comedy was not confined to stories which involved the English: all kinds of foreigners were the butt of linguistic satire.
In Jean et Blonde , the hero's beloved, although English, is described in terms of perfection, and the fact that ‘There was just a suspicion in her speech/ That she had not been born at Pontoise’ is a very minor and venial offence against courloisie .
Jean then set about teaching her the finest French ‘Par quoi ele mout chier le tint’(‘for  which she held him very dear’).
There are also in the poem a number of jokes by English characters at Jean's expense.
Gloucester and his retinue describe him as ‘ce sot français’, but his sottises are clearly misunderstood by them.
Their reaction is partly linguistically determined — they simply do not appreciate the word-play of courtly French and, as a result, Gloucester is worsted in his courtship of Blonde.
All ends happily, with a splendid scene of Anglo-French entente where the aged earl of Oxford decides to pass his remaining time in the company of his English daughter and French son-in-law, spending two years at Dammartin and two years in England by turns.
On his death, Jean becomes both earl of Oxford and count of Dammartin.
Though fictitious, his ‘cross-Channel’ landholdings and family connections put him into the company of Geoffroi de Joinville or Aymer de Valence
3
ANGLO-FRENCH TENSIONS
3.1 Homage for Aquitaine
It is generally agreed by historians that the treaty concluded between Henry III and Louis IX at Paris in 1259 lay behind many of the problems from which subsequent Anglo-French tensions stemmed.
To understand the nature of relations between the two kingdoms between 1250 and 1340 we must consider the manner in which the treaty was made, and the implications of the clauses.
As the treaty was concerned with rights to lordship and territory, their nature is clearly of considerable importance.
Sovereignty, homage and fealty, and the ‘domainal liberties’ of the Plantagenets, are sometimes considered in a theoretical light but they must also be put as firmly as possible into the more pragmatic context of Anglo-French relations.
There is nearly unanimous agreement among historians about the significance of the ‘impossible situation’ in which the Plantagenet king-dukes of Aquitaine found themselves in the later thirteenth and early fourteenth centuries.
Rulers who were kings in their own right were placed in a subordinate ‘feudal’ relationship to the kings of France as a result of their continental inheritance.
At the same time, a notion that the Capetian king was not only an overlord but ‘sovereign’ in his kingdom had also evolved.
What was ‘sovereignty’?
What could a sovereign do that others could not?
Firstly, he could exercise his so-called regalia (regalian rights) and judge cas royaux (regalian law-suits).
The first gave him a degree of control over appointment to benefices in the Church; the second referred certain cases to his court and gave him certain prerogative powers.
These were reserved to the crown in, for example, grants of apanages such as that conferred by Louis IX on Charles of Anjou in 1246.
Although formally set out only at a later date (c.1372), they came to include the rights to create notaries, to legitimize bastards, to grant letters conferring the status of bourgeoisie and nobility, to issue pardons and remissions, to license fairs and markets, to permit suitors to be represented at law by proctors, and to legislate for the common weal of the kingdom.
But, above all else, there was the supreme attribute of judicial sovereignty — the right to exercise ‘superior justice’ as ‘emperor in his kingdom’, or as ‘prince and superior lord in the kingdom of France.
No appeal was therefore permitted from the Capetian's supreme court, the incipient parlement of Paris.
It was in a literal sense the ‘last resort’(dernier ressort ).
Such authority could not be shared with, nor alienated to anyone; the notion was already fully developed under Philip the Fair by 1294: ‘the king of France is subject to no one’, wrote Guillaume de Nogaret, expressing the doctrine which could make vassals subjects and was absolute.
It did not, as has been claimed, need a Louis XI to act as its midwife in the fifteenth century.
What was the theory — did it really work in practice?
To answer this question, we must first assess the significance of homage and fealty in the later thirteenth century: how important were they as expressions of subordination of one ruler to another?
Did the obligations implied by them have any marked practical effects?
Louis IX apparently thought the issue of homage highly significant.
Joinville reported the king's reply to his counsellors who opposed the treaty with England of 1259: ‘it seems to me that what I give him [Henry III]I am employing well, because he was not my man, and now he enters into my homage’.
Louis was to some degree right; since 1202 no homage had been performed to a king of France by any plantagenet king for his residual continental possessions.
Homape could be a demeaning ceremony for a ruler who was sovereign in his own  right to perform.
The kings of France paid homage to no one.
The king of England was indeed emperor in his own kingdom, but he was expected to swear an oath of homage and fealty to another sovereign or princeps et dominus superior .
Under the Angevins, it has been argued, ‘the legal relationship between a king of France and a king of England who held territories on the continent meant that it was relatively easy for the king of France to legitimize his own actions as part of a legal process’.
This still held good under Henry III and Edward I. But there were at least two means whereby the un-welcome connotations of homage for the king-duke of Aquitaine could be made more acceptable.
Firstly, by appointing a proxy to perform the oath, and secondly, transferring the fief and his rights over it to another person.
By Gascon custom, observed in 1254 by Henry III and in 1306 by Edward I, this could only be the king-duke's eldest son.
He would hold the fief and render the homage.
Edward, earl of Chester, the future Edward III, did precisely this for Edward II on 10 September 1325.
But the matter was not such a simple one.
What happened if the king-duke had no son?
One privilege of his Gascon subjects was that the duchy could never be alienated to anyone except an eldest son — hence the outbreak of conflict under Richard II when John of Gaunt (the king's uncle) was made duke of Aquitaine (1390–4).
Furthermore, when the king-duke died, his eldest son would succeed to the English throne, thus necessitating a new transfer of Aquitaine.
What happened if (as was the case in 1327) the new king had no son, or he was a minor?
He would simply have to perform homage in person.
Edward III was in that position until the birth of Edward of Woodstock in June 1330.
He was therefore obliged to perform homage to Philip VI in 1329.
If the king-duke decided to alienate the fief, the king of France's permission (as sovereign) was technically required, because he was entitled to exact the feudal payment of relief when a fief changed hands.
In 1325 a relief of 60,000 livres parisis was demanded from Edward II when he gave Aquitaine to his son.
It was never paid.
But evasion of personal homage could be potentially expensive.
What then was the form of homage exacted for the continental lands of the  English crown?
The distinction between liege and simple homage had begun to be made in the course of the twelfth century.
There is no doubt, from the terms of the 1259 treaty, that Henry III's was intended to be liege homage: on 4 December 1259 he performed liege homage to St Louis in the garden of his palace on the Ile-de-la-Cité.
Henry, as peer of France, was now holding a new duché-pairie in the south-west.
The implications of liege homage were twofold: it combined both homage and fealty — although the latter was not sworn by the monarch in person, but by proxy.
To swear the oath of exclusive personal loyalty contained in fealty would certainly have derogated from the majesty of the king of England.
The point was vividly made at Amiens on 29 June 1320, when Edward II performed homage to Philip V of France before the high altar of the cathedral.
Three or four days later, according to an eyewitness report, a meeting took place between the two monarchs and their advisers in the French king's chamber there in order to renew an alliance of perpetual friendship concluded in 1303 by Edward I and Philip IV.
During the discussion, one of the French counsellors proposed that Edward was bound to swear fealty, as well as homage to Philip V. Edward's own words in reply to what he clearly considered an outrageous suggestion survive: they were spoken without the advice of his council, apparently because they had difficulty in hearing the king's whispered words and he lost patience.
Edward turned away from the assembled prelates and nobles of his council and addressed Philip V as follows:
The French council was stunned into silence by this intransigent retort.
Eventually, one of them tactfully suggested to Philip V that the perpetual alliance should simply be sworn, and also a mutual oath not to harbour enemies or those banished from either kingdom.
This presupposed parity of status was to have important implications.
No further allusion was made to the issue of fealty, and Edward II himself replied ‘with an amiable  countenance,: ‘We willingly wish this to be done [i.e. the alliance to be renewed], for it is right.’
But the eyewitness who reported the scene noted that all could see from his face that he was greatly irritated by the French counsellor who had attempted to alter the terms of his homage and exact a fealty oath.
That the king should feel it necessary to speak for himself in these discussions is striking — the theoretical concepts of sovereignty, homage and fealty clearly had important implications.
The bond of liege homage posed a further difficulty for one who was sovereign in his own right: how could the king of England perform services to the king of France which ran counter to his own previous alliances?
If, for instance, the king of France was at war with the king of Aragon or Castile and called upon the king of England, as duke of Aquitaine, to serve him according to his oath, how could former treaties of alliance between England and Aragon or Castile be broken?
One way round such thorny issues was the insertion of a clause in all subsequent alliances excepting the vassals' fealty to his liege lord.
Edward I did this in alliances with Castile, Navarre, Aragon and Flanders.
All this may seem cut and dried, and potentially restrictive, if not damag-ing to the interests of the Plantagenet king-duke of Aquitaine.
But by 1273, when both the original parties to the 1259 agreement were dead, the issues were by no means so clear-cut.
On 6 August 1273 Edward I paid homage to Philip III.
The form of words that he used were these: ‘Lord king, I do you homage for all the lands which I ought to hold from you’.
By this conditional statement, Edward clearly referred to the non-performance of the territorial clauses of the 1259 treaty.
Before be would perform liege homage, he must be invested with the lands and rights which were agreed between his father and Louis IX.
Again, on 5 June 1286, Edward performed homage to Philip IV of France, using the words: ‘I become your man for the lands which I hold from you on this side of the sea according to the form of peace made between our ancestors’.
By this, he and his diplomatic agents maintained, was meant the fully implemented terms of the 1259 agreement.
If, as was palpably obvious, those terms had not been properly executed, liege homage was to be postponed until such time as satisfaction had been obtained.
Hence, with the exception of Henry III's action of December 1259, liege homage (in its full and proper form) had not been performed for Aquitaine prior to the accession of Philip IV in 1285.
Homage was deemed conditional upon the putting into effect of what came to be called ‘St Louis's peace’.
To understand the reasons behind that agreement we must look more loosely at the context in which it was made.
The treaty can be divided into four main parts.
Firstly, Henry III of England took the somewhat unwise step of renouncing his fiefs in Normandy, Anjou, Touraine, Maine and Poitou.
His heirs and successors were not to lay claim to them.
Secondly, this was conditional upon Louis IX of France ceding to Henry all rights ‘that he has and holds in these three dioceses and three cities: that is to say, Limoges, Cahors and Périgueux, in fiefs and in domains’.
Thirdly, the Agenais, claimed by the king of England, was to remain in French hands until the question of his legal right was determined.
That was only done twenty years later, in 1279.
Lastly, all that Louis IX abandoned in favour of Henry III — his fiefs and domains in Limousin, Quercy, and Périgord (the so-called ‘three dioceses’) and all that remained to the Plantagenets of the ancient duchy of Aquitaine — was to be held by the king of England as an hereditary fief.
He must take an oath of fealty and liege homage to his suzerain, the king of France, for it.
In return Henry III was granted a peerage of France.
He became one of the twelve peers of the kingdom, taking his place beside the count of Flanders, the duke of Burgundy and the count of Anjou.
The treaty created conditions which, for three reasons, would arguably result in conflict: it was soon apparent that Louis IX possessed very little in the three dioceses worth ceding to Henry III: they were what Le Patourel called ‘a complex and varying bundle of rights and jurisdictions, often barely effective, a fruitful source of disputes and appeals’.
In addition, some lords, both ecclesiastical and secular, were privileged (privilegiati ) in that they could not be forced to transfer their allegiance to another lord against their will.
This was a rich, fertile field for those judicial disputes upon which many throve — especially the lawyers and officers in the pay of either side.
In this area, therefore, Anglo-French rivalry should be viewed in judicial, legal and proprietary terms, rather than in a purely military framework.
If war was a continuation of legal proceedings over rights by other means, then those legal proceedings were a result of the treaty of 1259.
Secondly, Henry III's renunciation of all his rights to Normandy, Anjou, Touraine, Maine and Poitou was a more serious matter than some contemporaries thought.
The fact that Henry was not in possession of those areas in 1259 did not mean that he or his successors might not actively revive their claims.
His renunciation also rested upon a dubious legal sentence of 1202, a punitive measure against King John by Philip Augustus.
Ought this to be  enforced in different circumstances against John's innocent son and heir?
And how did the inhabitants of those areas feel?
The barons of Normandy and Poitou were not innately unfavourable towards a Plantagenet lord and, as their successors were to discover after 1337, a choice of allegiance could be a very useful weapon in the course of disputes with the Capetian monarchy.
Thirdly, by agreeing to hold the duchy of Aquitaine as an hereditary fief from the crown of France, Henry III was putting both himself and his heirs into an untenable position since a king in his own right was to perform liege homage to another king.
Two sovereigns of equal authority in their respective kingdoms were put on an unequal footing because one of those sovereigns held land from the other.
To hypothesize, it was as if the king of France held the earldom of Cornwall or Lancaster from the king of England, who could therefore exert some degree of control over the foreign policy and behaviour of the king of France.
Conversely, it was theoretically to the advantage of the French kings to have the Plantagenets as feudal inferiors, rather than to expel them from their remaining continental possessions.
Professor Cuttino has concluded that the peace of paris ‘which re-created the feudal relationship which led eventually to war, was the result of English commitments towards Sicily and the desire to secure wealthy territory’.
As such, he argued, it was a mistake.
Henry III was indeed morally and financially committed to support the policies of Pope Innocent IV and his own brother, Richard of Cornwall, towards Sicily.
His problems with the English baronage in 1258–9 also necessitated a settlement with France of the status of his remaining continental possessions.
As we have seen, Louis IX's support against the troublesome magnates was highly desirable.
Yet there were also incentives for Louis IX to come to terms: Joinville reports that Louis replied to his critics, who asked why he should give away ‘so great a part of your land, that you and your ancestors have conquered, and which has been forfeited’, that he had given Henry, Aquitaine, Gascony and the three dioceses ‘to create affection between my children and his, who are cousins-germain'.
The domestic circle was thus to be brought closer together.
After all, Henry III, Richard of Cornwall, Louis IX and Charles of Anjou were brothers-in-law — they had all married daughters of the count of Provence.
Margaret, Louis IX's queen, was the sister of Eleanor, queen of England, and maintained the closest connection with both Henry III and Edward I. In January 1262, for instance, one of Henry III's proctors at Paris, Pierre de Limoges, wrote to Walter de Merton, chancellor of England, to tell him that Queen Margaret was so occupied in the business of negotiations that she had no time to write to him.
He was accordingly writing to give the views which the queen would otherwise have sent.
Again, in October 1281, Edward I wrote to her, saying that she had always striven to keep the peace between Henry III and Louis, and between Philip III and himself.
She had laboured hard ‘on behalf of this harmony for which’, Edward wrote, ‘we thank you with all our heart’.
Dynastic concord and family harmony were, however, bought somewhat at the expense of the two princes' subjects.
Henry and Louis had in effect entered upon a private treaty of peace, against the wishes of many of their most powerful subjects.
In France, it was thought by Louis's noble counsellors that Henry III's homage had been far too dearly bought.
The inhabitants of some areas ceded by Louis to Henry were similarly unenthusiastic about the treaty, and the people of some places in the three dioceses actually refused to celebrate St Louis's feast-day after his canonization in 1297.
In England the chronicler of Meaux accused Henry of making a ‘shameful concord’, and Matthew Paris singled out Richard, earl of Gloucester, as the scapegoat in this dishonourable peace.
Yet the strongest opposition to the treaty came from the very highest ranks of English society: from the Lord Edward, and from Simon de Montfort and his wife Eleanor.
Gervase of Canterbury tells us that Edward objected especially to Henry's renunciation of his rights to Normandy and to the infeudation of Gascony: although Edward had agreed to its terms by 25 July 1259, he was to change his mind in 1260 and allege that Normandy had been sold to the French.
He refused to accompany his father to pay homage to Louis IX in November 1259.
More immediately serious were the objections of de Montfort.
Eleanor, countess of Leicester, Simon's wife, had substantial claims against Henry III for her dowry as widow of William Marshal.
Abetted by her husband, she refused to countenance the renunciations which Henry was to make in the peace treaty.
Although a form of peace had been agreed upon on 28 May 1258, it was not until 4 December 1259 that Eleanor de Montfort actually accepted the renunciations and agreed that she would not revive her claims to her French lands.
She was in effect bought out for 15,000 marks.
It was  upon such essentially private issues that so-called ‘international’ agreements could founder in the thirteenth century.
Here, modern concepts of diplomacy and international relations are often at variance with those of this period.
Yet the treaty of 1259 did introduce a momentous change into the relations between the two powers.
Henry III, unlike his three Angevin ancestors, could now no longer style himself ‘king of England, lord of Ireland, duke of Normandy and Aquitaine and count of Anjou’.
His great seal had formerly born those titles, with an image of the king seated on a throne (or Norman stool) grasping a sword.
By 9 September 1259 a new seal had been made — it bore the legend ‘Henry, by the grace of God, king of England, lord of Ireland and duke of Aquitaine’, with a representation of the king seated upon a Gothic chair, bearing not a sword, but a sceptre.
Yet the new royal style was initially used only for diplomatic relations with France: the old style was employed by some departments of English government until June 1260.
In effect, Henry acted in breach of the treaty of Paris by using his style as duke of Normandy and count of Anjou for acts of English internal administration.
These apparently included documents concerning Gascony: for example, a letter to Oléron on 3 September 1259, but this did not provoke any kind of diplomatic incident or crisis in Anglo-French relations.
Louis IX did not apparently take any steps to prevent Henry from using an obsolete and illegal instrument.
But the reaction might have been different if Philip the Fair, rather than St Louis had been king of France at that time.
French susceptibilities over sovereignty had not vet developed to the extent that they were to do by 1294.
On 18 October 1260, however, the ‘last symbol of English resistance to the conquests of Philip Augustus’ disappeared.
A short ceremony in the king's chamber at Westminster marked the end of the Angevin Empire, in the form which it had assumed under Henry II and his sons.
The new great seal was handed to the king, and the old seal broken by the king's command.
Henry III then gave the new matrix to Master Nicholas de Ely who took the oath to keep it faithfully.
With his own hand, the king characteristically gave the fragments of the old seal's silver matrix to one of his clerks for donation to some poor religious house.
So ended the formal history of the Angevin dominions — Henry III and his successors were to retain only their south-western French lands de jure and de facto , held as fiefs of the French crown in liege homage, a form of tenure which normally implied feudal service.
Did the performance of an oath to the king of France in fact entail the subsequent performance of feudal services by the king-dukes?
There is some  evidence that this was the case, although it is sometimes negative in nature.
In May 1275 Edward I wrote to Alphonso of Castile, excusing himself from an alliance with Castile against France because he was bound by his homage and fealty to Philip III.
But in 1282 he received a direct summons from Philip requesting him to serve in arms in the proposed French expedition to Aragon of that year.
Edward was addressed as duke of Aquitaine and count of Ponthieu, and the summons was received in the duchy by his seneschal, the Savoyard Jean de Grilly.
Grilly's action was noteworthy.
On receipt of the summons, he sent a copy to Edward (who was in Wales), and immediately wrote to the nobles and communes of the duchy, ordering them to prepare themselves to serve ‘with arms and horses’(cum armis et equis ), and to make ready so that they might obey Edward's command when it was known.
In his circular letter to the Gascons, Grilly had made no mention of the fact that Philip III of France had issued the summons.
He waited for Edward's decision but, in a second letter, took the opportunity of reminding him that his son, Pierre de Grilly, was eligible for knighthood and that Edward had promised to knight him.
Jean desired this and as ‘the king of France has given permission to make war in this land’, Pierre could serve in Aragon.
In the event, there was no expedition to Aragon in 1282.
But on 21 July, Edward I ordered Jean de Grilly to obey Philip III's summons and to make ready to perform military service; but in his reply to the king of France he was to stress that in the 1259 treaty ‘the certainty of the said service has not yet been found’.
The Aragonese were politely told by Edward (in January 1283) that ‘we are bound by kinship and by homage to the king of France, nor does it behove us to rebel against him in any way, nor to do anything to arouse his anger nor give him offence’.
Military service to France was actually performed by Edward in 1283, in so far as Edward's seneschal of Ponthieu arrived at Bordeaux with a contingent of men-at-arms, ready to serve in Aragon, but they soon returned home.
There were, however, very strong Gascon objections to the performance of feudal services by their duke to the French crown.
The clergy, nobility and communes of Gascony and the Agenais sent Edward a petition urging him to refuse feudal services in the Aragonese war.
But they requested that his refusal should not be transmitted by appeal to the court of France (that is, to the king and peers), for that would be to recognize the superiority of Philip III's court in a  matter which was by no means certain.
As Philip's summons had been issued only on the fragile authority of a single peace treaty, its validity had to be established by other means.
The Gascons demanded that such issues, which gravely threatened the liberty and hereditary rights of both Edward I and themselves, be settled by those they called ‘common judges’ or wardens (esgardiatores ) who should judge the case according to marcher law.
Gascony and the Agenais were frontier areas; they were marches in the sense that the borders towards Scotland and Wales were to become marches, subject to their own customs and the jurisdiction of their two wardens.
This doing of justice en marche could be elevated to encompass the creation of ad hoc Anglo-French commissions (with a strong Gascon element) empowered to adjudicate disputes over services and obligations outside the formal appellate jurisdiction of the French crown.
Questions arising from the 1259 treaty were, after an ordinance of Edward's Westminster Parliament in 1285, to be resolved by such commissions, and the so-called ‘processes’ of Montreuil, Périgueux and Agen were pragmatic applications of this idea.
Yet they took place only after the Anglo-French war o
After 1303, however, no feudal service was performed by Edward I to the crown of France.
A request for military aid against Flanders from Philip the Fair in March 1304 certainly met with Edward's support: twenty ships were promised.
But they were only to be offered upon condition that this created no precedent.
This aid was interpreted as a product of the treaty of alliance concluded between the two sovereigns in 1303.
It was not obligatory feudal service for Aquitaine and Ponthieu, but the friendly assistance of one sovereign, acting of his own free will, to another.
In the event the ships do not appear to have been sent, although payment for preparing them was certainly made by the Exchequer at York to Roger Savage and Peter of Dunwich.
A letter of excuse was apparently sent to Philip, to be taken by three messengers including Savage and Dunwich.
Edward II, however, gave a measure of active assistance to Louis X of France against Flanders in  September 1315, when he ordered two English admirals to sail towards the Flemish coast with their six ships, and issued a letter permitting Amaury de Craon, seneschal of Aquitaine, to serve Louis personally in Flanders.
We have no other details of this aspect of Anglo-French relations before the outbreak of the Hundred Years War.
In effect, it seems safe to conclude that the performance of feudal services by the King of England as duke of Aquitaine and count of Ponthieu was very largely a non-issue.
The question of homage, on the contrary, was another matter: its significance lay not in the amount of service which it might subsequently furnish to the kings of France, but in the principle which it enshrined.
Henry III's damnosa hereditas made two sovereigns unequal when they became involved in the affairs of the surviving remnants of the Angevin Empire in south-west France.
It is important to be clear about the extent and status of those south-western French possessions.
If, as is usually argued, the course of Anglo-French relations before the Hundred Years War was largely dictated by disputes over them, their nature is highly significant.
They have been mistakenly described, with the Channel Islands and the Isle of Oléron (off La Rochelle) as component parts of ‘England's first Empire’, the first ‘overseas dominions’ of the English crown.
Their administration has been intensively studied and seen as part of what John Le Patourel called the ‘converging and ultimately clashing development of the government of [the Angevin Empire], or what was left of it…and the development of royal government in the kingdom of France.
It was more than the feudal relationship between king and king-duke, it was the overlapping and ultimately the conflict of two growing structures of government.’
To lift the conflict of England and France above the protracted legal wrangles and diplomatic bickering produced by the feudal relationship on to another, loftier, plane is no easy task.
Talk of ‘structures of government’ may distort rather than illuminate, and the centrality of the personal relationship between rulers can be too much played down.
Institutions can directly reflect political circumstances, and there can be no divorce between the implications of that feudal relationship and its expression in ‘constitutional’ forms — in appellate jurisdiction, in the devices used to delay homage or evade services, or in the administrative expedients whereby rights and revenues were upheld and increased.
In 1259 the status of Henry III's Gascon possessions was uncertain.
Were they all in fact part of the kingdom of France?
Did Louis IX really have a sound title to act as sovereign over them at that time?
It is a notable feature of English diplomatic activity in the late 1290s that Edward I's lawyers argued that Gascony was not in effect part of the kingdom of France at all: it  was an allodial land, held only from God.
The ‘duchy of Aquitaine’ in the mid-thirteenth century can only be described in relation to the kingdom of France.
One striking characteristic of the French kingdom throughout this period (1259–1340) was its fluctuating size.
It was a bundle of rights and privileges, both claimed and exercised.
Its extent expanded and contracted according to many external and internal pressures.
Philip the Fair's adviser, Guillaume de Nogaret, saw the regnum as the total area of Capetian jurisdiction — and that might not correspond to its territorial extent at a given time.
The use of royal letters of protection could annex territories — often enclaves — to the crown (Lyon, Valenciennes or the comté of Bar) but these might subsequently revert to other hands.
Outside his own domain (the Ile-de-France) the king often had no more than powers of general protection.
The precise extent of those powers was the subject of constant dispute, and at this stage in constitutional development the play of politics still had a direct influence upon the definition of the king's rights, especially his rights of justice.
How he chose to exercise those rights differed from time to time and from province to province.
It has been rightly said that in the thirteenth century the king of France (unlike the king of England) possessed no direct control over the whole kingdom: ‘outside the domain, default alone allowed him to act’.
It was only when seigneurial justice or administration broke down, or otherwise went awry, that the king could act directly to intervene in his vassals' conduct of their affairs.
How then did the south-western French domains of the Plantagenets rank in the hierarchy of fiefs which made up the kingdom of France?
Dr Pierre Chaplais has argued that Henry III's action, by which he acknowledged Louis IX's superiority over the whole duchy of Aquitaine, was more damag-ing to both Plantagenet and Gascon interests than may at first appear.
The treaty of 1259 transformed a Gascon allod into a fief, and extended the French kingdom, for the first time, as far as the Pyrenees.
For the first time, an English king held the duchy from the French crown in liege homage.
In other words, before 1259 the duchy of Aquitaine — or a substantial portion of it — had been an independent and autonomous unit, held by a duke who performed neither homage nor feudal services to the Capetians.
It might bear comparison with Normandy in some respects — there, a separate ducal  administration continued to function even after its so-called integration into France in 1204.
Louis IX legislated for Normandy and for the kingdom in separate ordinances and he heard appeals not at Paris, but at Rouen.
Professor Wood has noted the paradox that in Normandy ‘the rights and powers or its rulers [i.e. the dukes]so far exceeded those possessed by the king that it was desirable to maintain the duchy as a territory apart, and provide for its continued semi-autonomous existence’.
Much of this statement could be applied to Aquitaine.
In the south-west of France, however, complete autonomy had, it seems, prevailed before 1259.
The duchy of Aquitaine was not of ancient or Carolingan origin.
It represented the tenure after 1063 of the two ancient duchies of Gascony and Guyenne (the Gallicized form of ‘Aquitaine’) by one ruler.
The earlier duchy of Aquitaine had been part of the comté of Poitou , but the duchy of Gascony was an independent entity.
Very roughly, the boundary between the two lordships was the river Garonne.
The early charters of the dukes of Gascony dating from the tenth and eleventh centuries make no mention in their dating clauses of the reigning king of France, and the dukes certainly possessed such rights as the striking of coins.
From 1063 to 1202, the duchy of Gascony was held with Aquitaine by the counts of Poitou, but it was, unlike Poitou, held as an autonomous domain.
In 1152, Henry Plantagenet (later Henry II) became duke of Aquitaine, then part of the comté of Poitou, and as such recognized his vassalic status towards Louis VII of France.
But the duchy of Gascony, lying between the Garonne and the Pyrenees, remained inviolable, and the lands ‘in Wasconia ultra Guaro-nam’, as Richard I described them in 1191, were in fact allodial territories, held without superior lord.
So were the vicomtés of Béarn (independent of the French crown until 1612) and Turenne (independent until 1736).
The very fact that philip Augustus made no serious attempt to invade or attack Gascon), in the campaigns of 1202–4 may be more than simply a comment upon the military limitations of the French crown.
It could have meant that the Capetians acknowledged that they possessed no realizable claims to the allodial duchy of Gascony.
As we shall see, this area of the south-west was the source of much of the opposition to the crown of France between 1294  and 1303, and where traditional loyalties to the Plantagenet regime were most deeply rooted.
The Gascons themselves were well aware that the 1259 treaty had led to an immediate change in their status.
The Livre des Coutumes of Bordeaux contains a note that ‘[In 1259]king Henry did homage for Bordeaux, Bayonne and all the land of Gascony [Gasconha ]which was [then]free allod [franc en alo ]to Louis, king of France…but let it be known that this Gascony was the most free allod that the king of England had, before…king Henry received it back from the French king in homage’.
By the peace of Paris, the inhabitants of ‘Gascony beyond the Garonne’ had become arrière-vassaux of Louis IX, although in 1224 they had refused to transfer their ultimate allegiance to the king of France.
They performed no feudal services, military or otherwise, to the French crown, and they owed no suit of court outside strict territorial limits.
There was therefore every reason for them, and for those who served the interests of the Plantagenet king-dukes, to try to undo the treaty's effects.
Henry III's political miscalculation had to be set right, and it was imperative that the status of the Gascon lands be redefined.
The new duché-pairie in Gascony had to be dismantled and an independent duchy re-created.
If the actual performance of liege homage could be staved off by Henry's successors until the territorial clauses of the 1259 treaty were properly implemented, then it could be claimed that the duke was acting as defacto sovereign in his duchy until such time as the agreement was fulfilled.
Given the objections of interested parties, such as the lords known as the privilegiati in the three dioceses, this was unlikely to be a speedy process.
Edward I's behaviour may be seen partly in this light.
A theory of ducal sovereignty was in effect to be formulated between 1294 and 1300, which was to set important precedents for other peers and magnates of France to follow.
Capetian claims to the exercise of sovereignty evoked a hostile response from the magnates, led by the duke of Aquitaine and count of Flanders, which was not to be stilled by the death of Philip the Fair in 1314.
But it was only after Philip's seizure of Aquitaine (in 1293–4) that this response was brought out into the open.
Was a workable modus vivendi then possible between the rulers of England and France, even within the limits set  by the peace of Paris?
The answer cannot be found without closer scrutiny of the Plantagenet presence in France.
3.2 The Plantagenet Presence in France, 1259–1294
Sir Maurice Powicke reminded his English readers that ‘Edward [1]was a southerner by blood, and, through his dukedom of Aquitaine, by circumstance’.
It is not therefore altogether surprising that he should have spent the years 1254–5, 1261–3, 1273–4 and 1286–9 in south-west France; nor that his mind was often preoccupied with French and Gascon affairs both before and during his reign.
He knew the duchy well and, Powicke concluded, ‘he never wished, even if it were possible to do so, to relax his grasp upon the affairs of his distant province’.
He arrived in Gascony in September 1273, for example, before he had even returned to England as king, to deal with the actions of Gaston VII,vicomte of Béarn, against his authority as duke of Aquitaine.
Edward remained in Gascony until the end of April 1274, fully occupied with the settlement of the case of Gaston VII in which Edward was represented at the Parlement of Paris by one of the best civil lawyers in Europe, Francesco Accursius of Bologna.
He was busy negotiating alliances with the Spanish kingdoms, receiving oaths of homage from all his Gascon vassals, conducting a great inquiry into feudal tenures in Gascony (the so-called Recognicionesfeodorum of 1273–5), which had parallels with the Hundred Rolls and Quo Warranto proceedings in England, and summoning assemblies of the three estates of the duchy, and of the ‘court of Gascony’ to adjudicate (among other things) the case of Gaston de Béarn.
All this took place in the space of ten months — Edward was nothing if not energetic at this period.
But the duchy also required government and administration during the absences of its ruler.
Obviously the king-duke could not be everywhere in his far-flung territories at once, so delegation was presupposed; Henry II had used his son Richard (later Richard 1) or Queen Eleanor as viceroys.
Day-to-day government was from an early date conducted by an officer called a seneschal, with vice-ducal powers, and a council.
This was the origin of the office held by the king's ordinary representative in the duchy or Aquitaine until 1453.
By the mid thirteenth century, another permanent officer appears: the constable of Bordeaux, responsible for the financial administration of duchy, who is first documented in 1253–4.
After 1292, he accounted to the Westminster exchequer.
The reign of Edward I was a period of development and definition.
He was the last English king to spend time (as king) in Gascony: ten months in 1273–4; two years in 1286–9; so there was a need to establish an administration there which would function without the king-duke's presence at all.
The way towards permanent absentee government was prepared at the beginning of Edward's reign when the king was actually in Gascony.
What the Normans and Angevins had done in England was now done in Gascony.
The great inquiry into Gascon tenures initiated by Edward 1 in September 1273 was, however, based upon sound precedent.
In 1259, Henry III's seneschal of Gascony — Dreu de Barentin — had been ordered to inquire into feudal tenures in exactly the same manner as Louis IX's brother, Alphonse de Poitiers, had begun to do in his comté of Toulouse.
As was often to be the case, action by the French in lands adjoining the duchy of Aquitaine provoked the Plantagenet regime to do likewise.
The inquiry of 1259 was never put into effect, and it has been suggested that one reason for Edward's visit to Gascony in 1273 was the ‘desire to proceed to this measure’.
Edward had seen the confusions into which the administration of his duchy might fall through ignorance of vassalic obligations and regional customs.
If cases were to be properly judged in Aquitaine, kept out of the Paris Parlement or adjudicated successfully by ad hoc commissions in either Gascony or (if a petition to the king in parliament had been made) in England, then knowledge of tenurial conditions, rights, duties and privileges was essential.
Ignorance could spell ruin, as Edward's administration was well aware.
The state of confusion surrounding such issues was such that he was obliged to allow forty days' grace to many of his ninety or so loyal vassals assembled at St Sever in September 1273, so that they might consult their title-deeds, old charters, relatives and aged kinsmen.
The results of Edward's Gascon inquiry of 1273–5 were not entirely dissimilar to those of his subsequent inquest in England which led to the Hundred Rolls and the statute of Gloucester (1280).
Although there is no extant record of special itinerant commissioners taking information upon oath, the product of Edward's summonses to his tenants in Gascony was analogous.
A comprehensive survey of feudal and allodial tenures (in the Bordelais only) was made, and it is significant that Edward's demands for military service from Gascon vassals in 1294 closely followed the lists of vassals in the Recognicionesfeodorum of 1273–5.
In the Gascon inquest there is little suspicion, however, of rigorous quo warranto proceedings.
The nobility, clergy and communes of the region were not expected to produce justifi-cations for their tenures, and there was no waving of rusty swords by irate tenants-in-chief (as in England).
The nearest approach, however, to the inquiry which produced the Hundred Rolls was a letter of Edward, as lord of Aquitaine for his father, in November 1259, whereby his seneschal was required to ‘certify to us…all rights, liberties, and other matters belonging to our lordship, in cities, towns and vills, as elsewhere in our province [districtu ]of Gascony’.
His vassals were asked to swear on the Gospels what these rights and obligations (deveriis ) were, and the thrust of the inquiry appears to have been towards municipal and communal liberties.
In 1273, on the other hand, the clergy and nobility were prominent — indeed dominant — among those paying homage and fealty and declaring their services.
Edward may well have been thinking of exploiting his Gascon possessions militarily, as well as financially, and the frequent references to military service in the Recogniciones were to be put to good use.
The kind of information derived from Edward's Gascon inquiry can best be illustrated by citing the declarations of two vassals, both of whom paid homage to him at Bordeaux on 19 March 1274.
First, one of the barons of the Médoc, Senebron, lord of Lesparre, declared under oath that he held:
From this declaration Edward and his officers knew the amount of relief to be levied from Lesparre, the amount of military service owed and the status of the tenures.
This was useful information for any lord and it is indicative of the confused and turbulent state of south-west France that the Plantagenet regime had not recorded its tenurial condition before 1273.
The second case concerns a somewhat lesser man: Guillaume-Sanche de Pommiers,damoiseau , who spoke on behalf of his two co-heirs and co-seigneurs, pierre and Pierre-Amanieu de Pommiers, when he acknowledged that they ‘held in fee, immediately from the…king of England, lord of Ireland and duke of Aquitaine, the castle of Pommiers with the honour, and all that these co-heirs hold in the parishes of Morizès and Escaude, and at Tremblet, and the toll which they levy on land at Garges, near La Réole’.
For these, they owed  service in the host with one knight; they paid 300 s.bordelaises in relief at change of lord and they owed the king-duke a meal with ten attendant knights whenever he came to Gascony, at the castle of Redort.
If the king-duke did not order a specific meal, they were to be ready with pork, beef, cabbages (caulibus ), mustard, and hens; and if one of the co-seigneurs was knighted, he was to wait upon the king-duke wearing ‘red hose of scarlet and gilded spurs or shoes’ while he ate.
Some details of this tenure are reminiscent of a former age, not least the obligation to provide hospitality (gite ) and domestic service to the king-duke when he visited Aquitaine.
Yet it emphasizes the close personal bonds which had existed between the dukes of Aquitaine and their vassals: the Pommiers were an ancient family, members of the ducal household, and it was to this kind of traditional relationship that appeal could be made by a largely absentee king-duke at periods of crisis.
The ancestral obligations of Gascon nobles, recorded in the Recognicionesfeodorum , were not only strengthened by Edward I's Gascon visits of 1273–4 and 1286–9.
In the French war of 1294–8, as we shall see, they could be exploited by the king-duke so that French occupation of the whole of the duchy was effectively prevented.
Regional, local, even parochial loyalties, and the strength of Gascon conservatism were forces with which every ruler — plantagenet or Capetian — had to reckon.
International relations were determined by local factors as well as the interplay of political intrigue and diplomatic negotiation at the highest level: what Powicke rather dismissively described as ‘a chapter in French local history’ cannot be ignored if one is to explain the ebb and flow of events and the rapid transition from peace to war in this region.
Once his officers had been provided with a comprehensive register of the homages and other obligations of Gascon vassals, Edward could set about the task of governing his duchy with some confidence.
Since his administration there had to function without his presence, it was crucial to its development that competent seneschals should be appointed to represent him.
From 1274 to 1289 there was a tendency towards increasing definition of the functions of the seneschals and other officers in the duchy.
On the road towards autonomy there were a number of obstacles, some easily surmount-able, others notoriously resistant.
Most resistant of all perhaps was the appellate jurisdiction of the crown of France.
This meant that two essentially judicial functions were exercised by the seneschal of Gascony under Edward I: first, an annual progress through the duchy to preside over assises at Bazas, Dax and St Sever, although the seneschal, who had much business elsewhere, often empowered a lieutenant to serve in his place.
But seneschals still itinerated when they arrived in the duchy to take up office — receiving oaths  from the king-duke's Gascon subjects and swearing a reciprocal oath to them.
Secondly, he was appointed to represent his lord, the king-duke, at Paris.
Below the seneschal and constable of Bordeaux were a swarm of local officials —prevôts and baillis , a financial controller and keepers of seals for contracts.
Before Edward's reforms of 1289–91, offices were normally farmed out to the highest bidder.
They were often in the hands of the local nobility, who took the revenues of such offices as one price of their loyalty to the king-duke.
So, as Le patourel commented, ‘with a seneschal, an official council, sub-seneschals, a constable, receivers, and judges, a clear chain of command and a workable distribution of duties, the ducal government  seemed competent to deal with anything short of an overwhelming emergency’.
But emergencies could and did arise, as they were to arise in 1293–4 and 1323–4.
By the later thirteenth century, Aquitaine, like Brittany and to some extent the comté of Flanders, showed every sign of becoming an autonomous principality.
After their loss of Normandy in 1204 the king-dukes were all the more concerned to hold on to their southern lands.
The shadow of the 1259 treaty inevitably fell over the history of the Plantagenet administration of the duchy of Aquitaine in the later thirteenth century.
The appellate jurisdiction of the Paris Parlement not only over the three dioceses of Limoges, Càhors and Périgueux, but the whole of the duchy, meant that a constant ducal presence at Paris was necessary.
This was what sovereignty really meant — the king of France's right to hold a supreme court of appeal.
The king-duke's rights had therefore to be defended by his proctors at Paris and, above all, by the seneschals of Aquitaine themselves.
Hence the office became almost a non-resident one in the 1280s.
The appointments of two celebrated lawyers, Jean de Vaux and the Englishman John of Havering, as seneschals in 1287 and 1288 was a direct product of the need to represent the king-duke at the Paris Parlement against usurpations of his authority and against false or frivolous appeals.
The seneschals' functions had therefore become largely judicial.
The very existence of French appellate jurisdiction over the duchy clearly made Plantagenet rule potentially more difficult than it would otherwise have been.
But the status of the duchy was in essence no different from that of the other great principalities — Flanders, Artois, Burgundy or Anjou.
A constant irritant was contained in the possibility of the king-duke's Gascon subjects appealing to the court of France, and thereby removing themselves, if only temporarily, from the Plantagenet jurisdiction.
Subterfuges were devised and pressures were applied to prevent appeals going up to Paris.
The later thirteenth century demonstrated the difficulties of the relationship created by the treaty of 1259.
The practice of appeal from ducal courts of first instance in the duchy to the Paris Parlement led ultimately to the formulation of the theory of independent Plantagenet sovereignty over Gascony.
However, we should note that this took place only after the confiscation of the duchy (1294–1303) by Philip the Fair, after which English attitudes perceptibly hardened.
During peace negotiations of 1298, Edward I's representatives, led by Master Philip Martel, introduced the idea of Gascony as an allod.
The duchy was said to be a ‘free land where the king of England holds complete jurisdiction’.
It was held from God alone, and no earthly superior was acknowledged.
It was not therefore a part of the kingdom of France.
The king-duke was sovereign and was not bound to pay any homage, fealty or feudal service to the crown of France.
In the event, things ended in a compromise: by the peace treaty of 1303 the status quo was restored.
But the 1298 claim had set a precedent which was to be used again — especially by Edward III.
And the claim to autonomous ducal sover-eighty over a duchy was soon to be taken up by other princes — the dukes of Brittany, Normandy and, ultimately, Burgundy.
If the king-duke could not be a dejure sovereign in his duchy of Aquitaine then he had to be made one de facto .
The claims of 1298 are thus an acknowledgement that the relationship created by the treaty of Paris of 1259 could break down, but only when an assertive and belligerent French monarchy acted to enforce its rights.
In the early, fourteenth century, Edward's lawyers also argued that the treaty was in any case no longer valid.
Two reasons were adduced: firstly Louis IX had not surrendered the lands promised to Henry III in the treaty.
Edward had gained only the Agenais in 1279 and souther Sain-tongue in 1286, although these were valuable additions to his lands, partly because of the number of new settlements or bastides previously founded in the Agenais by Alphonse de Poitiers, count of toulouse, between 1259 and his death without heirs in 1271.
Such were the complexities of the tenurial  rights in these areas that one bastide — Castillonès (created in 1260)— was shared between the Plantagenets and the Capetians.
The frontier of the Agenais ran right through the middle of the town.
It did not fall wholly into Edward I's hands until the peace of 1303.
Secondly, it was alleged by Edward's envoys that Louis IX had never formally invested Henry III with the duchy of Aquitaine.
On such grounds, the treaty of 1259 was deemed to be invalid.
But the old problem of Gascon appeals remained.
It proved impossible to translate the theory that the duchy was an allod into practice.
There was resistance not only from the crown of France but from some local interests as well.
It was greatly to the advantage of certain Gascon subjects of the king-duke to have a source of judicial appeal outside the duchy.
The possibility of using it as a tactical weapon against the king-duke was too valuable an asset to be abandoned.
In c.1308 it was even suggested that some Gascons, especially from the Agenais, might have rebelled openly against their duke had it not been for the existence of French sovereign jurisdiction as a kind of safety valve.
The officials of the king-duke could be corrupt, and some behaved in a partisan fashion.
Under Edward II two of his seneschals (the Genoese Antonio di Pessagno and the Englishman Ralph Basset of Drayton) were removed from office within a year of their appointments, in 1318 and 1324 respectively.
Edward I and Edward II had two principal courses of action open to them in their rivalry with the king of France over judicial supremacy in Aquitaine.
Their position in this respect was little different from that of other great magnates of France.
Firstly, they could send requests to Paris asking for the abolition or limitation of the judicial control of the Parlement in Paris over the duchy's courts.
Secondly, they had to find some means of reducing the volume of Gascon appeals to Paris to as low a level as possible.
The slow erosion of ducal authority through the fluctuating number of Gascon appeals (some of them quite frivolous) had somehow to be countered.
The king-duke had to try to suggest that such appeals as were made were not his personal responsibility.
One device which was tried was to claim that the appeal was  only an appeal against one of the king-duke's officers, not against the king-duke himself.
Furthermore, he had to counter the claim of the French crown to legislate for the duchy.
This had begun in the late thirteenth century, and the edicts were falling thick and fast under Philip the Fair in the early fourteenth century.
All that the king-duke had to do was to legislate in the same way — to try to anticipate French edicts, or to follow them immediately with his own.
The nearest approach which was made to judicial independence was in 1289, when Edward I enacted that the seneschal of Aquitaine was the principal seneschal set above all the sub-seneschals (of the Agenais, Landes, Quercy, Limousin and so forth).
They received their powers not from the king-duke but from the seneschal of Aquitaine, as did the king-duke's proctors in the Paris Parlement.
This meant that any Gascon appealing against the verdict of one of the sub-seneschals could not go directly to Paris.
The way was barred.
The case had first to be heard in the court of the seneschal of Aquitaine, or ‘court of Gascony’ as it was entitled.
If an appeal to France was subsequently made, a system of agreed delays in hearing at Paris, until further action by the ducal courts in Aquitaine had been taken, was instituted.
If the proctors who represented the king-duke at Paris also received their authority not from him, but simply from the seneschal of Aquitaine, then Edward I was not personally involved in proceedings in the French court.
All this was intended to demonstrate to the king of France that these officials were not the king-duke's accredited representatives, but merely the delegates of his seneschal.
So they were appointed under the seal of office of the seneschal, not the great seal of England.
If he so wished, Edward I or Edward II could disown the actions of the proctors in the Parlement.
He could do what he liked.
But none of these legal tricks and fictions could alter one formidable fact: the king of England, as duke of Aquitaine, was technically a vassal of the French crown.
All that such devices could ever hope to do was to stave off the exercise of French sovereignty.
They could never eliminate it.
But that was no mean achievement.
It was, however, often in the best interests of the French crown to allow the ducal jurisdiction considerable freedom of action.
Direct government of Aquitaine from Paris was out of the question, and the interposition of ducal authority between the Gascons and the Capetian monarchy served to  relieve the French crown of many tiresome and onerous burdens.
To let the Plantagenet administration do the work of government while reserving the right of intervention in the last resort was a sensible and inexpensive use of limited Capetian resources.
There was therefore no desire to expropriate the Plantagenets in Aquitaine before 1294.
Yet the judicial and administrative reforms of 1289 in the duchy gave rise to certain anxieties.
Edward I was establishing a more powerful regime there and his presence in France was both symbolically and physically more visible.
Since the treaty made with Philip III at Amiens in 1279, the Plantagenet presence in France had also increased in territorial scope.
In May 1279, Edward I had become count of Ponthieu, as well as duke of Aquitaine.
By right of his wife, Eleanor of Castile, he inherited the northern French comté through the death of her mother Jeanne on 16 March 1279.
In so doing, he secured a foothold on the northern borders of the kingdom of France which brought him important benefits, as well as vexing problems.
The comté of Ponthieu was a small lordship on the estuary of the Somme, but its urban and rural life was vigorous.
Abbeville, Le Crotoy and Montreuil were important centres of cloth production, and the region's agriculture was dominated by the exploitation of its forests for timber.
The union of the comté to England in 1279 gave Ponthieu an administration in which Englishmen served, as they served in the duchy of Aquitaine.
It also gave England useful servants whose careers were advanced through the conduct of Anglo-French diplomacy.
Men from Ponthieu were also prominent among those who played a part in the worsening of English relations with the French monarchy in the latter part of Edward II's reign and the early part of Edward III's.
The outbreak of the Hundred Years War itself was not unconnected with intrigues on behalf of men such as Robert of Artois in which northern Frenchmen had important vested interests.
The administration of Ponthieu bore some superficial resemblances to that of Aquitaine.
A seneschal, receiver (equivalent to the constable of Bordeaux) and controller were at the head of the hierarchy.
The seneschals tended to be Englishmen and between 1279 and 1307 Thomas of Sandwich, knight, Richard of Pevensey, Thomas de Belhus, knight, John Bakewell and John Clinton of Maxstoke held the office.
Thomas of Sandwich subsequently became mayor of Bordeaux in 1289, and became embroiled in a dispute with the burgesses which led to an appeal to the Parlement of Paris; his place as seneschal of Ponthieu was taken by Richard de Pevensey.
By March 1289, however, a new seneschal had been appointed, this time a native of Ponthieu.
Guillaume de Fiennes and Tingry was described by Edward I as his ‘kinsman’.
Fiennes's sister, Mahaut, had married Humphrey de Bohun, earl of Hereford and constable of England, and was thus directly related to the English ruling house.
He was not the first of his family to serve the English crown, because his kinsman, Michel de Fiennes, had acted as chancellor to the Lord Edward during his stay in Gascony in 1254–5.
By 1265, Michel had become bishop of Thérouanne.
The family continued to play a significant part in Anglo-French affairs: in January 1317, Jean, sire de Fiennes, wrote to Edward II as his loyal vassal in Ponthieu, informing him of a rumoured scheme for the partition of the kingdom of France on the death of Louis X. His motive was not entirely altruistic, for Fiennes was a chief ally and supporter of the rebellious Robert of Artois, and hoped for English aid in the form of ships with which to enter Calais and St Omer.
The English tenure of Ponthieu, moreover, was a further means whereby vigilance could be exercised over the affairs of France, and Edward I retained a permanent staff of lawyers at Paris who dealt with appeals from the comté to the Parlement.
It was at Montreuil in Ponthieu that a series of Anglo-French meetings took place over the issues of sovereignty and homage in 1306.
To discuss such issues outside the parlement of Paris, in territory which was in the immediate lordship of the English crown (though held from the crown of France), represented a concession to English requests for a meeting which did not take the form of a lawsuit between unequals.
Philip the Fair's  government was often (sometimes surprisingly) prepared to compromise during the later stages of his reign, an attitude clearly reflected in the ‘process’ of Montreuil in Ponthieu.
In Ponthieu the seneschal's functions did not differ substantially from those or the seneschal of Gascony.
He was concerned with the sale and exchange of fiefs and the preservation of the comital domain: there is some evidence that, like the Recognicionesfeodorum of 1273–5 in Gascony, measures intended to clarify and even reform the feudal structure of the comté were initiated under Edward I. In a letter dated 5 June 1285 Edward and Eleanor confirmed a grant by Gerard d'Abbeville, lord of Mons-Bouberc, in which he assigned to her the payment of an annual rent on his property at Abbeville.
This was to be held, as part of the lordship of Bouberc, ‘in one single homage’, and further alienations were forbidden.
There is more than a hint here of the subsequent legislation in restraint of alienation which was to result in the English statute of Quia Emptores (1290).
But there was no ‘transplantation of English institutions’ from England to Ponthieu, just as there was none from England to Aquitaine.
Unlike Ireland, where English practices were imposed, the continental possessions of the Plantagenets were treated as inheritances, not as conquests, and were administered strictly according to local custom.
Edward I may well have had similar goals for England, Aquitaine and Ponthieu (a clearer definition of feudal obligations, a shortening of the links in the tenurial chain and a more precise knowledge of the military service owed to him) but the means by which those ends might be attained were very different.
If he was to prevent the outbreak of rebellion, or stem a flood of appeals outside his jurisdiction, he was bound to operate within the limits laid down by regional custom and privileges.
A tolerable degree of success resulted from these early attempts at administration on the European continent; in Ireland, as we know to our cost, it was to be another story.
It was a normal practice in the period 1259–1340 for the higher offices in the administration of Aquitaine to be held by Englishmen, or at least non-Gascons.
Powicke justly remarked that ‘the list of well-known English barons, ecclesiastics, knights and clerks who were trained in Gascon affairs in the course of their distinguished careers would be long indeed’.
The seneschals of Gascony and constables of Bordeaux were, on the whole, English-born knights and clerks.
The exceptions were the Frenchmen and Savoyards in the service of Henry III, Edward I and Edward II, such as Jean de Grilly or Maurice and Amaury de Craon, who served as seneschals; or the Italian creditors of Edward I and Edward II who held the financial office of constable as a means whereby their loans were assigned for repay-ment from Gascon revenues.
The inhabitants of the duchy generally preferred to be governed by a non-Gascon.
Soon after 1300 Gascon lieutenants and seneschals of the king-duke became exceptional.
Petitions for English (or Angevin, or Savoyard) seneschals were made under Edward II, on the grounds that a Gascon might have vested interests in the politics of the duchy and would be unable to adjudicate disputes with impartiality.
A parallel with the podestà of an Italian city-state would not be inappropriate.
The seneschal or his lieutenant would often act as an arbitrator or third party in conflicts between nobles, or between communes and their neighbouring lords.
This was an essential part of their duties in an area in which private war was endemic.
Sometimes the choice of non-English knights, without lands in England, might be troublesome — the Savoyard Jean de Grilly, for example, used his position as lieutenant and seneschal in Aquitaine to build up a considerable territorial holding in the Bordelais.
His tenure of the seneschalship of Aquitaine was stormy, and his dismissal and replacement by an Englishman in 1287 was applauded by the Gascons.
Between 1254 and 1272, moreover, the position had been made more complex by clashes between Henry III and the Lord Edward.
There were fourteen changes of seneschal in Gascony during these eighteen years, while under Edward, as king, only six changes took place in the twenty-two years from 1272 to 1294.
It has recently been pointed out by Dr J. R. Studd that ‘one of [the Lord]Edward's greatest problems was his inability to settle lands from his appanage [of Gascony and the isle of Oléron]on those who gave him loyal service in a traditional way’.
Only Jean de Grilly (seneschal 1266–8) and Thomas de Ippegrave, clerk of Edward's household (1268–9), seem to have been the results of Edward's own personal choice.
Of Edward's six seneschals during his first twenty-two years as king, however, five were Englishmen and none of them acted as Grilly had done, amassing a  patrimony for themselves and their heirs in the duchy.
This lack of English settlement in Aquitaine struck the first British student of Anglo-Gascon history as notable.
Montague Burrows, Chichele Professor of Modern History at Oxford, wrote from an Anglocentric point of view in 1886 that the English imperial administration of India bore certain similarities to that of medieval Aquitaine:
Burrows was no doubt thinking of the commercial contacts between England and Aquitaine, and the way in which at least a crude comparison might be drawn between English dealings with the greater nobility of Aquitaine — the Foix-Béarn, Armagnac, Albret, Comminges and so on— and British policy towards Indian princes.
But his main point was that the English did not settle in Gascony: ‘no colonial dependency of England’, he concluded, ‘has ever offered a similar parallel, nor, it may safely be said, ever will.
In Aquitaine and in India alike the Englishman was, and is, a foreigner, with a home elsewhere: in our other colonies men, with their families, settle and only now and then return’.
The resemblance was quite fortuitous, and the differences outweigh the similarities.
Gascony was not a colony in the accepted sense of a conquered territory subject to foreign domination and laws, and exploited by a foreign power.
But its governors of the thirteenth and early fourteenth centuries were certainly administrators and soldiers, not settlers, and they returned to their English, French or Savoyard estates.
Men such as Roger de Leyburne (see plate 3.1), the Kentish knight, or John of Hastings (from Sussex), gave their names to new settlements in Aquitaine (Libourne and Hastingues) but never themselves settled in the bastides which still bear their names.
Edward i's workhorses were the knights and clerks of his household.
As Professor Michael Prestwich reminds us, men such as Leyburne, Hastings, Odo de Grandson, or Sir John St John served in almost every part of Edward's possessions: England, Aquitaine, Ponthieu, Wales, Ireland.
The office of seneschal or king-duke's lieutenant in Aquitaine was therefore not a specialized one, although the tendency for men with legal training to be appointed increased as difficulties over the respective spheres of Capetian and Plantagenet jurisdiction in Aquitaine multiplied in the 1280s and early 1290s.
But the need for a military commander certainly did not diminish during Edward's reign — it became increasingly common for a king-duke's lieutenant to be appointed to lead the military forces of the duchy, as well as a seneschal with largely judicial functions.
The turning point here was, of course, the war of 1294.
At periods of crisis, lieutenancies were held by the greater English magnates — Edmund of Lancaster in 1295–6 or Henry de Lacy, earl of Lincoln, in 1296–9 and 1303–5.
But the day-to-day administration of the south-western French possessions of the English crown was in the hands of knightly-seneschals or lawyer-seneschals, aided and abetted by a Gascon council, by their own lieutenants, and (after 1279) by sub-seneschals in the major subdivisions of the duchy.
Most of the sub-seneschals were Gascons, and self-government was allowed to develop in their jurisdictions, intervention by the seneschal of Gascony being largely confined to the adjudication of disputes.
Of forty-two sub-seneschals appointed between 1254 and 1317 (of Agenais, Bigorre, Landes, Périgord, Quercy, Limousin and Saintonge) no less than thirty-nine were Gascon nobles, two were English and one was a Savoyard.
Again, an analysis of the lesser offices of bailli, prévôt and constable (of a castle) between 1254 and 1307 reveals that at least sixty-one identifiable Gascon nobles held these offices, as against a mere nineteen English or Anglo-Normans, of whom ten were appointed by Simon de Montfort and the Lord Edward in a single year (1253–4).
Apart from that somewhat exceptional period, in which members of these magnates' entourages were rewarded with Gascon pos-itions, the great majority of local offices in the administration were tena-ciously held by the Gascon nobility.
It was one of the prices of survival for the Plantagenet regime, a price well worth paying at periods of crisis such as the Anglo-French clashes of 1294–1303 and 1323–5.
At that level, there can be no doubt of the equation between public office and private interest.
The transfer of one sub- sénéchaussée — the Agenais — to Edward I at Amiens in 1279 marked a significant stage in the administrative development  of Gascony.
This sizeable addition to the king-duke's possessions necessitated the subordination of the so-called sub-seneschals to the overall authority of the seneschal of Gascony.
He became styled ‘seneschal of Aquitaine in August 1280 (or senescallus principalis ); his actions were supervised by a small council at Bordeaux, and by what was described as the ‘court of Gascony’.
The origins and early history of this institution are very obscure, but we know that in 1273 Edward initiated the Recognicionesjeodorum ‘in curie Vasconie’, which had assembled at St Sever.
This, according to a Gascon petition of 1279, was traditionally composed of the prelates, barons, knights and other nobles of the land and was to adjudge all cases concerning inheritance and other matters relating to the first two estates (clergy and nobility) of the duchy.
It was of significance both outside as well as inside the limits of Aquitaine.
In their petition, the Gascon clergy and nobility reminded Edward that his predecessors as ‘lords’(domini ) of Aquitaine, and their seneschals, had made full use of this assembly and that it was a valuable weapon in his armoury against the pretensions of the king of France and his officers.
They claimed that Philip III of France, his court and his officers had recently (a modico tempore ) hindered and troubled them by citing them before other courts — not only the Paris Parlement, but the court of the French seneschal of Périgord.
This contravened their ancient privileges, and Edward was requested to restrain Philip III and his agents from this abuse of authority.
Most striking is the conclusion of their petition (which was shared by that from the nobles of the Agenais) about the restoration of their court to its ancient status: ‘and by this means’, they told Edward, ‘the appeals which are at the court of France…shall cease’.
That is, the restoration of the court of Gascony to its former purpose would mean that appeals would not leave the duchy for the Paris Parlement.
There is some evidence that Edward acted upon this request: in 1289 a specific judge of appeals (unusjurisperitus judex appellacionum ) was created to handle cases arising from the court of Gascony, and a number of assemblies took place which gathered together the prelates, barons, knights and other nobles of the duchy, culminating in the great council at which Edward's judicial and administrative ordinance (1289) for the future government of Aquitaine was promulgated.
This set the pattern of Anglo-Gascon administration for the rest of the Middle Ages, and there was little departure from its terms before the final débâcle of 1453.
Yet, however easily accessible or however beneficial the judicial service provided to the king-duke's Gascon subjects was, the possibility of appeal to the crown of France could never be entirely eliminated.
This possibility became an actuality when the disaffected, or simply vindictive, wished to achieve their ends.
From there, it could be only a short step to Anglo-French war.
4
POLITICS AND SOCIETY IN AQUITAINE — I: THE NOBILITY
4.1 The Structure and Political Behaviour of the Gascon Nobility
This chapter and the next will attempt to examine the political, social and economic characteristics of the duchy of Aquitaine.
Divisions are always artificial and often misleading, but the material can be more easily considered if we make a distinction between nobility and townsmen.
The Gascon nobility and the clergy (who were often closely related to them) are therefore the subject of this chapter.
We saw in previous chapters that Aquitaine was a primary source of Anglo-French tensions.
This stemmed partly from the plain fact that the Plantagenet king-duke owed homage to the Capetian crown for his south-western French possessions.
But there were also features of the area itself which exacerbated Anglo-French friction and which have not been so closely studied.
Among these was the unruliness of the nobility.
The structure and behaviour of this group could promote conflict, and the laws and customs of the region did little to avert the outbreak of clashes which could develop into larger quarrels, sometimes of alarming proportions.
In a papal register of 1322–3 an Avignonese clerk noted that there were two reasons for the disturbed state of Aquitaine at that time: the existence of laws and customs which were neither written down nor  consistent with justice or reason; and the maintenance of excessively large households and retinues by the nobility.
They could not provide for them from their own resources, he alleged, and hence resorted to war, pillage and brigandage in order to sustain their followings.
An English memorandum of May 1311 also attributed the difficulties of governance in Aquitaine to the ‘arrogant presumption of the nobles and magnates [potentium ]of the land’ which engendered frivolous appeals to the court of France.
A turbulent and unruly nobility was not peculiar to south-west France, but the underlying causes of that turbulence warrant investigation.
Among the factors which may have contributed to the disorderly condition of the Gascon nobility was the slackening of the crusading effort against the infidel.
Members of that nobility had been prominent in the wars against the Muslims in Spain rather than in Outremer , and the decline of military opportunities in the Iberian peninsula after 1264 left aggressive energies untapped.
Some Gascon nobles had fought with Simon de Montfort against the Cathars during the Albigensian crusades, but benefited less from them than their northern French contemporaries.
The loss of Acre in 1291 had a symbolic significance for all the nobilities of western Europe, but a sense of unfulfilled obligation still lingered on in the testamentary dispositions of Gascon nobles.
In his will of May 1300, Pierre-Amanieu, captal de Buch, referred to the crusading vow which he had taken in the company of Edward I, in 1287, ‘to go to the aid of the Holy Land in Outremer' .
Although the vow was only to be accomplished if Edward went in person, Pierre-Amanieu none the less felt sufficiently bound by his oath to leave 500 livres bordelaises (1.
b.) to a knight, chosen by his executors from his ‘companhons’, who was to serve in his stead in the next ‘general passage’ to the Holy Land.
Similarly, in March 1312, Arnaud-Raymond,vicomte of Tartas, ordered his executors to send one man-at-arms to the Holy Land for the sake of his soul and those of his house.
The man was to be given 3000 s. morlaas and the seneschal of Gascony was to constrain Arnaud-Raymond's heirs to implement his wishes.
An identical sum was bequeathed by Margaret, countess of Foix,vicomtesse of Béarn and Marsan, in March 1319, to send a Béarnais noble of her family or household to serve in Outremer .
She desired that the legacy should not be in any way  altered by the pope nor any other person.
The crusading ideal was by no means moribund among the nobility of south-west France, but opportunities for its expression were in decline.
To offer generalizations about the ‘Gascon’ nobility can pose more problems than it solves.
Regional variations abounded and the nobility was not a homogeneous group.
‘L'ordre de la noblesse’, wrote Boutruche, ‘souffre d'une grande confusion intérieure qui se retrouve jusque dans le comporte-ment de ses membres, caracterisé par un étroit particularisme ou une entr'aide provisoire, limitée à la famille et à un petit cercle de vassaux, d'amis et de compagnons’.
Unless they were faced with a common enemy, as we shall see, concerted action by the nobility was difficult to achieve.
Customs of inheritance differed sharply on a regional basis, and the distribution of wealth, castles, fiefs and allodial holdings was uneven.
Impartible and partible inheritance customs co-existed side by side, and marked variations were to be found in the degree to which elder and younger children were favoured or disadvantaged.
Disparities between areas of customary law could, however, be exploited by the ducal administration in Aquitaine during lawsuits.
In February 1284, Constance de Béarn,vicomtesse of Marsan, complained that her claim to the comté of Bigorre had been assigned a hearing by Jean de Grilly, seneschal of Gascony, at Langon in the Bazadais because, she alleged, he knew that ‘the customs of Bazadais were against her, and that the opposing parties would be aided by those customs’.
Yet in most cases regional custom was the surest defence against the aggression of neighbours, immediate lords or sovereigns.
In August 1318, Margaret, countess of Foix, was supported by Pope John XXII against the officers of Philip V of France.
Their action in confiscating certain lordships from her was not only in-herently unjust, wrote the pope, but contrary to the customs of the court of Béarn.
This required judgement by two bishops and eleven barons of the  vicomté , and the French royal courts had no cognisance of such cases.
A similar proposition was put forward in a petition from the prelates, barons, knights and other Gascon nobles to Edward III that their ancient liberties,fors and customs stipulated that all issues of inheritance and other cases concerning prelates and nobles were to be heard by the king-duke or his seneschal.
The court of Gascony, composed of prelates and barons, was to be consulted to this end.
An entrenched and intransigent defence of regional customs was a binding force, especially at times of crisis, which could serve to unite a heterogeneous nobility.
A degree of freedom was afforded to the Gascon nobility by the prevalence of allodial tenures, whereby no immediate lord was recognized, in certain parts of the region.
Yet the king-duke began to insist from the 1270s onwards that all allods were sub posse et dominio…regis et ducis (‘under the power and dominion of the king-duke’).
One purpose of Edward I's Recogniciones feodorum of 1274–5 was to ascertain the number and nature of allodial tenures in the duchy and there is some evidence for the ‘feudaliz-ation’ of allods by the king-duke after that date.
But the tenurial structure of south-west France remained confused and ‘theoretical distinctions between nobles and non-nobles,…fiefs and rented holdings, did not correspond to reality’.
The potential for dispute and conflict over rights of jurisdiction, tolls,esporles (entry fines paid on change of lord), and the status of holdings was great.
The prevalence of co-seigneurie , or lordship shared among two or more lords, in areas such as the Agenais or Bazadais, could promote discord and a number of private wars broke out, as we shall see, between co-seigneurs.
Contracts of paréage , whereby the rights and profits of a lordship were shared, normally by two lords, sometimes produced conflict between them.
In a relatively loosely structured society of this kind, the opportunities for abrasion were many and there was no lack of candidates to indulge in judicial, economic and military conflict.
It was often difficult for ‘higher’ authorities — Plantagenet or Capetian, their identity was in some respects immaterial — to remain uninvolved in, and aloof from, these disputes.
A constant underlying tension therefore characterized the socio-political structure of the duchy of Aquitaine.
The Great Families
At the top of this structure stood a small number of great families.
The counts of Foix, Armagnac and Comminges, the vicomtes of Béarn and the lords of Albret were differentiated from the mass of middling and petty  nobles by their landed wealth and political power.
An early-fourteenth-century description of Gascony listed four counts and fifteen vicomtes among the upper nobility, set apart from the plèbe nobiliaire beneath them.
Descended from the Carolingian counts and vicomtes , they possessed and exercised very ancient rights of jurisdiction over their lordships.
A tendency to absorb smaller houses and to engage in a conscious policy of territorial expansion appears to have marked their behaviour in the second half of the thirteenth century.
With their absorption of the vicomté of Béarn through marriage and inheritance in 1290, the counts of Foix became the single most powerful house in the south-west.
Detached from the orbit of the old Raymondin counts of Toulouse, they were carving out a quasi-autonomous sphere of influence for themselves along the Pyrenean frontier.
Endowed with ancient privileges, ruling ‘by the grace of God’, the counts of Foix-Béarn continued to absorb lesser lordships and to extend a spider's web of connections among the Gascon nobility through contracts of vassalage and alliance.
This brought them into hostile contact with some of their neighbours, especially with the counts of Armagnac.
The later thirteenth century witnessed a sudden and rapid expansion of their territorial possessions, and by 1300 their hegemony was established not only over the previously independent vicomté of Béarn, but in the comtés of Bigorre and Comminges and the vicomtés of Nébouzan and Marsan.
Before the accession of Roger-Bernard III, count of Foix, to Béarn in 1290, its vicomtes had been relatively penurious.
Edward I told Gaston VII of Béarn in December 1282 that ‘we believe that you do not abound in money’, and the depredations and seizures of other people's property carried out by the impecunious Gaston and his allies between 1270 and his death in 1290 tried Edward's patience sorely.
The ascendancy of the house of Foix, with its extensive possessions in the central and eastern Pyrenees and in Catalonia, Roussillon and Navarre, brought a political force inclined towards the Capetians rather than the Plantagenets into the arena of Gascon politics at a troubled time.
In this  respect, as in others, the 1290s were to be a period of crisis and change which was to make an impact on Anglo-French relations.
The house of Foix-Béarn extended its influence by methods common to all princely houses of the later Middle Ages.
Acquisitiveness was served by marriages, alliances and sheer brute force.
Forms of alliance were developed to enlist the service of nobles whose lands lay beyond its own lordships.
In a letter of May 1259, Gaston VII of Béarn referred to the lordship which he exercised over Amanieu VI, lord of Albret, and to the ‘contracts [convenz ]that are between us’.
Albret held the castle of Casenave from him, and was his vassal, although the centre of Albret power lay well outside the vicomté of Béarn.
Similarly, in June 1253, Arnaud-Guillaume de Gramont had promised to aid Gaston VII, who would be his ‘good lord’ from whom he received a rent secured on the bailliage of Sauveterre-de-Béarn.
Gramont's lands lay on the northern frontier of Béarn, and he, like Albret, was a vassal of the Plantagenet king-duke of Aquitaine.
It was by such means — both ‘feudal’ and non-feudal — that the house of Foix-Béarn exercised some degree of control over those members of the Gascon nobility whose lordships lay outside their own domains.
The origins of the alliance , cultivated by the great families of the south-west in the later fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, are to be sought in these early contracts.
So well known were the acquisitive instincts of Roger-Bernard III, count of Foix, by 1300 that the treason charges made by Philip the Fair's proctors against Bernard Saisset, bishop of Pamiers, included allegations that Saisset had promised to make Foix lord of the comté of Toulouse in 1295–7, so that his power would then be feared from Bordeaux to the Pyrenees.
Although the collusion of Roger-Bernard in Saisset's alleged fantasies was strenuously denied, the mere existence of the charges suggests that they carried a certain credibility.
Given Foix's Haus-machtpolitik at this time, a desire to dominate the south-west by annexing further territories was easily attributed to the count.
But he chose to do so by exploiting the lieutenancy offered to him by Philip the Fair in 1295, rather than by rebellion against the crown.
A memorandum prepared for him, probably in 1297, claimed that he was owed over 50,000 1.
t. in unpaid wages of war in Gascony by Philip, and that he, like his predecessor Gaston VII of  Béarn,in presenti multum indiget (‘was at present very hard up’).
The appetite of the house of Foix-Béarn for income and revenue was insatiable.
Apart from the conclusion of alliances with other nobles, and the exploitation of casual sources of income, a major instrument of expansion was the diplomatic marriage.
One of the most important of these marriages was the match contracted in October 1256 between Esquivat, count of Bigorre, and Agnes, daughter of Roger IV, count of Foix (1241–65).
It gave the house of Foix some claim to the succession in Bigorre and, when Esquivat died without heirs in 1283, a conflict broke out which was not to be resolved until 1307.
It was notoriously difficult to deal with Esquivat.
Jean de Grilly, seneschal of Gascony, told Edward I in 1282 that he was quite unable to predict the upshot of negotiations over Bigorre ‘not least because of the changeability and inconsistency of the count’.
A plethora of words, Grilly claimed, impeded the conclusion of business.
The house of Béarn had a strong claim to Bigorre on Esquivat's death, as the much-married Petronilla, countess of Bigorre (1190–1251) had ordained in her will that, should her grandson Esquivat die without heirs, the comté was to be held by her daughter Mathe de Bigorre, wife of Gaston VII of Béarn.
In the event the union of Foix and Béarn in 1290 effectively solved one aspect of the controversy — Roger-Bernard III, count of Foix and vicomté of Béarn, now embodied the claims of both houses to Bigorre.
But, as we shall see, the final settlement was by no means so easily achieved, and no less than six claimants submitted their cases to Philip the Fair in 1302.
Nevertheless, the house of Foix-Béarn emerged as the neighbouring territorial power with the greatest measure of control over Bigorre and the important Pyrenean passes which lay within its boundaries.
A less stormy sequence of events lay behind the conclusion of an alliance between the houses of Foix-Béarn and L'Isle Jourdain, lords of the frontier zone which lay between the lands of Armagnac, Foix and the comté of Toulouse.
The L'Isle Jourdain were an ancient family, which had produced the twelfth-century bishop of Comminges, St Bertrand, whose cult was  to be promoted by pope Clement V between 1290 and 1314.
They were a powerful clan, with wide-ranging connections, and the marriage which was contracted in 1291 between Margaret, daughter of Roger-Bernard III of Foix and Bertrand Jourdain, son of Jourdain de L'Isle, secured a valuable ally.
Despite disagreements about the payment of her dowry, Margaret's marriage gave rise to a military and diplomatic alliance between the houses of Foix-Bearn and L'Isle Jourdain, concluded in January 1298, which was to serve the counts well in their quarrel with the house of Armagnac.
Jourdain de L'Isle had already renounced an existing alliance with Bernard VI, count of Armagnac, in January 1289.
The pacta, statuta et ordinaciones agreed between them were revoked, and the L'Isle jourdain began to turn away from Armagnac and towards Foix.
During the minority of Roger-Bernard III's grandson, Gaston II (1315–23), custody of the comté of Foix was granted to Bernard Jourdain de L'Isle until the count reached the age of fourteen.
Despite the flux of political events some alliances of this kind proved surprisingly durable.
Between 1290 and the outbreak of the Anglo-French war of St Sardos in 1324, a growing hostility between the house of Foix-Béarn and the Plantagenet administration in Aquitaine may be detected.
The increase in ducal authority which followed upon the transfer of the Agenais and of southern Saintonge to Edward 1 and the tighter control exercised by the king-duke over his vassals, including some Béarnais nobles, impinged upon the power of the vicomtes .
Although he received a pension from Edward I after 1280, Gaston VII of Béarn was not the most conspicuously loyal of Edward's vassals, and his successor, Roger-Bernard III, served Philip the Fair during the Anglo-French war of 1294–8.
His grandson, Gaston II (1315–43), also supported Charles IV of France during the war of St Sardos.
Yet some Béarnais nobles, including the baronial houses of Lescun, Audoins, Gay-rosse, Gabaston, Miossens and Gerderest, consistently served the Plantagenet administration against the French.
The vicomtes of Béarn could not therefore rely on the loyalty of those of their vassals who also held lands, offices and pensions from the king-dukes when an Anglo-French war erupted in Aquitaine.
This was to be characteristic of the Béarnais nobility throughout the Hundred Years War.
However, the origins of increasing tension between the vicomtes of Béarn and the Plantagenets lie in the consequences of the disputes which developed after 1287 over the succession to Bigorre, Marsan and Béarn.
Bigorre, as we have seen, was a Pyrenean lordship of considerable strategic and economic importance.
One claimant was Constance,vicomtesse of Marsan, daughter of Gaston VII of Béarn.
She had been married at Henry III's instigation to Henry, son of Richard of Cornwall, in 1269.
Widowed in 1271, Constance's claim was supported by her father, and she laid charges of forcible dispossession from Bigorre against Edward I and his seneschal, Jean de Grilly.
She claimed that she had surrendered possession of Bigorre to Edward I in England by word of mouth, but without prejudice to her rights.
But her rights had indeed been prejudiced by the manner in which Grilly had behaved, claiming that the comté was to be surrendered unconditionally, and acting in a high-handed manner during the ceremony in which the keys of the comital aula , or hall, at Tarbes were handed over.
Constance had clearly come to hate Jean de Grilly, whom she described as ‘so openly contrary and suspect to her, favouring her enemies’, that she refused to stand judgement before him unless he was accompanied by the bishop of Aire and abbot of St Maurin in the Agenais.
He refused, whereupon she argued that he was impeding and delaying justice by cavillaciones et diffugia (‘quibbling objections and subterfuges’), and aimed to dispossess her not only of Bigorre, but of her vicomté of Marsan as well.
The techniques which Grilly was applying seem to have resembled those employed in England by Edward I's treasurer, Walter Langton, in his pursuit of the inheritances of great heiresses such as Isabel de Forz.
Gaston VII of Béarn thus cast himself in the role of his daughter's protector against the territorial ambitions of Edward's seneschal, which were soon to lead to Grilly's dismissal from his post.
But old resentments died hard and they reappeared after 1290, when  Roger-Bernard III of Foix became vicomte of Béarn.
The judicial squabbling provoked by the succession to Bigorre offered opportunities for intervention to the French crown.
Although in 1284 Edward I had considered that ‘the comté of Bigorre is held freely from…the king of England, so that the king of France is not recognised as sovereign there’, Philip the Fair's lawyers were not prepared to accept this view.
Grilly's attempts to adjudicate the question had failed, and Pierre Flote was deputed to bring the affair to the cognizance of the court of France.
By 1292 the comté had been sequestrated by philip, and a series of hearings in the paris parlement began.
Capetian claims to jurisdiction were therefore certainly experienced in Béarn and Bigorre after 1285, but it cannot be argued that either Gaston VII or Roger-Bernard III were willing instruments of French royal sovereignty.
The question of Bigorre was also complicated by the claims of a religious foundation — the bishop and chapter of Le Puy in Velay — to exercise feudal rights over the comté .
In 1062, Bernard, count of Bigorre, had unwisely granted the bishop and canons a sum of money secured on his comté during a pilgrimage to Le Puy.
This resulted in a claim of the canons of Le Puy to receive homage from Bigorre, which they allegedly sold in 1253 to Henry Ill.
It was by virtue of this act that Edward I demanded its surrender to him in 1284.
But a judgement in favour of Le Puy was given in the Paris Parlement in 1290.
This was in fact contested not only by Edward I, but by Roger-Bernard III of Foix, acting as Constance of Marsan's proctor, in October 1292.
Roger-Bernard III appealed against execution of the sentence by Eustache of Beaumarchais's lieutenant in the sénéchaussée of Toulouse, acting for philip the Fair.
The count alleged that the seneschal's lieutenant entered the hall of the castle at Vic-de-Bigorre with the dean of Le Puy, and treated him in an inexcusably unmannerly fashion by seizing him by his clothing and expelling him and his household familia from the place.
The lieutenant had then flown the banners of the king of France and the church of Le Puy over the barbican at Vic-de-Bigorre, and had refused to countenance Roger-Bernard's protest on behalf of his sister-in-law.
A similar sequence of events bad taken place at the castle of Mauvezin in Bigorre and a charge that the lieutenant had far exceeded the limits of his jurisdiction was made.
Jean de Grilly's behaviour towards the house of Béarn had been bad enough in 1284, but in the eyes of the count the arrogant and arbitrary actions of Eustache de Beaumarchais's lieutenant in 1292 were even worse.
There was little to  choose between the behaviour of the agents of Plantagenet and Capetian power.
Ultimately neither the king-duke nor the count of Foix emerged victorious from the quarrel, because in 1307 the chapter of Le puy formally surrendered their feudal rights over Bigorre to philip the Fair.
When Constance of Marsan died, the comté passed to Jeanne de Navarre, queen of France.
Another diplomatic marriage was that which attempted to bring the house of Foix into a closer relationship with the French crown and with the great families of northern France.
In October 1301, Roger-Bernard III's son Gaston, who was to succeed him in 1302, was married to Jeanne d'Artois, sister of Robert II, count of Artois, at the very heart of the Capetian court circle.
This was perceived as a threat to the Plantagenets in Aquitaine.
A series of monetary gifts from philip IV followed the marriage, levied on lordships in Bigorre, Marsan, Castelnau-de-Rivière and Gabardan, and Gaston I served both philip and his son Louis X in war.
He performed military service during the king's Flemish campaign of 1315 and died at the abbey of Maubuisson, near Pontoise, on 13 December of that year.
But the intrusion of an heiress from a northern French family into the relatively closed circle of Foix-Béarn created tensions within it.
Gaston I quarrelled with his mother, Margaret of Béarn (d. 1319) and despite a reconciliation in September 1312, a dispute then broke out over the custody and tutelage of his heir.
Gaston II was seven years old at his father's death in 1315 and custody was claimed by his grandmother, against the rival claims of his mother, Jeanne of Artois.
In July 1318, pope John XXII wrote to philip V of France informing him that although the king's court had conferred tutelage of Gaston I's children on Jeanne, Margaret of Béarn already had Gaston II in her keeping and was in any case to be preferred as guardian of the young count.
Unlike Jeanne of Artois, whom he judged to be ‘prodigal and immoral’, the pope thought Margaret well able take the place of a mother and commended her to philip V. She had in effect governed Béarn, and  governed it well, since Gaston I's death in 1315, but was to die in 1319.
Gaston II came of age in 1323, but after the death of Margaret of Béarn his mother's influence played an important part in determining the anti-Plantagenet stance of the house of Foix-Béarn during the war of St Sardos.
The youth and inexperience of Gaston II caused concern to those who worked for peace in south-west France; above all, to the Pope.
In May 1323 John XXII told Fulk Lestrange, Edward II's seneschal of Aquitaine, to make peace with Gaston, as he was not responsible for the excesses of his own officers and subjects, who had been provoked and encouraged by his mother.
In a further letter, dated 28 June 1323, the pope reminded the bishop of Aire, who was acting as an intermediary between Lestrange and Jeanne of Artois, that Gaston II was very young, and was surrounded by young men who were easily swayed to unbridled and ill-considered actions.
The bishop was requested to advise them maturo consilio to restrain their passions and to come to terms with the Plantagenet administration in their quarrel over attacks upon ducal officers and subjects in the vicomté of Marsan.
In the 1320s the problems of disorder were compounded by the fact that both the leading houses of the region — Foix and Armagnac — were governed by youths who had barely achieved their majority.
Jean I of Armagnac (1319–73) was similarly youthful and lacking in political experience, a fact noted by John XXII in April 1322.
The prevalence of conflict in Gascony during this period reflects the vulnerability of minors to the political ends of their elders.
Both Foix and Armagnac, however, were anxious to forge links with the papacy, clearly viewing a connection with Avignon as a vital element in their local power.
The Gascon origins of both Clement V and John XXII made this much easier, and although the house of Foix-Béarn did not succeed in marrying into the papal clan, a strengthening of bonds with the Duèse family (from Cahors) can be detected in a number of casual, but significant, references.
In December 1316, Bertrand de Goth,vicomte of Lomagne and Auvillars, acting as Clement V's executor, returned to Margaret of Béarn and the seven-year-old Gaston II a ‘certain little knife’(cultellum ), which Gaston I of Foix had lent to the pope.
In 1318, after an attempt to poison him in the previous year, John XXII thanked Margaret for sending him ‘a certain knife-handle in serpentine form’ which was reputed to detect poison.
This may have been the same object as that lent by Gaston I to  Clement V. The pope agreed to keep the talisman safely and to excommuni-cate anyone else who attempted to use it.
Perhaps the counts of Foix were fulfilling a traditional office for the papacy.
Whatever the case, the alliance which they had made with the family of L'Isle jourdain (closely related to the Duèse clan), stood them in good stead with the Avignon papacy until John XXII's death in 1334.
The tendencies towards territorial and dynastic aggrandisement displayed by the house of Foix-Béarn were echoed by the counts of Armagnac.
Géraud V of Armagnac (1256–85) had married Mathe of Béarn, daughter of Gaston VII and sister to both Constance of Marsan and Margaret of Béarn, and therefore possessed claims through the female line to both Béarn and Bigorre.
Until 1290, the great houses of south-west France — Foix, Béarn and Armagnac — existed in relative harmony.
Géraud V of Armagnac was apparently on better terms with Edward I than his contemporary Gaston VII of Béarn.
He was constantly harassed by Philip III of France and his officers as a result of a fine of 15,000 l.t. imposed upon him by the French king's court in 1273.
Edward I provided a useful source of potential support against Capetian bullying, and in 1282 Jean de Grilly wrote to Robert Burnell and Odo de Grandson, that Armagnac is and always remains faithful to our lord the king'.
He was, confided Grilly, one of his ‘best friends’ in Gascony, the lord whom he trusted most.
Philip III had impris-oned Armagnac at Péronne for non-payment of the fine and Edward I wrote letters supporting him in September and November 1282.
Aid was promised from Edward's advocates at the court of France.
Writing from Paris, Jean de Grilly expressed considerable anxiety over the pressure exerted upon Armagnac to render homage to Philip III.
Armagnac's brother, the archbishop of Auch, had acknowledged that his temporalities were held from the crown of France, and Capetian lawyers tried to argue that the lordships of Armagnac and Fézensac were fiefs of the archbishopric and therefore subject to the superior lordship of the French crown.
By the autumn of 1283 the danger of Armagnac submission to the  immediate lordship of the French crown appeared to have passed, but the behaviour of Philip III's officers, especially his seneschal of Toulouse, had given rise to great concern among Edward I's Gascon council at Bordeaux and among his proctors and advocates at Paris.
Writing in June 1283 from Monflanquin, Jean de Grilly informed Edward that Armagnac's proctor had already been sent to deliver the castle and town of Auch to the seneschal of Toulouse, to be held in liege homage from the French crown.
The two brothers of Armagnac, count and archbishop, thought Grilly ‘are so oppressed…that in the end they will be compelled to submit by some contrived method…and one cannot believe that they can withstand these afflictions much longer.
Similar techniques were adopted by the French in 1293–4, when Bernard VI of Armagnac (1285–1319) was summoned to perform homage at Paris for the comtés of Armagnac and Fezensac, and the vicomté of Brulhois.
Edward I was also summoned at the same time, as duke of Aquitaine, ‘to reply to us concerning the homage of Armagnac and Fézensac’, Auvillars, Lomagne and Lectoure, in a peremptory letter from Philip the Fair (December 1293).
There was evidently doubt as to the status of the Armagnac lordships and about the nature of the homage to be performed.
We know that Edward I's seneschal of Gascony, John of Havering, was prompt to pay Armagnac's pension in January 1294, ordering the constable of Bordeaux to make the payment without delay ‘as you esteem the king's honour’.
Loyalties as subject to rival pressures as that of Armagnac demanded constant vigilance and reward to keep them fresh and responsive to ducal needs.
The Armagnacs were in a particularly vulnerable position as a result of the geographical location of their lands.
Lacking a defensible mountainous region into which, like the counts of Foix, they could retreat, their energies were primarily absorbed in the defence of their territories against their immediate neighbours.
As we shall see in the second part of this chapter, their conflict with the house of Foix was to become a dominant theme of the politics of south-west France.
Holding lands which lay on the boundaries of Plantagenet Aquitaine, the Capetian sénéschaussée of Toulouse, and the lordships of Foix-Béarn, Pardiac, Astarac and L'Isle jourdain, they were essentially marcher lords, attempting to enlarge and unite their territories.
Their attempts to acquire Bigorre and Comminges were effectively blocked by the  counts of Foix, but Bernard VI of Armagnac's inheritance of the town and comté of Rodez in 1304 (as a result of his second marriage to Cécile, daughter of Henri, count of Rodez) was a valuable acquisition.
Rodez was added to the other Armagnac possessions in the archdiocese of Auch, and Bernard VI and his son Jean I became powerful in the Languedoc as well as in Gascony.
They ruled over Rodez as counts Dei gratia and claimed the right to wear the iron crown of Rouergue.
For the Armagnacs, the acquisition of Rodez was the equivalent of that of Béarn for the counts of Foix.
During the first quarter of the fourteenth century, the Armagnacs also benefited from their close ties with the Avignon papacy.
The registers of the Gascon Bertrand de Goth, elected pope as Clement V in 1305, included twenty bulls relating to the family.
A dynastic connection was established by the marriage in 1324 of Jean I of Armagnac to Régine de Goth, daughter and heiress of Bertrand de Goth,vicomte of Lomagne and Auvillars, nephew of Clement V. By the marriage contract Bertrand was obliged to give 1000 1.
t. annually to Jean I, as Regine's dowry from lands in the Bordelais and Agenais.
These represented a significant addition to the lands of Armagnac because Bertrand instituted Régine, countess of Armagnac, as his sole and universal heir.
Lordships in the heart of Plantagenet Aquitaine, as well as in the Agenais and the Gers, were thus held by the short-lived countess of Armagnac until her death in 1325.
The vicomtés of Lomagne and Auvillars, the castellanries of Duras, Puyguilhem, Alemans and Montségur, the lordships of Veyrines and Blanquefort in the Bordelais, and of Dunes and Donzac in the Agenais, then descended to the young Jean I of Armagnac as his wife's universal heir.
Bertrand de Goth had also profited from his favoured position among Clement V's relations to acquire the Italian mar-quisate of Ancona, as well as land on the other side of the Rhône, including the castle of Monteux in the Comtat Venaissin.
He bought the lordship in 1313, granted it to Régine de Goth in his will, and she in turn bequeathed it to Jean I of Armagnac.
But the animosity conceived by John  XXII against Clement V's kinsmen and women was vented against Bertrand de Goth's heirs, and Monteux was seized into papal hands in February 1326.
It was not restored.
The Armagnacs thus lost the foundations of a potential power-base in Provence, but had greatly enhanced their position in the south-west.
Despite Edward II's attempt to take the lordships of Blanquefort, Montségur, Lectoure, Dunes and Donzac into his own hands on Régine de Gotb's death in September 1325, Armagnac retained his territorial foothold in Plantagenet Aquitaine.
The argument of Edward's lawyers that a woman could not succeed to a fief was not upheld by local custom, and so Jean I of Armagnac remained the beneficiary of much of the de Goth inheritance in the duchy.
These lordships were, however, to become a source of renewed Anglo-French tension under Edward III.
Armagnac's second marriage, to Béatrix de Clermont, tended (like that of Gaston I of Foix-Béarn to Jeanne of Artois) to incline him towards northern France and the Capetian or Valois court rather than towards an absentee king-duke of Aquitaine.
The history of the house of Armagnac at this time is poorly documented, but a greater dependence upon sources of income, power and influence in the gift of the French crown seems evident.
Yet the steady accumulation of territories and the regional power which accompanied it was soon to render Armagnac, like Foix-Béarn, one of the most independent of noble houses, especially during the crises of the mid fourteenth century.
Among the old families of Plantagenet Aquitaine there was by the late thirteenth century only one outstanding dynasty.
The house of Albret had emerged from obscure origins to become the most important single lineage in the duchy.
Stemming from the poor and insignificant Landais lordship of Labrit, they had built up a large territorial holding along the Atlantic coast of Aquitaine.
Their lands bordered the lordships of Foix-Béarn on the east, the vicomté of Soule and community of Labourt to the south, and the petty lords of the Bordelais and Bazadais to the north.
With the exception of some thrusts into the Agenais, the primary sphere of acquisitive activity for the Albret at this time was the Bordelais and Bazadais.
Amanieu VII's marriage to Rose de Bourg brought with it important landed possessions around Bourg and Blaye; his daughter Mathe married Renaud de Pons, lord of Bergerac, in 1314, and was to give the Albret a significant foothold on the borders of Périgord; while Amanieu's son, Bérard I (d. 1346) who was lord of Vayres and Vertheuil in the Entre-deux-Mers, acquired the castles and  lordships of Langoiran and Podensac for his cadet son Amanieu through the latter's marriage to Mabille d'Escossan in 1345.
The Podensac, who held a number of strong-points on the Garonne, had married into the bourgeois family of Caillau at Bordeaux in 1293 and thus brought much of their fortune into the Albret inheritance.
Bertrand de Podensac was already a client of Amanieu VII d'Albret in 1296 and appointed Albret as ‘tutor de…ma heretere’, with full power to exercise custody over his heiress and her lands until she reached the age of fourteen.
Her marriage was to be arranged by Albret and another Bordelais knight, Barrau de Sescas, whom Bertrand appointed as his executors.
As a result of two further marriages, an alliance was forged by the Albret with the house of Armagnac.
Bernard VI, count of Armagnac, had married Isabelle d'Albret (d. 1294) as his first wife, and Amanieu VII d'Albret's eldest son Bernard-Ezi V (1326–59) was husband to Mathe d'Armagnac, Bernard VI's daughter.
A tendency for the two houses to act together in their political connections and allegiances became increasingly notable in the 1340s.
Like the Armagnacs, the Albret profited from the rise of the de Goth family and its branches to a place in the sun under Clement V. Between 1305 and 1314 there are fifty references to Amanieu VII d'Albret in the papal registers: he received appointments as papal vicar in Italy and as a nuncio, although he was a layman, to England.
Amanieu VII was an executor of Régine de Goth, countess of Armagnac, in 1325 and his son Bernard-Ezi, who began his career as a clerk, was especially favoured under Clement V. In August 1305, for example, the pope recommended him to the abbot of St Denis and the deans of Bordeaux and Bourges.
He was already a canon of Notre-Dame-de-Paris, and was to be given the first vacant prebend at Bordeaux or Bourges by papal provision.
Clement also furthered the secular ambitions of the Albret.
In August 1306, at the pope's request, Amanieu VII was granted the lordship of Meilhan in the Bazadais by Edward I. The grant was not to prejudice the existing rights of another lord, Auger de Mothe, to levy a lucrative toll or péage at Meilhan, but Albret willingly agreed to this because  he and Auger had been ‘companions and friends since their youth’(a suis juventutibus fuerant socii et amici ).
The circle of the Albret affinity was wide and included most of the lesser seigneurs of the Bordelais and Bazadais.
The list of witnesses to the grant of Meilhan included Arnaud-Garcie de Goth,vicomte of Lomagne and Auvillars, the pope's nephew; Arnaud de Caupenne, knight; Amanieu de Sescas, Guillaume-Raymond de Gensac and Bertrand de Sauviac, esquires; and three citizens of Bordeaux.
The Sescas family were vassals of the Albret, and Barrau de Sescas, knight and admiral of Bayonne, was described in May 1297 as the ‘man’ of Amanieu VI in letters of Edward I to Albret, requesting his indulgence towards Barrau, who was detained on the king-duke's business in England through no fault of his own.
His son, Guillaume de Sescas, esquire (douzet ) recognized that he was a liegeman and military tenant of Albret in July 1309, holding land and tithes from him in the Bazadais, and owing him service, counsel and loyalty in perpetuity.
Papal favour was meted out not merely to the senior and cadet branches of the Albret under Clement V but to their more distant kinsmen and clients.
In June 1312, Guichard d'Albret, non-resident archdeacon of Canterbury, and Amanieu VII's nephew Guillaume de Brutails both received provisions and dispensations enabling them to draw the fruits of their benefices.
Guichard was provided to the rectory of Ightham (dioc.
Canterbury)‘which he has already held for three years without ordination and without papal dispensation’.
A further three years' non-residence, as well as the revenues already held for three years without ordination and without papal dispensation'.
A further three years' non-residence, as well as the revenues of Ightham, were also granted to him by papal indult.
There was nothing exceptional about such favours, but the Albret and their connections did especially well out of them.
The search for endowments, rents, lordships and revenues was particularly intense among all branches of this prolific family, and their relatively unproductive Landais lordships were a constant spur towards further, more profitable acquisitions.
They were prominent beneficiaries of grants from Edward I, and Amanieu VII served the king-duke loyally during the Anglo-French war of 1294–8.
He saw service in Scotland in 1300–1, and was celebrated by the anonymous author of the heraldic Song of Caerlaverock (1300).
With other Gascon nobles, he was partly repaid for his services by the grant of revenues from alien priories, and in June 1300 was  acting as ‘receiver of monies’ from the priory of Blyth.
But, as we shall see, the death or Edward I led to an increasing alienation of Amanieu VII from the Plantagenet regime, which was to culminate in his desertion of Edward II for Charles IV of France during the War of St Sardos.
Piers Gaveston and his Gascon allies were partly instrumental in arousing Albret's hostility and the Despensers did little to achieve a reconciliation.
It was left to Edward III to rebuild the amicable relationship between the Plantagenets and their most prominent Gascon vassal.
The Middling and Lesser Nobility
Below the greater families stood a large number of lesser nobles, a few styling themselves ‘baron’, most content with the title of ‘seigneur’ or ‘sire’, often accompanied by a patronymic derived from the name of their principal or original lordship.
A marked increase in the numbers of nobles had taken place since the early twelfth century.
The Gascon nobility were not exempt from the demographic growth of the period.
In the Bordelais, eight castellan families were to be found at the beginning of the twelfth century, but their number had grown to twenty-four by 1294.
From about fifty families in c.1150, the nobility of the Bordelais had increased to about 200 by 1300.
Among the noblesse moyenne a group of men styled ‘knight’(miles ) was emerging, but the rise of knighthood occurred considerably later in Gascony than other regions, such as Màconnais or Picardy.
Whereas the eleventh and early twelfth centuries witnessed the emergence of knights in greater numbers in northern France, the title was rare in the south-west until the first half of the thirteenth century.
The extension of northern French influences from the Languedoc as a result of the Albigensian crusades may have contributed to this tardy development.
The first designation of the substantial Agenais family of Durfort as knights, for instance, dates from as late as 1243.
They were first styled nobiles viri only in 1256, and a tendency towards a late crystallization of a titled noblesse at this level is found in much of south-west France, with the possible exception of the vicomté of Béarn and  other areas where primogeniture and impartible inheritance were established at an earlier date.
Knighthood was not yet a status sought after by the middling and lesser nobility of the south-west, and the rise of new men as milites only seems to have begun in the mid thirteenth century.
These were essentially fighting men, or milites strenui , making a career of arms and receiving the sword-belt from a superior lord, preferably a king or at least a count.
Edward I, as duke of Aquitaine, was particularly sought after by Gascon nobles as a patron of knighthood, prepared to gird them and their sons with the sword which was the symbol of their order.
By 1300 there were about eighty men styled ‘knight’ in the Bordelais from a total group of about 200 nobles.
Professor Higounet calculated, largely from the evidence of the Recognicionesjeodorum of 1273–5, that there were six ‘lords’(domini ), eighty knights, seventy-four damoiseaux (esquires), between twenty and forty other heads of families styled ‘noble’ and about a dozen patrician families of Bordeaux among the Bordelais nobility.
But the costs of knighthood were high, and some nobles were unwilling or unable to meet the expenditure which was demanded of them.
In 1319, for instance, the wealthy Genoese merchant Antonio di Pessagno, formerly seneschal of Aquitaine, claimed that he had been granted 3000 l.st .
by Edward II for the expenses of his knighting (a sa chivalerie ) assigned on Gascon revenues.
Others were not so favoured, and were obliged to meet the costs of the knighting ceremony and the provision of horses and equipment themselves.
Unless subsidies were forthcoming, it was only great and favoured men such as Jean de Grilly who requested knighthood for their sons from Edward I at their own expense.
In relation to the total number of nobles in Gascony, the proportion of knights was therefore relatively small.
Among the twenty-three barons of Béarn who agreed to serve Gaston II of Foix-Béarn in war against Edward III in June 1338, only five were knights.
As in most Gascon forces of the time, they were surrounded by a mass of damoiseaux, donzels or douzets , some of whom were not young, inexperienced esquires but veterans of many campaigns and expeditions.
The lesser nobility frequented the profession of arms, but few rose into its higher ranks unless they were fort
The proliferation of the lesser nobility was accompanied by an increase in  the number of seigneurial castles in Aquitaine.
These multiplied especially along the routes and inland waterways of the region.
Many lords profited from the tolls charged on travellers and merchandise, and their castles were often sited at points where roads or rivers met, and where merchants and pilgrims congregated.
The pilgrimage route from northern and eastern France to Compostella via Roncevaux and the Basque country passed through the duchy of Aquitaine and its neighbouring lordships, so that the nobility of the region benefited from the péages (tolls) levied on these routes.
These exactions could lead to quarrels, especially with the Church.
Tolls taken by the Durfort in the Agenais hampered the economic development of some Cistercian houses of the region, and the abbeys of Moissac, Belleperche and Grandselve engaged in litigation not only with the Plantagenet king-dukes but with many local seigneurs in defence of their rights and revenues.
The value of tolls levied in the duchy was specifically alluded to in a memorandum of 1294: the French had occupied the duchy, had seisin of péages and rents in Aquitaine, and therefore controlled most of it.
Yet no regime could afford to alienate its supporters, and it was unwise to take too many castles and tolls into royal or ducal possession.
By 1294 five-sixths of the castles within the duchy of Aquitaine were held by the nobility: thus, of 130 fortresses in the Agenais, only six were in ducal hands.
The price of loyalty was high.
A small ducal domain — Edward I held only twenty castles in Aquitaine in the 1290s — ensured the survival of his regime and the Plantagenets consciously and purposefully alienated most of their Gascon assets, with the important exception of the wine customs collected at Bordeaux.
The principal beneficiaries of these grants were the middling and lesser nobility.
Similarly, despite the Gregorian reforms of the later eleventh and early twelfth centuries, many Gascon lords held tithes, or a proportion of them, in parishes within their lordships.
The appropriation of ecclesiastical revenues by secular lords such as the Durfort during the twelfth century, and the installation of kinsmen in the more lucrative benefices, meant that a greater degree of lay patronage of the Church was exercised by the Gascon nobility than by their northern French contemporaries.
Sometimes elder, as well as younger, sons began their careers in the Church and only renounced their unordained clerical status later in life.
This was the case with Bernard-Ezi V d'Albret (1326–59) or Gaillard I de Durfort (c.1299–1356), who had been a notable canon lawyer, prebendary or Saintes, Agen and York, and archdeacon of Périgueux.
Gaillard inherited the Lacour-Durfort lands in 1345, after his marriage to Marguerite de Caumont, and his clerical career was abruptly terminated.
The tight grip of the Gascon nobility on the Church served their dynastic interests well.
Cathedral chapters and collegiate churches were full of their relatives and exclusive foundations such as Uzeste, Villan-draut or St Bertrand-de-Comminges provided subsistence for the younger sons of many families.
The sees of the region were also largely occupied by men of noble birth, and papal provision during the early Avignonese period worked in their favour.
There were notably few clashes over elections in the south-west.
With a de Goth or Canteloupe as archbishop of Bordeaux, and an Armagnac as archbishop of Auch, the alliance of higher clergy and nobility was assured, although family feuds could always spill over into ecclesiastical politics.
The regular clergy remained a major source of friction, however, and the claims of Benedictine and Cistercian monasteries and nunneries could often run counter to the interests of secular nobles.
But the need to provide for cadet sons and daughters could lead the nobility to compromise with abbots, priors and abbesses.
The formation of senior and cadet branches within many noble families was a marked characteristic of the period c .
1 100–1250.
A preference for primogeniture or other forms of impartible inheritance was common among senior branches, such as the Albret or Durfort, and it is arguable that this contributed substantially to their survival.
But a family whose lands lay in an area of customary law where partible inheritance was the rule faced considerable problems.
In the Bazadais, Bordelais, Agenais, Pays d'Albret, the Landes, Marsan, Gabardan, Tursan, Capbreton, Auribat and the prevôté of St Sever, inheritances were divided, sometimes among all heirs, both male  and female.
Yet the liberty to prefer one heir was generally available and many testators took advantage of this practice in their wills and testaments.
To institute a ‘universal heir’ was increasingly common, and that heir was normally male.
But the perennial problem of providing for other children remained.
At worst, the cadet and bastard sons sought occupation and profit in brigandage.
In 1311–12, for example, the consuls and commune of Montclar-d'Agenais told Edward II that their bailli had seized a gang of robbers and murderers, one of whom was ‘called Burd , natural son of…
Amanieu de Fossat, knight, lieutenant of the senescfial of Gascony’.
They were therefore unable to ensure that justice was duly done because Amanieu de Fossat was protecting him.
At best, a delicate balance had to be achieved among the male heirs in a family which might necessitate the sharing of lands and castles.
Sometimes two castles would co-exist on the same site; at others, a castle could be shared among co-seigneurs.
At Roquetaillade in the Bazadais there were ‘old’ and ‘new’castles, while at Puy-Calvary in the Agenais, the castle was divided by their father between his two sons, Raymond-Guillaume and Guillaume de Palazols.
A notarial instrument of April 1288 recorded the agreement specifying the position of the common wall which divided their respective quarters.
Raymond-Guillaume was to hold the salle (hall with living quarters) while Guillaume held the tower.
Neither brother was to molest nor disturb the other by making windows from which the other could be observed, but such arrangements could all too readily generate friction.
Condominium could be a divisive practice and lead to private war.