

1 The Invisible Woman: Sexism in Sociology
Who really gives a damn about reading studies, particularly feminist studies, about women, their dilemmas, their problems, their attempts at solution?
A growing body of literature is currently drawing attention to the disadvantaged position of women in society today.
Despite legal changes, smaller families and improved educational and employment opportunities over the last century or so, marked inequalities remain between the social and economic roles of men and women.
The revival of organized feminism, in the form of the women's liberation movement, has attached a powerful polemic to these differences.
It seems that the situation we are witnessing is neither the effect of a biological underpinning of sex roles, nor can it simply be seen as the persistence of institutional inequalities.
Discrimination against women is still, of course, to be found in law, and it is codified in other institutional practices determining sex-differentiated rights and opportunities; but a more fundamental source of discrimination lies in the realm of social attitudes and beliefs.
The reality of women's situation is daily constructed out of these attitudes: women are, in part, the way they are because of the way they are thought to be.
Thus one finds discrimination against women not only in society at large, but in the academic domain.
This is particularly true of sociology, the ‘science’ that studies social reality.
The counterpart to discrimination against women in society is sexism in sociology.
In much sociology women as a social group are invisible or inadequately represented: they take the insubstantial form of ghosts, shadows or stereotyped characters.
This issue of  sexism has a direct relevance to the main topic of this book: a survey of housewives and their attitudes to housework which I carried out in London in 1971.
The conventional sociological approach to housework could be termed ‘sexist’: it has treated housework merely as an aspect of the feminine role in the family — as a part of women's role in marriage, or as a dimension of child-rearing — not as a work role.
The study of housework as work is a topic entirely missing from sociology.
My survey departs from sociological tradition and takes a new approach to women's domestic situation by looking at housework as a job and seeing it as work, analogous to any other kind of work in modern society.
The discrepancy between this approach and the implicit assumption of much sociological writing on women derives from the basically sexist orientation of the discipline to date.
In this introductory chapter I therefore want to connect the two themes of the sociological neglect of housework, and the wider issue of the bias against women in sociology as a whole.
Sociology is sexist because it is male-oriented.
By ‘male-oriented’ I mean that it exhibits a focus on, or a direction towards, the interests and activities of men in a gender-differentiated society.
The social situations of men and women today are structurally and ideologically discrepant, and the dominant value-system of modern industrialized societies assigns greater importance and prestige to masculine than to feminine roles.
This bias is reflected within sociology, which tends to adopt the values of the wider society.
Attempts at ‘objectivity’— a major premise of the sociological method — may reduce many obvious biases, but they do not seem to have affected the deeply ingrained bias of sexism.
The question of sexism raises the question of feminism.
Is not feminism just as much of a bias as sexism?
To answer this question it must be noted that in sociology (and elsewhere) a feminist perspective appears to be polemical because it runs counter to the accepted male-oriented viewpoint — a viewpoint which is rarely explicitly articulated.
The word ‘feminist’, like the words ‘sexist’, ‘male-biased’, or ‘male chauvinist’, carries heavy polemical implications.
Although these are highly political words, we use them because they are the only available ones: conceptually the area of gender-differentiation in sociology is very poorly developed.
For these reasons feminist values stand  out like a sore thumb.
Conventional male-oriented values are buried in the very foundations of sociology and have to be dug up to be seen (but not believed).
Wright Mills talks of ‘biases’ rather than‘orientations’or ‘perspectives’, but his point stands:
My biases are of course no more or less biases than those I am going to examine.
Let those who do not care for mine use their rejections of them to make their own as explicit and as acknowledged as I am going to try to make mine.
Essentially feminism is a perspective rather than a particular set of prescriptive values.
A feminist perspective consists of keeping in the forefront of one's mind the life-styles, activities and interests of more than half of humanity — women.
Many different arguments or blueprints for a sexually egalitarian society can be, and have been, constructed on this basis.
Institutional sex equality, the overthrow of the capitalist system, the abolition of the family, and the revamping of our entire ideology pertaining to gender roles, have been variously identified as prerequisites for women's ‘liberation’.
These are all different strands of thought, but their common focus is on making visible the invisible: bringing women ‘out from under’ into the twin spheres of social reality and cultural belief-systems.
This chapter is not a systematic analysis of the areas of women's invisibility in sociology; rather, it is an attempt to suggest some of the areas and ways in which it is manifested, some of the reasons why it occurs, and why, from the point of view of sociology (and women) it matters.
1 MANIFESTATIONS
The concealment of women runs right through sociology.
It extends from the classification of subject-areas and the definition of concepts through the topics and methods of empirical research to the construction of models and theory generally.
The broad subject-divisions current in modern sociology appear, at first sight, to be eminently logical and non-sexist.
Social stratification, political institutions, religion, education, deviance, the sociology of industry and work, the family and  marriage, and so on: these are, surely, just descriptions of different areas of human social life.
To examine whether or not this is so one needs to ask three questions.
First, to what extent are the experiences of women actually represented in the study of these life-areas; secondly, how does this representation compare with the empirical role of women in social life; and, lastly, do the subject categorizations themselves make sense from the perspective of women's particular situation?
These represent different criteria of visibility.
The position of women as subjects in sociology may give a distorted impression of social reality.
Or the experiences and social importance of women may be particularly misrepresented through the need to fit them into pre-defined male-oriented sociological categories.
This last criterion is more problematic than the other two.
Male-orientation may so colour the organization of sociology as a discipline that the invisibility of women is a structural weakness, rather than simply a superficial flaw.
The male focus, incorporated into the definition of subject-areas, reduces women to a side-issue from the start.
For example, a major preoccupation of sociologists has been with the cohesive effect of directive institutions through which power is exercised — the law, political systems, etc.
These are male-dominated arenas; women have historically been tangential to them.
The more sociology is concerned with such areas, the less it is, by definition, likely to include women within its frame of reference.
The appropriate analogy for the structural weakness of sociology in this respect is the social reality sociologists study: sexism is not merely a question of institutional discrimination against women, but the schema of underlying values is also implicated.
Taking the major subject-areas of sociology, such as those listed above, it should in theory be possible to chart the areas in which women are most invisible.
The procedure would be to identify discrepancies between the extent to which women are studied in each subject-area, and their actual role in the sphere of social life that the subject-category represents.
For example, in the case of housework the omission of this topic from both family sociology and the sociology of work clearly conveys a distorted impression of women's situation.
No account is taken of the importance of housework to women, either in terms of the simple amount of time women spend on domestic-care activities, or in terms of the personal meaning of housework to women (which may, of course, vary with different social locations).
Using such a critical procedure, two indices could be constructed: an index of women's sociological visibility and an index of their social presence .
Lack of correspondence between the two indices would suggest a failure of sociology to take into account women's experience.
It might also point to more appropriate ways of re-classifying subject areas so that the perspectives of both genders are represented.
The value of taking this kind of critical stance to the subject-classifications of sociology can be illustrated by taking a brief look at five areas: deviance, social stratification, power, the family and marriage, and industry and work.
(a) Deviance
Patterns of deviance in women are ‘lonely, uncharted seas’ of human behaviour.
Very little of the empirical data collected by sociologists relates to women and, of that which does, a main focus concerns sexual offences.
Theories of deviance may include some passing reference to women, but interpretations of female behaviour are uncomfortably subsumed under the umbrella of explanations geared to the model of masculine behaviour.
Even where there is some attempt to account for female/male differences in deviant behaviour, the explanation may simply resort to the simplistic notion that sex roles are generally differentiated.
One reason why women are under-represented in this area is undoubtedly that the sociology of deviance has, until recently, concentrated specifically on criminal behaviour.
Since far fewer females than males commit crimes, this preoccupation has been one main source of sexism.
There is no doubt that women are less deviant than men, according to various criteria such as official crime statistics, suicide figures, data on vagrancy, and so on.
Eight or nine men are convicted of crimes for every single female.
Male suicides generally exceed female suicides (although the ratio is reversed for attempted suicide).
Some of this lower deviance in women may be an artifact of the definition or administration of the law.
There are some crimes for which women cannot be convicted (e.g. homosexuality, rape); courts may deal more leniently with females, and a proportion of female crime may remain undetected  because the police are less sensitive to it.
Nevertheless, even allowing for these factors, women are almost certainly more conformist than men.
Cultural notions of feminine behaviour probably act to conceal deviance in women.
The Wolfenden Committee, reporting on prostitution in Britain, recommended measures to reduce its social visibility (although allowing the phenomenon itself to persist).
This ‘sweeping under the carpet’ syndrome as applied to female deviance reflects the congruency of the sociologist's values with those of the wider society.
But the invisibility of women in the sociology of deviance is not simply a mirror of reality.
Women's social presence in this area, as shown by crime statistics, is far greater than their sociological visibility would suggest.
For example, in 1970 there were 15,623 occasions on which British women aged between seventeen and twenty were found guilty in court.
Over the decade from 1960 to 1970 the rate of all offences committed by females in this age group doubled, while the comparable male rate increased by less than a half.
These facts highlight the substantial and increasing importance of female deviance.
Moreover there is a well-established pattern of gender-differentiated criminal behaviour.
Female shoplifting offences exceed those of men, but women commit only a small percentage of sexual crimes and crimes of violence.
The female offender is characteristically older than her male counterpart.
Females are less likely to be juvenile delinquents, and sexual promiscuity is the female adolescent behaviour-pattern which is most liable to merit the attention of the authorities.
The feminine pattern of crime has the uniformity and degree of constancy which usually attracts the attention of sociologists, yet despite the fact that the sex difference far outweighs any other variable associated with criminal behaviour,
No one seems to have any idea why; but hardly anyone seems to have thought it worth while to try to find out…
While there have been a few studies of women offenders, investiga-tors have generally looked upon the difference between masculine and feminine criminality merely as a reason for eliminating female subjects from their researches on the ground that they provide insufficient material.
Whether this insufficiency reflects a genuine difference in feminine propensity to crime, or merely the superior skill with which female law-breakers  elude detection, and how this difference is related to factors in the training and education of girls which they do not share with their brothers — these questions remain unanswered and indeed unasked.
The situation is a little better today than it was when Barbara Wootton wrote these words fifteen years ago in Social Science and Social Pathology .
Shoplifting, undetected female crime and the social interior of women's prisons are no longer completely uncharted territories; we know more about the career of the prostitute and about the characteristics of delinquency in girls.
However there has still been no systematic attempt to relate female deviancy to women's situation.
The ‘sexual’ interpretation looms large but is inadequate in explaining the large category of female crime which consists of property offences.
Since sociologists of deviance are interested in why people become deviant and/or perpetrate criminal acts, it is obviously important to locate the deviant, whether male or female, squarely within the social context in which he or she becomes deviant.
This in turn requires a thorough knowledge of the customary socialization and life-styles of non-deviant males and females.
But the old and peculiar theory that female delinquency is less ‘versatile’ than male delinquency is still used to dismiss it.
(If female delinquency is less versatile than the male variety, it is also more specialized, but this habit of describing sex differences in terms of women being deficient in masculine characteristics rather than vice versa is common.)
Aside from the question of their own delinquency/criminality, there is the important question of women's influence over masculine patterns of criminal and delinquent behaviour.
To what extent do girls act as brakes on, or motivators of, delinquent behaviour in masculine adolescent gang-culture, for example?
This question has not been taken up in any serious way.
Girls may form a small part of the whole complex of gang behaviour, but the evidence presented in favour of such an interpretation is often very thin.
David Downes in The Delinquent Solution refers to a study of Chicago gangs carried out thirty years previously for support on this point.
He also asserts, although giving no evidence for the claim, that ‘the delinquent's girl is a force for conforming behaviour, as opposed to acting as provocateur for delinquent activity’.
This is fairly representative  of the treatment of the sex difference in the deviancy literature.
No study looks systematically either at the role of girls vis-à-vis masculine delinquency, or at the possible importance of girls' groups in female deviancy.
Recent research on adolescent girls in South Wales indicates that patterns of social relationships in girls do differ from those of boys; in particular, the ‘best friend’ phenomenon seems more important.
As this researcher points out, the backdrop to women's invisibility in the deviancy literature is the lack of attention paid to girls in sociological studies of adolescence.
Quite simply, a sociology of adolescent boys exists, while a sociology of adolescent girls does not.
A major way in which women are represented in the study of deviance is through the theory of ‘feminine identification’, which is a common one in explanations of delinquency and criminality.
The relative absence of the husband-father from modern family life supposedly leads boys to over-identify with their mothers, so that in adolescence ‘compulsive masculinity’ develops as a protest against femininity.
Women also appear as ‘invisible deviants’ supposedly ‘causing’delinquency through going out to work.
Such theories at least attempt to cope with the reality of the female presence, even if they do not do so accurately.
Finally, does the traditional definition of deviance make sense from a female perspective?
Perhaps the rejection of marriage and the espousal of a profession represents a ‘deviant career’ for women, or perhaps the phenomenon of the obsessive, houseproud housewife could be usefully seen as a form of gender role-related deviance.
The male-orientation of the deviancy literature is almost certain to have precluded the study of certain patterns of behaviour which constitute deviant ways of behaving for the female half of the population.
If the contention of Pollak and others is correct that the roles of women reduce the public display of deviance, then it is indeed in such ‘private’ areas that one would expect female forms of deviance to be located.
(b) Social Stratification
In social stratification theory and its application in research a number of assumptions made about the role of women serve to guarantee their invisibility.
These assumptions make up a set of inter-related hypotheses about the processes and criteria of  class membership.
They are theoretically testable, but in practice remain untested.
Three main ones are:
1
the family is the unit of stratification;
2
the social position of the family is determined by the status of the man in it;
3
only in rare circumstances is the social position of women not determined by that of the men to whom they are attached by marriage or family of origin.
The first of these is the lynchpin of the argument.
One can offer three principle objections to it, which constitute general criticisms of stratification theory, but relate specifically to the issue of whether women's situation is adequately represented in the theory (or its practice in research).
Firstly, not everybody lives in a family.
In the US Census data for 1970, more than one in ten of the adult population is an ‘unattached individual’; in the British Census data for 1966, about one in twelve of the population do not live in families.
A second objection is that stratification theory rests on the assumption of a ‘normal’ unit of male, female and child/children in which the father is the breadwinner.
How normal is this?
American estimates put the number of family households headed by a female, or by a male who is unemployed or in part-time work only, at two out of five.
Fifty-eight per cent of all British households are not of the nuclear family type according to 1966 data, and one in twenty of all households is a single-parent family.
Clearly, therefore, there are large numbers of people whose life-styles do not connect with the dictum that ‘the family is the unit of stratification’.
Thirdly, while members of the same family are held to share identical degrees of status, privilege, power and wealth, simply by virtue of their common membership of this unit, differences of role, position and status within the family are not themselves considered to be criteria of stratification.
This implies (a) that females have no resources of their own, and (b) that the family is an entirely symmetrical status structure.
Both these implications are false.
Apart from the question of wealth, married women have personal resources of education and sometimes occupational training: many are also employed during their marriages and are in receipt of income and status from this source.
The assumption that women's own resources become  inoperative on marriage means that abrupt alterations to the class structure are liable to occur every time someone gets married.
An occupationally based class categorization of married women would put many in a different class from their husbands.
For example, the British 1971 Sample Census data give the following picture: The implication of such substantial discrepancies cannot simply be ignored.
On the status dimension, husband-wife equality cannot merely be assumed either.
Haavio-Mannila set out to test the assumption that wives share the same status ranking as their husbands.
Some of her findings are set out in Table 1.2 below; this compares the ranks of men and women employed in certain occupations with the ranks assigned by a sample of respondents to the wives of men in these occupations.
The data suggest that gender role is influential.
Women are generally ranked lower than men, and wives lowest of all.
The conclusion that women participate unequally in their husbands' status is congruent with empirical data on the social, economic and legal treatment of married women.
For example, ‘reflected’ status is insufficient qualification for married women entering into hire-purchase agreements on their own; there is discrimination here, as in the area of credit generally.
Married women are treated as dependents by the income tax system, whatever their actual economic resources and social situation.
These are signs that the ranking of ‘wife’ or ‘housewife’is low relative to other occupations — signs which indicate that there may be a measure of agreement in society generally about the status of wife (such agreement being a crucial determinant of social prestige hierarchies).
If this were so, then an incorporation of this rank into stratification theory would give rise to a more accurate picture of women's position in the class structure, and it would increase the validity of stratification measures.
A second possibility is that social ranking of wife or housewife roles varies with different socio-economic contexts.
As Acker puts it:
…the position of upper-class housewife may be much more highly valued in the overall structure than the position of lower-class housewife.
It may be that the valuation of this position rises as its functions become more symbolic and less utilitarian.
Or, to put it another way, the value may rise as functions become centred more around consumption and less around productive activities.
These criticisms of stratification theory derive from the known  importance of gender as a criterion of social differentiation in modern society.
Sociologists have paid very little attention to the significance of gender in this context — much less attention than has, for example, been paid to age or ethnicity.
Gender differentiates; it may also stratify — that is, the attributes of femininity and masculinity may be systematically ranked differently.
Although there are scattered suggestions in the stratification literature that gender forms a criterion of stratification, such a statement tends to be either treated frivolously, or rebutted by a neat process of tautological argument.
Hence (to take the former method of dismissal first) Randall Collins' account of ‘A Conflict Theory of Sexual Stratification’ claims that stratification by gender is based on ‘sexual property’— the notion of exclusive sexual rights.
Men are bigger and sexier than women; every encounter between them is a sexual encounter, the only important market is the sexual market, and therefore women's resources, life-styles and class position are ultimately determined by the ‘biological facts’ of female sexual attractiveness and male sexual aggression.
The argument is frivolous firstly because conceptually it is full of elementary mistakes, the primary one being the equation of ‘sexuality’ with ‘gender’.
This is a common confusion and accounts for many weak arguments in sociology and elsewhere.
Social classification as masculine or feminine (gender) is not the same as biological maleness or femaleness, nor is ‘sexuality’ a synonym for it.
In other words, relationships between the sexes are not necessarily sexual relationships.
Sexuality may be a component in stratification by gender but it cannot be assumed a priori by a process of projection in which the male sociologist, himself accustomed to thinking of women in these terms, imposes his own proclivities and preoccupations on the data he is analysing.
Secondly, Collins' argument is deficient on the level of empirical evidence.
For example, the description of different sexual stratification systems, on which the theory rests, makes an appalling number of generalizations which can be falsified by a random search through the ethnographic literature.
In Class Inequality and Political Order , Frank Parkin unwittingly provides an illustration of how stratification by gender can be tautologically argued away.
The steps in his argument are summarized below.
1
The family is the unit of the class system: hence people are wrong in saying that sex or gender stratification exists.
2
Women are certainly oppressed, but these sex-based inequalities do not constitute a stratification system: for most women social and economic rewards are determined by the position of the male head of the family.
3
Only if the disabilities associated with female status were ‘felt’ to  over-ride class differences would sex/gender represent an important dimension of stratification.
4
Women see themselves as members of a kin group rather than as women.
5
Because the major unit of reward is the family, most women do not feel that their interests conflict with those of men.
6
Therefore gender is not the basis of a stratification system.
This is a classic case of an argument which purports to take into account the female point of view, but which fails because the reference is merely token.
Parkin asserts that only if women see themselves in non-family terms is stratification by gender meaningful, but he presents no evidence as to what women actually feel in relation to their family or class position.
He simply asserts that their perceptions are congruent with his own view that the family is the important unit.
 Women's role and position in the social stratification system husband and wife working in a paid job or career? vicarious role they are assigned in the sociology of stratification.
Even in ‘family’ stratification the role of women is hidden.
The relevant questions which sociologists fail to ask include: to what extent do housewives influence family status-rankings through their consumption or general housekeeping behaviour?
Does a married woman's adherence to stereotyped ideals of ‘feminine’ behaviour in dress, appearance and so forth, have any influence on social perceptions of her family's status?
How far do women determine the occupational positions and behaviour of their husbands?
How is a family's social ranking affected by both husband and wife in a paid job or career?
This kind of amendment to traditional stratification analysis would still, of course, leave standing the major objections to it.
In the end there has to be some way of restructuring the mode of  analysis to take account both of gender differences in role, status and resources within the family, and also outside it.
This is a major task, but its importance is affirmed by the attention feminists in general, and Marxist-feminists in particular , are giving to the problem of women's place in the class system.
(c) Power
The phenomenon of power is closely allied with that of stratification.
Rather than examining the visibility of women in all the various types of sociological analyses of power, I am going instead simply to draw attention to an area in which the undoubted social power of women has not been considered at all.
While occupancy of the traditional wife/mother/housewife constellation of roles — the manner in which much sociology represents women — is correlated with certain types of powerlessness, it also has its own avenues of influence.
For example, since women are the main socializers of children, they have an enormous capacity to affect patterns of personality and behaviour.
The incidence and patterning of illness among members of a family is interlocked with the emotional interior of the family: thus another logical corollary of women's pivotal position in this unit is their capacity to affect not only health, but ill-health.
Women have power as housewives, wives and mothers, and as members of the community.
As the ‘degree of control a person or a collectivity of people exercises over the actions of others’ the sociological examination of power is conventionally linked with male-oriented stratification analysis, and with the analysis of formal institutions such as government.
This line of thinking presupposes that there is only one kind of power.
Attention is thereby diverted from another variety: informal or unarticulated power.
This kind is more often exercised in private than in public places, the concept of ‘legitimate authority’ tends to be irrelevant to it, and it is less visible and less easily amenable to sociological analysis.
A distinction proposed by Peter Worsley between two kinds of politics is relevant here.
‘Politics I’ is concerned with ‘the exercise of constraint in any relationship…
Looked at this way, there is no such thing as a special kind of behaviour called ‘political’; there is only a political dimension  to behaviour…’
The field of ‘Politics II’ is much narrower.
It is concerned with the machinery of government, state and party political administration.
An example of the difficulties associated with the analysis of informal power — the political dimension to behaviour — in the case of women is given in a footnote to Katz and Lazarsfeld's study of Personal Influence :
In the study of voting behaviour during a presidential campaign, it was found that while wives frequently referred to discussions with their husbands, the latter rarely returned the compliment.
The husbands apparently did not feel that they were ‘discussing’ politics with their wives.
Rather, they were telling their wives what politics was all about.
Were the women influencing the voting choices of their husbands or not?
Katz and Lazarsfeld's own study delineates the crucial role of women in the shaping of everyday decisions to do with consumption patterns, fashions, public affairs and cinema attendances in a mid-western American community.
Female influence was greatest in consumer decisions, and least in public affairs (although, as in the above example of voting choices, the researchers say that the latter finding may be due to the men's unwillingness to admit to having serious political discussions with women).
Katz and Lazarsfeld found ‘gregariousness’ to be an important factor associated with the role of women in the formation of public opinion.
Gossip, defined as ‘idle, unconstrained talk especially about persons or social incidents’ is a function of many gregarious rituals.
As a means of controlling other people's behaviour, it meets the essential criterion of power, but is largely unanalysed.
(According to Worsley the associated notion of a ‘pressure group’ forms the bridge between formal and informal politics.)
British and American community studies give the phenomenon of gossip some attention, but there is, so far as I know, no systematic study of gossip as a form of unarticulated female power.
While both sexes gossip, the literature suggests that they gossip differently.
Where opportunities for controlling situations and events in a more organized sense are constricted as in the case of women at home — it is logical to assume that power to exert control through gossip becomes relatively more important.
Gossip has received some attention in anthropology.
According to Max Gluckman, gossip and scandal are ‘among the most important societal and cultural phenomena we are called upon to analyse’.
Although Gluckman does not consider the variable of gender, he describes some of the functions of gossip: the unification and affirmation of community values, the control of aspiring individuals and cliques within society, the selection of leaders, the maintenance of group exclusiveness.
Gossip may not be a female prerogative, but it certainly is so in the social stereotype of women.
For example Few would dispute that women excel at gossiping…
In the seemingly endless, and to male ears repetitive, chatter that goes on among women…a massive and  encyclopaedic confidence is built up in the gossipers…gossip serves exactly the same grooming functions for the women as poker for the men…
As gossip is to ladies and gambling to gentlemen, flirting is to both together.
There are intimate ideological connections between women's gossip on the one hand and sorcery and witchcraft on the other.
Gluckman quotes one example of this from the ethnographic literature, an analysis of African village life in which gossiping between one lineage and another is believed to introduce a risk of sorcery.
The fights of women (held to be the main culprits) who take their grumbles to outsiders provide an opportunity for these outsiders to bewitch the entire lineage.
Another example, much closer to home, relates to the persecution of witches in pre-industrial Britain.
A cursory glance at the literature in this field reveals the importance of suspicions concerning gossiping groups of women.
Witches were also often midwives and healers, and it is interesting that their persecution coincided with the beginning of a ‘takeover’ process in which the (predominantly) male medical profession acquired control over the care of women in childbirth — an area in which women were originally autonomous.
In other words, one form of power was challenging another.
(d) The Family
If women have no place of their own in much of sociology, they are firmly in possession of one haven: the family.
In the family  women ‘come into their own’; they are the family.
By far the largest segment of sociological literature concerning women is focused on their roles as wives, mothers and housewives — but not on the housewife's role as houseworker .
Major topics in this literature are marital happiness, the division of labour and the general patterning of husband-wife roles; the combination of women's employment with marriage, and its consequences for husband-wife and mother-child relationships; the inter-relationships between the nuclear family and the wider kinship system; and the ‘captive wife’ syndrome — the socially isolated situation of women with young children.
These topics are often looked at in an historical context: changes in the patterning of family life with industrialization and urbanization are examined.
The general consensus of opinion among sociologists is that, compared with the state of affairs in the nineteenth century, the modern marriage relationship is happier more egalitarian, more important, and therefore certainly more stressful.
Disputes wage over the issue of whether or not nuclear families today are isolated from their kin.
It seems to be generally agreed that young mothers run a far higher risk of isolation and loneliness than their Victorian counterparts.
Where are women in all this?
They appear to occupy the centre of the stage, but in what guise?
A favourite word is ‘role’, and the dramaturgical metaphor is highly appropriate.
In family and marriage literature women are entirely encapsulated within the feminine role.
The psychoanalytic view has been very influential, leading to an implicit definition of women as wives and mothers to the virtual exclusion of any other life-area.
In addition the literature has a definite ‘social problem’ orientation, which is shown most clearly in the vast number of studies of the ‘working mother’.
The focus on the child-rearing implications of women's employment has led to such detailed considerations as the relation between the employment status of mothers and their children's health, and the possibility of an association between employment and the nutritional adequacy of pre-school children's diets.
The problem of disturbances in the traditional pattern of domesticated-wife servicing employed-husband is also implied.
As one of the earliest studies in this field expressed it:
many people see it [the employment of women]as a challenge  to society, because it breaks with long-established patterns of family life, and with the values and beliefs supporting them…
It involves two of the most intimate personal relationships, that of husband to wife, and of parent to child…
Almost none of this literature is woman-focused.
While considering the advantages and disadvantages to other family members of new patterns of domestic life, the consequences for the woman are often omitted.
‘Role conflict’ is talked about, but this is not necessarily quite the same thing.
None of these criticisms of course implies that marriage and family life are not important to women today: indeed, the evidence suggests that these areas of experience are still critical.
But do we know how critical?
Where is a sociological account of the relative importance attached to these areas in the totality of women's experience?
Possibly the family and marriage are areas in which sociological visibility exceeds social presence; certainly the presence of men as fathers is not matched by an equal visibility in the discipline.
A sign of the over-exposure of women in this area is the low status of family and marriage sociology: as a radical young female sociologist asked the feminist-sociologist Alice Rossi in a moment of unguarded chauvinism: ‘how did you manage to get stuck in a low status field like marriage and the family?’
The status of this area is low, because the status of its subjects — women — is also low, and because attitudes prevailing among sociologists towards the position of women as an academic subject serve persistently to trivialize its importance.
Another consideration is whether conceptual distinctions and classifications in family and marriage sociology are appropriate to a female perspective.
In Chapter 4 I argue that the concept of women's ‘domesticity’ which is used loosely in sociological writing needs to be broken down into a number of more precise concepts before much sense can be made of women's similarities/differences on this dimension.
Other, broader confusions also hide under the umbrella of ‘the family and marriage’.
These are the areas in which sexuality, reproduction, child-socialization and housework are carried out, yet rarely is an adequate distinction made between the four kinds of experience.
Popular idiom has it that the four themes are very imperfectly combined in the family: ‘children ruin a marriage’, ‘sex and family life  simply don't go together’, and so forth.
There is a need to make this kind of distinction in sociology also.
(e) Industry and Work
By comparison with marriage and family sociology, women are conspicuous for their absence as data in the sociology of industry and work.
This is in striking contrast to the important role they play in the occupational structure: currently some thirty-six per cent of the labour force is female.
Despite this fact, studies of employment are almost wholly male-oriented.
There is a notable paucity of studies analysing (from the viewpoint of work-attitudes) the occupations in which women workers have traditionally been concentrated — food and clothing manufacture, retail sales work, clerical work, teaching, nursing and domestic work.
The employment of women tends to be studied as a deviation from the norm — i.e. when combined with marriage.
(The fact that this pattern is yearly becoming less of a deviation is brushed aside: in 1971 forty-three per cent of all married women in Britain were employed.)
Married women are asked ‘why do you work?’, a question whose equivalent in the study of men's work-attitudes is ‘why aren't you working?’
The invisibility of women in the sociology of work is guaranteed by the choice of predominantly masculine jobs in research design.
For example, the automobile industry, described as ‘the most intensively studied industrial situation’ has a largely male work force.
Whatever the specific features of the occupations chosen for study, samples tend uniformly to be male, or mostly male: this fact is hidden through the use of titles which purport to be describing work in general and the worker irrespective of gender.
Arthur Kornhauser's Mental Health of the Industrial Worker , Herzberg, Mausner and Snyderman's The Motivation to Work , Walker and Guest's Man on the Assembly Line and Hughes' Men and Their Work are examples.
(In the latter two cases ‘man’ and ‘men’are generic terms.)
Theoretical or descriptive surveys not based on empirical research commonly make no reference to women at all, or allot them a specific section on ‘work and the family’ or some such title.
Since women's place in the sociology of work is very much a secondary one it follows that we do not have enough empirical  data to determine the relative importance to women of their experiences in the occupational sector.
Fragmented evidence suggests that questions about married women's reasons for taking jobs tap the normative tip of the iceberg — that women say they work for the money because this is the socially acceptable reason.
Yet the prevailing treatment of women workers defines them as a particular and different sub-group of the general category ‘workers’(this parallels the role they are assigned in the study of deviance).
Such an astigmatic view of course excludes them from the main focus of research.
Robert Blauner in Alienation and Freedom , an analysis of job conditions in four factory technologies, provides an excellent example of this traditional approach.
He dismisses the women who make up almost half the workers in the textile industry he studied as ‘a major safety valve against the consequences of alienating work conditions’.
The high concentration of women in jobs which are, in Blauner's words ‘the least skilled, the most repetitive, and the least free’ makes it possible for men to have jobs with the opposite attributes.
‘Women in the industry are not dissatisfied with such work’ asserts Blauner, without giving his evidence for this statement: ‘Work does not have the central importance and meaning in their lives that it does for men, since their most important roles are those of wives and mothers’.
There may well be gender differences in attitudes to paid work, but these are not adequately demonstrated by the reiteration of the old adage that women's primary role is a family one.
A study which adopts a critical attitude to this conventional axiom is Wild and Hill's analysis of job satisfaction and labour turnover among women in the electronics industry.
They show convincingly that the belief in women's capacity for boring and repetitive work is part of industrial folklore: if it were true, turnover rates should be no higher in industries which offer such work than in those where the work is more intrinsically interesting.
However, this is not so.
In the electronics industry that Wild and Hill studied particularly, female turnover rates showed a high relationship with job satisfaction/dissatisfaction: many women, like many men, express a need for personally satisfying work and the failure to find it is often a reason for changing one's job.
These brief and incomplete excursions through five subject territories of sociology provide some examples of how male-orientation  may be manifested.
In exposing this it is possible to begin to see how and where the female perspective might usefully be introduced.
Other areas which call out to be critically re-evaluated in this way are methodology and theory.
For the former, Jessie Bernard has suggested an underlying distinction between two types of procedure that reflects traditional gender stereotypes.
‘Feminine’ methods such as participant observation, small-sample depth-interviewing, and concentration on qualitative rather than quantitative variables, have less academic prestige and acceptability than their ‘masculine’counterparts.
This deserves further consideration.
So far as the theorizing and model-building enterprises of sociology are concerned, these also require some assessment with the two criteria of sociological visibility and social presence in mind.
Some problems in stratification theory and the theory of deviance are mentioned above.
In the section below I make some observations on male-orientation in functionalist theory.
2 REASONS
I propose three main reasons for the present bias against women in sociology; the nature of its origins, the sex of its practitioners, and the ideology of gender roles, borrowed from the wider society, which is reproduced uncritically within it.
(a) Origins
The nineteenth century in Euro-American culture was one of the historical periods in which women have been most oppressed.
Institutionally, they were deprived of most individual freedoms, rights and responsibilities, and ideologically they were little more than chattels, slaves or decorative ornaments (depending on their class position).
This was also the period in which the foundations of sociology were laid.
The so-called ‘founding fathers’(an appropriate phrase) lived and wrote in an eminently sexist era.
Of five such founding fathers — Marx, Comte, Spencer, Durkheim and Weber — Marx (1818–83) and Weber (1864–1920) alone held what could be described as ‘emancipated’ views about women.
Marx provided the bones of an analysis of marriage as  female domestic slavery, although he was personally something of a rearguard romantic; Weber argued for sex-equality within marriage.
Herbert Spencer (1820–1903) protested that marriage was an unequal institution, and that women should have equal rights of competition with men, but in his later writing he reversed this opinion and declared that ‘if women comprehended all that is contained in the domestic sphere, they would ask no other’.
August Comte (1798–1857) was a doctrinaire sexist and his philosophy about women is most clearly shown in his utopian ‘positivist scheme of social reconstruction’.
Every social class except women was to be ranked on a hierarchical scale of importance and specialization of function.
Women were to be in charge of domestic morality, and their moral influence was to be ensured by the rule of indissoluble monogamous marriage.
Ultimately, his view reduced to a belief in the constitutional inferiority of women, whose maturation Comte considered to have been arrested in childhood.
The perspective Durkheim (1858–1917) held on women was also shaped by a biological doctrine: women belonged ‘naturally’ in the family.
His analysis of the structure of the modern conjugal family was phrased solely from the point of view of the man.
He regarded it as essential that men become more deeply committed to their work through the formation of professional/occupational groups, since for them an involvement in the family did not provide a sufficiently sound moral basis for continued existence: ‘Men must gradually become attached to their occupational or professional life…
In the hearts of men, professional duty must take over the place formerly occupied by domestic duty’.
Meanwhile, the family (as the province of women) would continue to be a centre of moral education and security.
This axiom was one that Durkheim carried out in his private life.
Indeed, the intellectual achievements of these men rested in a personal way on the basis of women's domestic oppression.
(The Webers' marriage is, to some extent, an exception here: Marianne Weber was a feminist and a writer in her own right.
Of the five, Herbert Spencer never married.)
It was said of Comte that ‘the woman he chose as his wife was nothing more than a means for the immediate gratification of his crude sexuality’.
The prototype of many a wife was Marx's wife Jenny, who 
dedicated her whole being to his life and his work.
It was an entirely happy marriage.
She loved, admired and trusted him and was, emotionally and intellectually, entirely dominated by him.
He leaned on her unhesitatingly in all times of crisis and disaster, remained all his life proud of her beauty, her birth and her intelligence…
In later years when they were reduced to penury, she displayed great moral heroism in preserving intact the framework of a family and a household, which alone enabled her husband to continue his work.
Similarly, Durkheim's marriage
could not have been happier, both personally and in creating an atmosphere conducive to his work…the domestic ideal that is evident in his writings (the family being his favourite subject of study and lecturing) was most clearly represented by his own home life…his wife created for him the respectable and quiet familial existence which he considered the best guarantee of morality and of life.
She removed from him every material care and frivolity…
These comments probably portray accurately the role-segregation of Marx and Durkheim's marital relationships, but it is perhaps reasonable to question the assumption of female happiness they both make.
Jenny Marx's life was at times appallingly wretched and difficult.
Durkheim was a very austere man who led a rigidly timetabled existence and refused to talk to his family except at mealtimes.
Such points could be made repetitively.
Domestic sexism does not guarantee sexism in public affairs, although one is often a symptom of the other.
Both can be presumed to matter most when and where they are most influential — as in the charting of the interests, concerns and methods of analysis that make up a new academic discipline.
The early sociologists established a number of traditions that have subsequently moulded the place of women in sociology.
These include a biological reductionism applied to gender roles, a presumption that women belong in the family but hardly anywhere else, and a ‘functionalist’ analysis of the family and its connections with the rest of society.
The American school of sociology had no less sexist beginnings.
In particular Lester Ward and W. I. Thomas took over themes from Comte and Spencer and developed their own form of biological dogma and social prescription applied to women's place.
Their view of women as solutions to the Hobbesian problem of order repeated values dominant in  America in the early years of this century, according to which oppression by sex, colour or class could be justified in a laissezfaire, utilitarian philosophy of human relationships.
(b) A Male Profession
As Wright Mills observed in his critique, ‘The Professional Ideology of Social Pathologists’: ‘If the members of an academic profession are recruited from similar social contexts and if their backgrounds and careers are relatively similar, there is a tendency for them to be uniformly set for some common perspective’.
This applies both to the origins of sociology and to the characteristics of its practitioners since the beginning.
Gender was not a variable that Wright Mills considered in his analysis of the social backgrounds of social pathologists (thus indicating his own low level of awareness about such matters).
Systematic data on the sex of sociological personnel now exists.
An American report,The Status of Women in Sociology documents the existence of tokenism — in eighty-five per cent of sociology departments there is at least one woman.
It shows the pattern of the gender hierarchy — five per cent of full professors, sixteen per cent of assistant professors, but thirty per cent of lecturers in 1972 being female.
It demonstrates the under-representation of women in sociological publications and in editorial positions.
Similar inequalities are to be found in British sociology.
Such facts are highly relevant to the continuing message of sexism transmitted by all aspects of the discipline.
(c) The Ideology of Gender
‘Perhaps the most enlightening part of the Committee's investigation was the discovery that many able sociologists…abandon the empirical stance and rely upon folk myth and stereotype’.
This observation from the American Status of Women in Sociology report draws attention to the underlying ideology of gender roles which is responsible for all the various manifestations of sexism.
Ideology in this context may be defined as ‘a set of closely related beliefs or ideas, or even attitudes characteristic of a group or community’.
This ideology relating to gender roles underpins the structure of sociology much as it does the structure of social life.
 But while the dominance of folk myth  discussed above, for example, the ‘sexual’ and ‘conformist’stereotype of women has acted against their presence in the about women in popular thinking is well documented, no such critical stance has been taken to the persistence of these stereotypes in sociology itself.
Implicit assumptions about how women do, and should, behave colour all subject-areas.
In those study of deviance; a belief that the family is the only important vehicle of reward and realization for women has led to a distortion of their role in the stratification system; and an unspoken devaluation of female types of power as trivial and insignificant has led political sociology towards a one-sided examination of formal constraint- and authority-systems.
A multitude of particular inter-related notions about women may be identified as shaping research and theory in all areas of sociology, but a general set of axioms is responsible for the place of women in the two areas of family and marriage, and industry and work.
The neglect of housework as a topic is also anchored in these axioms.
They can be stated thus:
1
women belong in the family, while men belong ‘at work’;
2
therefore men work, while women do not work;
3
therefore housework is not a form of work.
The first two of these assumptions have been illustrated above.
The third appears to be a deduction from the first two, but the syllogism is false.
Its falsity hinges on the fictional nature of the dichotomy between ‘family’ and ‘work’and on the meaning of the term ‘work’.
Although the work/family distinction expresses the separation between these two spheres of life brought about by industrialization, it does not follow that one is the world of men while the other is the world of women.
Many women go out to work; many women (and some men) work in the home, but one would never guess the facts from this kind of statement:
The adjustment of female workers to their jobs is often made more difficult by the peculiar problems of the employed woman who must divide her interests and attention between the working world and her traditional role as a woman .
Confusions are compounded by the assertion of biological determinism:
The situation confronting the woman in our society is somewhat different [from that of the man].
Because she alone has  the capacity to give birth to and nurse children, her primary function is seen as one of mother and homemaker…it is clear that working occupies a more important place in the lives of men than women.
Both these quotations are representative of many studies in this field.
What is ‘work’?
According to one definition, a work role has five properties.
It requires the expenditure of energy; it permits a contribution to the production of goods or services; it defines patterns of social interaction; it provides social status for the worker, and, lastly, it brings in money.
The only difference in this definition between employment work and housework is housework's lack of pay.
But because work is not a component of the feminine stereotype housework lacks any conceptualization in sociology as work.
The ‘dual role’ concept which is in common currency validates the denial of housework's status as work.
Again, the two worlds are work and home.
Alva Myrdal and Viola Klein's Women's Two Roles was one of the first studies to adopt this concept: its focus is the position of women in the labour force and the problems of combining home and work.
In this analysis housework is a side-issue.
The American habit of referring to housework as ‘homemaking’ neatly cements the ideological division between home and work.
In turn this paves the way for another procedure which acts against the conceptualization of housework as work activity, and that is the confusion between the four words/roles housewife, wife, mother and woman.
For example, Helen Lopata in her study Occupation Housewife discusses the ‘life-cycle of role involvements’, and says
Although women state that they are tied down by the responsibility of small children, they also experience satisfaction with several aspects of their role [which role?].
In the first place, becoming a housewife impresses them by the very openness of the role [?]and by the freedom they now have from constraining supervision…
Housewife and mother roles are synonymous in this quotation, although Lopata herself presents considerable evidence as to the differences and disjunctions between them.
Hannah Gavron in The Captive Wife is aware of the political implications of the ‘dual role’ concept:
Women today are considered to have two choices — to work or to stay at home.
This implies that staying at home does not involve work.
Yet at a time when the rest of the industrialized world is moving towards a forty hour week, women, many of whom may work at least eighty hours per week, are encouraged to regard this as not being work.
Yet Gavron's own chapter ‘Mothers and Work’ uses the term ‘work’to mean employment work, not housework.
In her five-page chapter on the running of the home she considers only two topics: financial arrangements between husband and wife, and the extent to which men share housework and the care of children.
The women's own attitudes to, and perceptions of, housework are left unanalysed.
These are examples of the way even studies of women's domestic roles tacitly subscribe to the myth of feminine passivity.
Although housework is work they say, we would have to turn the ideology of our culture on its head to analyse it in such a manner.
The most serious consequence of this mystification is a failure to represent the meaning of housework to the actors (actresses) themselves.
This point is expanded in the next chapter.
Other consequences follow.
The attitudes of women to work in the home are very likely to be related to other attitudes they hold — such as those to paid employment, to marriage, to child-socialization, to leisure activities and so on.
But the failure to see housework in this way is endemic to sociology, and so these possible relationships have not been explored.
A way of seeing is a way of not seeing.
One example is functionalist theory, a school of sociology which, as a distinct ‘way of seeing’, has had a pervasive influence.
Other feminist critics have pointed out how functionalist theory effectively presumes that the domestic oppression of women is necessary for the stability of the social order.
Elsewhere, I have criticized functionalism as a myth of the division of labour by sex to which ethology and anthropology make their own contributions.
But functionalism also operates specifically to deny housework's status as work; indeed, one of its main premises is that the feminine role in the family is opposed to the masculine role precisely on this dimension.
According to functionalist theorists, the role of ‘task leader’ in the family involves ‘instrumental’activities such as decision-making, earning money and ‘manipulating  the external environment’; the role of ‘sociometric star’carries ‘expressive’duties such as the expression of emotional warmth and the integration of internal family relationships.
Men perform an instrumental role, women an expressive one.
Put in plain language, the women stay at home and provide emotional support while the men go out to work and provide financial support.
The gender division is reducible to biology.
According to Zelditch, ‘a crucial reference point for differentiation in the family…lies in the division of organisms into lactating and nonlactating classes’.
The distinction between the two kinds of role in functionalist theory is simply the stereotyped separation between women/home and men/work.
The qualities of the feminine expressive role, as defined by Zelditch, Parsons and others, are directly opposed to the qualities of the housewife/houseworker role.
For, to express warmth, to be constantly person-oriented and conciliatory, it is clearly ‘necessary’ that the housewife-wife-mother not be occupied with such highly instrumental tasks as cleaning the house, budgeting the housekeeping money, laundering the clothes, and throwing out the rubbish.
In functionalist theory, as in most family and marriage literature, women are over-visible.
This is because the areas of women's greatest visibility in sociology tend also to contain examples of the most rampant sexism.
The ideology of feminine passivity not only runs right through sociology, but is the cornerstone of that zone within it where women are least hidden.
A correction of this distorted male-oriented perspective involves going back to women themselves and looking through their eyes at the occupation of housewife.
2 Description of Housework Study
Despite a reduction of gender differences in the occupational world in recent years, one occupational role remains entirely feminine: the role of housewife.
No law bans men from this occupation, but the weight of economic, social and psychological pressures is against their entry into it.
The equation of femaleness with housewifery is basic to the structure of modern society, and to the ideology of gender roles which pervades it.
About eighty-five per cent of all British women between the ages of sixteen and sixty-four are housewives, according to the findings of a national survey described by Audrey Hunt.
The definition of who is, and who is not, a housewife is phrased in terms of responsibility : thus a housewife is ‘the person, other than a domestic servant, who is responsible for most of the household duties (or for supervising a domestic servant who carries out these duties)’.
A housewife may be married or not, and she may or may not have a job outside the home.
In Hunt's survey, nine out of ten non-employed women were housewives, but so were seven out of ten employed women.
Thus, not only is the housewife role specifically a feminine role, it is also women's major occupational role today: the responsibility for running a home is one which is shared by the majority of all adult women.
This, then, is the main justification for a study of housework.
It is a daily experience in the lives of most women, who in turn make up statistically the greater part of the population.
Another reason for looking at women's attitudes to housework comes from surveys of gender differences in the areas of education and employment over the last few decades.
These fields, in which  there has been a growing attempt to eradicate sex inequality, still show the persistence of women's domestic commitments as a barrier to equality.
This division between the life-styles of men and women is well documented, but little is known about the precise form or effect of housework attitudes.
The sociological neglect of housework was demonstrated in the last chapter.
Because so little material exists, the study presented in this book was conceived as an exploratory, pilot survey.
As Margaret Stacey observes in Methods of Social Research :
Hypotheses which are worth testing can only be developed in areas about which a good deal is known, i.e. where a great deal of empirical field data has already been collected.
Before this stage most research is of an exploratory nature…
It is only after much empirical data has been collected and a series of simple relationships, close to reality, have been established, that either precise hypotheses can be enunciated for testing or theory derived inductively from empirical data.
A first aim is to describe the housewife's work situation and the housewife's attitudes to housework.
A second is to examine patterns of satisfaction and dissatisfaction with housework in relation to a number of variables, including social class, education, the division of labour in marriage, technical equipment, patterns of social interaction and so on.
A third aim is to suggest possible hypotheses directed towards explaining differences between housewives in attitudes to housework and the housework situation.
The sample consisted of forty London housewives.
All were aged between twenty and thirty at the time of interview, and all were mothers.
They were selected from the medical records of two general practices (details of sample selection are described in Appendix I).
The area of London remains unspecified, and the names of the women have, of course, been changed in order to preserve anonymity.
The women were interviewed in early 1971 using the interview schedule reproduced in Appendix II; the interviews were tape-recorded and lasted on average about two hours.
A number of ‘ratings’ of satisfaction and other aspects of the work situation were based on the interview responses and used in the analysis of data.
These include: ratings of satisfaction/dissatisfaction with housework, child-care, marriage, employment  work and life generally; an assessment of the women's level of identification with the housewife role, and the level of definition applied to housework standards and routines; an assessment of the marriage relationship as ‘segregated’ or ‘joint’on the two dimensions of leisure activities and decision-making, and, lastly, an assessment of the husband's part in the division of labour as reported by his wife.
All these ratings are discussed in relevant parts of the following chapters.
Further information about their use is given in Appendix I.
A sample of forty is undoubtedly on the small side; most sociological research studies using empirical data obtain it from larger samples than this.
What kind of universe does this small sample of forty women represent?
Are generalizations from the sample population warranted?
These questions are common reactions to the notion of a research study based on ‘only’ forty interviews.
I will provide brief answers to them here, since the general relevance and acceptability of the findings presented in the rest of the book clearly depend on the methodological status of the sampling, data-gathering and measurement procedures used.
There is a widespread tendency in social science and in more popular discussions of opinion/attitude surveys to assume that a large sample provides some automatic guarantee of reliable results, while a small one promises unreliability.
This misconception is based on a naive idea of what constitutes ‘validity’ and ‘representativeness’in research procedure.
Statistical representativeness is not, of course, assured simply by means of large numbers; a large sample, running into several hundreds or thousands may be selected in a way which makes it unrepresentative of the general population, while a small sample may, conversely, meet more precisely the criterion of representativeness.
The classic example of large sample research involving an inadequate sampling frame is the Literary Digest 's attempt to forecast the results of the US presidential election in 1936.
The sample was picked from telephone directories which did not cover the poorer segments of the electorate.
C. A. Moser in Survey Methods in Social Investigation identifies three sources of bias in sample selection:(1) the use of a sampling frame which does not cover the population adequately, completely or accurately;(2) the use of a ‘non-random’ method of sampling, so that the selection of subjects is consciously or unconsciously affected by human judgement; and (3) the refusal to co-operate among some segments of the chosen population.
Non-response is liable to be more of a problem in the larger-sample surveys, particularly those using postal questionnaire methods.
Even where the data is collected by trained interviewers, non-response probably remains a greater problem than with small samples, since the requirement of having a team of interviewers (rather than one or two) may result in a lower commitment to the goal of obtaining a high response rate.
A response rate of seventy to ninety per cent is common in professional surveys involving large samples; for instance, the 1,928 individuals interviewed in the main sample of Young and Willmott's recent study of work and leisure in the London region represented seventy-three per cent of those chosen as being eligible.
Lack of representativeness through inadequate sampling and high non-response rates are not the only sources of invalidity and unreliability, however.
An equally crucial (though much less often discussed) area in which errors can arise is that relating to the interview itself — to the content of the schedule and the measurement and/or classification of the resulting data.
Bias may creep in through the wording of questions (which may be ambiguous, unintelligible or suggestive of a particular answer), through the careless recording of answers, through the interviewer's (perhaps unwitting) influence over response-patterns and through a general failure of the interviewer to establish the kind of rapport with the respondent that enables him or her to give truthful answers on personal matters.
The manner in which the interview data is subsequently classified and processed may lead to other kinds of distortion.
These problems in the collection of data, like the question of sample representativeness, are not endemic to large sample research, nor are they magically solved by the use of a smaller sample.
On the other hand they are more likely to arise with larger samples simply on common sense grounds: the investigator's distance from the data is increased through the involvement of others (interviewers, research assistants, coders, etc) in data-gathering and processing, and possible occasions for the introduction of bias are thereby multiplied.
Very careful training of all the research workers is needed to avoid the various  pitfalls.
In addition, the investigator must not make the (conscious or unconscious) assumption that the size of the sample makes careful attention to the wording of the interview unnecessary.
The interview is a research instrument and the research findings are only valid if the questions ‘get at’ the areas the researcher claims (or assumes) they do.
What all this amounts to is a proviso that research based on samples of five hundred, a thousand, or more individuals should not be uncritically accepted as ‘good’ research while surveys using small samples, say a hundred or less, are dismissed as invalid.
Careful attention needs to be paid to the aspects of research procedure mentioned above.
The evaluation of the findings of any piece of research must also, of course, take into account its nature and aims.
Is the research mainly descriptive?
Is it hypothesis-testing?
What claims does it make as to the universal applicability of its results?
Every research study needs to be assessed on the criterion of whether it measures up to its own stated objectives.
For the goals of mapping out an area, describing a field, and connecting events, processes or characteristics which appear to go together, a sample of forty individuals is certainly adequate.
This type of taxonomic approach may, perfectly appropriately, give rise to explanatory hypotheses, and particular, well-defined hypotheses may also be tested with samples of this size.
In Theory and Methods of Social Research Johan Galtung makes a useful distinction between a ‘substantive’ hypothesis ‘which is about social reality and to be tested by means of the data’and a ‘generalization’hypothesis ‘which is about the data’.
The question as to whether a specific hypothesis is confirmed or not confirmed by the data is in principle different from the issue of whether the research findings can be generalized to a wider population.
For testing substantive hypotheses Galtung considers a sample of forty perfectly acceptable (the criterion being the minimum number of cases required for statistical tests to be applicable).
On the other hand, to be on the safe side for the purposes of generalization , a sample size of around eight hundred individuals is needed.
Important contributions to sociological knowledge have been made using data from small samples.
For instance, Elizabeth Bott's influential study Family and Social Network is based on  interviews with twenty couples.
J. M. and R. E. Pahl's study of middle-class career and family relationships derives its material from questionnaires completed by eighty-six managers and their wives, supplemented by home interviews with sixteen couples.
Hannah Gavron's The Captive Wife is based on interviews with forty-eight middle-class and forty-eight working-class women.
Each of these works incidentally illustrates one or more of the problems discussed earlier.
For example, twenty-seven per cent of Gavron's middle-class sample was drawn from the London Housebound Housewives Register, a self-selected group of ‘dissatisfied’ housewives: this reduced the representativeness of the sample.
The Pahls in their study had quite a high rate of non-co-operation: twenty of the group of 113 managers whom they wanted to study did not complete the questionnaire (although the response rate was higher from the wives' postal questionnaire); of the twenty-nine couples who were asked to give home interviews, six refused and six did not answer the letter.
Elizabeth Bott and her colleagues had considerable difficulty finding families to take part in their project: they used forty-two ‘contact agencies’ ranging from general practitioners, clergymen, students (taught by one of the researchers), and a branch of the Labour Party to simply ‘friends and colleagues’.
Altogether forty-five couples were suggested, and twenty-five were willing to be interviewed, although five of these did not meet the research criteria.
This is also a sizable rate of refusal, and the nature of many of the contacts used casts some doubt on the representativeness of the sample population.
However, Bott's aim was not to test well-defined hypotheses, but to carry out an intensive exploratory study of a small number of families, with the idea of furthering psychological and sociological understanding of urban family life.
In the presentation and analysis of the interview data which follows, the conclusions I draw do, strictly speaking, apply only to the research sample.
However, there is no reason to believe that the sample is unrepresentative in any way.
Referring to Moser's three sources of sampling bias mentioned earlier, it is clear that the sampling frame used (two general practice records) does not cover the whole population of housewives; yet there is no evidence that these records represent a particularly unrepresentative sub-sample of the population.
Neither general practice  has a reputation for being outstanding or different from the normal run of practices.
Two practices were employed rather than one because one did not provide enough names fitting the research criteria, and also because both working-class and middle-class respondents were required: one practice was in a working-class and one in a middle-class area.
Names were selected from the practice records on an alphabetical basis (see Appendix I), which, although not strictly speaking a ‘random’ method, is not obviously biased in any particular direction.
Although there were some failures to contact patients selected, there were no refusals to co-operate among the housewives who were contacted.
These considerations generate confidence in the representativeness of the women studied.
In analysing the relationships between particular variables in the housewife's work situation I use a number of statistical tests, chiefly the chi-square test of significance.
This procedure might be criticized on the grounds that the sample is too small to justify it.
There is, however, no statistical reason why these tests should not be employed on such data, although clearly the probability of any result being due to chance is more likely to be lower as sample size increases.
It should not be forgotten that in general, statistical tests of this kind are aids to interpretation.
There is a difference between ‘statistical’ and ‘theoretical’significance.
A relationship may be statistically significant but theoretically non-significant (because it is tautologous or trivial).
The more difficult case is when theory suggests that a relationship should exist that seems to the researcher to be present in the data, but on a statistical level the relationship is not confirmed.
In the end, the interpretation of research data and the results of statistical tests applied to them rests squarely on the researcher's shoulders:
There is after all more to research than can be seen from the tables, and the researcher in interpreting his [sic]results is inevitably — and rightly — influenced by all that has gone before, by his acquaintance with the raw material behind the figures and by his own judgement…
The researcher who cautiously confines his conclusions to those strictly justified by the data may be safe from criticism, but he is not making his own full potential contribution.
It would be shirking one's responsibility not to speculate on  how one's findings may or may not be generalizable beyond the research universe.
Important connections to draw are those between one's own findings and the conclusions of other, related research.
These are broadly the approaches I adopt.
I also operate with the assumption that, although my results pertain strictly only to the sample of forty housewives I interviewed, there is no reason why they should not relate to the wider population of housewives, since it cannot be shown that the forty women are unrepresentative of the larger population.
Nevertheless, the crucial test must be whether further research along similar lines duplicates these findings.
In an important sense a piece of research planned, executed and analysed by one person derives both its strength and its main weakness from this source.
The strength comes from the coherence and consistency that a single perspective makes possible.
The weakness hinges on the fact that the research is only as ‘good’ as the integrity and judgement of the person who carries it out.
This applies particularly to the interpretation of interview responses and the use of rating scales.
On the first point, I aimed to make the questions as ‘factual’ as possible.
Thus for example the questions about domestic routines and husband's participation in the division of labour were geared to specific activities and time periods rather than to the more attitudinal or normative dimension of who ‘usually’ does what at what time.
These procedures minimize the task of interpretation.
As for the use of rating scales, Goode and Hatt have pointed out that pooled judgements increase the accuracy of any rating scale: the use of one judge only reduces accuracy.
Limitations of time and money acted as major constraints in the design of my research.
The research was carried out for a doctoral dissertation on the princely sum of £410 per annum(this was the ‘married woman's’ rate of postgraduate grant at the time, £120 lower than the full grant).
These limitations affected the size of the sample and also made it difficult to employ such procedures as the multiple judging of rating scales.
However, a number of techniques which it is hoped reduced the possibility of bias in this stage of the research are described in Appendix I.
To return to characteristics of the sample: the forty women interviewed were all aged between twenty and thirty, were married, and the mothers of at least one child under five.
In addition, all the women were born either in Britain or Ireland.
These criteria were used in selecting the sample.
The idea was to get a fairly homogeneous sample, to look at housework attitudes in a group of women with similar backgrounds.
In this way gross dissimilarities in housework attitudes due to different cultural backgrounds, different age groups, and so forth, would be avoided, and the task of analysing the relationships between certain kinds of attitude and other facets of the work situation would be simplified.
Including Irish women — six of the forty fell into this category — might be seen as contradicting this objective.
But studies of traditional working-class life in rural Ireland (from which the Irish-born women in this sample originally came) and in urban Britain show many similarities.
The division of labour by sex, the segregation of male and female roles in marriage, and the socialization of females for domesticity are all aspects in which the two cultures closely resemble one another.
In fact, analysis of the interview material did not mark out the Irish women as particularly different from their British-born counterparts on any dimension of attitudes or behaviour.
In two respects — the nature of their self-concepts and their social networks — their position was quite highly domestic and kin-oriented, but they shared these characteristics with other women in the sample.
Half the forty women were ‘working class’ and half ‘middle class’; social class was assessed in the conventional way, on the basis of husband's occupation.
This use of conventional methods runs counter to the criticisms offered in Chapter I of traditional stratification analysis.
At the time I selected my sample (late 1970) my objections to male-orientation in stratification theory and practice existed only in embryonic form, and discussions among sociologists (feminist or otherwise) of the place of women in sociology were non-existent.
There was, however, one overriding reason for taking the conventional approach: much of the existing literature on women's domestic roles draws attention to social class differences in women's satisfaction with domesticity; middle-class women are supposedly more dissatisfied than working-class women.
Therefore, for meaningful comparisons to be possible between my own findings and those of other researchers, social class had to be assessed in the same way.
Although the analysis focuses on social class, other variables  relating to the housewife's own education and previous (or present) employment are also examined: in some cases it is these factors rather than social class itself which turns out to be important.
The Registrar-General's classification of occupations was used in making the social class assessments: classes I and II (professional and managerial) were termed ‘middle class’ and classes IV and V (semi-skilled and unskilled)‘working class’.
Class III was divided into (1) white collar and (2) skilled manual occupations.
The former were counted as ‘middle class’ and the latter as ‘working class’.
In three cases of clear-cut discrepancy between the social class classification arrived at in this way and the wife's previous occupation, education or general life-style, social class was upgraded or downgraded to take account of the contradiction.
This is the somewhat rough-and-ready solution to the problem of male-biased occupational classification followed by John and Elizabeth Newson and others.
Two other characteristics of the sample population require some comment: the incidence of employment, and of domestic help.
Six of the women were employed outside the home at the time of interview.
One had a full-time secretarial job, one had a part-time factory job (for four hours each morning), three did part-time cleaning jobs (two in the evening, one in the morning) and one housewife had a Saturday job as a hairdresser's receptionist.
Does the inclusion of these women affect the survey findings?
In Hunt's national survey of women's employment between fifteen and twenty per cent of women responsible for children aged five years or under were employed nationally, over half of them part-time.
The percentage in the present sample is fifteen (six out of forty); on this score it is not unrepresentative.
It might be suggested that the employed women make up a particular group with respect to housework attitudes: women who are dissatisfied with housework may turn to employment as a palliative.
Research does not generally support this conclusion.
Of the six employed women among the present forty, two were assessed as satisfied with housework, two as dissatisfied and two as very dissatisfied.
This spread is similar to that in the sample as a whole.
The addition of paid work to the housewife's activities does not mean she is no longer a housewife.
The definition of house-wifery  is cast in terms of responsibility for the running of a home.
For this reason, the fact that three of the forty women had paid domestic help does not disqualify them from the title ‘housewife’.
(None of the three had living-in domestic help.)
The area from which the working-class housewives come is an area of mixed housing in which rented flats and rooms are interspersed with some owner-occupied dwellings.
The houses date mostly from the 1910–20 era, and are in poor condition.
The general appearance of the area is a drab one: there are few green spaces and few trees break up the uniform lines of terraced and semi-detached housing.
Shopping amenities of the area are good.
On the main street, running directly into central London, a Woolworths, a Marks and Spencer and several other department stores preside over a range of smaller shops.
Transport amenities are poor, with the nearest London underground station a twenty-minute bus ride away.
Since a major redevelopment plan is currently being implemented, many areas of slum and semi-slum housing are being demolished and families are moving to new council estates.
Such a move had already affected three of the twenty working-class housewives interviewed.
The impression of a shifting population given by this redevelopment is intensified by the proximity of the area to a major immigrant settlement zone.
By contrast the middle-class area has a relatively stable and prosperous population.
Most homes are owner-occupied and most are well maintained.
Several new privately developed housing estates are prominent landmarks, developments of homes with the distinctly middle-class assets of laundry rooms, ground-floor children's playrooms, integral garages and so forth.
The streets are well provided with trees, and green spaces abound.
Like the working-class area to which it is geographically close, the nearest shopping centre contains department stores and supermarkets, along with the usual variety of smaller shops.
However, unlike the working-class area, the shopping centre is also a transport centre: there is a main line station on the national rail network and two underground lines connect it with the rest of London.
These, then, are the contexts from which the forty women come.
Although they represent a particular group in modern society — young mothers — they are also representative of that  much larger heterogeneous population which occupies the suburban fringes of our cities.
In this sense the picture of the housewife which emerges in the present study not only bears on an understanding of the situation of women in society today; it also illuminates one face of urban family life.
With this background in mind, the next chapter begins a discussion of some of the conclusions arising out of the interview material.
3 Images of Housework
Two conflicting stereotypes of housework exist in popular thinking today.
According to one, the housewife is an oppressed worker: she slaves away in work that is degrading, unpleasant and essentially self-negating.
According to the other, housework provides the opportunity for endless creative and leisure pursuits.
In this view housework is not work but homemaking, and the home is a treasure house
of unsuspected joys…the delectable smell of her own bread as it emerges crisp and brown from the oven, and the satisfaction of stitching up a new print dress on her own sewing machine…the smell of fresh earth in her own backyard
The aesthetic appeal is strong.
But how does this argument — and its converse — measure up to the reality of the housework situation as perceived by housewives themselves?
Throughout the forty interviews a clear perception of housework as work emerges.
The women in the sample experience and define housework as labour, akin to that demanded by any job situation.
Their observations tie in closely with many findings of the sociology of work; the aspects of housework that are cited as satisfying or dissatisfying have their parallels in the factory or office world.
This equivalence is emphasized further by the women's own tendency to compare their reactions to housework with their experience of working outside the home.
A number of interview questions in particular provided answers on which these generalizations are based.
The first two of these are questions about the ‘best’ and ‘worst’aspects of being a housewife.
Over half the answers to the ‘best’ aspects question refer to what could be called the work dimension of the role, as do almost all the answers to the ‘worst’aspects question — even though these questions do not specify housework, but permit  answers relating to marriage, motherhood and home life generally.
(The answers are shown in Tables 3.1 and 3.2.)
Of course it could be objected that the responses highlight this facet of the housewife role because much of the rest of the interview was taken up with questions about housework.
Yet this generalization is consistent with the line taken by the women in many other comments made spontaneously — unprompted by questions from the interviewer.
In addition, groups of questions were devoted to marriage and to child-care, so that there was no pressure on the women to feel that responses on these subjects would be out of order.
Autonomy is the most valued quality of the housewife role: housework is the worst.
Joanna Giles, an ex-computer programmer married to a radio producer, described her feeling of autonomy thus:
To an extent you're your own master…you can decide what you want to do and when you want to do it…it's not like being at work when somebody rings you up and you've got to go down and see them or you've got to do this and that within half an hour.
The impression is given that, rather than being positively valued for its autonomy, housework is negatively valued as a retreat from a disliked alternative — employment work.
This is a common feature of many responses:
(What would you say are the best things about being a housewife?)
Well, you don't have to get up early in the morning and go out to work, do you?
(Factory machinist's wife)
The thing that's nice about being a housewife is you have your own time — there's nobody behind you with a punch card…
You're your own boss, like.
(Painter and decorator's wife)
Many of the answers — nineteen in all — used this phrase ‘you're your own boss’ to describe the housewife's feeling of being in control.
The phrase presents a direct analogy with the paid job situation.
Autonomy, in the sense of freedom from supervision and ability to determine one's own work rhythms, is an important dimension of employment work.
Martin Patchen, in a study of 834 US government employees found that the factor of  control over work methods consistently emerged as most closely associated with high job motivation.
Table 3.1 
In the housewife's case autonomy is more theoretical than real.
Being ‘your own boss imposes the obligation to see that housework gets done.
The responsibility for housework is a unilateral one, and the failure to do it may have serious consequences.
As itemimized by these women, such consequences include the wrath of husbands and the ill-health of children (through lack of hygiene):
Why do I clean the kitchen floor twice a day?
Well, it's because she's all over it, isn't it?
I mean it's not nice to let a child crawl on a dirty floor — she might catch something off it.
(Lorry driver's wife)
What this means is that the taking of leisure is self-defeating; the fact that one is one's own boss adds to, rather than subtracts from, the psychological pressures to do housework.
Joanna Giles, the ex-computer programmer, went on to make this point:
The worst thing is I suppose that you've got to do the work because you are at home.
Even though I've got the option of not doing it, I don't really feel I could not do it, because I feel I ought to do it.
In the words of a lorry driver's wife:
It's not that anyone's going to whip me if I don't do it — but I know there's going to be double the quantity tomorrow, so really I'm just beating my own brow.
Thus housework — the actual work involved — is the other side of the coin from the nominally high evaluation attached to autonomy.
Twenty-eight replies to the ‘worst things’ question mentioned housework or its monotonous, boring quality as the most disliked dimension; a further six described negatively the women's feeling of being constantly responsible for home and children.
To use Eleanor Driscoll's words:
(What would you say are the worst things about being a housewife?)
Having to get up every morning…you think ‘Oh heck I've go to do the place today, and I've got to do the dinner’— that's something I can't stand, thinking I've got to do the dinner.
(Shop manager's wife)
The housewife is ‘free from’ but not ‘free to’.
That is, she is exempt from supervision but not wholly free to choose her own activities.
If housework is work, what kind of work is it?
Answers to two other questions give information on this point.
The first invited the women to compare their own work (housework) with that of their husbands.
This is a sensitive issue on which many wax indignant.
Deborah Keyes, an ex-typist, says:
I think housewives work just as hard.
I can't stand husbands who come home and say ‘Oh look you've done nothing all day, only a bit of housework and looked after the child’.
But I reckon that's tiring myself, well, not tiring,it's just as hard as doing a job — I don't care what any man says…
My husband says this — that's why I feel so strongly about it.
(Italics added)
Deborah Keyes has one child, is married to a central heating fitter and lives in a ‘high-rise’ flat.
She is dissatisfied and tends to comment apathetically on her dissatisfaction, but her observations at this point in the interview were very lively indeed:
I say to him [husband]I'm going to clear off for the day and you can do it all one day, and you'll see what it's like.
Of the forty women, twenty-six claimed that they worked harder than their husbands, seven said the men worked harder, and seven that it depended on personality or on the kind of job the husband had.
There are explicit comparisons of one set of work routines with the other:
Housewives work harder.
My husband's always coming home and saying ‘Oh I sat down and talked to so-and-so today’ or ‘we had a laugh today with so-and-so…’
I don't do that, I never sit down.
(Plasterer's wife)
Or:
I always say it's harder, but my husband doesn't say that at all.
I think he's wrong, because I'm going all the time — when his job is finished, it's finished…
Sunday he can lie in bed till twelve, get up, get dressed and go for a drink, but my job never changes.
(Wife of a driver's mate)
A painter and decorator's wife produces conclusive evidence on this point:
The husbands never look very tired do they?
It's always the woman that's tired isn't it?
When they've finished, they've finished…
Things like road digging might be harder [than housework]but there again, when they've finished, they go and have a drink and a cigarette and that's it.
Housework is described as a never-ending job — in the stock phrase ‘a woman's work is never done’.
It is said by some to be more tiring physically than a paid job, by others to be less tiring: some women say it takes a greater emotional toll, others  that the drain is less than other work.
Reference is made to the unconstructive nature of housework tasks, to the emotionally frustrating sense of being on a treadmill that requires the same action to be repeated again and again ;
Housewives tend to be busy all the time but they're not really doing anything constructive, are they?
Well, I suppose it is constructive in a way, but you never really see anything for it and it's all routine.
(Statistician's wife)
Miles are walked in exchange for a feeling of perpetual defeat.
In the eyes of Jean Bevan, an ex-nurse married to an office manager, housework is ‘real’ work and employment work is not:
(Do you think housewives work as hard, not so hard, or harder than their husbands?)
Harder.
He doesn't work you see — he just sits in an office and tells other people to work.
Before Jean Bevan's husband was promoted to an office job, he did, in his wife's opinion, do ‘real’ work, i.e. manual work, like housework.
This is an interesting point.
The denigration of office work as inferior, non-manual labour, has a key place in the sexual transformation of clerical work around the turn of the century.
‘Don't we lose our manhood?’ asks the blackcoated hero of an early twentieth century novel as he reflects on his job.
‘What do we see of real life’?
What do we know of the world?…
We aren't real men.
We don't do men's work.
Pen-drivers — miserable little pen-drivers — fellows in black coats, with inky fingers and shiny seats on their trousers — that's what we are.
To class housework as manual work is thus to put it higher up the scale of job prestige.
This defence of housework is all the more necessary because housework passes unmentioned in the predominant stereotype of the housewife as a leisured homemaker.
Yet another reason why the women's comments are phrased in this way derives from the low social ranking women see as attached to the occupation of housewife.
When asked how they felt about writing this occupation on a form, twenty-one housewives ‘minded’ and nineteen did not see anything disadvantageous in it.
A journalist's wife makes reference to the social stereotype:
I only think of myself as a housewife when I have to fill up a form.
Sometimes I'd like to put something a bit more interesting.
I think it's a menial sort of job —people look upon it like that.
(Italics added)
It is clear from this comment that the question of occupational classification is closely linked to the self-concept: it involves the issue of whether, and to what extent, women see themselves as housewives.
This is explored in more detail in a later chapter.
But whatever their level of personal identification with the housewife role, the denigration and trivialization of housework is such a pervasive cultural theme that the message is likely to have filtered through to the housewife in some form or other.
The need to disassociate oneself from it then follows.
Mixed with low social ranking are the related notions of housework as ‘dull’ work and the housewife as a ‘dull, boring’person.
A warehouse foreman's wife says:
I mind writing housewife on a form.
I'd like to put ‘secretary’ or something — it sounds better.
The majority of people are housewives.
It sounds dull — you've nothing else to do except clean and dust and cook.
The image of the housewife as a cabbage makes a number of appearances in answers to the question about writing housewife on a form (it is mentioned by twelve of the forty women).
A ‘cabbage’ housewife is someone entirely immersed in domestic affairs, a colourless personality, a drab, uninteresting automaton.
Eleanor Driscoll, a working-class housewife who has recently moved from a two-room slum into a local authority house, puts it like this:
I did [think of myself as a cabbage]when I was living at the other place doing all that washing by hand…
I had no facilities, no money, I was bored, fed up, had nothing to look forward to.
At least now I know that perhaps one day we might get a car — even save up for a house — and that's something to look forward to…so I don't think of myself as a cabbage.
Another woman resolutely described herself as a ‘shrink wrapper’ rather than a housewife.
This is the definition of her part-time factory job, which consists of wrapping tins in cellophane paper.
She gets a certain amount of amusement from  describing herself in this way, but the verbal presentation of self has a serious purpose:
I think of myself as a housewife, but I don't think of myself as a cabbage.
A lot of people think that they're housewives and they're cabbages; I don't like to think I'm only a housewife…
I usually say ‘I'm a wife and a mother and I've got a part-time job’.
People look down on housewives these days.
‘Only’ or ‘just’a housewife is the ubiquitous phrase.
Its implication is that being a housewife is something so eminently inferior to every other occupation; it also belittles those other roles of wife and mother.
Elaine Cawthorne, another working-class housewife, expresses it splendidly:
I'm not married to a house!
I hate the word ‘housewife’…they say to you ‘what are you?’ and you say ‘I've got a baby.
I'm a mother, a wife’ and they say, ‘oh just a housewife’.
Just a housewife!
The hardest job in the world…you're never just a housewife…
Into that category comes everything.
Resentment is compounded because ‘housewife’ contains ‘wife’and ‘mother’.
The social denigration of housework overflows into the even more highly valued (to the women themselves) occupations of wife and mother.
Women must consequently separate out these different roles, and a way to begin is to protest that the whole image is wrong.
Another message that comes over clearly is the need to separate out the different tasks that make up housework.
Housework is not a single activity.
It is a collection of heterogeneous tasks which demand a variety of skills and kinds of action.
Washing a floor contrasts with shopping for groceries: peeling potatoes with washing dirty socks and planning a week's meals.
To call all these jobs by the same name is to disguise their differences, to reduce them all to the same common denominator.
In fact, some are more liked than others; some are more repetitive, some less tiring, some more potentially creative and so forth.
Each of the tasks that the housewife does — cooking, laundering the clothes, cleaning the house and so on— can, after all, constitute a paid work role in its own right.
The role of chef is very different from the role of commercial laundry operator or the job of ‘domestic help’.
The six core housework tasks — cleaning, shopping, cooking, washing up, washing and ironing — can be arranged in a kind of league table of likes and dislikes.
Table 3.3 is such a table.
It shows the percentage of the sample who say they ‘like’, ‘dislike’ or ‘don't mind’each task when asked a direct question about that task.
Two percentages are shown in each case: one relates to first responses to the question ‘Do you like…?’ and the other to all responses.
By asking the women what they liked or disliked about the task in question, and whether their attitude was reversed in any particular circumstances, I was able to get a more complete picture of their experience of each task, and also to learn something about the characteristics these different housework tasks are seen to possess.
Of the six tasks, ironing is most disliked: three-quarters of the sample report a negative attitude.
It is disliked because it is physically an exhausting activity; more than any of the other tasks it consists of actions which have to be repeated time and time again with little variation.
I loathe ironing.
It's just standing there, and you take one [garment]from the pile and stick it on the ironing board and iron it, fold it, and put it down, take the next one — and it's as though it's never going to end.
(Plasterer's wife)
What I don't like about it is standing over the board, moving the iron back and forth.
(Wife of a driver's mate)
It's a boring job — ironing.
Moving the iron back and forwards the whole time.
(Factory hand's wife)
Ironing consists of repetitive actions which tire specific muscles without engaging the attention of the mind or the concentrated energy of the whole body.
The obvious comparison here is with the assembly line worker in a factory, tied machine-like to a mindless and endlessly repetitive task.
No other aspect of housework presents quite this parallel.
Only one woman out of the forty actually claimed unequivocally to like ironing, and she said she knew she was unusual, particularly in the satisfaction she gets from ironing shirts, an activity which many of the other housewives said was the most intolerable of all.
Those housewives who ‘don't mind’ ironing make it clear that they dislike the task itself, yet have found conditions under which it becomes bearable.
Having the radio or television on is one such ploy; another is to plan the ironing to coincide with the husband's presence in the evening.
Similarly, a negative attitude may turn to a ‘don't mind’ one under certain conditions, for example when the items ironed are less intrinsically boring (baby's clothes are said to come in this category).
Washing up is next in the ‘dislike’ section of the table: taking first responses together with later ones, seventy per cent of the women describe a negative attitude.
Like ironing, it tends to have assembly line aspects, though these are not so pronounced.
One ‘just stands there washing plate after plate’, or ‘it just tires one out’.
It is also a dirty job; in an ex-fashion model's words:
I hate it.
I dread it.
I just can't bear mucking around with dirty greasy things.
The unpleasantness is stressed because it is usually preceded by an enjoyable activity — eating a meal.
Every meal is followed by washing up: washing up is a recurrent event ,
It's never ending.
You've no sooner done one lot of washing up than you've got another lot, and that's how it goes on all day.
(Lorry driver's wife)
If you could have paper things…sometimes it seems to be putting out fresh plates, eating off them, washing them, and  then putting them out again…some days you seem to be at it all day long.
(Food wholesaler's wife)
This inevitability is not present in the same way with ironing.
Those who say they like washing up do not like the task itself — one woman likes it because she has a dishwasher, one because she has just acquired a new stainless steel sink, and the third likes it merely ‘to get it out of the way’.
Attitudes to cleaning — the third in the ‘dislike’ list — are a little less negative: twenty of the forty women dislike or hate cleaning, eight ‘don't mind’it, twelve like or ‘love’it.
Typical responses are:
I dislike cleaning.
I don't really know why.
Probably I feel there's always something else I could do and it never seems to stop.
(Statistician's wife)
I don't really mind it.
It's something to do.
I'd be bored if I didn't have it to do.
(Carpenter's wife)
I like cleaning — polishing, everything.
I like to see a nice shine.
(Wife of a driver's mate)
These are the first answers given, but in reply to further questions the number of women making at least one negative reference increases to twenty-seven — sixty-eight per cent of the sample.
Many women say cleaning is boring: you do it one day and there it is to be done again the next.
Cleaning a house is
just like working in a factory — you dust the same thing every day and it's never appreciated.
I mean I could get this whole place so tidy and the kids come home from school and it's like a bomb's exploded and nothing's appreciated about it, whereas if you're decorating or teaching children there's something always gained out of it…as far as actual housework goes, I don't see how anyone can like it.
It's boring, just like a robot.
(Shop manager's wife)
The comparison with repetitive industrial work is thus articulated.
This comparison is not confined to the middle-class half of the sample, but is an observation that working-class housewives  also make.
A working-class housewife married to a machine operator declares:
Housework is boring.
The same old thing — cleaning the same things all the time, that's what gets me.
When a man goes to work, he might be only making things, but at least they're different things…
While a middle-class housewife, the wife of the director of a publishing firm, comments:
Yes, I think I do find housework monotonous, if you think one has to get up, make the beds every day, wash up every day, one should dust every day — I mean it is monotonous, isn't it?
Unlike shopping, cleaning is a lonely duty.
The felt need to get the cleaning done conflicts with the desire to be sociable; one can iron, or perhaps cook, while talking to a friend or neighbour, but one cannot wield a vacuum cleaner and carry on a conversation at the same time.
The conflict is clearly illustrated in the interview with Marilyn Thornton, a plasterer's wife with five children.
She does her own housework in the mornings and spends every afternoon cleaning the bedrooms in an overnight transport cafe belonging to a friend of hers.
She takes her eighteen-month-old twins with her to work.
While the point of the job is to make money, it is also to get out of the house and talk to other people.
(When doing her own housework Marilyn Thornton has the radio on constantly ‘for company’.)
Because she has this afternoon job, she must get through her own work in the mornings; but she gets her work done in the mornings in order to create time for a job.
Significantly, another housewife mentioned the fact that housework is not paid work as a reason for disliking it; she said she would be happier doing someone else's housework for pay than doing her own work.
The example of Marilyn Thornton emphasizes sharply the association of housework with social isolation.
The importance of this in relation to work satisfaction patterns is discussed in Chapter 5.
Two other common reasons for disliking cleaning concern technical aspects of the work environment and one's ‘mood’.
The housewife says she has an old and inefficient vacuum cleaner: this is a statement about the inappropriateness of the tool to the work.
Or she may describe the interior of the home as difficult to clean:
I've been on at my husband to get a fitted carpet in this room because this lino drives me mad.
It gets so dirty and it looks dirty if it's not polished every day.
(Policeman's wife)
This carpet's navy and it's terrible, it shows everything.
You've got to do it again and again.
Invariably if I leave it, someone walks in.
So I feel happier in my mind if I do it every day.
(Retail chemist's wife)
A frequent claim is that cleaning is only a bore when one's mood is out of tune with it: conversely, in the ‘right’ mood, cleaning is cheerfully and quickly done.
Perhaps this can be seen as a statement of a general condition that obtains for all workers.
Or is it a typically ‘feminine’ response?
Connections can be traced with the imagery of advertisements which portray harassed housewives overcome by sudden headaches while coping with the demands of husband, home and children; on these occasions the mood is corrected by the appropriate painkiller or vitamin pill and then the housewife proceeds to go happily about her work.
On a more basic level the attribution of dislike to a personal deficiency (the wrong mood) also probably reflects on the deeply personal nature of the housewife's relationship to her role.
The housewife, in an important sense,is her job: separation between subjective and objective elements in the situation is therefore intrinsically more difficult.
This is an important point which is crucial to the whole question of attitudes to, and satisfaction with, housework:
I like housework.
I'm quite domesticated really.
I've always been brought up to be domesticated — to do the housework and dust and wash up and cook — so it's a natural instinct really.
(Supermarket manager's wife)
The indistinguishability of the housewife and her work provides, if anything, a motivation to be satisfied — whether with cleaning specifically or with the whole complex of housework activities generally.
So far as washing — the fourth most disliked task — is concerned, attitudes are more evenly divided between positive, negative and ‘don't mind’ categories.
Thirteen housewives say they ‘like’ washing, fourteen ‘don't mind’it and thirteen ‘dislike’or ‘hate’it.
Although both washing and washing up are activities in which dirt is removed from objects, the pleasure inherent in  washing seems to be greater.
Possibly this is because of the personal associations that clothes have.
The clothes that are washed belong to and are used by someone, normally the housewife, her husband and children.
It depends, of course, on the particular item.
For example, Elaine Cawthorne says
I like washing his [the baby's]clothes, but I hate washing his nappies.
I find them tiresome…
It's not that they're his nappies and he wets them — it's nothing to do with that — it's just that they're endless.
Whereas if you're washing his clothes, you're washing one jumper and it's not the same as the next jumper; nappies are one square after another, like a nightmare…
If washing can be repetitious in this way, a counterbalancing image is suggested by the next quotation from the interview with a supermarket manager's wife:
Once the washing's on the line, I think that's nice — nice and clean.
I suppose it's a satisfying thing — to know you've done it at last and it's all there,nice and clean.
It's always a nice sight to see a line of washing blowing.
(Italics added)
Why is a line of washing a ‘nice’ sight?
Mass media advertising reiterates the message of white clothes gently blowing in the wind, transmitting a feeling that ‘whiteness’ or ‘cleanliness’is the housewife's moral obligation to her family.
Perfect cleanliness is the commercial ideal, but the clothes must also be seen to be clean.
Public visibility is achieved when the clothes hang in the garden, and the advertising image adds the alluring finishing touches to this picture with cloudless skies, matched only by the cloudless smile on the housewife's face and the unbelievably perfect condition of the white garments on which her attention is perfectly focused.
(According to these advertisements a large proportion of the population wears white from head to toe, especially for the more messy activities.
Is your son a champion dirt collector?
If so dress him in white and use sunshine soapflakes to get the dirt out.)
Seven out of the forty women specifically mention the pleasure they obtain from seeing a line full of clean clothes; some explain it is because they anticipate the silent admiration of neighbours at this visible (though shortlived) achievement.
Others do not mention the possible approval of others, and apparently have no idea why the image attracts  them, nor why they should feel an inner compulsion to conform to it.
Automation makes a difference here.
Eleven of the working-class and fourteen of the middle-class housewives had washing machines: use of a machine in one's own home lightens the task.
As Eleanor Driscoll recollects
At one time I had this scrubbing brush and I used to spend the whole day scrubbing and I used to have a big pan and I used to boil my clothes up in it — it drove me round the bend…
I've got this washing machine now, thank goodness.
A washing machine cuts housework really down.
‘I don't know what I did without it’ is the sentiment.
There is a difference between fully automatic washing machines — which change the nature of the task altogether — and ‘twin tub’ machines where the hot wet washing has to be lifted manually into a separate drying compartment.
The women who had this type of machine complained about the considerable amount of work still required of the housewife, and the mess on the kitchen floor to be cleared up afterwards.
In a similar way the launderette does not remove the physical drudgery of washing.
The housewife has to get the washing there in the first place, she has to unload it, sort it, sit and watch it wash and dry (or dash out to shop in the interim) and then pack it all up again.
This, when there is a baby in the pram and a two- or three-year-old to attend to, is no mean feat.
Against launderettes it also has to be said that they do not fit the media image of the perfect housewife.
‘I don't believe in the launderette’, said one working-class housewife.
‘They don't seem to get the clothes clean — you have to boil them when you get back.’
In part this is a complaint about the inferior service these establishments offer.
But it is also an ideological statement: the housewife's place is in the home washing and hanging out her own clothes; not in the launderette where they are processed for her.
The ethic of the ‘little woman in the little house’ is surreptitiously eroded, for launderettes are meeting places where housewives collectively discuss their work — and who knows what else besides?
By contrast with these other tasks, the housewife's role as a consumer is a more public one; it requires an absence from her work-place — the home.
Largely for this reason, answers to the  question ‘Do you like shopping?’ are predominantly favourable; many women mention ‘getting out of the house’or ‘meeting people’as advantages of shopping.
A carpenter's wife and a policeman's wife describe their feelings:
I like shopping.
You see people when you go out — it's a change from the house.
I like it because I'm out, I think, and I like looking in the shops and sometimes I bump into people I know, and it just makes a little break…
Not surprisingly, shopping tends to be a daily event.
As Table 3.4 shows, most of the women shop six times a week, only four shop two or three times a week, and no housewife does all her shopping once a week.
The social class difference in frequency of shopping is negligible.
The proliferation of shopping excursions as a relief from domestic captivity is recognized:
I do my big shopping on Tuesday — but I go for odds and ends every day.
I make these journeys just to get out of the house.
Otherwise I'd be in the house all the time.
(Policeman's wife)
I go shopping nearly every day — although that's not really necessary.
But I do because I combine it with taking her [the child]for a walk.
And it does me good to get out of the house.
(Journalist's wife)
As an earlier comment mentioned, another merit of shopping is that it can be expanded to include (or even defined to consist of) window shopping.
This is self-consciously an escapist activity, its  main value being that it avoids the careful budgeting and penny-counting which shopping itself entails.
Thus, not enough money or impossibly high prices are reasons why shopping is disliked.
A clear distinction is made between the two sorts of shopping:
I don't mind shopping on Saturday when I've got the money, but I don't like it during the week — I'm usually broke by Monday — so I keep it down to a minimum.
I don't really like walking around thinking I'd like to buy that — I'd rather not go.
(Machine operator's wife)
Of course a limited budget could be seen as a challenge.
Only two housewives actually see it this way without reservations; Dorothy Underwood, a cinema manager's wife and the mother of three children under four, and Sandra Bishop, the wife of a painter and decorator and the mother of one child:
I quite enjoy shopping.
It makes a change from housework getting out of the house — and it's a bit of a challenge too, budgeting and trying to get the cheapest of everything.
(Dorothy Underwood)
I like it.
But I don't just go in one shop, and I never buy anything without looking at the price.
I'm terrible with prices.
Some people say ‘you're mad — just go in one shop’ but I can't.
I usually go in at least three.
Like tea — we have the same brand each week — but if I know it's cheaper in one shop I go into that shop, just to get that one thing — like I got it for 1 //6; this week and it's usually 1 //11;— I like to get the best, but cheaper.
(Sandra Bishop)
Other complaints about shopping cite physical difficulties.
Having to take children along imposes both a physical and mental burden; there is the problem of managing children and shopping simultaneously, and the housewife's attention is distracted by the need to pacify a crying child or by the knowledge that a baby in a pushchair is parked out of sight.
Consequently she becomes a less efficient shopper and a more frustrated one.
Queueing or having to wait in shops is disliked; so are certain kinds of shops — in some the large supermarket, and in some the small corner shop.
The more shopping resembles work, the less it is liked.
Small semi-serious shopping expeditions are valued as  a relief from the social isolation and the work of housework.
But major expeditions for food are disliked.
All except two of these forty women do their ‘big’ shopping once a week — that is, stocking up on goods like sugar, flour, etc. — and it is customary to combine this with shopping for the weekend.
Virtually all dislike this kind of shopping.
The mental strain of trying to concentrate on it with small children is considerable, and so is the physical strain of getting it all home.
Only five of the forty had the regular or occasional use of a car for shopping and other activities.
Of the six basic housework tasks cooking is, according to these women, potentially the most enjoyable activity.
It presents a challenge; it can be an art:
Cooking doesn't bore me like cleaning does.
I enjoy it — I enjoy trying new recipes.
(Cinema manager's wife)
I get fed up with cooking the same old thing — I like it if I can experiment.
We [herself and the housewife in the next flat]try new recipes off the Jimmy Young show, and see how they turn out.
(Lorry driver's wife)
No doubt this perception — of cooking's creative potential — is also influenced by advertising and by the attention devoted to cooking in women's magazines and similar literature.
The object of the exercise as presented in such channels of communication is not how to get the most nutritious meals prepared in the shortest possible time but rather how to go beyond the usual range of meals with time-consuming inventiveness and culinary skill.
The aim is not simple efficiency.
Instead it is an elaboration of the task, designed to subtract it from the category of ‘work’ and add it to the creative pleasure dimension.
This treatment of cooking, reflected in the comments of these housewives, is a particularly clear demonstration of how the social denial of housework as work operates.
They say it can be creative, but is it, in practice?
A lorry driver's wife:
I do like cooking if I've got time to do it properly.
But the way I'm doing it now I don't like it.
I used to love concocting meals…really love it.
But now the quickest and most nourishing meal is the winner.
Limitations of time (and money) act as brakes on the enjoyment of cooking.
The housewife is not only a chef but also a washer up, a cleaner, a nanny, a childminder:
I mean I can't get my hands covered with flour and egg and stuff if he's going to cry and I've got to pick him up, can I?
(Lorry driver's wife)
I think if I was left in peace to cook, then I'd get pleasure from it.
But as it is…if I make pastry, there's usually pastry from one end of the house to the other, because the kids have got to have their little bits, and in the end you think, ‘Oh was it worth it?’
(Food technologist's wife)
In reality husbands demand meals at specific times, small children cry when their stomachs are empty, the hour that might be spent cooking competes with the hour that ought to be spent washing the floor or changing the beds.
‘Thinking what to eat’ is an endless duty, however creative the actual task may be.
Thus one latent function of the creative cookery ideal is the production of dissatisfaction.
Standards of achievement exist of which the housewife is permanently aware, but which she cannot often hope to reach due to the other demands on her time.
In sum, one could list certain properties of housework tasks, their context, or the housewife's approach to them, which make recurrent appearances in answers given to the section of the interview dealing with what is liked and disliked about the six core housework tasks.
Attributes referred to as promoting a positive attitude include (in order of importance):
1
Being able to talk to other people while working;
2
Being in the ‘right’ mood;
3
Having enough time;
4
Having the right work environment or tools of work;
5
Having enough housekeeping money;
6
Having one's work appreciated.
The following factors are mentioned as associated with a negative attitude:
1
Monotony and repetitiousness;
2
Having the wrong environment or tools of work;
3
Being in the ‘wrong’ mood;
4
Children getting in the way;
5
Not having enough time;
6
Social isolation;
7
Having to think about work.
These points reinforce the generalizations made at the beginning of this chapter, that housewives approach housework as work, analogous with any other kind of job.
Their comments about the ‘best’ and ‘worst’aspects of housewifery refer predominantly to the work dimension of the role; freedom from supervision heads the list of positive qualities, while the work itself is the major negative aspect named.
Housework is defended as ‘real’ and ‘hard’work, a defence made all the more necessary because of the low status and value conventionally accorded to it.
While the stereotyped image of housework treats it as a single activity, women see it as consisting of many disparate ones.
Feelings about these different tasks do not seem to be dependent primarily on temperament or on personal background; rather they emerge as related to the kind of conditions under which the tasks are performed.
The picture thus sketched is in strong contrast to the popular view of housewives as a leisured class.
Housewives cannot be accused of ‘doing nothing all day’; nor can it legitimately be said that their only ‘work’ is ‘creative’and thus intrinsically pleasurable.
As to that other view of housewives as oppressed workers, we need to look more closely at the extent of women's overall satisfaction or dissatisfaction with housework.
The impression already given that, by and large , the women interviewed did not enjoy their work, is dissected and examined more thoroughly in the next chapter.
4 Social Class and Domesticity
Out of the conceptualization of housework as work which is a major theme of this study arises the need to spell out the different components in what is broadly termed women's ‘domesticity’.
One of the most important of these is the concept of overall satisfaction with housework.
Other components relate to attitudes to housework and the perceived status of housewifery.
The discussion in this chapter has a two-fold purpose.
On the one hand the aim is to describe patterns of domesticity in the present sample of housewives.
But these findings are also tied in with assertions about social class differences in domesticity which abound in much of the literature dealing with women's place in the family.
Various authors have suggested or claimed that working-class women are satisfied with housework while middle-class women are not.
For example, the psychological dilemmas of women's two roles discussed in the late 1950s by Myrdal and Klein are said by them to affect only the minority of educated middle-class women.
Discontent with the traditional role of housewife is seen as a middle-class prerogative.
In The Family and Social Change , an account of kinship in a South Wales town, Rosser and Harris make a similar assertion, that ‘for a variety of reasons’ the ‘domesticity’of working-class wives is higher than that of their middle-class counterparts.
Strangely, they do not examine these reasons, although the level of feminine domesticity is a crucial link in their argument about the existence of close-knit kinship networks in working-class communities.
Mirra Komarovsky, in her study of American Blue Collar Marriage , finds that higher education is correlated with a ‘less favourable’ attitude to housewifery, and a number of other studies back up this contention as applied to the American scene.
None of these writers looks at housework satisfaction; the notion of feminine domesticity is undefined and usually rather vague.
The categorization of social class used in these studies is the conventional one based on husband's occupation.
For the present sample the relationship between housework satisfaction and social class assessed in this way is shown in Table 4.1.
The concept of ‘satisfaction with housework’ follows the concept of ‘work’or ‘job’satisfaction as used in the sociology of industry and paid work; it represents an overall assessment of the degree to which housewives are positively or negatively oriented to their work.
The four categories shown in Table 4.1 are collapsed into a simple dichotomy — satisfied, dissatisfied — in subsequent discussions of the relationships between satisfaction patterns and other factors.
The placing of each housewife in a satisfaction category was done by the interviewer-researcher, on the basis of the overall interview response; further details for the methodologically curious are given in Appendix I.
As Table 4.1 indicates, there is no social class difference in the frequency with which housewives are satisfied or dissatisfied with their work.
The predominant feeling is one of dissatisfaction — twenty-eight of the forty women come out as dissatisfied.
If education is taken instead of social class, there is still no difference between groups of women: equal proportions of those educated to sixteen and beyond are satisfied and dissatisfied with housework.
In this context it is interesting to note a finding from Arthur Kornhauser's study of industrial workers.
Kornhauser found that occupational differences in mental health  (broadly equivalent to ‘satisfaction’) persisted apart from the influence of education.
Proportions of workers having good mental health persistently decreased from higher to lower level occupations for each of three educational categories separately.
In other words, mental health is likely to be reduced in low skill occupations (like housework) irrespective of the worker's previous educational background.
The best way to make these somewhat abstract concepts of satisfaction and dissatisfaction more concrete is to give some illustrations from the interviews.
One ‘very satisfied’ housewife is Sandra Bishop, the twenty-three-year-old wife of a painter and decorator, an ex-factory machinist and the mother of one daughter aged eighteen months.
Here are some of her comments.
Yes, I do like housework.
I like to make it [the house]nice, you know, and I like to spend quite a bit of time cooking and that.
I like to put it on the table and hear the comments afterwards, and I'm pleased to bits if it's been all right…
I don't mind cleaning at all…
I like shopping…
I like to get the best as cheaply as I can…
I like washing up.
When I first came here [a new council maisonette]I went mad on it, because of this sink, and I washed all my wedding presents.
At my Mum-in-law's the sink was in the corner, not under the window where it is now…
I do more washing up than anything now!
I do think of myself as a housewife.
Some days I think I'm only young — I fell straight away for her [the baby]— I used to think before I was married I'd better get all the clothes I want now because I'll never get them when I'm married — but I was wrong, because I can really have all I want now…
I like being a housewife.
I never did have any ambitions really — I never did want to do anything.
(Is there anything else you would rather be doing at the moment, apart from being a housewife and a mother?)
No, not really.
(When you feel really happy these days, what sort of thing is it that makes you feel like that?)
The weather, and I like entertaining, I couldn't do any when I lived with my Mum-in-law….
Overall, the tone is highly positive; certainly it is so in relation to the impressions created by some other women in the sample.
Norma Larkin, a police sergeant's wife, an ex-hairdresser, and the mother of one son, is ‘very dissatisfied’ with housework:
I don't like housework particularly — it's just a bore, it's so  monotonous, and with a child you've done it once and five minutes later it just doesn't look as though you've done it at all.
(Cooking?)
No, not particularly, but you've got to eat.
(Washing?)
No, I can't say I like any of these jobs — I do them because they've got to be done: I'm here and I've got to do them (all said in a dragging monotone).
(How far do you really think of yourself as a housewife?)
I've gradually got accustomed to it.
Being stuck at home and always told ‘that's your job’.
It gets my goat sometimes.
Because I used to earn a bit of money and be independent, and now I've got to rely on every penny from my husband.
(Do you ever feel there is anything else you would rather be doing now…?)
No, if I could see myself as anything else it would be in a career that I was doing, but then I wouldn't be married.
(Marriage and a career aren't compatible?)
They are but not as I saw things at the time — I didn't think I would marry.
I thought I would go on in that job — hairdressing.
Things changed and I got married and I should accept things as they are.
(When you feel really happy these days…)
Life's not monotonous — but it's very much the same.
I feel very happy when there's a holiday coming up — just because it's a change of routine.
I think to myself ‘what a rut to be in!’
I mean I wouldn't change things for the world with him [the child]but how else can you do it?
You've got to stay at home and have children — men can't have them.
But being at home and doing housework all day — I really don't like that.
You don't get any permanent satisfaction from it.
To count such comments as these as indicative of satisfaction and dissatisfaction with housework may perhaps be criticized on the grounds that what these women are talking about is not the housework situation, but marriage.
However, neither of them makes any reference to her husband, or to the dynamics of her marriage relationship in these comments, though Norma Larkin makes some (implicit) observations about marriage in general.
The economic dependence to which she refers is not a facet of marriage as such, but a facet of marriage in which the wife is not employed.
It is an aspect of full-time housewifery as a work role, not of the marriage relationship itself.
For all but the most privileged housewives, economic dependence is a fact of life, and dependence on the husband for money with which to feed and clothe the family and run the home constrains the freedom which women might otherwise have to control their work situations.
The issue of satisfaction with housework is more complex than has been suggested so far.
Twelve of the forty interviews contained interesting contradictions between the overall assessments of satisfaction and answers to the direct question ‘Do you like housework?’ asked in the early stages of the interview.
These contradictions throw some light on the social class question.
They fall into three groups:(1) eight working-class women who say initially that they ‘like’ or ‘don't mind’housework, but turn out to be dissatisfied with it;(2) two middle-class women who follow the same pattern; and (3) two middle-class women who say they dislike housework but are satisfied with it.
These contradictions cannot simply be explained in terms of the satisfaction assessments being incorrect; the disjunction between the two factors-initial answers and overall feeling — is too complete.
The following example comes from the interview with Sally Jordan, a factory worker and a dustman's wife; she belongs in the first group of working-class women whose early positive or non-committal response turns into predominantly negative feeling:
(Do you like housework?)
I don't mind it…
I suppose I don't mind housework because I'm not at it all day.
I go to work and I'm only on housework half a day.
If I did it all day I wouldn't like it — woman's work is never done, she's on the go all the time — even before you go to bed, you've still got something to do — emptying ashtrays, wash a few cups up.
You're still working.
It's the same thing every day; you can't sort of say you're not going to do it, because you've got to do it — like preparing a meal: it's got to be done because if you don't do it, the children wouldn't eat…
I suppose you get so used to it, you just do it automatically…
I'm happier at work than I am at home…
(What would you say are the worst things about being a housewife?)
I suppose you get days when you feel you get up and you've got to do the same old things — you get bored, you're stuck in the same routine.
I think if you ask any housewife, if they're honest, they'll turn round and say they feel like a drudge half the time — everybody thinks when they get up in the morning ‘Oh no, I've got the same old things to do today, till I go to bed tonight.’
It's doing the same things — boredom.
These comments reveal obvious discontent.
An interesting methodological and theoretical problem is posed by these contradictions.
How can they be explained?
One  major reason why it is important to provide an explanation hinges on the discrepancy between the present finding of no social class difference in housework satisfaction and the widespread notion that middle-class women are more likely to be dissatisfied.
The tendency of working-class women to respond positively or non-committally to a question about ‘liking’ housework (whether or not they actually experience a basic dissatisfaction) may be one reason why other researchers have concluded that fundamental social class differences exist on this dimension.
Answers to the question ‘Do you like housework?’ are not evenly distributed between the two class groups, as Table 4.2 shows.
The working-class housewife is more likely to say that she ‘likes’ or ‘doesn't mind’housework, and the typical middle-class response is one of dislike.
In his work on social class and linguistic styles, Basil Bernstein has identified two different modes of language use.
These he began by terming a ‘public’ and a ‘formal’language, but later called ‘restricted’and ‘elaborated’codes.
It would not be in order to list fully here Bernstein's distinctions between the two codes; however, one of these distinctions is of direct relevance to the question of social class differences in answers to the question ‘Do you like housework?’
Describing what could roughly be termed the ‘working-class’ code, Bernstein says
A public language is one which contains a large number of idiomatic, traditional phrases from which the individual chooses.
Instead of an individual learning to create a language-use within which he can select to mediate his individual feeling, a public language user tends to attach his feelings to social counters or tags which maximize the solidarity of the social relationship at the cost of the logical structure of the communication and the specificity of the feeling.
In contrast to this, the speech mode more characteristic of the middle class
facilitates the verbal elaboration of subjective intent, sensitivity to the implications of separateness and difference, and points to the possibilities inherent in a complex conceptual hierarchy for the organization of experience.
Whereas the (predominantly) working-class mode of language use inhibits the verbal elaboration of individual differences, the (predominantly) middle-class code is precisely oriented to this dimension of experience.
Bernstein's work has come in for some strong criticism recently.
Although much of this criticism centres on the misuse of his work by others, some more substantive arguments are that middle-class values inform his conceptual distinctions and that these are insufficiently grounded in the raw data of speech patterns.
Without engaging in the details of this debate, and having presented what is an admittedly brief over-simplification of Bernstein's work, I would nevertheless venture to say that the different response patterns of working-class and middle-class women in the present sample do seem to fit into the broad outlines of Bernstein's scheme.
My suggestion is that the eight working-class women who say they ‘like’ or ‘don't mind’housework but show evidence of being dissatisfied with it, are in fact committing this contradiction because the speech mode they are used to makes the presentation of individual feelings difficult.
The linguistic style of the middle-class housewife more easily permits her to describe her own individual feelings about housework than does that of her working-class counterpart.
This does not mean, of course, that the working-class respondent is unable to produce complex verbal structures.
The point seems to be one of the relative facility with which working-class and middle-class housewives can, in response to a direct question, immediately describe their individual feelings about housework.
In the working-class group the use of similar phrases ('I like', ‘I don't mind’ housework) may overlay differences in experience which are not readily articulated.
Several riders must be added to the bald statement that class-differentiated linguistic codes help to explain the contradiction between initial statements of attitudes and overall feelings.
Why should the working-class housewife say she ‘likes’ or ‘doesn't mind’housework — why should this be the typical response?
It has been observed by others that housewifery as a role for women is more positively evaluated in traditional working-class communities than in middle-class social networks.
In other words the dominant norm is one of feminine satisfaction with housework.
A tendency to repeat this norm follows.
This tendency is illustrated succinctly in the responses of two working-class housewives to a question about general satisfaction asked at the end of the interview:
(Would you describe yourself as generally satisfied or unsatisfied with life — or neither, particularly?)
Generally satisfied.
Well, I mean to say you have to make the best of things .
(Painter and decorator's wife)
I don't really know.
Satisfied, I suppose.
I suppose I have to be.
What's the point of being the other way when you know you've got to be satisfied .
(Factory hand's wife)
For those who are dissatisfied with housework, a statement of this feeling is problematic because the break between socially acceptable behaviour and individual experience has first to be made.
The converse point may help to explain the phenomenon of the two middle-class women who said they ‘disliked’ housework yet showed evidence of satisfaction with it.
Their reference is to the middle-class norm of the discontented housewife.
This explanation is borne out by the remark of one middle-class housewife: ‘I don't go about feeling discontented’, the implication being that she thinks she might be expected to do so.
The fact that many of the twenty middle-class women did not say they disliked housework does not rule this explanation out of court.
In neither class group is either norm — satisfaction or dissatisfaction — adhered to absolutely.
While most middle-class women say they dislike housework and most working-class women say they like or don't mind it, there are some in each class group who deviate from this pattern.
It is simply that one  is a more likely response for the middle-class housewife and one is more likely for her working-class sister.
Since the social class assessment is based on husband's occupation, it may also be that the ‘deviants’ are more ‘working class’or ‘middle class’on several important dimensions than their class-categorization itself indicates.
This is certainly true of the two middle-class women who said they liked or didn't mind housework but were dissatisfied with it.
One, Clare Pullen, was married to a supermarket manager, but had herself been a machine operator before giving up work to have a baby.
The family lived in a two-room rented flat in a predominantly working-class area.
Jean Bevan, the second of these two, had a middle-class previous occupation nursing — but also lived in a working-class area.
Her methods of child-rearing stand out as being more ‘working-class’ than ‘middle-class’; for example she smacked a lot and expected the three year old to be clean and tidy all the time: both these are areas in which the Newsons found social class differences in their study.
As they point out, child-rearing patterns may provide a better indicator of social class than the more conventional criteria.
However, to date no systematic method has been devised of assessing social class in this way.
Most researchers are at some stage forced up against the inadequacy of the social class classification.
To define away every social class difference on the grounds that the social class division itself is erroneous would clearly be a pointless procedure, but the researcher does have an obligation to note those cases where it seems to her/him that faults in this classification ‘explain’ the pattern in the data most closely.
To summarize this part of the argument, it can be said that the contradictions found in these forty interviews between housework satisfaction patterns and answers to the question ‘Do you like housework?’ may be interpreted as evidence of class-differentiated linguistic styles and norms of feminine domesticity.
These weight the balance of responses in each class group in a particular direction, while the actual experience of doing housework is a dimension on which the classes are not divided.
Rather than proving an insoluble methodological problem, these contradictions are, in fact, a key finding in the research.
As later chapters show, answers to the ‘Do you like housework?’ question are also related to the kind of standards and routines adopted  in housework, and to women's self-concepts as expressed in a written statement.
These connections suggest that what a woman says about housework at the beginning of her interview does not only reflect on the mode of feeling-expression general in her class-specific linguistic code.
A ‘like’ or ‘don't mind’attitude seems symbolic of a search for satisfaction in housework; the declaration of ‘dislike’appears to indicate the recognition of dissatisfaction.
This crucial distinction is expanded in Chapter 10.
Before leaving this issue, I will note a methodological moral.
The lesson learnt is that simple questions produce simple answers.
Not a great deal in the way of interpretation or conclusion should be hung on answers to a single question about ‘liking’ housework.
Only a depth interview of several hours can be expected to provide a complete picture of overall positive and negative feelings experienced by the housewife in relation to housework.
Thus far the major burden of the evidence seems to be against the view that social class differences in women's domesticity exist.
Working-class and middle-class women are satisfied and dissatisfied with housework in equal numbers: different patterns of response to a particular interview question are interesting, but do not affect this basic conclusion.
The conclusion is confirmed by the social class distribution of positive, negative and neutral responses to questions about housework tasks, some of which were described in the last chapter.
These are shown in the table below.
In this table there is very little difference between one social class group and the other.
On another issue, that of the way in which the status of housewifery is perceived, both class differences and similarities in women's domesticity are found.
While thirteen out of twenty middle-class women (sixty-five per cent)‘mind’ describing themselves as housewives on a form, only eight out of twenty working-class women (forty per cent ) state this objection.
(The difference is not statistically significant.)
Mirra Komarovsky comes up with the same finding in her survey of American working-class marriage.
She says:
The discontent of the housewife is often attributed to contemporary values.
She chafes, it is said, because of the low prestige society attaches to her role…
Such an explanation of discontent may perhaps apply to educated middle-class housewives, but we find little evidence of status frustrations among working-class wives.
This perception of the low social esteem in which the housewife role is held, charted in the previous chapter, is associated with work dissatisfaction.
Of twenty-one housewives who mind being labelled a housewife, nineteen (eighty-six per cent) are dissatisfied with work; of the nineteen who ‘don't mind’ this label, ten (thirteen per cent ) are dissatisfied.
(This difference is significant at the five per cent level.)
Thus, in so far as middle-class women are more likely to perceive the low status of the housewife role, they are more likely than their working-class sisters to be dissatisfied with it.
What is the logic of this process?
The sociological theory of ‘status crystallization’ or ‘status congruency’is relevant here.
Broadly speaking, this theory states that stress or dissatisfaction is more likely to be experienced by an individual if her/his ranks are discrepant — for instance the ranks associated with income, education and ethnic group.
If all are at the same level, there is a high degree of status crystallization, and stress for a status-related reason is improbable.
In the case of the housewife there are two possible discrepancies which might be connected with dissatisfaction: that between the status of housewife and the status of the husband's work, and the discrepancy between the status of the housewife's own present or previous employment work and her status as a housewife.
While the former is not  associated with work satisfaction patterns in this sample, the latter is — or at least the relationship is in the expected direction.
In Table 4.4 ‘status’ was assessed using three criteria of skill, training and social prestige.
In evaluating the social prestige of each occupation I have placed special emphasis on ‘feminine’ rewards — that is, those dimensions of a job that have relatively high prestige within the feminine job world.
These include ‘glamour’, the opportunity lo mix with high status men and women, and the intrinsic reward of doing a ‘worthwhile’ job.
Of course qualities like money, responsibility and promotion  opportunities still remain important, but a degree of gender-differentiation in the dimension of prestige follows from the broad structure of gender-differentiation in the occupational world.
In Table 4.4 sixty-two per cent of the housewives with low status occupations are dissatisfied with housework, sixty-seven per cent of those with intermediate occupations are dissatisfied, and, of those with high status occupations, all are assessed as dissatisfied with their present work — housework.
This suggests that, in part, the housewife's dissatisfaction with her work is a function of downward social mobility.
The connection is articulated by some women in the sample.
Mary Byron, a middle-class housewife married to a sales representative, talks about her previous job experience:
I did hairdressing for five years and then I had a job as a manicurist at Claridges.
Manicuring is boring actually, but it was meeting all those people, there was always something interesting to talk about because the people were so knowledgeable and travelled…you get all the kings and dukes and lords.
It's like a different world there, and they treat you so nicely…
They treat you like a lady, it was fabulous.
By comparison housework is boring, lonely, unrewarding work, and it has none of the prestige associated with meeting famous people and working in a glamorous establishment like Claridges.
Being a fashion model is also a ‘nice’ job:
Sometimes actually I think ‘Oh I'd like to go back to work’— to be in that hubbub — because I always worked in the West End and there was something about the atmosphere — being dressed all day…
I adored it — the glamour, the feeling of being in the hub of things which I love — I love clothes — I used to make up every day and make myself look nice and meet people…to me it wasn't work, every minute of it was enjoyment…
I didn't have to think ‘Well, if I put that dress on I'll only get it dirty because the baby will be sick over me’— to be dressed up all day and feel you can be clean and only have nice jobs to do and always be with people…
Or there may be regret for the loss of the rewards of professionalism, as in this woman's comments about nursing:
I very often miss nursing.
I thoroughly enjoyed it.
I found it extremely satisfying, which was something I never found when I worked in an office…
I didn't ever seem to get the same sort  of satisfaction out of getting something to balance properly as I did out of seeing a patient recover, which was something you'd helped them to do.
There's just something special about it.
Nothing else is like nursing — it's a job on its own.
But the status frustrations of moving from an interesting and professionalized work-world into the world of the housewife stand out most clearly in the interview with Juliet Warren, an ex-television production assistant.
She says:
I would hate to think of myself as just being a housewife…
I think that's why I'm so frustrated.
I really cannot come to terms with the fact that I am…there's lots of interesting work to do — there was in the job I did — and I want so much to identify with that rather than just sit back here and say ‘I'm a housewife and I'm happy’…because I couldn't be.
I think ‘housewife’ is like ‘spinster’and ‘spinster’is a terrible label to put on anyone.
‘Housewife’ is a terrible label too.
For Juliet Warren the comparison between her previous and present work is not merely provoked by the interview.
It is brought home to her every day in the person of her husband, a television documentary director.
She reports one recent incident and her reactions to it:
The thing that made me a little envious was this girl — she's his assistant on this particular film — ringing up, and there was a slight chance they would be going to Switzerland that day, and suddenly I was in there again and I thought how exciting it all was and how nice it would be to go off filming again.
I said so to Tom and he said of course this girl isn't all that popular with the men — that's an important part of a production assistant's job — and he said ‘she'd give anything to be in your place — to be married and have a baby’.
Then I could remain sane about it, by thinking I'm being stupid: I've really got the best world.
It's just that having known it, I do get fed up sometimes.
This connection between high status employment work and present dissatisfaction with housework holds only for the middle-class women, but there is evidence that the tendency to be dissatisfied with housework in relation to the status of one's previous job may involve the question of a ‘reference group’.
There are no women with high status previous jobs in the working-class group, so that those with an intermediate status job hold the highest status jobs in the working-class group as a whole.
Among the working-class women, eighty-eight per cent of those with jobs whose status is ‘high for class’ are dissatisfied with housework; in the middle-class group, the figure is a hundred per cent.
Conversely, of those women with jobs whose status is ‘low for class’, a lower proportion is dissatisfied with housework; fifty-eight per cent in the working-class, and fifty-seven per cent in the middle-class group.
Thus, while middle-class women are more likely to object to the label ‘housewife’ on grounds of its low status, there is a general tendency for downward mobility on the status dimension — from paid work to the job of housewife — to be associated with present dissatisfaction.
Beyond this particular question of status, middle-class and working-class women in this sample have in common a deep-seated appreciation of the rewards experienced in outside work.
The resultant comparison with housework persistently branded it as a less enjoyed and less enjoyable occupation.
This is all the more remarkable since many of the jobs held by these women are not, at first sight, particularly rewarding ones.
Nearly a quarter of the forty were in unskilled factory jobs and over a third have done typing or general office work.
Thirty of the forty fall into the four occupations of factory work, retail sales work, domestic work, and office or secretarial work.
All, with the exception of Joanna Giles, an ex-computer programmer, were engaged in occupations stereotyped as feminine and thus traditionally low paid.
Housework contrasts with employment work in its lack of economic reward, its isolation and the lack of social recognition accorded to the responsibilities carried by the housewife.
Helen Crane, an ex-secretary, valued her job because it not only gave her the experience of autonomy, but it publicly valued her exercise of this responsibility:
I was my own boss for a start — the man I worked for left after about seven months, and the man who took over didn't know anything about it: I knew more about the job than he did, so I had to tell him what to do for the first six months…in fact he tried to get the job upgraded anyway.
He did get it upgraded from a secretary to more of an assistant…
The extreme depth and detail in which these women describe their job experiences — often of five or more years ago — is an index of their continuing significance.
Carol West, an ex-sales ledger clerk, reiterates the importance of job responsibility:
I worked at City Motors and I stayed there for seven years I had quite a few jobs before that but I liked that one.
I enjoyed the work there — dealing with customers on the phone — there were two of us girls…the other girl was in charge and we had a man over us, but it was between us two…we had to get all the statements out at the end of the month…
Janet Gallagher worked in a factory:
I didn't like the beer factory all that much — it was wet all the time, but in the yeast factory I quite liked that, because I was working with machines…
I tell you one thing I used to enjoy, on this particular belt there were so many girls, what I used to enjoy was sending plenty of work down to them — I was responsible for how much work they got out…
June Doyle's pre-marriage job was equally ‘menial’; she was a chambermaid:
I worked at the London Palace Hotel as a chambermaid for three years.
I enjoyed it very much.
It wasn't the work, it was the company — the environment.
The variety of ages up there — old, middling and my generation.
I was very, very happy.
And I had a lot of time to myself.
I finished every day mostly at one o'clock and I was to start at half past five the next morning.
I missed it when I gave it up to get married.
I'd like to be back in that time again…
You can't really explain it…
Although she gave up this job eight years ago, she has a lasting identification with it.
When asked if she ever felt lonely in the daytime as a housewife, she replied:
Yes, sometimes, but then you get adjusted to it.
I was lonely at first.
Before I got married I was living in the London Palace and there was something like three hundred and sixty girls there.
I have a card someplace and all their signatures are on it, when they gave me my dinner service [a wedding present].
There was always somebody there and we had a television set and rest room there, and there was always about twenty or thirty girls in it.
On the basis of their comments about their jobs, the women were assessed as satisfied or dissatisfied with employment work.
Of twenty-seven who are satisfied, twenty (seventy-four per cent) are dissatisfied with housework, and eighteen (sixty-seven per cent ) with life generally.
Among the thirteen who are dissatisfied with their jobs, eight (sixty-two per cent) are dissatisfied  with housework and two (fifteen per cent ) with life in general .
Although only one of these relationships is statistically significant — that between employment work satisfaction and dissatisfaction with life generally — both are in the direction suggested by the women's own observations.
Enjoyment of one's past job does not augur well for contentment in the role of housewife.
Again, this conclusion runs counter to the general idea of class differences in women's domesticity.
Even though most of the working-class women had low skill, repetitive jobs, they picked out certain qualities of these jobs as satisfying by comparison with housework, and they shared this tendency with the middle-class women.
The findings presented in this chapter, taken together, force a re-evaluation of the claim that the unhappy housewife is a purely middle-class phenomenon.
Such a claim is too simplistic; it does not take into account the various faces of women's domesticity.
Working-class women are no less likely than middle-class women to express dissatisfaction with housework.
Their attitudes to the separate tasks which make up housework are on average very similar to the attitudes of the middle-class group.
A drop in status from paid work to housework is likely to be associated with dissatisfaction in both social classes, and a simple enjoyment of the rewards of an outside job is also, for both middle- and working-class women, a bad omen from the viewpoint of housework satisfaction.
The findings discussed in Chapter 7 should be added to these similarities: irrespective of their husband's social class, women share a similar childhood socialization for domesticity and a consequent personal identification with the housewife role.
Two differences between working-class and middle-class housewives coexist with these similarities.
Complaints about the label of ‘just a housewife’ are more common in the middle-class group, and attitudes to housework as revealed by the question ‘Do you like housework?’show a class-differentiated patterning.
Both these differences suggest the importance of a distinction which I shall come back to later: attitudes to the role of housewife are in principle not the same thing as feelings about housework.
A woman's attitudes to the housewife role may be positive — she may feel herself to be a housewife, and agree with the idea that housewifery is an appropriate role for women, but she may at the  same time dislike doing housework.
The reverse pattern is also possible.
Feelings about housework are a question of the experience of doing housework and one's reactions to it; orientation to the housewife role involves the issues of self-concept, gender identity and subcultural norms of feminine role-behaviour.
The data on domesticity presented in the preceding pages suggest that working-class women on the whole have different attitudes to the housewife role from their middle-class counterparts, but in the area of work activity, middle-class and working-class experiences are very similar.
5 Work Conditions
One preoccupation of the sociology of industrial work has been the causes of job dissatisfaction.
What accounts for the fact that some workers are satisfied, while others are not?
The difference cannot simply be dismissed as a question of personality, since certain patterns of job satisfaction or dissatisfaction seem to be associated with particular kinds of jobs.
Thus jobs which involve social interaction with other workers are generally more satisfying than socially isolated work; monotonous, repetitive work is more likely to be linked with job dissatisfaction than more varied work; jobs which involve responsibility and the ability to organize work time and work methods are generally preferred over those which lack these qualities, and so forth.
It would seem that one source of industrial discontent in the modern world is the structure and content of work itself.
This is a general conclusion.
But does it apply to the case of the housewife?
Answers given by the forty women in the sample to questions about work tasks suggest that certain characteristics of housework may be more or less uniformly experienced as dissatisfying while others are potentially rewarding.
A look at the social class dimension also indicates that there is a considerable area of shared response to housework which may reflect on the nature of the work itself, and the conditions under which it is done.
Hence it would seem both helpful and important to examine a number of aspects of work that industrial sociology has highlighted as critical in the explanation of job satisfaction.
These are the experiences of monotony, fragmentation and excessive pace in work and social interaction patterns.
Two other dimensions of work which have been found less important in the case of the industrial worker are also looked at in this chapter: working hours and the technical environment.
1 MONOTONY, FRAGMENTATION AND EXCESSIVE PACE
A common charge levelled against housework is that it is inherently monotonous and repetitive.
Although the tasks that make up housework are dissimilar, there is said to be a ‘sameness’ about them which derives from their frequent need to be repeated, their lack of intrinsic meaning, and the impermanence of the goals they achieve.
There is nothing more ‘automatic’ than the perfect housewife, mechanically pursuing the same routine day in and day out.
The Peckham Rye Women's Liberation Group speak from personal experience when they say that housework is:
An endless routine; it creates it own high moments of achievement and satisfaction so as to evade…futility.
The bolt you tighten on the factory floor vanishes to be replaced by another: but the clean kitchen floor is tomorrow's dirty floor and the clean floor of the day after that.
The appropriate symbol for housework (and for housework alone) is not the interminable conveyor belt but a compulsive circle like a pet mouse in its cage spinning round on its exercise wheel, unable to get off…
But the routine is never quite routine, so the vacuum in one's mind is never vacuous enough to be filled.
‘Housework is a worm eating away at one's ideas’.
Like a fever dream it goes on and on, until you desperately hope that it can all be achieved at one blow.
You lay the breakfast the night before, you have even been known to light the gas under the kettle for tomorrow's tea, wishing that by breakfast time everything could be over…
The monotony of housework turns it into a mindless task.
Without calling for one's whole attention, it so persistently demands a small part of it that concentration on anything else is ruled out.
Thus monotony and fragmentation are intimately connected, and through the need to accomplish a long series of jobs each day, a feeling of always having too much to do may be added.
Is this a very one-sided picture, as it is sometimes claimed to be?
Perhaps monotony, fragmentation and excessive pace are noted by few housewives and are not bound up with a dominant feeling of dissatisfaction.
One way to test this possibility is to ask direct questions about the incidence of these experiences in  housework, and compare them with that reported by other groups of workers.
In their study of affluent workers' attitudes to work John Goldthorpe and his colleagues asked three questions designed specifically to measure the extent to which industrial work is experienced as intrinsically unsatisfying.
These questions were: ‘Do you find your present job monotonous?’
‘Do you find you can think about other things while doing your job?’ and ‘Do you ever find the pace of the job too fast?’
On the basis of the answers they received to these questions Goldthorpe and his colleagues concluded that monotony is a definite source of job dissatisfaction.
Fragmentation and excessive pace were also found to be important variables bearing on job satisfaction, with many workers, who did not find their work monotonous, stating that it did not absorb their full attention or that they found the pace of it too fast.
These three questions were used in an adapted form for housewives in the present sample.
When asked, ‘Do you find housework monotonous on the whole?’ thirty out of the forty women said ‘yes’:
It's the feeling that although you've done the job for today you've still got to do it tomorrow.
It's one of the things that gets me down about it.
(Journalist's wife)
Dissatisfaction is higher among those who report monotony.
Eighty per cent of the women who said ‘yes’ to the monotony question are dissatisfied with housework, compared with forty per cent of those who said ‘no’.
(This difference is significant at the five per cent level.)
The conclusion to be drawn is that monotony is clearly associated with work dissatisfaction, and this is supported by the large number of housewives who mentioned monotony spontaneously at various points in the interview.
A cinema manager's wife and a toolmaker's wife provide examples:
I like cooking and I like playing with the children, doing things for them — I don't like the basic cleaning.
It's boring, it's monotonous .
It's the monotony I don't like —it's repetitive and you have to do the same things each day .
I suppose it's really just like factory work — just as boring.
Fragmentation — the experience of work subdivided into a series of unconnected tasks not requiring the worker's full attention — is also a common experience.
Thirty-six of the forty women said ‘yes’ to the question ‘Do you find you can think about other things while you're working?’, and most of the women then went on to offer examples of topics they thought about.
From these answers it is clear that fragmentation is an expected and accepted quality of housework.
The women were on the whole surprised at the question, apparently assuming that a dispersal of concentration is intrinsic to housework.
As Dawn Abbat, a middle-class housewife, answered the question:
(Do you find you can think about other things while you're working'?)
Oh, of course .
Today I've been thinking to myself, I've only got the sleeves to put in that dress — when am I going to have the time to do it'?
Perhaps for this reason, fragmentation is not associated with work dissatisfaction: there is little difference in the percentages dissatisfied in the two groups — those who report fragmentation and those who do not.
This is an instance of the general finding that aspects of work activity have the capacity to satisfy or dissatisfy people only in relation to the personal value put upon them.
Job satisfaction or dissatisfaction is a function of the perceived relationship between what one wants from one's job and what one sees it as offering or entailing.
Since women do not see housework as a coherent, meaningful structure of tasks demanding their full attention, they are not made dissatisfied by its fragmented nature.
What are the kind of thoughts that occupy the housewife while she works?
The list of topics given in answer to the fragmentation question is as follows: fantasy, eighteen replies; leisure/ social activities, seventeen replies; housework, fourteen replies; child-care, twelve replies.
(These add up to more than forty because some women mentioned more than one topic.)
‘Fantasy’ comes first on the list.
The housewife's name for this is ‘daydreaming’: Sally Jordan, a dustman's wife, says:
I daydream when I'm doing anything.
I'm always going off into a trance.
I don't hear people when they talk to me.
I stare into space.
I'm working at the same time.
Favourite topics for daydreaming are housing and holidays.
The  significance of fantasizing about a new house or a new flat is that one is visualizing a change in one's work environment.
Pauline Cutts, a secretary who lives in a rented furnished flat with her husband and one child, says:
Usually I dream about having my own house.
I think about that most of the time.
I think there's more reward in housework if you've got your own house — even with an unfurnished flat there is.
The dream of ‘my own house’ holds out the prospect of perfect satisfaction with housework.
This seems to be because owning the floors one cleans promises such a harmonious alliance between the worker and her work that dissatisfaction is (in theory) ruled out.
Although the desire to become a home-owner may represent a genuine social aspiration for these women and their families, there is no evidence that it guarantees satisfaction with housework: the housewives in the sample who did own their homes were no more satisfied than those whose homes were rented.
The ideal of ‘each woman in her own house’ is certainly one fostered by advertising, and thus it may be, in part, a stereotyped response to the boredom of housework.
The same holds true of holidays as themes of mental activity while working:
(Do you find you can think about other things…?)
Yes — a summer holiday in Ibiza!— No — seriously — I'm usually thinking about what Susan is up to, planning what to do.
(Machine operator's wife)
Holidays are avenues of escape:
I think about how I could get dressed up and go out somewhere, for a couple of hours, and just leave it all, because I get so sick of it sometimes…
I do get very irritable with myself very often.
I often feel like I could pack up and go home for a holiday in Ireland.
(Painter and decorator's wife)
The status of daydreaming about holidays, housing and related themes as conventional ways of expressing discontent is suggested by a passage from the interview with Elizabeth Gould, an ex-fashion model.
She lives in a new four-storey house on a recently completed private estate, and typifies the perfect housewife of television advertising: her house has fitted carpets  throughout, gleaming unmarked white paint, and every modern gadget, and it is impeccably maintained by Elizabeth, who describes herself as a housewife with very high standards.
She explains:
I don't daydream about things in my future very much because I must admit I haven't got much to daydream for — because I'm very lucky, I've got a lovely house, a lovely husband; we go on lovely holidays, we lead a nice social life, I've got lovely clothes — I can't really daydream and say I wish I was this, I wish I was that.
As answers to the ‘fragmentation’ question the category of leisure activities tends to merge into that of fantasy.
‘Getting out for the day/away from the house’ are ubiquitous topics; there is also a focus on social life:
(Do you find you can think about other things while you're working?)
Yes — what I've done the night before, the day before — thinking about parties and that.
What people said, the things that happened, what we might do next Saturday night — that kind of thing.
(Van driver's wife)
Although fourteen answers to the fragmentation question concern housework, the housewife rarely thinks about the work she is actually doing.
Instead there are references to past and future performances:
I think about the carpet that's got to be laid, and I must clean those windows tomorrow…
(Lorry driver's wife)
I think about what I'm going to do next…what I'm going to cook, the children, where I'll take them out…this sort of thing.
(Sales director's wife)
This is a crucial finding.
Housework is such fragmented work that almost never does the housewife report thinking about the task in hand.
Whatever skills are needed, complete mental concentration is not one, and the effect of having many different tasks to do is a dispersal of the housewife's attention in many different directions.
Children amplify this fragmentation effect.
They make perfect concentration impossible and are often the cause of breaks in work activity.
The extent to which children  are thought about while housework is done is not only a reflection on housework's fragmented quality; it also signifies the basic difficulties which inhere in the combination of housewife and mother roles.
All these strands of thought fulfil a latent function for the housewife.
They enable her to get housework done; thinking about something else is a weapon deliberately employed in the attempt to combat boredom.
The case of bakery workers provides a parallel: ‘For those trying to survive, empty stretches of time must be structured, and an alternative content — some psychological colour — must be injected into the present in order to make it tolerable’.
In this sense, daydreaming is purposeful — not merely a random response to a superfluity of mentally unoccupied time:
Daydreaming?
That's what keeps me doing it [housework].
(Factory hand's wife)
The alternative strategies of having the radio or television on ‘to take my mind off it’ or ‘so I don't realize I'm doing it’are also mentioned.
Like fragmentation, the experience of time pressures in housework is not associated with work dissatisfaction.
The women were asked ‘Do you find you have too much to get through during the day?’
Roughly half of those satisfied and half of those dissatisfied with housework say they have too much to do.
Neither do feelings of ‘having too much to get through’ relate to the number of children the housewife has, or to the kind of aids and amenities she possesses.
This finding is inconsistent with the conclusions of various surveys of job satisfaction in industry, according to which a feeling of excessive pace is a potent cause of dissatisfaction.
For the housewife the situation is complicated.
Apart from the deadlines created hy husbands' and children's needs, she imposes her own time pressures; these follow from the way she organizes her work and the kind of standards she sets herself.
The interviews suggest that satisfaction or dissatisfaction are the prior conditions here, and that the feeling of having too much to do or not flows from them.
A woman who is generally satisfied will organize her days so that she is not overcome by the many demands on her time.
One such housewife is Barbara  Lipscombe, the wife of a car patrolman and the mother of three children aged four, two and one.
She says of ironing, for example ,
I don't let the ironing build up too much.
I wait until my husband's doing the late shift, and I wait until the children have gone to bed, and I sit down in front of the television.
I find I can do it much easier if I've got one eye on the television.
I seem to get through it easier and it doesn't worry me at all then.
Lack of organization creates work and may be a consequence of feeling dissatisfied, as in Juliet Warren's case:
My standards have definitely dropped since I've been at home with the baby.
I suppose it's hecause I can't do anything uninterrupted and I still can't get used to that.
It takes a lot of effort.
I'm very aware there's lots of johs I ought to do — I used to be pretty thorough — and there are things I haven't got the time to do.
I might start off the day with lots of intentions and by the end of it I'm so fagged out I just collapse.
It worries me, because it's there again tomorrow…in my mind I've got a fixed routine, but I know I haven't got one really…
I'm just badly organized.
(Wife of a television documentary director)
Another facet of work is that of limits or deadlines.
As Chapter 4 showed, the need to complete a task within a set period may produce a negative attitude towards it.
Cooking is especially suhject to this limitation, although it is in theory one of the most liked activities.
This finding is echoed in one study of job motivation among industrial employees.
The author sums up:
Members of groups which have frequent time limits express significantly less pride in their work…
The finding that those who more frcquently work under time limits are not more interested in their work and take less pride in their job…is arresting.
It may be that time limits, even when employees help set them, are not viewed as a standard of excellence by most employees in these job settings.
Another possible explanation is that, while time limits may provide one standard of excellence, the attention which they focus on the speed of work diverts attention from the possibility of doing work which is creative or innovative, thereby reducing achievement incentive.
So far as the housewife is concerned, time limits imposed by factors outside her control mean that the pace of her work is too fast for each task to get the attention she would like to give it.
Unlike many jobs, housework can often be done in a very short space of time without actually failing to be done at all.
Cleaning may consist of a quick dust or ‘whip round’ for the harassed housewife, and to some eyes at least it will still look as though the house has been cleaned — hence the expression ‘eye service’('I've just given the house eye service today').
However, it is the housewife's ultimate responsibility to see that all tasks get done properly.
Neglect or minimization of a task is at best only a short-term expedient, and the housewife's awareness of this fact causes time pressures to be felt possibly more acutely than they are in other kinds of work.
To summarize therefore, monotony, fragmentation and time pressures are aspects of housework commonly experienced by housewives.
In reply to three direct questions ninety per cent report fragmentation, and seventy-five per cent monotony, but the percentage drops to fifty per cent in the case of time pressures: these are more often referred to spontaneously in the course of discussing housework tasks.
In Table 5.1 housewives' experiences of monotony, fragmentation and speed are compared with those of a sample of factory workers.
Housewives experience more monotony, fragmentation and speed in their work than do workers in the factory.
But when a particular sub-group of workers is taken — assembly line workers — the gap is narrowed.
The inherent frustrations of assembly line  work are also to be found in housework.
This gives substance to the contemporary feminist polemic which brands housework as ‘alienating’ work.
2 SOCIAL INTERACTION
From the direct comparison of housework with factory work we move to an aspect of work which many studies agree has possibly the strongest influence on a worker's satisfaction.
This is social interaction.
Research has shown that loneliness is an occupational hazard for the modern housewife, who is often cut off not only from community life but from family life — in the wider sense also.
According to Gavron's survey of ninety-six urban housewives, the feeling of being tied to the house.and isolated from meaningful social contacts is a common one for both working-class and middle-class women.
Herbert Gans in his study of American suburbia The Levittowners reports that boredom and loneliness affect women more than men, because of the women's housebound role.
The forty women interviewed were asked early in the interview to give an account of their daily routines.
This enabled the topic of social relationships to be covered, although a direct question was also asked: ‘Do you ever feel as though you're on your own too much in the daytime?’
Of the twenty-two women who said ‘yes’, seventeen (seventy-seven per cent) were dissatisfied with housework, while eleven (sixty-one per cent ) of the eighteen who said ‘no’ were also dissatisfied.
The difference is in the direction of more dissatisfaction in the lonely group (but it is not significant at the five per cent level).
These bare figures do not give the whole picture, however.
The women vary a great deal in their patterns of social relationships.
In some cases only two or three people are seen in the course of a week; in others, there are two or three social contacts in the course of each day.
Compare the description of her social life given by Linda Farrell, a delivery man's wife, with that given by Margaret Nicholson, the wife of the director of a publishing firm .
Although I'm quite happy to be indoors and getting on with my work — I don't say I'd be outside gallivanting everywhere — it'd be nice to know people.
I'd like just to pop round to my sister's — that sort of thing…
The only person I really see is my neighbour next door.
I suppose I see her once or twice a week — she comes in for a cup of tea, or I go to her.
She's got one child at school.
My other neighbour's working.
I don't like this area at all— you just don't know people.
My mother comes once a week, for the day.
She phones me every other day.
I look forward to my husband coming home in the middle of the day — it makes a break, breaks the day up.
Normally I don't see anyone till my husband comes in — it is lonely really.
When I first got married I got terribly depressed, because coming from a big family there was always something going on at home.
I somehow regretted getting married at first.
I couldn't get used to it at all.
I used to hate coming home here.
I'd wait till he came home, and then go to my mother's…it sounds childish, doesn't it?
(Linda Farrell)
I suppose I have a friend in to tea nearly every afternoon that is, a friend with children.
We come back from fetching the children together, and then she'll stay till about 6.30.
I get tea for all the children.
Then there's a friend next door I see an awful lot— every day, certainly.
My children play in her garden.
About twice a week I go to lunch with a friend, and again about twice a week I have someone to lunch here.
Monday afternoons I have to keep free because I like to take Mrs James — the domestic help — home and Friday afternoon Lucy has a dancing lesson.
On Friday morning I take my neighbour shopping.
I do it because she relies on me, she can't get down there on her own.
Oh, and I belong to a Young Wives' group, we meet once a fortnight, and I see people from that quite often.
(Margaret Nicholson)
Linda Farrell's social circle is much more restricted than Margaret Nicholson's.
It is also more narrowly focused on the kinship group — relationships with her parents, brothers, sisters, in-laws and so on are the ones she most values.
Not surprisingly, her main aim is to move back to the area where her family live — preferably to buy a house there.
With two small children and no transport, like most of these women, the daytime journey across town is problematic, and the idea of going on one's own in the evening (leaving one's husband to baby sit) is seen as imposing too much of a strain on the marriage relationship.
The pattern of kinship relationships extends to other women in the working-class half of the sample, particularly to those who come from a large family.
For several women an attachment to one sister, also married with young children, is the chief social focus of  the week.
In these cases there are also younger sisters, unmarried, who come visiting in the evenings or at weekends, and during the day if they are ever ‘off’ work.
Mothers are important: so are mothers-in-law.
In two cases the housewife's father is a regular visitor in the day time, and in one case the father regularly combines a social visit with a trip to the launderette to dry clothes on his daughter's behalf.
The social relationships engaged in by Margaret Nicholson include a wide variety of friends and the stress on family ties is missing.
This is much more the stereotyped picture of middle-class coffee mornings, flower arranging, and other ‘feminine’ cultural activities.
There is more stress on the companionship of the husband-wife relationship: an ethic of ‘being on our own together’.
Taking the criterion of the number of ‘social contacts’ the housewife has during work time, an association with work satisfaction patterns does emerge.
A ‘social contact’ here is any individual, not a residential member of the housewife's family, with whom she experiences social interaction.
This may vary from a few words exchanged over the garden fence, to visits which last all day.
The total amount of time taken up in such social exchanges or interactions in this sample is in fact relatively small: a division of housewives into three groups according to the proportion of work time thus occupied — less than twenty-five per cent, between twenty-five and fifty per cent , more than fifty per cent — revealed the majority of women to be in the first group; there was no significant relationship with work satisfaction patterns.
What seems to be important is the number   of people the housewife sees.
Twenty-six of the forty women have nineteen or fewer social contacts a week; thirteen have more.
(I excluded the one woman who had a full-time job from this tabulation since this was the one respect in which her housework situation was not directly comparable with that of the other women.)
The relationship with work satisfaction patterns is shown in Table 5.2.
Some women expressly blame loneliness for their dissatisfaction.
As a supermarket manager's wife put it:
Do you ever feel you're on your own too much in the daytime?)
Yes.
The last couple of months it's been dragging: you feel ‘I wish I could talk to somebody’…not knowing anybody else you tend to get this feeling that unless you go out and talk to someone you'll go stark raving mad…
A feeling of loneliness is connected with a feeling that nothing is happening:
(Do you ever feel you're on your own too much in the daytime?)
Yes.
Very often.
I could be murdered here and no one would know.
When the milkman comes, it's an event.
(Lorry driver's wife)
The general impression conveyed is that these women would not necessarily be more satisfied with work if they saw more people, but that they would certainly be less dissatisfied .
It is interesting to note here that similar findings have been reported for employed workers.
The quantity and quality of social interaction during work time can apparently act as a ‘dissatisfier’ but not as a ‘satisfier’.
Some degree of isolation is entailed by the housewife role, simply because housework is ‘home’ work, privatized and solitary.
The housewife's only faithful companions are her children.
Satisfactory social relationships with adults thus have a heightened importance.
But for some women, seeing and exchanging a few words with a number of other people during the day may actually be a source of negative feelings.
The superficiality of these ‘social contacts’ acts to remind the housewife how critically important to her are the deep and meaningful relationships she lacks.
In the words of a working-class housewife living on a new council estate:
It depends what you call friends .
You see everybody here  practically every day.
There's about six or seven mothers with children in this corridor I see every day.
I've got one neighbour who's a friend — we go in each other 's homes.
3 WORKING HOURS
The housewife's working hours are among the longest in contemporary society.
Hours worked by housewives in this sample ranged from forty-eight (the one housewife who had a full-time job) to 105.
The range of variation is shown below in Table 5.3 in relation to number of children.
Most of the women — twenty-five out of the forty — work between seventy and eighty-nine hours a week.
Only ten work less than seventy hours, and five do ninety or more hours of housework a week.
These calculations of working time are taken from the accounts of daily routine obtained in the interviews.
They include all time spent in housework, including shopping, and in child-care or supervision.
Not counted as ‘work time’ are periods described by the housewife as spent in leisure occupations watching television, reading and so on.
Time away from home, visiting relatives, neighbours or friends, is not included in the total.
The care or supervision of children, though not strictly speaking housework, is included because in practice it was impossible to make an adequate distinction between the two activities of housework and child-care.
From these women's descriptions of their days, it is clear that rarely, if ever, is it possible for them to make this distinction either.
(A distinction between attitudes to housework and child-care is a different matter from a temporal merging of the two activities.)
While doing housework they are responsible for children and must know what the children are doing: while looking after children they are almost always involved in housework activities.
Changing a baby's nappies involves washing those nappies: feeding children entails (eventually) tidying up, cleaning, and washing up.
There are two exceptions to the inclusion of child-care in housework time.
One is the counting of visiting as leisure which from the viewpoint of child-care it really is not.
Wherever the housewife-mother is, she retains the responsibility for the care   of her children.
The other exception is time when children are asleep.
Here again, the responsib ility for children is maintaine d and the housewif e must be prepared to interrupt whatever she is doing at a moment's notice if her children wake up and require her attention.
Neither of these categories of time is included in the assessme nt of working hours unless of course, in the latter case, the housewif e is actually doing housewor k during the hours ‘freed’ by children's sleep.
The average working week of housewiv es in this sample is seventy-seven hours — almost twice as long as an industrial working week of forty hours.
This figure is in agreemen t with other informati on about housewor k hours gathered by other researche rs: Table 5.4 contains a comparis on of results from a range of different studies.
These studies cover three countries and a period from 1929 to 1971.
The division into ‘rural’ and ‘urban’studies suggests that housewor k hours are longer under urban condition s.
But the figures in both groups indicate that there has been no decrease in housewor k time over this period.
In the United States in 1929 rural housewiv es put in a sixty-four-hour week; in France, thirty years later, a sixty-seven-hour week.
Comparin g urban Britain in 1950 and in 1971, housewiv es have added seven hours a week to their working time during this period.
This lack of change contrasts with the situation of employed workers.
For example, between 1920 and 1953 in the United States in the manufact uring industry the average hours of work decreased by ten: from fifty to forty hours.
These various surveys use different methods and different kinds of sample for the computati on of housewor k time, so precise comparis ons are difficult.
However, if one looks at the size of family, the findings are fairly consistent: in the 1948 French   study, for instance, housewives with one child put in on average a seventy-eight-hour week; in the 1950 British study a sixty-seven-hour week, and in the present study a seventy-one-hour week was the average figure for housewives in this group.
The French studies which contain the most sophisticated breakdown of housework hours, according to a number of variables, suggest that, on average, one child adds twenty-three hours to housework time, two children add thirty-five hours, and three or more add forty-one hours.
Of the twelve housewives with three or more children in the present sample none works less than seventy hours a week, eight work eighty or more hours, and two ninety or more.
Somewhat surprising is the fact that the longest hours are not put in by the women with the largest number of children.
In the group with one child, Elizabeth Gould works eighty-four hours, Clare Pullen ninety-one hours, and Elaine Cawthorne 104 hours.
In the group with two children Jill Duffy puts in a 105 hour week: of the forty she is the most industrious.
(I discuss this paradox in Chapter 6.)
Is a long working week connected with work dissatisfaction?
In this sample there is no statistical relationship.
This of course might be due to the fact that the sample as a whole has a long working week; it certainly contradicts the impression given by the women themselves that ‘women's work is never done’:
The worst thing is, you've never finished.
I always go to bed knowing that there's something I should have done — often the housewife slaves all day and the husband just comes home and puts his feet up.
(Cinema manager's wife)
What then, accounts for the absence of a relationship between work hours and satisfaction patterns?
The interviews suggest two answers to this question.
First of all, it seems that the housewife's resentment of her long working hours is located by her in the context of a comparison between her own and her husband's situation.
As earlier quotations have indicated, the assertion that women work harder than men is part of a constant dialogue between husband and wife.
A second answer is that long working hours are not a cause of housework dissatisfaction because they are an expected part of the housewife role.
Like its fragmented nature, housework's ‘never-endingness’ is so much bound up with the idea of housework that the two are not conceived apart.
Housewives simply do not expect to work the same hours in the home as they would in an office or factory.
The relative unimportance of extended work time as a determinant of dissatisfaction is confirmed by studies of industrial work.
In one review of job attitudes research, working hours come out as less important than any other aspect of working conditions, and working conditions as a category come ninth in a ranked list of ten job factors.
Not surprisingly, working hours are more important to employed married women than to employed men, since they have the double burden of employment work and housework.
4 THE TECHNICAL ENVIRONMENT
Is the modern housewife's malaise due to deficiencies in her work environment?
Lack of proper equipment, inadequate housing — are such considerations in fact a cause of dissatisfaction?
Or is dissatisfaction actually unrelated to these features of the home as the workplace?
The women interviewed were assessed on the number of amenities — running hot water, nearness to shops and so on— and aids — vacuum cleaners, washing machines and so forth — they possessed.
(For a full list see the interview schedule in Appendix II.)
A score was then obtained by acsigning a value to each item.
The average score for amenities was 7.5 and for aids 3.1.
As was expected, scores were higher for both aids and amenities in the middle-class group (8.0 and 3.8 as opposed to 7.0 and 2.4 in the working-class group).
A housewife with an average ‘score’ was Joan Hubbard, an ex-shop assistant married to a toolmaker.
She has two children aged four and two years, and lives in a privately rented unfurnished flat.
It has two bedrooms, a kitchen, a bath and inside lavatory, and one living room, and is within five minutes' walk of the shops.
The Hubbards have access to a small garden, but they have no running hot water: all water has to be heated on the gas stove.
In the way of household appliances Joan Hubbard has a single tub washing machine (one that cannot rinse or dry the clothes), a vacuum cleaner and a fridge.
The highest score on amenities and aids was obtained by Sarah Maddison, an ex-office worker married to a food technologist, and the mother of three children.
She lives in a house owned on a mortgage with four bedrooms and a large garden.
In addition to such items as a fridge and a vacuum cleaner, she has a dishwasher, central heating, hired domestic help and the use of the family car in the day time.
In these last two respects, Sarah Maddison is unusual.
Only three housewives had paid domestic help at the time of the interview: two for six hours a week and one for five and a half hours a fortnight.
None had living in domestic help.
(A further two normally had help in the house, but were temporarily without it when interviewed.)
All these housewives were middle-class.
Similarly, out of the forty women, only five had the regular or occasional use of a car for domestic or leisure purposes, and this too, is an exclusively middle-class phenomenon.
Differential ownership of mechanical aids, and differences in the possession of amenities, may affect the way housework is done, and they may have some influence on attitudes to work  tasks, but they do not appear to affect satisfaction with work.
Neither scores for amenities nor those for aids are related to work satisfaction patterns in this sample.
In the interviews housewives sometimes expressed dissatisfaction with the aids and amenities they had, and a desire to replace them with ‘better’ ones: to substitute a fitted carpet for loose rugs, a stainless steel sink for a vitreous enamel one, an inside lavatory for an outside one.
Complaints may range from criticism of the architecture of the house to criticism of the methods available for doing housework:
I hate cooking more than housework.
I'm bored with food.
I think it's partly because of my kitchen actually — it's down those two little stairs, it's with the bathroom and it's away from the living room.
It's not the sort of room that anyone wants to come and chat to you in.
I couldn't have the baby in there, for example.
(Radio producer's wife)
Washing is a drag because I've got nowhere to dry it…these heating cabinets don't work…
I have to put it in the bathroom.
At my mother's I could dry it in the garden.
(Lorry driver's wife)
The acquisition of a new machine may temporarily raise enthusiasm for a particular task, but it does not seem to affect the basic feeling of satisfaction or dissatisfaction:
I don't really mind the cleaning.
I just get on and do it.
I've just had this new hoover bought me for Christmas, and he comes home from work and I say it only took me five minutes to do the stairs, and all this sort of thing, because it used to take so long before.
(Office manager's wife)
But such stated satisfactions and dissatisfactions appear to be segregated from the housewife's general attitude to housework and the housewife role.
Some of the most satisfied women were actually those with the smallest number of aids and amenities.
Sandra Bishop, who lives in a new two-bedroomed council flat on a new estate with her husband (a painter and decorator) and one child aged eighteen months, lacks several aids which many women would consider essential, including a hoover and either a washing machine or access to a launderette.
She says:
I love housework.
And yet some people come and say —‘Oh you have a hard time, with no washing machine and no hoover’, but they're the ones who moan!
I say I just get on with it…my Mum's managed — she still manages without a washing machine, and she washes every day, and I think it's really how you are…
(Italics added)
In saying ‘it's really how you are’ Sandra Bishop is identifying other factors as more crucial determinants of housework satisfaction than technical aspects of the work environment.
This insight is a valid one and is explored in Chapter 7.
The absence of a relationship between differences on the technical dimension and work satisfaction patterns in the case of the housewife cannot be directly compared with the factory worker's situation.
The function of technology in the factory is quite different from its function in the home.
Factory work is defined in a total sense by its technology; housework is not.
(This, of course, is partly because the level of technology applied to housework is a long way behind that in industry.
Domestic technology affects particular tasks but not the job of housework as a whole.)
The industrial worker's control over the work process is shaped and generally reduced by technology; in the home, machines do not themselves determine the pace and rhythm of work.
The housewife retains her control.
However, the lack of relationship between the technical dimension of work and housework satisfaction patterns may point to the relative unimportance of working conditions as factors shaping work satisfaction generally.
Here, research into the attitudes of employed workers to their work does support a parallel.
Herzberg, Mausner and Snyderman observe in their study of The Motivation to Work that the provision of better working conditions has the effect of reducing dissatisfaction but not the effect of producing satisfaction.
Arthur Kornhauser reports for his sample of Detroit car workers that the physical conditions of work appear ‘to have little or no explanatory value in accounting for poorer mental health at lower versus upper job levels’.
In short, then, neither the technical environment of work nor the hours of work the housewife puts in at her job are linked with patterns of work satisfaction and dissatisfaction in the present sample.
But a limited amount of social interaction is related to dissatisfaction with work, as also are feelings of  monotony.
The fragmented nature of housework is an accepted characteristic of it, and for this reason is not a source of dissatisfaction.
Feelings of excessive pace are symptomatic of the housewife who is generally dissatisfied, and do not proceed directly from qualities of housework as work (although frequent time limits are intrinsic to housework and affect attitudes to work tasks).
6 Standards and Routines
‘Work’ has no single definition or shared meaning for the individuals who do it; the meanings of work are as various as the kinds of job that exist.
Nevertheless for most people the idea of work contains some notion of externally imposed constraint.
Even if one's occupation is freely chosen, it usually carries with it a set of rules about what should be done, when, how and to what standards.
A train driver follows printed schedules and rules controlling speed and safety; a typist processes other people's material in accordance with pre-ordained standards of tidiness and literacy; accountants are accountable to their clients and are governed by rules of ‘professional’ conduct, and so forth.
Not so for the housewife.
Housewives, as Chapter 3 showed, are impressed by the freedom from the constraints of externally set rules and supervisions.
However, a consequence of this autonomy is their responsibility for seeing that housework gets done.
The housewife is her own supervisor, the judge of her own performance, and ultimately the source of her own job definition.
The two dimensions of this job definition are standards and routines .
In describing her daily life every woman interviewed outlined the kind of standards she thought it important to stick to in housework, and the type of routine she used to achieve this end.
There was, of course, a great deal of variation between one housewife and another.
Some set what could be called ‘perfectionist’ standards, while others adopted a more casual attitude to order and cleanliness in the home.
For some there were rigid routines repeated in the same way from one day to the next; for others, routines were more flexible.
Different criteria are used in defining standards.
Cleanliness may be the basic aim, with untidiness tolerated; or there may be an attitude of ‘a place for everything and everything in its place’ while the dust under the  beds and the dirt hidden in crevices pass relatively unnoticed.
Two portraits taken from the interviews will illustrate some of these differences.
Barbara Lipscombe, a cheerful, warm, slightly dumpy woman, lives in a rented three-bedroomed house and has three children under five.
She used to be a typist and is married to a car patrolman on shift work.
The house is clean and tidy and most of the Lipscombes' family life takes place in the room off the kitchen, at the back of the house, furnished with a table and chairs, a sofa and a television.
Her day begins like this:
I get up when the children wake up about a quarter to eight.
I get a cooked breakfast, then I always get myself and my little girl washed and dressed first, because I take her to school.
I take her to school, I come back, and my husband shoots off he minds the other two for me while I go to the school.
I get the other two washed and dressed.
Then I like to get the washing in the machine, because I can leave it doing while I'm down the shops.
I go shopping every day, and by the time I come back it's usually time for the baby to have her food at about twelve — and then she usually sleeps till about two, and then I cook lunch for him [the two-year-old]so that in the evening it's a tea, although it's usually a cooked tea.
Usually we've finished with lunch by about a quarter past one.
Then I tidy round.
I make the beds first thing in the morning, but on Thursday I do enough shopping for Friday, so that on Friday I don't go out, I do all my housework.
I go right through the house.
Usually I start in my bedroom and I like to get to the top of the stairs by the baby's lunchtime, and then I stop and give them lunch and then I carry on and get on quite well.
I go through the front room and then I get to this room [the ‘breakfast’ room]and I do the lunch washing up then, and I wait till they go to bed to put the hoover over this room and polish round.
The rest of the week I just sort of tidy round, dust, put the carpet sweeper over — that takes me till a quarter past three, when I go to meet my little girl from school, and I don't very often get much done once she's home…
She goes to play with a little girl up the road, and then it's usually time for the baby's tea.
I feed her and get her washed and undressed and ready for bed and then these two sit down to tea.
If my husband's going to be in about that time we all have it together, but if he's going to be late they have theirs first.
Then quite soon after tea I wash and undress them, so I've finished for the day.
They play around for a bit, and he goes to bed about half past six, and the little girl between  seven and half past — and then I can sit down!
I do the washing up when the children are eating their tea.
Like the other women, Barbara Lipscombe was asked if she had ‘particular ways of doing things’ that she regularly kept to in housework:
I think I like particular standards, but I don't think I always keep them.
I like everything to be clean — not particularly tidy-I like the washing and ironing to be nice — nice and clean and nicely ironed.
If I've got a lot to do I can't actually take as much time as I'd like over it.
I like the beds changed often, which I find is hard to keep up with, because of drying the washing.
(Is it important to you to keep to these standards?)
I find I've got to make excuses for myself if I don't, but I sort of think I've got this to do for the children, and that to do — and I'll have a grand old clean up next week, sort of thing.
It's probably the wrong attitude, but I feel if I can't keep up, I can't keep up, so it doesn't really worry me.
This seems to be a fairly relaxed approach to housework, though the standards set are high ones and housework routines are defined and followed precisely and conscientiously.
The daily schedule is recited almost automatically; Barbara Lipscombe gives the impression that it is well established and almost never disturbed.
A journalist's wife with one child paints a different picture altogether.
Catherine Prince is tall, athletic-looking, easy going and sociable.
Her home — owned on a mortgage — is still in the process of being ‘done up’: some rooms gleam with newly stripped floorboards and pristine white walls, while others have barely been touched.
There is a feeling of disarray about the house; newspapers and books are mixed with the baby's toys and used cups and saucers draw the visitor's attention to the washing up left undone.
I get up about 8.30 — when the baby wakes up.
My husband gets up earlier and makes his own breakfast.
I feed the baby and have something to eat myself and clear up a bit.
About 9.30 I sit down with a cup of coffee to read the paper.
After that I might do some washing — I'd rather do a little each day than a large amount at once.
I tidy the beds.
The baby sleeps for about an hour from 11 till 12 — I'm afraid I read a book then — I don't do very much housework!
When she wakes up we sometimes go shopping — though not every day, by any means; sometimes we don't go at all and sometimes we leave it till the afternoon.
We have lunch between one and two and usually I cook, though if I don't feel like it, I don't bother.
Then I play with the baby and we might go out for a walk or go and see friends — that sort of thing.
From about 3.30 she plays quite happily by herself and I return to my book again!
I give her supper about half past five and then she goes to bed.
I tidy and vacuum the sitting room after she's gone to bed — I don't see any point in doing it in the morning because it'll only get messed up again.
I can't spend much more than ten minutes a day cleaning altogether!
In the evening I get supper and we've eaten and washed up by eight.
After that I knit or do some dressmaking and watch television.
(Would you say you have particular ways of doing things…?)
Yes, I've got very low standards!
You see, I think housework is a waste of time, I don't do it, or I do a minimum.
I do things like making the beds.
(How do you decide which things to do?)
Well, as long as it doesn't make me feel uneasy, I'm a fairly tidy sort of person, so I do make the bed, and sort of tidy up in the bedroom, and I tidy up in here, when she's gone to bed.
But if I don't think ‘Oh God, that's dirty!’ well, then, it's alright.
But if I suddenly think ‘that's a bit dirty,’ then I do it.
These are ‘low’ standards compared to those of many other housewives in the sample, and the routine is there, but it is not anchored nearly so securely to set times of the day as Barbara Lipscombe's.
All this fits in with Catherine Prince's professed anti-housework ideology, in contrast to Barbara Lipscombe's evident dedication to the housewife role.
The forty women were all assessed on this dimension of their approach to housework.
There are three categories: a ‘high’, a ‘medium’ and a ‘low’specification of standards and routines.
‘Specification’ here describes a process of rule-definition to which   housewives either implicitly or explicitly refer when describing their standards and routines; the dictionary definition of ‘specification’is ‘detailed description’.2 Barbara Lipscombe is assessed as having a ‘high’specification, while Catherine Prince has a ‘low’specification of standards and routines.
Table 6.1 shows the spread of these assessments in the whole sample.
Over half the sample have a ‘high’ specification; about a third fall in the ‘medium’category, and the rest are ‘low’.
There are no social class differences.
The specification of standards and routines has four identifiable functions.
First, it provides a means of unifying the collection of heterogeneous tasks that make up housework; dissimilar tasks are knitted together, and some kind of coherent job structure emerges.
Secondly, it serves as proof that housework is work : the spelling out of these rules to be followed places housework in the same category as other work — there are things that simply have to be done.
In this sense, the definition of standards and routines can be seen as a defensive process: the housewife is defending herself against the allegation that she does nothing at all.
Thirdly, rule-specification is a means of ‘job enlargement ’, a process of elaborating housework tasks so they take up endlessly increasing amounts of time.
For the full-time housewife, in particular, standards and routines thus serve to keep the ‘worker’ employed.
And, lastly, the definition of rules for housework establishes a mechanism whereby the housewife can reward herself for doing it.
The housewife receives no wage for her work.
Rewards of a more subtle kind thus have to be substituted.
The husband is one potentially appreciative figure in the housewife's landscape but does he play this role effectively?
Among these forty women, none referred spontaneously to her husband's comments as a source of personal reward for doing housework.
Eight women said their husbands never passed opinions about how the housework had been done:
I think I ought to keep the house clean, but I don't do it for my husband — because quite honestly he doesn't notice whether it's clean or not.
He just takes it for granted that it always looks like this.
(Retail chemist's wife)
Most of the housewives — twenty-four out of the forty — said  that their husbands only commented negatively, never appreciatively.
Linda Farrell's exposition of this tendency generalizes from her husband to all men:
I think if you haven't done something, it's noticed.
If you have done something, it's not noticed.
That's always true isn't it?
I mind.
I once said to him ‘if you can't pay compliments, don't insult’ I think they should do both.
And Jill Duffy's succinct comment summarizes the general situation:
I think if you don't do it, you get more thanks in the end when you do do it.
For housewives who do receive appreciative comments from husbands, this positive reward is often conditional, and therefore hardly an improvement on a situation in which only failure is referred to:
Sometimes when he brings someone home he says ‘the place is looking nice today’.
But he never says that any other time.
(Wife of a driver's mate)
Some reward may be obtained from neighbours' or friends' comments, and some from a comparison of one's own work achievements with those shown in the media.
But in the end the housewife has to encourage and reward herself.
The existence of this self-reward mechanism is demonstrated by the women's answers to a question about how they felt when they had got their work done as they liked it.
These are three typical replies:
I'm more satisfied in my mind when I know it's clean.
Then I can sit down and psychologically I feel relaxed.
Well, proud, I expect.
Happy.
Once it's all finished I can sit back and I think ‘Oh that's lovely’.
Psychological reward is derived from simple adherence to standards and routines which, although originally emanating from the housewife as worker, take on an objective quality.
Of course women do not define these housework rules entirely in isolation from other influences.
Media advertising almost certainly has an effect, and so does the prior socialization of women for domesticity.
But these sources do not themselves set standards  and routines which are automatically taken up and followed.
The paradox is that although standards and routines are, in the first instance, subjectively defined, they become curiously externalized.
The housewife refers to them as external obligations to which she feels a deep need to conform.
A second paradox follows.
This process of objectification effectively robs the housewife of her much-prized autonomy.
She becomes bound by the constraints of pre-set work rhythms.
The top of the cooker mustn't look dirty, whatever happens.
So I clean it after every meal.
(Policeman's wife)
One thing that must be done is that my place must look respectable by 11 a.m. so that if anybody does come in, it looks tidy.
(Accountant's wife)
A further implication is that, although standards and routines provide a basis for self-reward in housework, they also make possible less happy outcomes.
‘Guilty’, ‘worried’, ‘miserable’ and ‘depressed’are the words which women use to express their responses to a situation in which they do not get their work done ‘as it should be done’:
If I've got a routine I like to try and keep to it, otherwise I get very disorganized and upset.
I feel very inadequate if I can't live up to the standards that I have and I start to feel guilty as well.
(Cinema manager's wife)
If the floor needs washing, okay, I won't wash it, but I know it needs washing and it'll go on nagging me until I've washed it — so you can't win really.
(Lorry driver's wife)
This phrase, ‘you can't win really’ sums up the problem well.
What, then, is the relationship between the specification of standards and routines and work satisfaction?
In Table 6.2 the two sets of figures are given.
The percentage of work-satisfied housewives is higher in the group with a high specification and lower in the group with a medium or low specification.
It is possible to say on the basis of these figures that the higher the specification, the more likely it is that the housewife will be satisfied.
Yet less than half the women with a high specification are satisfied with work.
One explanation here is that, rather than a high specification of standards and routines being a direct route to the achievement of satisfaction, it is instead symptomatic of the search for satisfaction .
In Chapter 4 the discrepancy between responses to the question ‘Do you like housework?’ and the assessment of work satisfaction led to an explanation of these responses as (in part) expressive of norms to do with feminine domesticity and as indicative of two alternative approaches to housework: the search for satisfaction and the recognition of dissatisfaction.
Those who said they ‘liked’ or ‘didn't mind’housework seemed to be asserting their attachment to the norms of feminine satisfaction with housewifery.
If the explanation of a high standards and routines specification as symptomatic of the desire to be satisfied is correct, one would expect some relationship between this measure and answers to the ‘Do you like housework?’ question.
Table 6.3 shows the relationship.
On the basis of this table, it can be said that the two variables are connected: a woman who declares a positive attitude to housework is likely also to have a high specification of standards and routines.
This whole question of housework behaviour raises an interesting issue: in what sense can a housewife who has very high standards and extremely repetitive routines be considered ‘pathologically’ obsessed with housework?
In common parlance the ‘houseproud’ housewife is perfectionist in her approach to housework, but the term itself carries neither strong negative nor strong positive connotations.
The psychiatrist John Cooper has carried out some work on the personality characteristics of ‘houseproud’ women.
He compared three groups of people: houseproud housewives, people suffering from chronic obsessional illness, and ‘normal’ women.
Cooper's method was to give the three groups an inventory of questions dealing with obsessional traits and symptoms; his results showed that the mean symptom score of the houseproud women fell between those of the normal women and the group of obsessional patients.
Two scales of ‘resistance’ and ‘interference’, designed to measure the intensity of obsessional distress and the intrusion of symptoms on other activities, produced a similar result.
Cooper's conclusion is that houseproud housewives are ‘abnormal’ in the sense that their behaviour has something in common with that of obsessionally ill people.
Some of the women with a high specification of standards and routines in the present sample did, indeed, demonstrate a strong emotional involvement in housework and their ‘guilt’, ‘worry’ or ‘anxiety’about failures to meet housework standards does suggest some of the obsessional symptoms manifested by the patients in Cooper's survey.
Jill Duffy, an ex-shop assistant married to a painter and decorator, is one of these women.
She has two children aged three years and eight months, and her home is a two-room basement flat.
It has a small kitchen and an outside lavatory, and the bathroom is shared with other people in the house.
Heating is by means of one oil fire and a coal fire in the evenings.
She has no refrigerator or washing machine, but she does have a vacuum cleaner.
The flat is dark and somewhat damp but is meticulously clean and tidy.
About housework she says:
I love it.
(Cleaning?)
I just like it.
I'm just happy when I'm doing it.
(Washing?)
I love doing my own washing.
I don't believe in washing machines.
(Why do you like it?)
I don't know.
I just like it.
I like to see what I've done.
I do it every day — I hate leaving it.
If I did leave it, I'd stay up in the evening to do it, it'd be on my conscience…
I wish I didn't have to do it…
I wish I had the nerve just to leave it, but I can't.
Here is part of her description of daily routine, together with some observations about the kind of standards she has (I have used italics to draw attention to particular ‘perfectionist’ remarks):
I go shopping after I've fed the baby every morning, and then I come back and start my work.
I can always find something to do .
I very seldom sit down — my God, I don't know where to start!
I do my bedroom out every day — sweep it and dust the furniture and I do something else every day, like I dust the tops of the cupboards or I give the wardrobe a polish.
Every second day I wash out this room — because it's only lino.
And every fortnight I wash the curtains — the net ones and the heavy ones too.
(So you don't do both rooms every day?)
Oh I do.
I could hoover this one twenty times a day .
I always feed Sharon [the three year old]because if she feeds herself she gets it everywhere and the place is all messed up, and I have to clean it again .
It's the same when people come.
If they drop cigarette ash or crumbs on the carpet I'm out with the hoover again.
I wash every day and Sunday as well.
I never miss a day of my life with washing on the line .
I know my standards have dropped because with Sharon I used to change her clothes twice a day.
I really used to keep her lovely.
I only change Roberta's clothes once a day…
When my husband takes his shirts off I have to wash them straight away — like he wears two shirts on Sunday and I wash them as soon as he takes them off.
(What do you do in the evenings?)
I only sit down when he comes in and he's not in much.
Friday night and Saturday night are my busy nights.
Friday night I wash the carpets — I start about 10 p.m. and finish about midnight .
Saturday night I always do the gas oven out.
The other nights when he isn't in I go into the kitchen and I find something to do — I clear the cupboards out or something.
(Would you say you have particular ways of doing things…?)
I suppose I have high standards but some others are as good as me.
My landlady doesn't spend nearly as much time doing housework, but her place is always clean and nice  when you go into it.
Some people don't do anything — some people's places really aren't clean…well, this one isn't very, but I keep it the best I can.
Jill Duffy is certainly highly involved with the state of her home and she does a great deal of housework that many other people would consider unnecessary.
Her response to ‘free’ time is to fill it with more housework, and her housework ideals shape the way she brings up her children (the insistence on not letting a messy three year old feed herself, for example).
However, rather than seeing Jill Duffy and others like her as ‘pathologically obsessed’ with housework (and thus as unrepresentative of the wider housewife population) it makes more sense to view their behaviour as a rational response to a problematic situation.
In the pursuit of housework satisfaction an impression of perfectionism is easily created.
Because self-reward is gained through meeting standards and sticking to set routines, in the long run the tendency is to raise standards and elaborate routines so that self-reward may continue to be achieved.
The definition of high standards and repetitive routines to be followed in housework is a means of ‘job enlargement’.
In industry the purpose of this process is to make work more interesting, through the restructuring of the components of a work role — either by increasing the number of operations that each worker has to perform or by making changes from one activity to another more frequent.
The same idea of raising the satisfaction potential of work lies behind the housewife's elaboration of her work.
In her case, the function is not the straightforward reduction of repetitiveness, but rather the creation of constantly rising expectations which she can then try to meet.
Neither Jill Duffy nor any other of the high specification women in the present sample were receiving medical treatment for obsessional symptoms at the time of interview.
Moreover, slight degrees of guilt/worry/anxiety about failures to observe housework standards and routines were also expressed by some women in the low specification group.
In Cooper's own survey, the test scores of the houseproud housewives were closer to those of the normal women than to those of the obsessional patients.
A further important point is that on two scores — the overall symptom score and the resistance score — there was a difference between the normal women and a group of normal men who  were also given the inventory.
The normal women showed more obsessional symptoms and more obsessional distress than the normal men.
This suggests that the personal identification of women with the housewife role weights the balance in favour of a psychological involvement in housework.
A high specification of housework rules can be seen as a common response to a common problem — the problem being how to make sense of work that is intrinsically unsatisfying under conditions where less and less of it need be done (through automation, ‘convenience’ foods, better housing conditions, etc), but where the structural pressures which assign women to the home remain as strong as ever.
One consequence of ‘job enlargement’ in the housewife's case is an increase in working hours.
This facet of housework, discussed in the previous chapter, is unrelated to such factors as number of children, technical aids and amenities, and so on.
But there is an association between the kind of standards and routines followed in housework and the amount of time spent doing it.
Jill Duffy's psychological involvement in housework, for example, manifests itself in a 105-hour week.
The relationship between standards and routines and working hours in the sample as a whole is shown in Table 6.4.
‘Housewifery expands to fill the time available’— this principle was discovered by Betty Friedan in her 1950s tour of American suburbia.
The trend towards rising standards certainly provides an explanation of why housework hours have shown no notable decrease in recent years; pre-prepared foodstuffs, household  machines and equipment, and cleaner more comfortable homes do not necessarily reduce the housewife's work-load.
Betty Friedan cites an apt illustration of this:
The automatic clothes dryer does not save a woman the four or five hours a week she used to spend at the clothes line, if, for instance, she runs her washing machine and dryer every day…
As a young mother said, ‘Clean sheets twice a week are now possible.
Last week, when my dryer broke down, the sheets didn't get changed for eight days.
Everyone complained.
We all felt dirty.
I felt guilty.
Isn't that silly?’
Silly it may be, but it is only by considering the way women define their job as housewives that the housewife's long working hours can be understood.
This is one reason why standards and routines represent an important dimension of housework behaviour.
But, more fundamentally, the unique quality of housework as a job is precisely this dimension of self-definition.
It explains why housework is apparently so different from, and yet is experienced by women as so similar to, other jobs.
A lack of structure is intrinsic to housework; thus a psychological structure is imported to it.
Women enter into a form of covert contract with themselves to be their own bosses, judges and reward-givers.
Gaining coherence and self-reward in their work, autonomy is relinquished and creativity constrained.
To understand the processes behind the definition of housework rules it is necessary to look more closely at the way in which women identify with the role of housewife; this is the subject of the next chapter.
7 Socialization and Self-Concept
The complex definitions of housework standards and routines described in the last chapter are not simply created as a response to the job situation; they antedate the time of ‘becoming a housewife’.
Their roots lie in the lessons of childhood, when girls learn to equate their femaleness with domesticity and female identities are moulded round the housewife image.
The performance of the housewife role in adulthood is prefaced by a long period of apprenticeship.
Housework is not unique in this respect: other occupations also have apprenticeship schemes.
But a female's induction into the domestic role unlike these other schemes — lacks a formal structure, and consequently is rarely seen as an occupational apprenticeship.
A main reason for this is that preparation for housewifery is intermingled with socialization for the feminine gender role in the wider sense.
Neither in theory nor in practice is one process distinguishable from the other.
While the female's childhood preparation for domesticity is ‘informal’, there are, nevertheless, regular procedures involved which span many of the differences between groups in our society and act as a common denominator in the socialization of women.
The American sociologist Ruth Hartley, in her study of feminine role development, has identified four of these processes.
They are ‘socialization by manipulation’, ‘verbal appellation’, ‘canalization’ and ‘activity exposure’.
An example of the first process is a mother's tendency to ‘fuss’ over a female child's appearance and to stress her prettiness —‘You are a pretty little girl’.
The child takes over the mother's view of itself; verbal appellations reinforce the manipulative process.
Canalization  involves the direction of attention on to particular objects — in this case toys of the domestic kind: miniature washing machines, cookers, dustpan and brush sets, and so forth.
(The world-famous toy department store in London, Hamleys of Regent Street, has a whole floor called ‘The Little Housewife’.)
Children are often socially rewarded for playing with toys of the appropriate gender, and this process lays down the basis of future adult pleasure in relation to similar objects — full-size washing machines, cookers and dustpan and brush sets.
Lastly, there is actual exposure to adult activities in childhood.
The future housewife is encouraged to participate in her mother's domestic activities — to help with the washing up, make the beds or lay the table.
These processes are all confirmed outside the family context.
Recently various writers have drawn attention to the domesticated image of women put over in the mass media, in textbooks and reading books for children, and in school curricula.
Schools also encourage girls to play ‘domestic’ games and to behave in appropriately feminine ways.
The latter goal may be achieved either indirectly, through teachers' attitudes, or, more directly, through the sex-segregation of play areas and particular activities.
On a more general level, differences between adult feminine and masculine roles which persist as a (more or less) uniform feature of our society have a pervasive effect on the gender role perceptions and preferences children develop.
For girls caught up in this nexus of processes, the effect is that the feminine role, the ‘little housewife’ role and self-definition are blended together in an ‘unselfconscious complex of unobstructed behaviour’.
Through the integration of feminine role learning with self-definition, housekeeping behaviours tend to be developed as personality functions.
There may be very little awareness of their connection with sex status.
As Ruth Hartley sums it up:
with imitative activity filling the gap until the child is able to participate meaningfully as a partner in home-centred behaviours, the definition of this aspect of the female sex role [the domestic one]seems to proceed without interruption and with continuous reinforcement from the cradle on.
These abstract generalizations take on substance in the words of many of the women interviewed in the present study.
Faith  Abraham, who used to work in a factory making artificial jewellery, is married to a labourer; she was born and brought up in Ireland:
We lived on a farm.
My mother looked after the chickens.
She was always busy — I've got seven sisters and three brothers.
She used to do the cooking but we washed up, tidied up, made the beds and swept the floors.
She wouldn't let us do the washing — she said we didn't wash properly.
She loved doing the washing herself.
My mother likes housework — she's a great housewife, very clean.
When we were seven or eight we could clear the place up as good as my Mum…but I've seen some girls — like my aunt's little girl and she's fifteen, she's just hopeless.
She can't do a thing around the house.
(What do you think about that?)
I think it's terrible — she's just lazy.
My sisters are all like me — they like cleaning, we're all alike in that way.
(Your brothers?)
My brothers didn't have to do housework!
Of her own housework behaviour she said earlier in the interview:
I like cleaning…ironing is the only thing I don't like really.
I like shopping.
I like cooking.
(Why?)
I just like it.
I like washing up…
I like washing — I wouldn't like to wash sheets and blankets and things, but I don't mind doing the children's things…
(Would you say you have particular ways of doing things…?)
Yes, I think so.
I like to keep the place tidy and clean.
I think when we were young we always had to do housework really.
There were such a lot of us…
I think that's why I like children — because there was always somebody smaller than me and I had to do everything for them really when I was younger — feed them, change their nappies…
(When you were young, do you remember whether you wanted to be like your mother?)
I did always want to get married.
I used to say I'd love to get married and have children.
In this brief account three main aspects of Faith Abraham's socialization are mentioned: the direct rehearsal of housework tasks in childhood: a more general imitation of the mother as role model; and the repetition of the mother's housework behaviour in the daughter's own.
The section of the interview dealing with housework standards and routines was one in which references to the mother were very frequent.
For example:
I have the same standards as my mother.
If anything needs doing, she does it.
You don't have to look around and say ‘that needs doing’ because it's done.
I always try to model myself on her .
(Food wholesaler's wife)
Such references also tended to crop up in the earlier discussion of attitudes to particular tasks: this comment of Jean Bevan's is representative:
I like washing.
I like to see washing out on the line — especially sheets and the boy's shirts.
I think this is a bit of my mother — she's extremely particular, my mother.
(Office manager's wife)
One woman traced her like of cooking not only back to her mother but to her grandmother.
The word ‘inherited’ is used here and the biological analogy is perhaps not inappropriate: a series of close mother-daughter relationships presents an invaluable opportunity for the perpetuation of feminine domesticity.
The mother may exert an influence even if she is not a ‘perfect’ housewife.
This is brought out in the answers Joanna Giles gave to the question about standards:
Housework-wise, I think I've got pretty low standards.
But my mother's never been a great one for housework and I think my standards are probably like hers…as long as things don't get filthy, I'm happy, but a lot of people wouldn't be satisfied with that.
Also important is the fact that the attitude formed may be either one of continuing imitation or of direct rebellion against the mother's standards.
Both are aspects of the same process:
My mother's a terrible housewife.
She's very muddly and disorganized and I can see so clearly where she falls wrong…when I lived at home it was always a bit of a nightmare because I was always trying to get things straight.
(Juliet Warren, wife of a television documentary director)
The attempt to reverse one's mother's disorder is one form of rebellion, though its obverse — a general relaxation of maternal housework standards — is also possible:
(Would you say you have particular ways of doing things…?)
Yes — keeping the kitchen clean…and also the meals I cook, but not very high standards where tidiness and dust are concerned…
I'm improving — in fact I used to be much worse.
My mother doesn't work outside the home.
She's very houseproud — obsessional.
She's not a happy person.
(Dorothy Underwood, a cinema manager's wife)
The point is that in each case the woman is defining her own housework behaviour with reference to that of her mother.
Maternal influence is paramount.
To put it another way, mothers are by far the most important ‘significant others’ so far as housework behaviour is concerned.
For this reason an assessment was made for all the forty women of their levels of identification with the housewife role.
This is defined as a condition in which the responsibility for housework is felt as a feminine, and therefore a personal attribute, normally as a result of a childhood identification with the mother as role model.
The spread of identification levels across three categories —‘high’, ‘medium’ and ‘low’— is shown in Table 7.1 in relation to social class grouping.
There are no social class differences in this crucial area.
Very similar childhood experiences are recalled by the forty women as influential in the formation of housework attitudes; this similarity is illustrated in the following two quotations, one from a ‘working-class’, and one from a ‘middle-class’ interview:
Anything my mother did was fine by me.
Kids get idols — well, my mother was mine, and I'm not ashamed to say she still is, and she can't do anything wrong in my book.
She's all for the finishing touches on everything.
She's a fantastic cook, which I've followed in her footsteps.
She does everything right; when I was young I helped with my small sister — she was born when I was fourteen — and I helped with the housework of course.
From about the age of ten I remember that.
I was scruffy until then — after that I was houseproud!
I get on well with my mother.
I'd love to be like my mother.
(Lorry driver's wife)
My mother was very particular.
She still is.
You could eat off the floor in her house.
When I was fourteen I can remember being constantly nagged by her — our bedrooms were always untidy.
It's terrible but I find I do exactly the same with my children now: they come in from school and everything is dropped and I say ‘pick them up’ and I try to stop nagging them because I remember how much I hated it.
But I think it does influence you…
I remember coming home from school and before you could do homework or go out to play there were always chores to do — you know, our own set of chores.
We knew it had to be done and we used to accept it.
She was a hard worker, and I call myself a hard worker and I know that some days I push myself too hard and my mother's done that all her life.
(Food technologist's wife)
The conclusion that middle- and working-class women share similar levels of domestic role-identification provokes an important question.
How is it compatible with other findings of social class differences in domesticity — both those discussed in Chapter 4 and those suggested by other writers?
One explanation is that there are social class differences of a more superficial kind which overlay the similarity in role-identification patterns.
In discussing (below) answers given by the women in my sample to a test of self-attitudes, I shall present some evidence in favour of this interpretation.
There are also indications from other sources that women's basic allegiance to the housewife role is not class-dependent.
One American study of primary school girls found a class similarity in the range of behaviours, including domestic behaviours, perceived as feminine.
Although some social class differences in preferences for certain domestic activities were found middle-class women were more likely to dislike domestic service activities such as washing floors and dishes — the more fundamental sense of these as a feminine responsibility persisted.
Another kind of ‘test case’ is the dual career family.
Where both husband and wife have substantial commitments to the job world, one might expect domestic responsibilities to be shared.
This would be evidence against the present finding that identification with the housewife role is not differentiated by class.
However according to the Rapoports' analysis of the dual career family, women remain the domesticated individuals.
The diaries charted by the Rapoports portray a frenetic picture of  the career-woman-housewife-mother desperately chasing all her duties simultaneously.
The women's daily routines contain a far higher proportion of domestic interruptions than do those of the men.
For example, Mrs Benson, an architect married to an architect (they both work at home), begins her description of a weekday thus:
7.55 Remind son of time
8.45 Mend daughter's nightdress
9.15 Organize a party and the day's laundry
9.45 Go to shops, laundry, chemist — thread, plant, fish, buns, polish
11.05 Get office coffee, hang out day's laundry
11.40 Work finally started
During the same period Mr Benson got up at nine, read his mail, started his office work at ten, and worked through till lunch at one.
A dilution of women's traditional commitment to the housewife role is, then, rare even in those families where there is symmetry between husband and wife on the paid job dimension.
The Rapoports comment that the dual career pattern is actually liable to induce a reaction of overconscientious adherence to conventional gender role stereotypes in domestic areas.
The woman responds to the negative image of the cold, ‘masculine’, competitive female, and her enduring dedication to the ‘responsible housewife’ pattern is a denial of gender role deviation and an affirmation of women's domesticated conditioning.
Beyond these specific studies there is little support for the view that the domestic theme in women's general situation has been substantially muted over recent decades.
Employment figures show the continuing ‘domesticity’ of women's work roles: the bulk of women workers in all industrialized countries are in teaching, nursing, shop work, clerical work and factories making domestic products like clothes and food.
In Britain the concentration of women workers in traditional female occupations has increased, not diminished, over the last ten years or so.
The expansion of educational and professional training opportunities for women has done very little to alter the concentration of female professionals in ‘domestic’ professions: most professional women are still teachers or nurses — both jobs closely allied with the traditionally ‘nurturant’role of women.
One particular connection between the socialization of women and their later performance of the housewife role is elucidated by the present research data.
Comments already cited from the forty interviews have demonstrated that women are often aware of a link between their own ways of doing housework and those of their mothers.
This link can be more precisely stated.
Table 7.2 shows that there is an association between the level of a housewife's identification with the housewife role and the degree to which she specifies standards and routines for housework performance.
Most of the women who are high on one measure are high on the other, and those who are low tend to show the same symmetry.
This connection between the two factors suggests that the nature of a woman's early relationship to the housewife role helps to shape her own housework behaviour in later life.
What are the precise mechanisms involved in this process?
An experimental study of children's behaviour outlines a possible answer.
In this study forty children with a mean age of four years and five months were divided into two groups: one group received ‘nurturant’ behaviour from a role model, while the other group was exposed to a non-nurturant relationship.
The children were next asked to perform a two-choice discrimination problem — deciding which of two boxes contained a picture sticker — with a model who exhibited ‘functionless’ behaviour during the discrimination trials, that is behaviour not related to the stated task-goal (finding the sticker).
The conclusion was that ‘children display a good deal of social learning of an incidental imitative sort , and that nurturance is one condition facilitating such  imitative learning’.
In particular, during the discrimination trials, the children ‘dutifully’ followed the example set by the model, even when she took an indirect route to the boxes, which more than doubled the distance to be travelled and ‘was clearly incompatible with the subjects’eagerness to get to the containers'.
A parallel with this behaviour can be found in the present study.
Many of the women made it clear in the interviews that their concern is not simply to get housework done in the most efficient way and the shortest possible time.
Instead, they are bound up in the replication of previously set standards and routines which may actually frustrate the straightforward goal of simply getting housework done.
To the extent that these ways of behaving are inherited from the mother, it can be hypothesized that they are not directly taught from mother to daughter: rather they are indirectly and unconsciously assimilated.
The ‘nurturant’ child-caring relationship that exists between housewives and housewives-to-be serves to make this assimilation more likely than not.
The learning lesson of domesticity sets up what is essentially a relationship between self (feminine) and role (housewife).
Is a conception of self as housewife in fact articulated as part of the self-image?
About half way through the interview, the forty women were given a test of ‘self-attitudes’ developed by the American sociologists Manford H. Kuhn and Thomas S. McPartland, which provides data on this point.
In its original form the test consists simply of asking respondents to complete the sentence beginning with ‘I am…’ twenty times over.
In the present study the number of statements required was cut to ten, because the test was just one item in rather a long interview.
The women were handed a sheet of paper on which the words ‘I am…’ appeared in a sequence numbered from one to ten.
They were asked to write their statements down as quickly as possible and to answer as though describing themselves to themselves rather than to anybody else.
According to Kuhn and McPartland, this procedure overcomes one weakness of direct questions aimed at uncovering people's self-images, which is that
they provide no way of measuring the salience of an attitude; we never know whether the attitude would have been expressed at all, or in the same way, apart from the direct question…
When a respondent, in reply to the ‘who am I?’ question of the Twenty Statements Test writes ‘I am a man’, ‘I am a student’…it is reasonable to believe that we have far more solid knowledge of the attitudes which organize and direct his behaviour than if, on a checklist and among other questions, we had asked ‘do you think of yourself as a man?’
‘Do you think of yourself as a student?’
The particular dimension of the self-concept to which the test is oriented is thus that of salience .
Kuhn and McPartland believe that ‘the ordering of responses is a reflection of the makeup of the self-concept’.
In their use of the test it was found that the order of salience of certain roles varied between different cultural groups.
Ethnic group status was mentioned earlier in the case of negroes than it was in the case of white people, and gender role was mentioned earlier in the test and more often by women than by men.
Each one of the forty women made some attempt to complete the test, though the number of statements made varied from three to eleven, with an average of 8.03 out of the desired ten per respondent.
There were some clear social class differences in their answers.
One difference was that working-class women were more likely to describe themselves as housewives and to give ‘domestic’ responses generally.
Altogether twenty-five of the forty wrote ‘I am a housewife’ at some point in the test and seventeen of these were working class.
Table 7.3 gives the relevant figures.
These answers from a salesman's wife and a plasterer's wife are typical of this group; Linda Farrell writes:
I am a housewife
I am a mother
I am ordinary
I am a wife
I am happy
I am reasonably attractive
I am a sister
I am a neighbour
I am a friend
I am sociable
and Marilyn Thornton describes herself thus:
I am a housewife
I am a mother
I am a slave 
I am energetic
I am a good worker
I am broadminded
I am nearly thirty
In fact, most of the women who describe themselves as housewives do so very early in the test; twenty of the twenty-five ‘I am a housewife’ statements occur in the first two places.
One problem with the evaluation of these results is the possibility that the women who described themselves as housewives did so because this was an interview about housework.
Even if some process of this kind was at work, one still has to explain the differences between women's responses — why did some women describe themselves as housewives and others not?
Can this ‘contamination’ explain the social class patterning of the responses, for instance?
Since the majority of the women were full-time housewives, some self-categorization as housewives can, in any case, be predicted.
The apparently greater salience to working-class women of self-conceptualization as a housewife is confirmed by a look at overall ‘domestic’ responses.
Other statements such as‘I am a slave’‘I am a good worker’(referring to housework) are also statements of affiliation to the domestic role.
Table 7.4 shows these statements and also ‘personality’ descriptions ('I am a happy person') and statements of mood ('I am depressed').
The majority of statements in every category of ‘domestic’ responses are in fact made by working-class women.
Shirley Archer's list of statements illustrates the working-class stress on   domesticity: here it is contrasted with Elizabeth Gould's more typically middle-class capacity to see herself in other terms:
I am a good housewife
I am good to my children
I am good at housework
I am good to my husband
I am good at washing
I am fed up at times
I am bad tempered at times
I am very happy with my work
I am happy with my children
I am seldom unhappy
(Shirley Archer)
I am moody
I am hard working
I am someone who talks too much
I am happy most of the time
I am a satisfied person
I am someone who needs other people all the time
I am a person who loves going out
I am often over bossy
I am a dreamer
I am a worrier
(Elizabeth Gould)
The first of these lists contains virtually no description of individual personality.
Statements six and seven describe mood being ‘fed up’ and ‘bad tempered’.
The last three statements are assertions of contentment, but only three statements — numbers six, seven and ten — do not refer in some way to domestic work or the work environment.
But Elizabeth Gould's self-concept hardly refers to her domestic situation at all— except perhaps for the statement ‘I am hard working’.
What she is describing are characteristics of herself as a person, qualities of her own individual personality.
This tendency she shares with other women in the middle-class group; the middle-class rate of personality descriptions is twice that of the working-class group.
The Ten Statements Test thus appears to reveal social class differences in self-concept of an unambiguous kind.
To retain any coherence in the research findings it is necessary to reconcile this conclusion with the fundamental similarity between working-class and middle-class women on the dimension of identification with the housewife role.
There are three parts to the explanation.
Firstly, the measure of ‘identification’ and the answers to the Ten Statements Test are probably tapping two different dimensions.
Identification is a profound conformity-base, a fundamental and enduring facet of personality.
According to the classical definition, identification is the major process leading to internalization, and internalization is ‘a condition of incorporation of norms and/or roles into one's own personality, with a corresponding obligation to act accordingly or suffer guilt’.
When a norm is internalized, it is part of a person, automatically expressed in behaviour, rather than regarded in a more detached way as a rule external to the self.
Actual statements about the self (such as those obtained in the Ten Statements Test) may not refer to this dimension at all, but instead relate to the psycho-linguistic question of the extent to which self and (housewife) role are differentiated in the self-concept.
We thus return, for the second part of the explanation, to the issue of class differentiation in linguistic styles discussed in Chapter 4.
Following the lines laid down there, and using Bernstein's work on class and language codes, we could say that a language of explicit meaning (broadly speaking, the middle-class code) is a language in which what is expressed  is ‘a function of the psychological qualities of the person’.
But a language of implicit meaning (the working-class code) raises the ‘we’ above the ‘I’and encourages an assertion of role conformity.
While all women are socialized for domesticity in much the same way — by identifying with their mothers (and/or other adult women) as housewives, internalizing the conviction that they must be housewives in their turn — for the working-class woman the linguistic process of role learning is such that ‘I’ becomes part of the role.
To put it somewhat differently, conceptual differentiation of self from role is inhibited by the mode of language use which mediates the process of role learning.
Where this language stresses shared structure and identification ‘all women are housewives’— individuation becomes both less important and less possible.
A third consideration draws attention to the association between answers to the Ten Statements Test, and another set of factors.
In Chapter 4 social class differences in responses to the question ‘Do you like housework?’ were noted.
The social class difference in statements of self-concept parallels the social class difference in statements of attitudes to housework; there is a close association between the two variables, as shown in Table 7.5.
This relationship does suggest that the syndrome of class-differentiated response styles (and the related question of class-differentiated norms of feminine domesticity) may be responsible for  the difference in mentions of the housewife role by class.
Since answers to the Ten Statements Test represent, in part, expressed affiliations to the housewife role, language and subcultural norms relating to women's satisfaction with housework are likely to be important.
(While, on the other hand, an assessment of identification with the housewife role by the interviewer is relatively free of these complications.)
This interpretation of class differences in answers to the Ten Statements Test — as entirely compatible with class similarities in domestic role-identification — does not, of course, mean that answers to the test have no meaning or importance in their own right.
Conception of oneself as a housewife or not is liable to influence a woman's behaviour in a variety of ways.
For example, it is probably important in relation to educational or occupational choices; it may affect the nature of the marriage relationship, and also, very possibly, the way in which a mother brings up her daughters.
For these kinds of reasons, the finding that a significant minority of the forty women have a self-concept which is highly domesticated is an important one.
Shirley Archer's list of statements, already quoted, is one example.
Her amplification of the statement ‘I am a housewife’ to the later ‘I am a good housewife’sets a pattern followed by others:
I am a woman
I am a housewife
I am a mother
I am happy
I am a good housewife
(Olive Brennan, a factory hand's wife)
I am a housewife
I am going to the shop
I am a mother
I am a good housewife
I am a mother of four children
I am a hard worker
I am a wife
I am a good cleaner
I am a good washer
I am always working
(Janet Gallagher, wife of a driver's mate)
I am a very busy housewife
I am always on the go 
I am not lazy
I am a good housewife, I think
I am a soft person
I am very fond of style [fashion]
I am all for my children
I am fond of shopping
I am fond of washing
I am fond of cleaning
(Jill Duffy, a painter and decorator's wife)