

Italy as the white rhino
One of the wonders of the world, the Colosseum in Rome, is falling down.
Last month a thirty-foot stretch of the walls of Urbino actually did fall down, provoking a ritual wailing and breast-beating in the Italian press last heard when the bell tower of Pavia cathedral collapsed in 1989, killing three bystanders.
It seems that the country which boasts of having more art that any other European country, and thereby justifies having some of the most restrictive laws in Europe to stop the export of works of art, is incapable of looking after this unparalleled wealth.
In 1986 an official report recorded that over a thousand monuments were in urgent need of restoration or protection from pollution.
These include the Certosa of Pavia, the entire historic centre of Orvieto, the Roman theatre in Verona, the whole of Venice (the news has just arrived that the cupola of the Salute church is giving way) and the buildings on the islands in the lagoon, and the Giotto frescoes in the Scrovegni chapel in Padua.
It has not been possible to take one  building off this list in the intervening six years.
The reason why there is so little progress is horribly tangled up in the overall failure of Italy's public life, a failure which is arousing mounting concern among her EC partners.
At its basis is the stale-mate of the party political system which has perverted its raison d'ëtre into mere self-perpetuation the same stale-mate which led to Italy still being without a government three months after the April elections.
It has to do with the underfunding of the Ministero per i Beni Culturali, the ministry for the heritage and arts, which receives only 0.19% of the national budget.
It has to do with short-term planning and public accounting systems, which mean that, although money can in theory be voted for projects over a number of years, in practice, it usually arrives in annual dribs and drabs.
It has to do with the pervasive corruption in public life, now at last being revealed in Milan, which favours large, one-off projects over mere maintenance because they allow more opportunities for douceurs.
It has to do with Italy's terrifying national public deficit, estimated at L 34,000 billion, which on 26 May led to the money voted by Parliament at the end of January being frozen until October; this means, for example, that Venice, Italy's most fragile urban and artistic organism, which was to have had L450 billion spent on its infrastructure this year, is once again unable, for example , to dredge its canals, essential if the city is to avoid being flooded next time there is a high tide.
This is not a matter of merely local concern, like the incompetence of the postal services.
Italy's art is the world's art, as any text book makes plain.
If Italian politicians cannot be moved to action by protests from within their own country, it is up to us outside Italy to turn on the pressure in the world media.
Universities and museums abroad should each publicly ‘adopt’ a slice of Italy's artistic patrimony and become its watchdog and lobby-force.
This has worked in the past: in 1990 the indignation of the world's intelligentsia stopped the plan to make Venice the site of Expo 2000 when most Italians had resigned themselves to its being inevitable.
Institutions might even consider sanctions: museums could refuse to lend to an exhibition if the public body behind it is falling down in its conservation duties (a recent likely candidate for boycotting would have been the Titian exhibition in Venice in 1989).
The message of the Rio summit has been (as if we didn't already know it) that this is a small and fragile world and where conservation is concerned, everything is everybody's business and that doesn't just apply to the white rhino but to the artistic patrimony as well.
Italy's honour is being saved at the moment by the private sector; local industries and banks are adopting projects, and although the choice of priorities is not always beyond criticism, their efforts shame the government's.
Who has just declared that they will save the Colosseum?
The Banca di Roma, and to the tune of L40 billion.
London
‘I am glad that one of the first things
I have been able to do as Minister is to remove the spectre of listing’
David Mellor, head of Britain's new Department of National Heritage, rejects listing for control of art exports
LONDON.
David Mellor, Secretary of State for the new Department of National Heritage, has rejected the listing of key works of art in order to keep them in the country.
This definitively scotches a proposal which the previous Minister for the Arts, Tim Renton, had asked museum directors and the Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works of Art to consider (see The Art Newspaper No.11, October 1991, p.1).
In reply to a written Parliamentary question in the House of Commons on 5 June David Mellor said ‘Listing would represent a diminution in the rights of owners to dispose of their property as they saw fit.
And prohibition upon the export of outstanding heritage items would distort the market value, both for outstanding items and others’.
The Reviewing Committee has recommended that a further £15–20 million be made available to buy works of art threatened with export for the nation.
In the current economic climate Mellor was reluctant to say whether he would be able to obtain the extra funding from the Treasury.
Instead, at a press briefing, he made it clear that he would be looking to private benefactors to come to the rescue in extreme cases, and pointing to the successful purchases of ‘Portrait of a lady with a squirrel and a starling’ by Holbein for the National Gallery (see The Art Newspaper No. 16, March 1992, p.1) and Canaletto's ‘The Old Horse Guards, London, from St James's Park’by Andrew Lloyd-Webber (see The Art Newspaper No.19 June 1992, p. 3).
Private treaty sales such as secured the Holbein would be encouraged by the government, as would the acceptance of significant objects in lieu of tax, whereby inheritance tax or death duties are offset by gifts of works of art to the nation.
The spectre of listing was blamed earlier this year for the number of important works of art from historic collections to have come onto the London market over a short period.
It was clear then that there are not enough funds, either public or private, to cope with such a flood onto the market.
An equally serious prospect is now looming as disastrous losses at Lloyd's mean that Sotheby's and Christie's are currently besieged by bankrupt Names (see The Art Newspaper No. 19, June 1990, p.18) anxious to sell works of art as soon as possible.
It is believed that the National Gallery has committed its entire purchase grant for the next three years towards the cost of the Holbein and, given the fact that purchase grants for national museums have been frozen since 1985, other museums are similarly powerless both to acquire when the works come onto the market, and to match their export price when their licences are suspended.
It will be another two years before the proposed national lottery will make any extra funds available (the sum suggested is £1 billion to be divided between sports facilities, the restoration of historic buildings and buying art treasures).
In the meanwhile, the British system devised by Lord Waverley forty years ago to retain the works of art most essential to Britian's artistic and historical heritage will be a largely pointless administrative hoop-la as works of art are declared to be national patrimony by the committees of experts, and then are exported anyway for lack of funds.
Isabel Boucher
The National Endowment for the Arts
A second slap in the face to ex-N.E.A. chief but from the other side
Federal judge finds decency clause unconstitutional
WASHINGTON, D.C. Mr Frohnmayer, the former Chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts (NEA) forced to resign earlier this year by President Bush for the NEA's support of risqué art in the past (The Art Newspaper No. 17, April 1992, p. 1), has received a slap on the other cheek now.
Last month a Federal judge in Los Angeles found in favour of four performers to whom Mr Frohnmayer had refused grants on the grounds that their acts were sexually explicit.
The judge ruled that the NEA cannot ‘impose whatever content restrictions it chooses’.
The NEA must deal only with matters of ‘art’.
The judge further invalidated a statute that requires the agency to ‘take into consideration general standards of decency and respect for the diverse beliefs and values of the American public’.
According to the judge, the ‘decency clause’ another compromise with Congressmen who threatened to dissolve the NEA was so vaguely worded that it tends to impinge on the First Amendment's guaranteed right to freedom of speech.
The judge deemed it unconstitutionally restrictive to require that a person evaluate art by taking into consideration ‘general standards of decency’.
This victory for freedom of expression will however have no effect on the grant-making process at the NEA.
For a decision to violate the law, a plaintiff must demonstrate that politics or concerns with ‘general standards of decency’ affected the evaluation.
If the NEA maintains a decision is based on ‘artistic merit’, there can be no argument.
The NEA comes up for re-authorisation next spring, while the current chairman has recently rejected grant applications recommended for funding by the advisory Council on the Arts.
Acting Chairman Anne-Imelda Radice vetoed two of the 169 council-approved applications in the Museum Program's Special Exhibitions category.
Critics of the NEA were quick to note that both contained works that depict genitalia, but Ms Radice should be safe from prosecution, for she stated only that the shows were ‘unlikely to have the long-term artistic significance necessary to merit endowment funding’.
Since the government cannot submit every decision to popular referendum, elected or appointed individuals act on behalf of larger constituencies.
The NEA selection process mitigates the vagaries of personal bias by submitting grant applications to representatives of the applicant's peers, which in turn makes recommendations to a presidentially appointed twenty-six-member Council on the Arts.
The council advises the chairman, who cannot approve a proposal they reject, but can veto one they approve.
The chairman rarely contravenes the advice of the Council.
But as she forecast in recent months (The Art Newspaper No.19, June 1992, p.3), Ms Radice believes that sexual content is grounds for a grant's denial.
According to the California ruling, however, this may be an unconstitutional stance.
Ms Radice correctly reasons that her constituency is not the art community, but Congress, which authorises and funds the endowment, and which represents the American people in toto.
She may have acted over-cautiously in rejecting the proposals but Ms Radice was obviously on her best behaviour as legislators work out the budget for fiscal year 1993, which begins 1 October.
The question is whether the arts council, Congress, or the chairman, knows best what taxpayers really want.
As it stands, the process favours the chairman, but some would say the twenty-six member council knows best what art the taxpayers need.
The council, they believe, should override the individual opinion of the chairman.
Thus, no sooner had she rejected the two $10,000 grants than Ms Radice was called a ‘decency czar’, a ‘faux-moralist sharpie’, and a betrayer of the public trust.
With all the bad publicity, one might think Americans were fed up with the NEA.
But a Harris poll conducted in February indicates that support for the arts is up significantly, now over 60% as opposed to 48% in 1974.
Moreover, despite the recession, an overwhelming majority favour a $5–10 tax surcharge for the arts.
The figures indicate what Pollster Louis Harris calls ‘a sharp and bitter reaction to the [spate of conservative]attacks on the NEA’.
In New York business and community leaders launched New Yorkers for the NEA, sponsoring and distributing an informative video in praise of the endowment.
Narrated by famed 1960s news anchorman Walter Cronkite, the nine-minute tape features snippets of NEA-sponsored activities.
In Washington D.C., the American Arts Alliance sent every member of Congress a stack of blue ‘Post-it’ note pads, with a fact about the NEA at the bottom of each sheet.
For example: ‘Annually, each American pays taxes of $1,137.28 for the military, $201 for education and 68 cents for the arts’.
In Boston, Alan Shestack, Director of the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, and Anne Hawley, Director of the Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum, were among the speakers at a press conference announcing ‘Stop the Art Attack: A Campaign in Support of the National Endowment for the Arts’.
Several groups have organised Congressional call-in and postcard-writing campaigns, to urge legislators to fund the NEA fully.
And five national arts associations representing 12,000 organisations across the country have banded together, hiring a New York-based public relations firm to lead a campaign in support of the endowment.
The trend indicates that as the date for reauthorisation approaches, liberals have resigned themselves to the fact the NEA chairmanship is not a rostrum for ethics, but a political post.
The chairman, unless stripped of veto authority, will always act in what he or she perceives to be the best interests of the agency.
If the NEA is to survive, it will have to act responsibly vis-à-vis the electorate and the electorate does not want certain work funded.
The peer panels and the council would do well to consider this fact, and to keep in mind that a rejected grant is not a denial of artistic freedom, but an eventuality of government-sponsored art.
The Venice Biennale
The political wrangling is over
Achille Bonito Oliva inventor of the Transavanguardia to head the visual arts section
VENICE.
The outgoing Executive Committee of the Venice Biennale has elected the art critic Achille Bonito Oliva interim curator for the Visual Arts section.
Ten members voted in his favour, with one abstention and one vote for the art historian Giuliano Briganti.
It is highly likely that the new Committee, due to take up office at the end of the year, will make the appointment permanent, in which case Bonito Oliva will be responsible for the organisation of the 1995 centenary exhibition.
Quick reflexes, intuition and mobility have been the chief assets of Achille Prospero Rosario Maria Giovanni Carlo Bonito Oliva.
Bonito Oliva began to feel his way through this complex labyrinth of the contemporary art world in the Sixties, when, newly armed with degrees in law and philosophy, he began creating visual poetry as a member of Gruppo 63.
He soon came to doubt ‘the optimism of avant-garde movements’, abandoning any illusion that art had a vital role to play in the ideological struggle.
He encouraged controversy with an exhibition at Montepulciano in 1970 entitled ‘Amore mio’, opposing the then unacceptable concept of frivolity to the generally accepted idea that art was to do with austere militancy.
It was considered even less seemly to talk of the art market and collecting, but Bonito Oliva refused to bow to such conventions and, in 1974 wrote an essay entitled ‘Mercato come opera d'arte’(The market as a work of art), giving historical instances of how the market had often anticipated the choices of museums and art critics.
The official birth of the Italian Transavanguardia movement with which Bonito Oliva's name is now crucially linked took place in 1979 in an exhibition he organised entitled ‘Opere fatte ad arte’ at Acireale, followed the next year by ‘Aperto 80’at the Biennale which featured the work of Chia, Clemente, Cucchi, De Maria and Paladino, the first in a series of shows devoted to young artists at the Venice festival.
And when, in 1983, The Guggenheim Museum opened its doors to the ‘return of painting’ with an exhibition devoted to Transavanguardia, works by the ‘3Cs’(Chia, Cucchi and Clemente), were snapped up at prices in excess of $50,000.
As a result of the movement's success Bonito Oliva has become something of a celebrity in Italian cultural circles, be they popular or high-brow: television appearances, articles in a daily financial newspaper, even an illustrated article in the popular  satirical magazine Frigidaire showing him completely nude.
His work now emphasises the exhibition as a work of art in its own right; his 1982 show ‘Avanguardia-Transavanguardia’ used the Aurelian walls of Rome as a backdrop while his ‘Contemporanea’nine years earlier used the garages of the Villa Borghese, Rome, to introduce the notions of Fluxus, Minimal Art, Arte Povera and Conceptualism.
Bonito Oliva's involvement with the Venice Biennale began in 1972 with ‘Persona 2’, and has continued with ‘Quartetto’ in 1984, then with four rooms devoted to Transavanguardia artists in 1988 and, most recently, a supporting exhibition featuring that most nomadic, mobile and international of movements in the arts, Fluxus.
In 1984 in an interview with the Giornale dell'Arte Bonito Oliva observed that ‘A critic has to have extremely rapid reactions; his role is to grasp ideas and project them into the future’.
The Biennale can only benefit from his involvement.
Royal Holloway College to sell three pictures
LONDON.
Royal Holloway College is a gigantic Victorian neo-Renaissance structure in South London, and part of the University of London.
During the 1980s the college built up a deficit of over £1 million because for several years its grant was not increased.
The estimated cost of its building maintenance over the coming decade is £10 million.
In order to establish a trust fund to cover this, and the maintenance of the college's picture collection, the Charity Commissioners, after over two years of deliberation, have given permission for the sale of three paintings: a Turner, a Constable and a Gainsborough.
The pictures in the collection were purchased entirely at auction between 1881 and1883 by Thomas Holloway, the college's founder.
They include mainly Victorian works by Frith, Millais, Landseer, Fildes and others.
The paintings are Turner's ‘Van Tromp going about to please his masters’ of 1844, Constable's sketch, ‘View of the Stour, near Dedham’of about 1821–22 and Gainsborough's ‘Peasants going to market, early morning’of about 1770.
An unfortunate precedent was Edinburgh University's sale of its complete edition of all four volumes of John James Audubon's Birds of America published between 1827 and 1838, which was auctioned at Christie's New York on 24 April for $4.07 million, breaking all previous records for illustrated books on Americana.
Edinburgh University's Director of Finance had made a cumulative forecasting error of £1.5 million per annum over four years, thus necessitating the sale.
Veronese's ‘Marriage at Cana’ badly torn after the Louvre's lengthy restoration
PARIS.
Veronese's monumental ‘The Marriage at Cana’ in the Louvre was seriously damaged when curators tried to check whether it was securely hung.
The painting, which has undergone restoration lasting three years without being moved from its place in the Salle des Fëtes housing Italian Renaissance works, was ripped in five places on 3 June, although the Louvre kept the information secret for a fortnight.
According to the Museum's press bureau the canvas was slashed vertically in five places, in several cases along more than ‘several dozen centimetres’ while being handled.
The damage affected the balustrade in the painting, but neither the sky nor faces, which would have been far more difficult to restore, were affected, the Louvre said.
‘The Marriage at Cana’ was the first of a series of Biblical feasts painted in 1562 when Veronese, aged thirty-four, returned from a trip to Rome.
Too large to be moved from the Salle des Etats, the painting had remained partially visible to visitors behind specially designed scaffolding since restoration work, financed partly by ICI France, began in 1989.
After the accident on 3 June the painting was concealed behind tarpaulins to allow experts to start repairing the canvas.
According to the Louvre, patching up the tears should prove easy, as the Museum's restoration team is now in possession of abundant information about every square centimetre of the canvas.
Work should therefore be rapid and finish in time for the Louvre's exhibition of ‘The Marriage at Cana’ which is going ahead as scheduled at the end of September.
New York
How to succeed in Hollywood but don't make your script too accurate
The FBI have identified a screenplay touting suspect for the 1990 robbery from the Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum
NEW YORK.
After more than two years of investigation, police have not yet made any arrests in their effort to solve the March 1990 robbery of thirteen paintings from the Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum in Boston.
Now, however, they may have a suspect who was seeking to put a bizarrely similar story of art robbery on the screen.
In late May the FBI admitted that it had questioned thirty-one year old Brian M. McDevitt in connection with the theft, in which two robbers cut such masterpieces as Vermeer's ‘The concert’ and Rembrandt's ‘The storm on the Sea of Galilee’from their frames.
McDevitt has not been arrested (as of the beginning of the second week of June) but his role in a bungled 1980 robbery and his peddling of an art theft inspired screenplay in Hollywood have raised hopes that authorities may finally have cracked the perplexing case.
In Hollywood, McDevitt, a would-be screenwriter, had been trying to generate interest in a film script about two thieves who hide stolen works of art in a cave in Germany.
After his partner in a film production company was arrested for financial fraud, it turned out that the charming, fast-talking McDevitt had also been convicted in a bungled 1980 art robbery that mirrored the Gardner theft.
In 1980 McDevitt and an accomplice dressed up as Federal Express employees and set out for the Hyde Collection in Glens Falls, New York.
Their aim was to subdue security guards and cut paintings from their frames.
They got stuck in a traffic jam, however, and were caught with tools and stolen Federal Express property before they could get to the works of art.
McDevitt confessed and served several months in prison.
At the Gardner ten years later, two robbers disguised as police overpowered guards, handcuffed them, bound them with tape, and cut canvases from frames before escaping with thirteen works.
McDevitt was living in the Boston area at the time, and left for California suddenly, just after the Gardner robbery.
In an interview with the New York Times, McDevitt (who had three more larceny convictions in the 1980s) denied even knowing about the Gardner theft, but he revealed a familiarity with techniques of cutting paintings from frames.
So far, McDevitt has been questioned and fingerprinted, but the FBI will not say for sure that he is a suspect.
A reward of $1 million remains in effect for information leading to the recovery of the works of art stolen from the Gardner, which, besides the Vermeer and Rembrandt, include Manet's ‘Chez Tortoni’ and five small Degas watercolours and charcoal sketches.
FBI statements reflect a new confidence that a solution to the Gardner case is near, including recovery of the stolen works.
Nice
A major work by Matisse surfaces in his Nice home after sixty years
The first version of Matisse's ‘La Danse’ has been discovered; valued at $17.8 million, the French State is deciding the painting's future
PARIS.
A preliminary version of ‘La Danse’, a mural painting executed in 1933 by Henri Matisse for the home of Dr Barnes at Merion near Philadelphia (see p.7) has recently come to light in the possessions of the youngest son, art dealer Pierre Matisse.
The find, announced by critic and Matisse expert Pierre Schneider, is a 1931 version of the thirteen metre-long work in the form of three rolled-up panels.
More angular and less fluid in outline than those which feature in the final version of ‘La Danse’, the figures are painted in predominantly grey-blue tones against an unfinished blue background.
The painting has been estimated at FFr97 million (£9.9 million; $17.8 million) according to Schneider.
A second version of ‘La Danse’ painted in 1932 which until very recently was thought to be the first was donated by Matisse to the Petit Palais in Paris in 1936.
A mistake in measurements taken in Dr Barnes's home meant it was too wide to install.
It comprises a larger range of colours blue, pink, white and black than ‘La Danse I’ and includes six figures.
Recently restored, it is now on show in the Musée d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris.
Pierre Matisse, the artist's son, who ran the famous New York gallery which bore his name from 1931 until August 1989 when he died aged eighty-eight, left a stock of 2,300 paintings by sixty-one modern artists, purchased for $142.8 million by Sotheby's and New York dealer William Acquavella.
The French State meanwhile acquired forty-seven important twentieth-century works from the estate of Pierre Matisse thanks to its dation system allowing the payment of death duty by kind (see The Art Newspaper No. 16, March 1992, p. 1).
They are on show this summer in the Pompidou Centre in Paris.
Only after the completion of the transaction and the removal of the works valued according to one report at FFr 193 million did Matisse's family stumble upon the rolled-up ‘Danse I’ and a box containing a dozen bronze sculptures by Matisse.
It seems that the rolled-up canvas, which had lain on a basement floor for sixty years in the Nice house, had been thought to be unused.
It was only shipped up to Paris recently when the house had been emptied of furniture.
The paint has cracked in several places, especially in the central panel of the composition, and needs to be restored and given a proper backing before it can be displayed.
The lawyers for the Pierre Matisse estate say that they are currently preparing an amended tax declaration and that the State needs to decide what will happen to the picture.
In France there is 40% inheritance tax for children to pay on the estates of their parents.
Cultural property case history
In limbo: still no clear title to the Schloss Gotha Wtewael withdrawn from Sotheby's sale
A tale, which could and probably will be repeated a thousand times, of the fate of a work of art shaken loose from its context by the tempest of World War II
NEW YORK.
Who owns a picture?
That was the question raised several months back when Sotheby's London Old Master department included a pocket-sized painting on copper by the seventeenth-century Dutch mannerist Joachim Wtewael of ‘The Holy Family with Angels’ in their Old Master sale on 1 April April Fools' Day.
Its sudden reappearance, a product of the uncertain economic times in Eastern Europe, at first seemed easily explained, but whether it was wartime booty or a token of gratitude, whether a museum who may or may not have owned it wanted it back or not, whether it was legally correct or amoral, by putting it up for auction (and illustrating it on the catalogue cover) Sotheby's assured themselves of one thing: whatever they did would be wrong.
The auction house had been assured by their legal advisors that the current owners of the work had legal entitlement.
In addition, Sotheby's London Chief Executive Timothy Llewellyn explained, ‘We have a notarised statement by a previous owner of the painting, Alexander Kozlenkov, given in the Land of Berlin and dated 26 January 1990, that the picture was given to his late father, a colonel in the Soviet Army, by a German family who lived in the Schlossmuseum, in gratitude for helping them obtain food during the occupation.
He did not recall the name of the family’.
During the Weimar republic, Schlossmuseum Gotha was a semi-private institution which combined an art gallery with the residence of the Duke of Saxe-Coburg.
Kozlenkov Junior sold the picture to one Itela Sunguza in Moscow in 1985, and in 1987, the picture appeared in West Germany, on consignment to a Berlin antique shop specialising in Russian icons and silver, priced at DM150,000.
A small German dealer (who has asked to remain anonymous), who often stopped by, was shown the picture by the proprietor who believed it to be an Italian or Flemish painting.
The dealer asked the proprietor of the shop if he could take it to the Gemäldegalerie in Berlin-Dahlem for an opinion and authentication, and was given the picture.
Once the dealer got home, he noticed Wtewael's signature and excitedly called the Gallery's director, Dr Henning Bock, to make an appointment.
Over the phone, Bock asked the dealer for a detailed description and size of the copper, and set an appointment the following Monday.
When the dealer arrived at the Gallery, he was escorted to Dr Bock's office, where the director looked the picture over carefully.
As soon as he pronounced that the picture was the original painting by Wtewael, two police officers appeared and arrested the bewildered dealer, who claims that on Bock's desk there was a book of the ‘Hundred most wanted paintings’ missing from German museums since World War II, its page opened to a reproduction of the Wtewael.
The dealer was taken away for questioning, and the painting was confiscated by the Gemäldegalerie who kept it for six months, attempting to resolve the situation themselves.
‘At that time, we could do very little’, said Erich Schleier, curator of Italian baroque pictures at the Museum.
‘We knew it came from Gotha, but it was legally very difficult to stop a picture that belonged to an East German public collection…as this was before the unification of Germany’.
Rainald Grosshans, Berlin's assistant curator of Early Netherlandish pictures, concurs.
‘During the time we had the picture in our possession, in an attempt to keep it off the international art market we consulted the criminal police, and attempted to put the picture on the index of important works of art which cannot leave Germany.
(For the complete index, see The Art Newspaper, No. 10, July-Sept. 1991, pp. 10–11.)
Contacting Gotha itself was a great problem…we did all we could to get the picture back to them…due to political circumstances we were unsuccessful’.
During this time, the dealer had hired a lawyer who successfully claimed the picture back from the Gemäldegalerie; relations were strained between East and West Germany, and, according to the dealer, ‘There was no interest from the DDR’.
After returning the painting to the icon shop, the dealer subsequently received two contradictory letters, the first stating that ‘his’ Wtewael had been placed on the national index of important works of art that could not leave Germany, and the follow-up, which noted that the Wtewael had been taken off the index, and that it could, therefore, be exported.
The Wtewael was then sold to a man from a bank who paid between DM350,000 and 400,000 for it, with the proviso that the sellers would receive an additional commission if the picture could be successfully auctioned for more.
Later in 1987, the picture surfaced in London, being peddled around to various dealers, none of whom would touch it.
According to Richard Feigen, ‘It does the art dealing profession a lot of harm if they are perceived as traffickers of stolen merchandise…dealers have to be able to stand behind what they represent, and know that it was bought legally otherwise you lose your client's trust’.
Sotheby's was approached towards the end of 1988, and, according to Llewellyn, ‘We told the seller that we certainly would not be prepared to sell it for him unless it was clear that there were no existing legal claims to be made by any third parties against the picture.
We also told him that, as a matter of policy, regardless of the legal situation, we certainly wouldn't be prepared to offer the painting for sale unless it had first been offered to the museum to see whether it would be possible for them to re-acquire it.
That's a policy position which we take in all such cases’.
While some might ask why the Gotha museum should be required to buy a picture which was theirs to begin with, every picture offers a unique set of circumstances, and the Gotha Wtewael was no exception.
In the pre-unified past, Sotheby's sold, without a peep of protest, a Pater and Lancret that had been looted from Potsdam (The Art Newspaper, No. 1, October 1990, p. 1)(subsequently reacquired), and negotiated with the Kupferstichkabinett, Berlin-Dahlem, in the sale of drawings from the Theodor Allan Heinrich estate, some of which had been looted.
Berlin took their pick, then allowed Sotheby's to sell what was left over.
Most recently, in July 1991, two fine Balthasar Denner heads of ‘Old Women’ were withdrawn from sale in London when it was learned that they had been looted from the Dresden Museum.
Remarkably, they were given back by the owner without payment.
Sotheby's was undeterred by the knowledge that the picture had been offered around.
Says Llewellyn, ‘If anybody knows it's a stolen picture, then they should obviously come forward with evidence that this is the case.
It seems to me significant that in the course of several years of investigation, and after consulting, quite extensively, with all the authorities concerned, no such evidence has emerged.
We believe that we're entitled to represent the interests of the vendor; indeed, I'm sure that this picture has been sold in good faith several times since 1945.
If there were evidence that the picture was stolen or pillaged, then obviously our attitude towards it would be rather different from what it is’.
As to the statutes of limitation on the picture, Llewellyn notes that, ‘The longest that could ever apply is thirty years.
Even if something has, in the first instance, been pillaged, rather than just been given as a gift or whatever, the statute of limitation could perfectly well have run out, and indeed, in Germany, if there has been a good-faith purchase in between, the period is ten years’.
Satisfied with Kozlenkov's story, and on the basis of provenance and advice on the legal position, even if it had been looted, Sotheby's therefore approached the Schlossmuseum Gotha.
They only approached the Kulturstiftung der Länder (the federal funding agency that finances the purchase of works considered vital to Germany's heritage; see The Art Newspaper, No. 13, December 1991, p. 4) two days before the 15 January deadline, which was too late for action to be taken.
In early February, Sotheby's received a letter from A. Schuttwolf, paintings curator at Gotha, who noted that there was no possibility of them buying the Wtewael, and that the painting could proceed to sale.
Thus emboldened, Sotheby's issued their 1 April catalogue to a chorus of disapproval, the most jolting being a letter from Toronto doctor Morton Shulman, who was something of an authority on Schlossmuseum Gotha, having acquired a seventeenth-century clock that had once belonged to the museum.
In the course of researching his clock to verify its provenance, Shulman had evidence that was at variance with Kozlenkov's testimony.
According to the doctor, after the Russian army invaded the museum, members of the family and all museum officials were ordered out at gunpoint, making it highly unlikely that any affectionate gifts were tendered to the occupying officers.
‘The painting is definitely stolen property’, wrote Shulman, ‘and I strongly suggest that Sotheby's postpone the sale until a full investigation can be carried out’.
Sotheby's then heard from Michael Hebecker, Director of Schlossmuseum Gotha, informing them that, while the auction house had behaved fairly and correctly in offering the picture to the museum first, the permission to sell the Wtewael had been granted in his absence and with neither his knowledge nor consent, and asking them if the picture could be withdrawn for the time being.
(Apparently Mr Hebecker had been contacted by the consignor's lawyers as early as July 1991.)
To this Sotheby's agreed, and the auction proceeded…minus one Wtewael.
‘It's obviously irritating and awkward for us that they have changed their minds, but they are perfectly entitled to do that’, explains George Gordon of the Old Masters department.
‘If you have pictures whose past is confused, or questioned, or whose title and ownership are a matter of dispute, the one way to settle this is to put it up for auction and see what happens.
In this way, it means those who wish to stake a claim may do so.
We shouldn't be bashed for putting it into a sale; we help to bring it to a resolution by bringing out it into the open’.
Three months later the picture is in limbo, believed still to be in Sotheby's storage.
And for all the last minute protests by the Gotha Museum, nothing further has been heard from them.
Statutes of limitation
What?
I've bought my Boucher and I don't own it!?
LONDON.
If your painting or other work of art has ever been the subject of a theft in the past then you may not now be the true owner even if you bought it in good faith; you may be forced to hand it back to the original owner, or his heirs, depending on the relevant jurisdiction.
Here are a few indications of the different laws worldwide where a stolen work is put up for sale.
Legal advice must be taken to ascertain the exact rules and how they are applied.
Australia
Market overt applies in Victoria, South Australia, Western Australia and Tasmania.
A purchaser at an established market does, therefore, obtain good title.
Market overt is expressly excluded in New South Wales, Queensland and, by inference, in the Australian Capital Territory.
There is a six-year Statute of Limitations which relates to the period from the date at which the competing claim was first asserted (not at the time the work of art was stolen nor the date of subsequent sale).
France
In the case of moveables (e.g. works of art), ‘possession is equivalent to title’[Art.
2279 French Civil Code].
However, an original owner can reclaim within three years from the date of the loss or robbery.
This is subject to a requirement that the current owner in possession originally purchased the work:
(a)
at a fair or market, or
(b)
at a public auction, or
(c)
from a dealer who sells similar articles,
then he or she can only be forced to hand back the item if the price it cost him or her is paid in compensation [Art.
2280].
Germany
A bona fide purchaser acquires title after ten years.
A purchaser at a public auction acquires absolute title and therefore claims by the original owner against any person who later acquires the work are rebuttable.
Greece
A purchaser in good faith acquires a protected title within three years.
A purchaser, ‘not in good faith’(i.e. one who is negligent or reckless in his belief about the ownership rights of the seller) may nevertheless acquire full title after a lapse of twenty years.
Italy
Italy is unusual in that a purchaser does acquire good title and claims by the original owner can therefore be rebuffed.
The requirements are that the purchase must be bona fide and the transaction must be one which would be sufficient (in terms of formalities/documentation) to transfer ownership if the seller were the true owner [Arts.
1153, 1155 Italian Civil Code of 1942].
Jersey
It is highly likely that the basic English common law rule (that ownership cannot be transferred from someone who has no title) applies.
Jersey courts do, however, look at Norman customary law and it appears that the existence of any kind of market overt rule has not been fully explored.
Netherlands
A bona fide purchaser at a public auction or market does acquire effective ownership after a lapse of three years from the date of theft [BW 2014].
Russia
The original owner can always recover stolen painting.
No market overt [Art.
152 Russian Civil Code].
Sweden
A bona fide purchaser does acquire ownership.
The original owner however has a right to repossess within three months from the date of unauthorised sale provided he reimburses the new buyer [Law No.
SFS 1986: 796].
Switzerland
A person in possession of a moveable chattel (e.g. a painting) who loses it, or has it stolen from him or otherwise taken from him against his will can demand it back within five years from any person who then has possession of it [Art.
934/1 Swiss Civil Code].
If the chattel has been purchased through a dealer or auction house or in market overt ‘it cannot be recovered from the first purchaser or any subsequent bona fide purchaser, unless he is compensated for the purchase-money paid’[Art.
934/2].
United Kingdom
England
A buyer does not obtain good title except in the limited case of a market overt between hours of sunrise and sunset.
There is a six-year limitation period which runs from ‘date cause of action arose’.
This is likely to be interpreted as the date when the original owner discovers whereabouts of stolen painting and legal action becomes possible.
If a work is recovered from the current person in possession by the original owner, no compensation need be paid.
Scotland and Wales
No market overt.
The original owner can always recover subject to a six-year limitation period.
USA
No title in a stolen work is transferred to a bona fide purchaser.
Limitation period of between three and fifteen years (depending on State) from date that original owner discovers details of the adverse claim on the work of art.
UNIDROIT DRAFT PROPOSALS
[Preliminary draft Unidroit Convention on Stolen or Illegally Exported Cultural Objects]
A bona fide purchaser of a stolen ‘cultural object’ does not acquire good title and is under an obligation to return it.
Claims for restitution have to be made however (a) within three years from the time when the claimant knew or ought reasonably to have known of the location, or the identity of the possessor of the object, and (b) in any case within a period of thirty years from the time of the theft.
Compensation is payable in certain circumstances provided that the possessor exercised due diligence.
Tougher art export controls urged by the European Commission
STRASBOURG.
The European Parliament wants tougher art export controls.
To that end it has recently amended the European Commission's proposals for the introduction of a licence system for art exports outside the European Community and a directive concerning the regulation of the return of works of art illegally removed from one member state to another.
In particular, it is determined to uphold the exclusive rights of member states to protect their national treasures, with the eventual aim of mutual recognition by the different national legislatures.
The 9 and 11 June amendment widens the scope of the categories of objects concerned and increases the time limit within which a claim for restitution can be made from thirty to fifty years, removing it altogether for objects in state or  ecclesiastical ownership.
The requirements that member states co-operate are at the same time strengthened.
The Council of Ministers will not find it easy to repeal the ep amendments to the directive if the Commission accepts them (the Commission has already indicated its agreement to the scope of the categories and the time limits).
New York
Imitation may prove the most expensive form of flattery for Jeff Koons
Damages for copying a photograph to create the sculpture ‘String of Puppies’ may amount to $2.8 million; further plagiarism charges are pending
NEW YORK.
A federal appeals court judge here has affirmed a 1990 lower court decision and ruled that Koons illegally copied a photograph from a greeting card when in 1987 he made four sculptures of a couple holding eight German shepherd puppies.
The photograph was taken in 1980 by the Californian photographer Art Rogers, who brought the suit.
The Koons work in question is ‘String of Puppies’, which the artist commissioned for his 1988 ‘Banality’ show at the Sonnabend Gallery, which is named as co-defendant in the suit.
(Koons sold three of the ‘String of Puppies’ sculptures for $125,000 each.)
Reaffirming the 1990 decision, which found Koons guilty of pirating the original photograph, the appeals court criticised Koons and Sonnabend for assuming that their position in the art business and the high price of the works would shield them from any legal action.
Court documents cite the exacting detail in which Koons instructed hired sculptors to copy the photograph.
He had also torn off the copyright mark from the greeting card before sending it to the Italian artisans who made the sculptures.
The appeals court found that the Koons copying of the photo was so complete that it went beyond the bounds of the ‘fair use’ doctrine, which allows artists, authors and journalists to ‘quote’from other works.
Since the Koons works didn't conform to the definition of parody that the work parodied has to be either known to the viewer or acknowledged by the parodist the court concluded that Koons simply made the sculptures to make money: ‘…
Koons's copying of the photograph ‘String of Puppies’ was done in bad faith, primarily for profit-making motives…’
After the ruling, Koons told the New York Times that he would appeal again the next step is the U.S. Supreme Court because, ‘since when do judges qualify as critics?…
The ruling not only hurts me but every other artist’, Koons added.
‘It was only a postcard photo and I gave it spirituality, animation and took it to another vocabulary’.
Koons has found some unlikely allies among New York's art critics.
One of those lamented that a judgement against Koons could mean the end of ‘appropriation’, a practice in which artists either manipulate or simply reproduce images from other sources to comment critically on the social core of notions of meaning or beauty.
‘The limitations on artists who wish to make works that respond to the contemporary world of existing mass media images will be very confining indeed’, one critic warned.
That process of appropriation, Koons's lawyer argued, is not plagiarism, but rather the creation of an entirely new work.
The court accepted at least part of that argument, allowing that the sculptures may contain something more than the original work.
‘To the extent that Koons is able to prove that the profits at issue derive solely from his position in the art world’, Judge Richard J. Cardamone wrote, ‘he should be allowed to retain them’.
But the judge was less generous on the subject of Koons's ‘willful and egregious behaviour’ after the original judgment in 1990.
At that point, the court ordered Koons to hand over the fourth sculpture, which he had kept for himself.
Koons reacted by shipping the work to Germany on a long-term museum loan, at which point the court held him in contempt, a charge which carries a daily fine.
During the appeal process, Koons was protected from those penalties.
In June of last year, Koons handed over the fourth ‘String of Puppies’ to Art Rogers before a court deadline for doing so, and no fines were levied.
A lower court is now assessing damages against Koons.
L. Donald Prutzman, the lawyer for the photographer Art Rogers, says his client is asking for $2.8 million, which represents a share in Koons's profits from Rogers's work, plus damages.
Had Koons asked for permission to use the photo, and Rogers had refused, Prutzman said, ‘Koons could have made the same point about banality with any number of other images.
You can't write a song to a tune that's been written by someone else’.
Other plaintiffs now charge that Koons is singing their songs without their permission.
MGM, the film company, has sued over Koons's appropriation of the cartoon character, the Pink Panther, in a 1988 sculpture.
Another greeting card photographer has claimed Koons has based a sculpture on her work.
In another suit, Koons is charged with incorporating a comic-strip character into an ensemble of figures.
The threat of at least one multi-million-dollar fine facing Koons and Sonnabend compounds their financial woes at this moment.
Koons's last show at that New York gallery, which showed works depicting the artist in sex acts with his wife the porn star and Italian parliamentarian Ilona Staller is said to have sold badly and run up its own multi-million-dollar deficit.
New York
Taubman sells 30% of his Sotheby's B shares
Sotheby's chairman and largest shareholder is offloading part of his stake in the auction house, but retains overall control
NEW YORK.
Only two months after Sotheby's Holdings Inc. posted a first quarter loss of $5.7 million (£3.2 million; compared to $5.2 million a year earlier) and following pretty dismal results for 1991 (profits were 86% down from 1990) Alfred Taubman, chairman and largest shareholder, is selling 8 million of his 21.9  million B shares as part of a larger transaction.
Max Fisher, Sotheby's vice chairman, in conjunction with Martinique, the American hotel chain, will sell another 2 million B shares.
The sale is expected to raise $100 million (£55 million), although buyers will be offered A shares with one vote each.
Sotheby's B shares carry ten votes each and this, of course, will enable Taubman to retain control of the auction house which he purchased for £80 million in 1983, unless the bank forecloses on the debt of Mr Taubman's affiliate (assumed to be his investments in the troubled retailing sectors) for which 11 million of his Sotheby's B shares stand guaranty.
Is Taubman disillusioned with his investment?
The wealthy Detroit property developer of shopping malls enjoyed the social prestige of owning the world's largest auction house.
He transformed Sotheby's marketing and introduced much financial sophistication.
He also obtained planning permission to build apartments above the auction rooms on Manhattans's York Avenue (currently postponed for obvious reasons).
Taubman took out $47 million in the first public share offering when Sotheby's shares were successfully floated in 1988.
An earlier attempt had been withdrawn immediately after the 19 October 1987 Wall Street crash.
Since then Sotheby's business has spread into less traditional auction house areas, including real estate.
In the spring of 1990 they financed to an ultimate cost of $153.1 million the purchase of the Pierre Matisse inventory with dealers Acquavella Modern Art.
It is to be noted that in the most recent quarter, although auction sales were 15% up on the previous quarter, the higher loss compared to last year reflects a $7 million drop in sales from the Acquavella deal, now a separate division within Sotheby's although included in the accounts as part of their auction operations.
Although Michael Ainslie, president and chief operating officer said in April that the Acquavella deal had now paid for itself, there are rumours that payments for sales have slowed, and new sales are difficult.
Nor do we know what the implications of Sotheby's withdrawal from the court hearings over the Sevso hoard of silver will be (see this page).
Much has been made by Ainslie of the improving art auction market, the 83% sold at the Impressionist and Contemporary February art sales and the June sale of the $3.19 million Fabergé Imperial ‘Love trophy egg’ commissioned by Czar Nicholas II in 1905 on the birth of his son Alexei.
The question remains: is the hard hit property market in the US forcing Taubman to liquidate some cash in the normal course of business or are we about to see greater shifts in York Avenue and Bond Street?
Letters to the editor
There was no political interference at the V&A
I am sure that, despite his letter in your May issue (Arm's length or arm's twist) John Mallet really understands as well as the next man that, when I wrote in my letter of 10 March in The Times that ‘we do not apply the arm's length principle to the national museums and galleries’, I was saying no more than that there is no funding body between the Office of Arts and Libraries (now the Department for the National Heritage) and the national museums and galleries as there is between the Government and the subsidised theatres and performing arts bodies.
If John Mallet believes that the restructuring proposals at the V&A were the result of political interference, he will believe anything.
It's time Japan joined Unidroit
The Unidroit convention (for which the initiative was taken by Mussolini, thus making it older than Unesco, which at times performs a similar task), concerns itself with the legal aspects of stolen and illegally exported works of art.
It is an institution in which forty countries take part, but in which Japan is not represented.
And there's the rub.
Questions about Japanese art-theft law have until now been carefully evaded.
Even the Art Loss Register, which plans to open an office in Japan, carefully avoids any probing into the subject.
What is the true story of the Japanese businessman who returned a stolen Impressionist painting to France and was decorated for it by President Mitterrand on the occasion of the reopening of the Louvre a few years ago?
If, as it currently appears, it is correct that Western countries have almost no legal means to recuperate stolen works of art from Japan, and as long as Japan refuses to join the Unidroit convention, it will remain impossible to find a conclusive solution to art theft.
A fan
After reading the May issue of The Art Newspaper, I feel compelled to write and tell you what an extremely useful publication this has turned out to be.
I can't imagine any person seriously interested in art in any part of the world not being a subscriber, and I congratulate you on an ever improving publication.
I can only most fervently wish for your continued success.
A clerihew
Paolo Uccello
Though a splendid fellow
Had an obsession with perspective
That aroused invective
Mellon adds $25 million to the Yale Center for British Art endowment
NEW HAVEN, CONN.
Yale University's $1.5 billion capital campaign got off to a spectacular start when philanthropist Paul Mellon donated gifts valued at more than $50 million.
The 1929 graduate added $25 million to the endowment of the Yale Center for British Art, of which he is the founding benefactor.
In addition, he presented the Center with a trove of illuminated books by William Blake including America, Europe, Urizen and the only complete hand-coloured copy of Jerusalem along with Blake's watercolour illustrations for the poems of Thomas Gray.
Mr Mellon also gave the university the archives of the Château Rochambeau, including numerous letters from Washington and Lafayette to the Comte du Rochambeau, and other correspondence relating to the American Revolution.
These will be deposited in the Sterling Memorial Library.
Mr Mellon's generosity to the university has been staggering.
He has bestowed more than $170 million of art and funding on the Center for British Art and to the University Art Gallery, and contributed another $30 million to the university.
‘Yale has made a profound contribution to my life and especially to my interest in the arts and letters’, he explains.
New Thyssen conservation venture gets going
LUGANO.
The newly-formed arch group (Art Restoration for Cultural Heritage; see The Art Newspaper, No.15, February 1992, p.2), under the leadership of Francesca Thyssen-Bornemisza, held its first meeting in Lugano at the beginning of June.
It was under the auspices of arch that the conference to discuss how best to repair Croatia's war damage was held in Zagreb last December.
In the meantime arch has enlisted some powerful names to its board.
These include: Dr Marilyn Perry, President of the Samuel H. Kress Foundation; Dr Paolo Viti, Director of the Palazzo Grassi, Venice and Senior Vice-President of Fiat's corporate Cultural Activities; J. Carter Brown, Director of the National Gallery of Art, Washington; and Patrick Cardon, President of International Cultural Associates, France and former Secretary-General of the International Council of Museums, France.
It was agreed that arch's first project should be the provision of mobile conservation units to tour regions where war has inflicted heavy damage on the cultural heritage, primarily Croatia.
These ‘environmentally-friendly’ studios will be funded by a grant from the Kress Foundation and will be co-ordinated by the Swiss conservator Luca Bonetti who has been working on the design with the Italian team of Mario and Dario Bellini.
Tobacco sponsorship of the arts applauded by the Whitney
NEW YORK CITY.
The Whitney Museum of American Art has established an honorary award to be given annually ‘to an individual or representatives of an organisation who have made a significant contribution to the arts in America through a sustained commitment to the diversity, quality and originality of American artistic achievement’.
The first winner is Philip Morris Companies Inc., cited for ‘nearly thirty-five years of support for the arts’.
The tobacco company is a particularly apt choice for the Whitney's Board of Trustees.
Former Philip Morris Chairman and CEO, George Weissman, has been a Whitney trustee since 1979.
During his tenure the corporation opened a Whitney branch in its midtown headquarters.
The award comes as the museum's other two Manhattan off-site sponsors, IBM and The Equitable, have terminated the museum's lease (see The Art Newspaper No. 16, March 1992, p. 5).
Cartier Inc. has underwritten production of the award itself, designed and produced by artist Richard Artschwager.
The Dutch government rids itself of the art mountain
THE HAGUE.
The Office for Fine Arts in the Netherlands has decided to rid itself of most of the 230,000 works of art which have been left to deteriorate in a number of large depots around the country.
Museums will have the first pick of a huge art mountain which has been allowed to accumulate over the years as the result of an income support scheme for artists which was stopped in 1984.
The scheme was set up just after the war in order to ensure state-sponsorship of the arts.
Artists, selected by a jury, were guaranteed an income by the Dutch government, who agreed to purchase their works for a set amount each year (see The Art Newspaper No.17, April 1992, p.2).
In a letter to parliament at the beginning of June, the Dutch Minister of Culture, Mrs Hedy D'Ancona, made known her decision to allow the deaccessioning of the works of art to go ahead.
The Office for Fine Arts has not made definite plans about the procedure to be followed but it is thought that those institutions which already have some of the works of art on loan will be allowed to keep them, while the museums will be able to choose from what is left.
Having said that, it is not thought that their interest will be great.
The Office for Fine Arts intends to keep only a few of the better works for itself.
In order to prevent the art market from being flooded, the rest will be donated to institutions, such as hospitals, who do not themselves have a separate budget specifically geared to the acquisition of works of art.
At the same time artists, many of whom have already contacted the Office for Fine Arts in order to find out what will happen to their works, will be allowed to claim them back.
The rest will be given or sold to the public, while those works for which a home cannot be found or which have been damaged beyond repair by the years of neglect and the atrocious conditions in which they were kept, will be destroyed in a bonfire.
French bronze founders propose action against forgery
PARIS.
In the wake of recent scandals involving fake Giacometti and Rodin sculptures (see The Art Newspaper No.19, June 1992, p.19) the official French union of bronze founders, the Syndicat Général des Fondeurs de France, has had talks with auctioneers and art gallery representatives to discuss means of combating forgery.
At a meeting in Paris on 11 June the Syndicat decided to draw up a code of conduct for its members.
The main item will be the obligation to mark the date, name of founder or his stamp and the date of casting on all posthumous works.
The Syndicat also envisages setting up a central register to record the date of founding, the name of the artist, the title of the work, its size and weight.
A further meeting with sculptors will be held and the Syndicat plans to extend its measures to the rest of Europe.
Imaging the visual arts
LONDON.
London University's Birkbeck College in collaboration with information technology consultants Brameur Ltd are holding the third annual conference on electronic imaging and the visual arts.
The venue is the National Gallery London, 29, 30 and 31 July.
The thirty or so papers presented will concentrate on the following areas: input, storage and display technologies; image processing software; multimedia; telecommunications; and applications, and speakers will be drawn from museums, industrial research institutions, educational establishments, libraries and galleries.
Topics covered in the papers will include the digitisation of the French National Library; the International Art and Antiques Loss Register; the art design applications of micro computers in primary schools; and the museum of the future.
The conference is supported by the research and development programme of the Commission of the European Communities.
Brameur is one of a consortium of European companies which have been funded by the EC to advise and participate in the development of visual information systems for institutions including the Louvre and the National Gallery.
For further information on the conference and the accompanying tutorials and workshops (to be held at The Charing Cross Hotel) contact Brameur Ltd. tel: 0252 313437 fax: 025222580.
Sotheby's pulls out of Sevso
LONDON AND NEW YORK.
Sotheby's has abandoned a two-year struggle to sell the Sevso Treasure of late Roman silver (see The Art Newspaper, No.11, October 1991, p.1) belonging to the Marquess of Northampton Settlement and estimated to be worth £40 million.
The auction house decided to withdraw from the sale when its December 1990 contract with Lord Northampton came up for renewal.
This decision was made public on 27 May this year when the auctioneers filed a motion in the New York Supreme Court seeking to be discharged from current litigation over the silver's ownership involving Lebanon and Croatia, both of whom claim it was smuggled from their territory.
Speaking to The Art Newspaper, Mr Ray Harding, the New York attorney formerly representing Yugoslavia and now Croatia, expressed his firm conviction that Sotheby's attempt to withdraw from proceedings at the stage is premature and should not be allowed until the pre-trial discovery process has been completed.
This will involve the deposition of four expert witnesses called by the Lebanon and Yugoslavia: Richard Camber, a former member of Sotheby's staff; Felicity Nicholson of Sotheby's Antiquities department; art historian Marlia Mango who catalogued the silver for Sotheby's; and Anna Bennett of the Institute of Archaeology in London who cleaned and restored it.
Clearly the auction house feels that in the light of new revelations about the treasure's origins, its manner of acquisition and details of falsified export licenses, any attempt to offer it at auction would be bound to result in failure and would not redound to the auction house's credit.
The involvement of the late Peter Wilson, former Chairman of Sotheby's in the acquisition of the treasure and the subsequent syndicate set up with dealer Rainer Zietz to offer the treasure to institutions including the Getty, was published in an article by Geraldine Norman and Thomas Hoving in The Independent in December 1991.
A Sotheby's New York spokeswoman declined to say how much the company had already spent on the treasure over the last two years but acknowledged that it had been ‘very, very expensive’.
Japan's answer to Villa Medici opens near Kyoto
KANSAI, KYOTO.
An initiative between the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Franco-Japanese Society has resulted in a new building for French artists named the Villa Kyjoyama.
The funding has been raised by the grandson of the Society's co-founder, Senator Katsutaro Inabata, and runs to nearly FFr30 million (£3 million; $5.5 million).
In 1927 Senator Inabata funded the construction of the original Franco-Japanese Institute on the site of the present building.
The first institute transferred to the University of Kyoto.
French artists will stay at the Villa (designed by Kunio Kato of the University of Kyoto) for three to twelve months.
The first group will include a choreographer, two sculptors, two photographers, an architect and a writer.
Kyoto already is the home of a French academy of music and the French School of Far Eastern studies which are currently undertaking a major study of Buddhism.
Museums
Bible Lands Museum, Jerusalem
Wonderful objects
But why don't we know anything about them?
JERUSALEM.
Visitors to the new Bible Lands Museum may be forgiven if they expect to find a museum of ancient manuscripts, a biblical Disneyland or an institution devoted to Israel's spiritual past.
The new $12 million museum, which opened in May, is more a monument to one man.
Built and financed entirely by Canadian millionaire art dealer Elie Borowski, the Bible Lands Museum houses his personal collection of 3,000 ancient artefacts largely covering the neighbouring cultures of Syria, Iran, Mesopotamia, Anatolia and Egypt rather than Israel per se.
Originally planned in conjunction with John Hopkins University to be both a museum and a biblical study centre, the BLM became a single-handed operation when the American institution withdrew its $7 million commitment to the project.
With construction already underway and with no alternative source of funding, Borowski assumed the entire cost himself.
The sale of a magnificent Roman marble Doryphoros to the Minneapolis Institute of Art for $2 million and another precious artefact to a Japanese collector for an undisclosed sum enabled the museum to open its doors this year, albeit several years behind schedule.
Built on government-donated land, the Bible Lands Museum enjoys a prime site next to the Israel Museum and the Shrine of the Book (home to the Dead Sea Scrolls) in the heart of Jerusalem.
Its very proximity however to these two prestigious institutions poses a problem of identity for the new museum.
With superb collections of biblical archaeology and ancient artefacts on view at the Israel Museum and the oldest biblical manuscripts on show at the Shrine of the Book, a visitor might well ask: what then is there to be seen at the Bible Lands Museum?
‘What we offer is a global approach’, answers BLM director Binyamin Abileah.
‘No other archaeological museum relates as we do to the ancient lands of the Bible’.
Indeed a prime aim of the museum is to inspire a new interest in archaeology and in the biblical era; in addition to hosting travelling shows the museum intends to function as an educational and study centre.
To underline its goal of illuminating biblical history through ancient artefacts the Bible Lands Museum has chosen an unusual method of display.
Borowski's magnificent collection of ancient seals, figurines, ivories, mosaics and sarcophagi, spanning six millenia, is laid out chronologically, in one continuous trek specifically arranged by American designer Clifford LaFontaine to emphasise the inter-relationships of cultures and ideas.
Beautifully inscribed biblical quotations dominate the different sections.
Curators and archaeologists have, however, levelled criticism at the museum for the often tenuous relationship between the objects displayed and the Bible.
Lack of specific dating and provenance for many of the exhibits has also fuelled allegations that a large part of the collection was illegally acquired, arriving on the antiquities market after being stolen from archaeological sites and illegally exported.
Rather than deny the nature of the trade, Elie Borowski has responded by saying he ‘is saving art objects for mankind, to bring them back to the public’.
The museum's elegant sloping design, by Jerusalem architect Ze'ev Schoenberg, has, on the other hand, won general applause, the atmosphere of airiness and intimacy being a happy contrast to the more cavernous Israel Museum.
A lower level devoted to educational facilities (library, auditorium, conference rooms) leads visitors to an attractive cafeteria, decorated with colourful oriental carpets, and to a large sun terrace.
The admission fee of I$8 will cover, admits Binyamin Abileah, only a fraction of the museum's I$1 million a year running cost.
The rest will be made up by endowment funds, grants, government subsidies and…by Elie Borowski.
New York
Dial AT&T for arts dollars
Has the corporate world discovered political correctness?
NEW YORK.
In an initiative that is bound to influence the practice of corporate funding of contemporary art exhibitions in the United States the American Telephone and Telegraph Corporation announced last month that it will award grants totalling $500,000 to ten different museums.
The AT&T programme, called ‘New Art: New Visions’, describes itself as the first corporate effort in the U.S. to help promote recently created work by living artists, especially the work of women and ‘artists of colour’, the term now used to refer to artists of the many racial minority groups vying for exhibition space and for a dwindling pool of public and corporate funds.
The exhibitions in question, each receiving a challenge grant ranging from $30,000 to $50,000, are located in Long Beach (California), Atlanta, Houston, Columbus (Ohio), New York, Chicago, Washington D.C., Los Angeles and Boston.
Most of these institutions are devoted to showing contemporary art and most of the exhibitions fit the growing category of ‘educational’ shows presented in these sorts of art museums.
The Long Beach Museum of Art in Long Beach, California, initiates the ‘New Art: New Visions’ programme with an exhibition devoted to a reconsideration of the internment of Japanese-Americans during World War II.
In the autumn, the Wexner Center for the Arts in Columbus, Ohio will present ‘Re Visions’, a show of new works by ‘six outstanding mid-career artists of colour who have established a mature body of work and whose art is expressively and politically charged’.
A year from now, at the Studio Museum in Harlem, ‘Artists Respond: The ‘New World’ Question’will take on the quincentenary of Columbus's voyages to the Americas with the now-customary mix of installations, collaborations, performances and video.
Amid all this flurry of ‘decodings’ and ‘demystification’is a discernible new Zeitgeist in the American museum world.
For better or worse, the art world thinks in decade-blocks, and if the Eighties were the decade when cash-rich corporations sponsored major loan shows by established artists and contemporary art museums heralded the ‘mid-careers’ of artists anointed by the commercial galleries, the Nineties are the era of social concern.
Not only have art museums chosen to scrutinise such problems as AIDS in society, racial injustice and the status of women, at least several corporate funders may be willing to subsidise these pursuits.
However ironic it may seem, the same corporate power so often targeted by these protests may be ensuring that such protest art has a guaranteed place in those museums.
Funding ten different exhibitions may be a shrewd image-building manoeuvre for AT&T.
‘High and Low’, MOMA's ambitious attempt to fathom the relationship between high and low culture in modern art, was a costly AT&T-funded project that travelled from New York to Chicago and Los Angeles only to be savaged by most critics at each of its stops.
Funding multiple shows means creating cheaper multiple targets, not all of which will be aimed at, much less seen by, reviewers.
Also, some corporations, as well as museums, want the exhibitions they sponsor to be reflections of a social conscience, rather than displays of gilded treasures from rarefied European museums.
(That trend is sure to intensify as corporations compete to create a mood of ‘rebuilding’ following the devastation of rioting in Los Angeles and other cities.)
Even AT&T, however, admits to a marketing aim in focusing ‘New Art: New Visions’ on works of art by women and minorities.
‘We want to reach a target audience that's younger in age and ethnically diverse’, said a spokesman for the AT&T Foundation, a separate philanthropic arm established by the telephone company, ‘both groups being major customers and consumers of ours’.
According to AT&T officials, fifty museums applied for funding from the ‘New Art: New Visions’ programme.
Since AT&T is one of the few major U.S. corporations not to have cut its arts funding significantly over the past year, it is likely that many more museums will tailor exhibition proposals to fit the firm's thematic guidelines.
Subject matter, then, could be dictated by a corporation's willingness to fund a certain kind of exhibition.
The programme's provision for acquisition of works by museums also gives dealers an incentive to show similar works.
But while AT&T may be lunging into the Nineties, the corporate giant has not altogether abandoned the fashions of the previous decade.
In fact, last month AT&T also announced that it will be contributing $100,000 to a retrospective of the work of the late Jean-Michel Basquiat, whose life and tragic death in 1988 are closely identified with the excesses of the art market boom.
The exhibition, which begins at the Whitney Museum of American Art in October and travels to yet-unannounced sites in the United States and Europe, is described, bizarrely, by Whitney officials, as fitting into the museum's practice of offering mid-career retrospectives of contemporary artists.
David D'Arcy
Montreal
Musée d'art contemporain, comes out of exile led by a Jesuit philosopher
After twenty-four years, it leaves the remote site of Expo ‘67
MONTREAL.
For the past quarter century, the Musée d'art contemporain de Montréal one of three museums operated by the province of Quebec, and Canada's only museum devoted exclusively to contemporary art has occupied ‘temporary’ quarters at Cité du Havre, the remote site of Expo ‘67 on an island in the St Lawrence River.
Attendance plummeted as projected crowds dissipated even faster than popular fervour for Expo itself.
But now, on the city's 350th anniversary, after a decade of preparation, the MAC has moved to the city centre, taking up residence in a new C$33 million building on the Place des Arts, the centrally located cultural centre already home to the city's orchestra, opera and the Grands Ballets Canadiens.
Director Marcel Brisebois a Ph.D.
in philosophy, Jesuit, and for eighteen years host of the television talk show Rencontres told The Art Newspaper, ‘The museum was in virtual exile at Cité du Havre.
We were utterly inaccessible by public transportation.
Now there is a Metro stop at our door’.
The 150,000 sq.ft. building, funded entirely by the province which also provides C$8 million of the museum's C$9.2 million annual budget triples the museum's space.
The basement includes a 400-seat theatre, a smaller multi-use performance space and a conservation studio.
On the upper floors are a documentation centre and administrative offices with a commanding view of the city.
But the situation is far from ideal.
In order to fit onto the prestigious site, the facility is shoehorned into a very narrow tract, and the ground level is further delimited by the exit from a subterranean parking lot.
The Postmodern design by Jodoin Lamarre Pratte & Associates of Montreal is wrapped in a simple screen arcade, clad in drab pre-fab slabs of concrete to blend with older buildings on Place des Arts.
Inside, the potentially uplifting light and space of the skylit rotunda are obstructed by four incongruous non-structural piers painted a peculiar faux-bronze green.
From this pseudo-grandeur, a curving stairway ascends to eight capacious galleries.
These are divided into two inaugural shows: ‘Pour la suite du monde’ and selections from the permanent collection (both until 11 October).
The former consists of socially conscious installations by twenty-nine artists (twelve Canadian), including Geneviève Cadieux, Leon Golub, Hans Haacke, Cildo Mereiles, Nam June Paik, Giuseppe Penone, Cheri Samba and Jeff Wall.
The exhibition extends outside where, for example, Geneviève Cadieux has set on top of the building an alluring photo-billboard of rouged lips, and Alan Sonfist has planted an evergreen emerging from a splayed ballistic missile.
The selections from the 3,300 object post-1939 permanent collection evince weakness in all but Canadian art, Art Brut and Informel (Alechinsky, Dubuffet, Poliakoff, Riopelle, Soulanges, etc).
Until these holdings are improved, the museum would best mount high-quality temporary shows, rather than abide by its stated intention to consecrate half its exhibition space to the permanent collection.
Forthcoming temporary shows include surveys of contemporary Hungarian art (23 October 1992–93 January 1993), art about Aids (5 November 1992–93 January 1993) and various Quebec artists.
Admission is C$5.
Birmingham to spruce up its museums and galleries
BIRMINGHAM.
The performing arts have led a startling cultural renaissance in this Midlands industrial city, but the visual arts are now catching up.
In October 1993 the Gas Hall Exhibition Gallery will open with a show devoted to Canaletto and England.
The restructuring of the 1911 town offices by architects Stanton & Williams is the first increase in the Birmingham Museum and Gallery's display area since 1919.
The total cost of the project is £4 million, to which the City Council and the European Regional Development Fund contributed £1.5 million each and the rest is being raised by the museum.
The museum has recently set up the Jewellery Discovery Centre and is also planning to spend around £2.4m refurbishing Soho House, once owned by the eighteenth-century industrialist and inventor Matthew Boulton.
Plans are also being made for the redecoration of the whole museum and a new integrated display of its collections, costing around £4 million and taking at least ten years.
The Barber Institute, part of Birmingham University, which has recently had its 1939 building upgraded by Robert Atkinson with the restructuring of the nineteenth- and twentieth-century galleries, is discussing with the University plans to redevelop its basement, reorganise the library and improve teaching facilities and staff accommodation.
The Institute is also planning to make more efficient use of its spacious hall and render it more welcoming.
The Ikon Gallery, whose lease is coming up for renewal in February 1993, is studying the possibility of taking over a Victorian school next to the International Convention Centre.
The developer of the area has offered the listed building for free to the Gallery, which must now raise the funds necessary for the restoration, estimated at £2 million.
The project would allow the Gallery to increase its exhibition space by about a quarter and acquire much needed education, office and public areas.
Museum Overholland is closing down
AMSTERDAM.
Christian Braun, founder and director of the Overholland Foundation, has decided to close down the privately run museum on Museumsquare in Amsterdam.
Situated next to the Vincent van Gogh Museum in a lovely building dating from 1925 which is closely reminiscent of the architecture of Frank Lloyd Wright, the Museum Overholland was the only museum exclusively devoted to modern works of art on paper.
Not long after the museum opened in 1987, however, relations between the museum's director and the City Council became increasingly strained.
Braun had asked the City Council to create, or at least support, the creation of a system of pathways which would connect the several museums bordering Museumsquare in order to encourage visitors to circulate.
However, the sluggish and top-heavy bureaucratic apparatus of the City Council could not be moved to action.
Braun had also asked them to guarantee the peace around the museum, which they agreed to do.
The breaking of this promise led him to close the doors of the museum two years ago during the height of the van Gogh fever when a large outdoor festival was held right outside his doorstep.
The increasing friction between Braun and the City Council came to a head last month when proposals for a large sculpture garden, which was to be financed completely by the Overholland Foundation, again did not find the support from the City Council that Braun was hoping for.
As a result, both the closure of the museum and the abolition of the plan for the sculpture garden have been confirmed.
Projects undertaken by the Overholland Foundation have, during its brief existence, been characterised by high standards and a close attention to detail.
On the other hand, the City Council can hardly be blamed for wanting to sponsor large crowd-pulling cultural events in what is undoubtedly the most obvious place for them, right among the country's leading museums and near its most prestigious concert-hall.
Nevertheless, the City Council has behaved in what can only be described as a lax, sluggish and offhand manner towards one of the few private initiatives at the very centre of Dutch cultural life.
Jacob Voorthuis
Los Angeles County Museum acquires Florentine Silk Weavers' Guild altarpiece
LOS ANGELES.
The main panel of a late-fifteenth-century altarpiece from the monastery of San Marco, Florence, has been acquired by the Los Angeles County Museum of Art.
The 6 x 6 ½ ft tempera-on-wood painting was commissioned around 1485 by the Florentine Silk Weavers Guild for the chapel dedicated to the Holy Cross in the church of the Dominican complex, famed for its frescoes by Fra Angelico.
It shows the crowned and richly robed Christ smiling beneficently as he hovers orant against a cross that floats above a Eucharistic chalice.
To his left are the Blessed Antoninus, the later-canonised archbishop of Florence who founded San Marco, and St Mark, its patron saint; to his right are St Vincent Ferrer, an early Dominican, and St John the Baptist, patron saint of Florence.
The panel is not cut down though it may have had an adjoining predella and lunette with few areas of paint loss, and the intensity of the original pigments preserved.
Vasari recorded it in situ in his biography of Cosimo Roselli, but the work has since been attributed to the Master of the Fiesole ‘Epiphany’, a follower of Domenico Ghirlandaio.
In the late sixteenth century, the altarpiece was replaced by a Cigoli, and eventually sold.
Passing through a number of English collections in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, it was taken to a British-owned Italian villa in the mid-1930s.
The house was destroyed in World War II, and the Roselli assumed lost, though it had in fact been transferred to Switzerland.
With the death of the last heir, the estate sold the work through a London dealer, Derek Johns, to LACMA, whose Senior Curator Philip Conisbee recognised its potential even through layers of grime, and reserved it immediately.
Funds for its acquisition were provided by the Ahmanson Foundation, established in 1953 by former LACMA trustee Howard F. Ahmanson (1906–68), a local financier and major donor to the museum.
Newly conserved and cleaned, the altarpiece is now on display on the second floor of the Ahmanson Building, mounted in a temporary frame as it awaits a Renaissance-style gilt and sculpted frame being made in Florence.
Met and Brooklyn divide important collection of Modern American art
NEW YORK city.
The Metropolitan Museum of Art and the Brooklyn Museum have received substantial gifts of modern American art from the estate of Edith and Milton Lowenthal, a New York couple that assembled one of the most important private holdings of American art from the 1930s and 1940s.
The thirty-nine works Brooklyn acquired nineteen paintings, nine works on paper and three sculptures; the Met gained seven oils and one work on paper are all that remained of the hundreds of works the Lowenthals purchased between 1943 and 1958.
Robert T. Buck, Director of the Brooklyn Museum, called the donation ‘the most important single gift of twentieth-century American art in the history of the museum’.
During their lives, they gave work to numerous American museums, including Brooklyn, which already has more than a dozen Lowenthal pictures.
The gift to the Met, however, is the first from the couple's collection.
William S. Lieberman, Curator of Twentieth-century Art at the Metropolitan, expressed complete satisfaction with the seemingly unfair split.
‘I indicated the strengths and weaknesses of our own collection, and the Met got what it needed’, he told The Art Newspaper.
Among the Met's eight works are two oils each by Stuart Davis and Marsden Hartley, an oil and a drawing by Charles Sheeler, and single canvases by Arthur Dove and Max Weber.
Another coup was Hartley's 1938 portrait of painter Albert Pinkam Ryder, arguably the most historically resonant painting of the group.
Brooklyn got the bulk, though not the best, of the bequest, with eight oils by Hartley, three paintings and a watercolour by Davis, two oils by Weber, single canvases by Milton Avery, Stanton MacDonald-Wright, Alfred Maurer and Georgia O'Keeffe, two watercolours by John Marin, an oil and two watercolours by Lyonel Feininger, two sculptures by John B. Flanagan and one by Jos de Creeft, an oil and a drawing by Yasuo Kuniyoshi, and single works on paper by Morris Graves, Paul Burlin and Henry Cady wells.
Mr Lieberman told The Art Newspaper he would someday like to reassemble the Lowenthal holdings for the public.
‘It's an extraordinary capsule in time, covering American collecting over a period of a dozen years’, he said.
Major opening of new rooms at Rouen
ROUEN.
Two months ago the Musée des Beaux-Arts inaugurated the first phase of its renovation scheme with the opening of thirty-one new rooms devoted to painting and works of art of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
These include a section of little-known Russian icons, a gallery for temporary drawings exhibitions, a public reception area and a library, administered by the Réunion des musées nationaux.
The restoration project was begin in 1988 in collaboration with the State, and involves almost half of the museum.
For the occasion, around 300 works have been specially restored.
The final stage of the programme will conclude with the opening in 1994 of around fifty more rooms in the north wing, devoted to the eighteenth, nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
The museum houses the major collection outside Paris of Impressionist painting, and owns almost 3000 pictures, 7000 drawings, 400 sculptures along with furniture and works of art.
Among its more celebrated paintings are Clouet's ‘Diana at her bath’, Caravaggio's ‘Flagellation of Christ’ and Velazquez's ‘Democritus’in addition to outstanding French pictures from Poussin to Jouvenet.
The museum's south courtyard has become a sculpture garden conceived as a winter garden in which the more monumental works of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries such as Dufy's ‘Cours de la Seine’ are shown.
Special provision has been made for handicapped access, and in addition the museum now boasts an auditorium, and greater accessibility to the reserve collections.
Museum für Moderne Kunst in financial straits after only one year
FRANKFURT-AM-MAIN.
The much acclaimed Museum für Moderne Kunst built by Hans Hollein, which opened to the public last June (see The Art Newspaper No. 10, July-September 1991, p.4), is in financial trouble.
The museum for contemporary art, which cost DM48 million to build and was funded by the city of Frankfurt, needs an injection of at least DM250,000 (£86,000; $155,000) to keep going.
The director, Jean-Christophe Amman, foresees having to close a floor at a time if the city is unwilling to subsidise its costs.
He blames the crisis on the fact that the museum has been forced to pay for warders out of its own budget, which has meant that the sum of DM300,000 (£103,000; $186,000) per year earmarked for  acquisitions has been virtually used up.
One solution proposed by Amman is to bring in entry charges of DM3 per head, although there would continue to be no charge on Wednesdays and Sundays.
Sprengel completes its museum after a thirteen year gap
HANNOVER.
The Sprengel Museum re-opened in May after the completion of a new extension, making it one of the foremost museums for twentieth-century art in Europe (see The Art Newspaper No. 14, Janaury 1992, p.9).
Always envisioned by the architects, Peter and Ursula Trint (Cologne) and Dieter Quast (Heidelberg), as part of the final plan, the new building completes the museum complex by linking the old and new wings and tripling the existing exhibition space.
The first exhibition in the new rooms is ‘John Heartfield’, photomontages by the dadaist Berlin artist who commented with mordant satire on the Third Reich, which continues until 26 July (see The Art Newspaper No. 12, November 1991, p.7).
As part of its declared aim to present art in all its forms the museum gave twenty performances of ‘Futurismus Collage’ a theatrical experience of Italian Futurism with the title ‘Tod dem Mondschein oder gelbe Ohrfeigen?’
(Death to moonshine or a yellow box on the ears?).
Dutch museums will be allowed to deaccession to buy other works for the collection
THE HAGUE.
A sigh of relief emerged from the Gemeentemuseum in The Hague as the decision by Mrs Hedy D'Ancona, Minister for Cultural Affairs in the Netherlands, was announced concerning the deaccessioning of important works of art from Dutch museums.
She has sent a proposal to parliament that the sale of major works of art should be allowed on condition that the proper procedures be followed and the necessarily vague criteria be observed.
In effect the Netherlands Office for Fine Arts has been given powers to approve the sale of a work of art or, if it concerns a potentially important item, to refer the decision to the Minister, who will then be advised by the Heritage Council.
Mrs D'Ancona believes that this will allow each museum director to take his own stand on this controversial issue.
Credit for forcing a decision on this issue goes to Rudi Fuchs, director of the Gemeentemuseum in The Hague, who caused a fierce public discussion when he announced that he wanted to deaccession two Picassos in his collection in order to create a fund with which he could supplement his annual acquisitions budget and concentrate more on collecting contemporary art (see The Art Newspaper, No. 14, January 1992, p. 3).
Whatever the fate of the Picassos, there can be no doubt that the Minister's decision has altered the character of Dutch museums fundamentally.
They have always been relatively free to do what they liked with their collections, within reasonable limits, but now a museum can actually sell a top work of art with financial gain as a prime motive.
The only stipulation by law is that the profits be spent on the acquisition of other items for the collection, which means that a museum will, more than ever before, become the show-case of each successive director's taste.
Major gift of works by Calder to Chicago's contemporary museum
CHICAGO.
The Museum of Contemporary Art has been promised fifteen works by Alexander Calder, donated by the Ruth and Leonard J. Horwich family.
The gift from Mrs Horwich, an MCA trustee, includes four hanging mobiles, a balancing mobile, four stabiles, three sculptures and three works on paper.
During the 1960s and 1970s, she and her late husband collected mainly Surrealism and Chicago Imagism, and knew a number of artists whose chosen works were in the collection, including Calder.
The fifteen Calders join seven in the museum's permanent collection, including three mobiles previously given by the Horwiches.
Chicago has a special liking for the artist.
His ‘Flamingo’(1973) rises in Federal Plaza and ‘Universe’(1974), a huge motor-driven ‘moving mural’, is in the Sears Tower.
In 1974, former Mayor Daley declared 16 October ‘Calder Day’.
The Horwich donation is the first major gift following the unveiling of the MCA's new building plan, designed by Josef Paul Kleihues.
Paris
‘We are not just a temple to gold and glass but should turn our attention to daily life’
The Director of the Musée des Arts Décoratifs talks about forging links with industry and hi-tech which will allow visitors to ‘wear’ the jewellery and costumes
PARIS.
It is at present impossible to make chronological sense of the Musée des Arts Décoratifs: even the most determined visitors eventually lose the thread and are forced to retrace their steps.
The restructuring of this wing of the Louvre, which holds some 180,000 items is therefore more than welcome.
The project involves a complete re-think of the museum's identity.
Luciana Mottola Colban discussed the plans with Danièle Giraudy, one of the minds behind the Pompidou Centre, where she worked in an educational role for eight years, before becoming director of the Musée Picasso at Antibes, and then moving on to the Musée des Arts Decoratifs as Director in 1991.
Danièle Giraudy.
In restructuring the museum, we have concentrated on three areas, which also correspond to stages in the museum's historical development.
For the specialist visitor, we shall be reconstituting the so-called ‘study collections’, which formed the original nucleus of the museum.
These are alphabetically arranged sample collections of small items such as padlocks or door handles, exemplifying craftsmanship in a wide range of materials.
They will now be exhibited in a series of large display cases arranged around the seven circular balconies on the fourth floor.
Second, for the non-professional art lover, we shall be keeping the ‘period rooms’, originally gifts from generous donors, while attempting to order them in a coherent sequence spanning the period from the fifteenth to the twentieth century.
To do justice to the nineteenth century, we intend to open eleven new rooms, hung with wallpaper from our own collections, and to feature our little-known panoramas.
The third floor will be devoted to tapestries and a series of particularly famous larger exhibits, such as Napoleon's throne.
In the rooms currently occupied by the Musée des Arts de la Mode (which will be transferring to the Richelieu wing of the Louvre), we shall be presenting an overview of the twentieth century, while the Gallery of Creators on the ground floor, will feature occasional displays of contemporary subjects.
The idea of a ‘period room’ has recently been called into question.
The so-called ‘Louis XIV’ room at the Metropolitan was the subject of heated debate…
At the Metropolitan, disparate objects were brought together to create a period setting.
But in most cases we possess complete sets of furnishings and fittings.
The room itself is an object, with all its elements, carpets and hangings included, constituting an authentic whole, through which we can give a lesson in the development of style and taste.
The only thing to guard against is their rather repetitive effect, so we intend to introduce interesting lighting effects and to incorporate small video displays.
What will you be doing to make the museum more user-friendly?
In consultation with out architects, we are trying to improve movement between floors, so that we can suggest five one-hour itineraries, each catering to different interests.
We are also preparing a complete guide book in four languages and are considering using state-of-the-art innovations such as virtual image technology.
How exciting to look at the costumes and have the impression that one is wearing them, or see one's own face adorned with the ear-rings on display.
And what is the museum's new policy on exhibitions?
We intend to work in conjunction with the Musée des Arts de la Mode.
The two museums have some real hidden treasures, including 3,300 items of jewellery from all periods.
One of the joint ventures we envisage is ‘Autour du noir’, an exhibition on the theme of black, from the Middle Ages to the present day.
How do you respond to those who deplore the fact that brand promotion and advertising have found their way into a museum which frequently displays industrial products side by side with one-offs?
We should be quite clear on this.
Every year, the State pays us a subsidy to cover the daily running costs of the museum, while it is the museum's responsibility to find funds for staging exhibitions.
Clearly, the easy way to raise the money would be to become yet another cultural garage.
But that is definitely not our intention.
Where fashion is concerned, on the other hand, we are on more slippery ground.
For this reason, the agreement concluded between the museum, the Union Centrale des Arts Décoratifs and the Union Française des Arts du Costume, expresses the desire of all parties to concentrate on thematic exhibitions, in order to avoid pressures from manufacturers and designers.
Do you, nevertheless, believe that the Musée des Arts Décoratifs should play a role in the industrial life of the country?
In my view, one of the tasks of this museum is to establish links between the world of industry and the world of art.
Next year, in collaboration with the Monoprix department store chain, we shall be organising a competition for artists (rather than specialist designers).
Their brief will be to design everyday objects of the kind normally overlooked or treated as necessary evils: plastic bags, scouring pads, floor cloths, lavatory brushes, and so on.
The winning objects will be sold at reasonable prices in 300 department stores, from the date our exhibition begins.
We are not just a temple to gold and glass, but should turn our attention to daily life in all its many aspects.
Chicago
Back to the drawing board for Museum of Contemporary Art
Community rejects plan to raise garden above street level
CHICAGO.
The Museum of Contemporary Art has run up against community opposition to its $55-million proposal to redevelop a two-acre block in the city's Streeterville district.
The main bone of contention is not the Josef P. Kleihues-designed building itself, but the plan to raise the adjacent sculpture garden atop a two-storey parking garage, masking it from pedestrian view with a sixteen foot stone wall.
Locals claim the plan is not in keeping with representations the museum made when initially seeking community approval.
According to Martha Fitzgerald, a spokesperson for the Streeterville Organization of Active Residents (SOAR), ‘The museum is cavalierly ignoring the terms of the $99 ninety-nine year lease the community helped them achieve’.
That lease stipulates that the building occupy not more than half the lot, but the garden-topped garage brings the footprint to 90%.
MCA Director Kevin Consey points out that the city does not consider auxiliary structures, like a parking lot, part of the footprint.
But Gerald Kubasiak, president of SOAR when the lease was negotiated, states, ‘If the proposal does not violate the legal aspect, it clearly and absolutely violates the spirit of the agreement’.
Mr Consey told The Art Newspaper, ‘We are going to try to come up with a modified plan whereby overflow parking may be off-site.
But I don't think the wall would be eliminated completely, because of security’.
The Chicago Plan Commission, appointed by the mayor, has ultimate say on the MCA's building permit.
The commission will seek to arbitrate a resolution before handing down a decision in late summer.
Moscow
Yeltsin bails out
Tretyakov with $15.2 million in Western credits
Commission of enquiry critical of Gallery's foreign trade activities
MOSCOW.
A visit by Boris Yeltsin has brought an unexpected solution to the financial difficulties facing the Tretyakov Gallery (see The Art Newspaper No.17, April 1992, p.5).
The President has promised to allocate $15.2 million from impending Western credits to complete construction at the Gallery.
Old hands at the Tretyakov remember that Yeltsin examined the plan for restoration and construction work at the Gallery back when he was the minister at the USSR Gosstroy (State Construction Department).
Tretyakov Director Yuriy Korolev confirmed the idea of construction with him, and now Yeltsin has effectively seen to it that the project is carried out.
During Yeltsin's visit, Yuriy Korolev secured the President's support in the matter of keeping the Tretyakov Gallery building on the Krymskaya Naberezhnaya, where part of the gallery was located during reconstruction.
It is known that the Museum of Modern Art, which has no accommodation at the moment, has had its eye on the Krymskaya Naberezhnaya location for a long time.
However, the joy at the promised financial assistance and the meeting with the President has been somewhat marred.
The government commission examining the activities of the Gallery has finished its work.
While it made a number of positive points, the commission was nonetheless fairly critical in its assessment of the operation of the Gallery.
According to chairman Aleksandr Rozhin, the commission has come to the conclusion that the Gallery's foreign trade activities suffer from an amateur approach.
The economic gain from foreign contracts is not worth the risk to national property.
The commission also pointed out the extremely confused state of the Gallery's accounts, unpaid revenue from hard currency contracts and multi-million rouble purchases of unused equipment.
There has as yet been no well thought-out conception of the layout of the Tretyakov Gallery, which has been disrupted by the reconstruction of the old building.
The government commission's work was not limited to establishing the current state of affairs at the Gallery; it was also entrusted with working out new proposals.
Among these is the establishment of a board of trustees which would keep an eye on expenditure of budget resources and financial allocations, setting up a charity council, drafting completely new regulations for the museum, the foundation of a commercial marketing service and other moves.
Some variety was brought into the humdrum life at the gallery by the arrival of the Italian carabinieri, who found the works from the Tretyakov which were stolen in Genoa last year.
Apart from the canvases which had been found they brought the gallery a number of landscapes as a gift.
They returned to Italy with the traditional gift of Tula samovars with certificates of commendation from the Russian government.
ARTscribble (as she is wrote)
Sensitive strolling while living The Natural
[Richard Long's]forms, the marks, the accidental decantations of sensitive strolls, do not possess the ‘imperfection’ of the natural, they are the archetypes of human sublimation that deliberately establish a certain landscape counterpoint, a kind of megalithic writing, but their elaboration is so cared for that it tends towards a dialectic not of oppositions but of alliances.
Long does not reduce to the simple; he departs from it.
He projects his body, positions his knowledge and identifies his vital trajectory.
He therefore lives The Natural, something apparently forgotten in favour of an alienating fiction.
Rodin's drawings: the complete inventory
PARIS.
The Musée Rodin has published the last of six volumes cataloguing the artist's drawings.
There are over 7,200 drawings extant and it has taken Claudie Judrin ten years to complete the task.
Most of Rodin's drawings are undated, unsigned and untitled, so she had to work virtually from scratch.
To mark the completion of the inventory, the Museum is mounting an exhibition which runs until 19 July.
It illustrates the criteria adopted in preparing the catalogue and the difficulties encountered, explaining how fakes were identified, what discoveries were made and how the drawings were dated.
New home for Rottweil's sculptures and antiquities
ROTTWEIL.
Rottweil's fine collections of medieval Swabian wood sculpture and Roman antiquities is now on display in the new Dominikanermuseum.
The sculptures (around 170 in number) date from around 1300 to 1520.
They were in the collection of the local parish priest Johann Georg Martin Dursch (1800–1881) until King Wilhelm I bought and donated them to the town in 1850.
Particularly well represented is the school of Ulm (1482–1519) with figures and altarpieces by its main masters Hans Multscher, Michael Erhart, Daniel Mauch, Nikolaus Weckmann, and Jörg Kändel.
The Roman relics, all found in the area, include a large Orpheus mosaic and an important collection of terra sigilata.
The museum a branch of the Württembergisches Landesmuseum Stuttgart also has a room and a small budget of DM100,000 (£34,812; $61,164) for temporary exhibitions of contemporary art.
Metropolitan takes on new medievalists
NEW YORK.
William D. Wixom, Chairman of the Department of Medieval Art and the Cloisters, has added two persons to the Metropolitan Museum of Art's curatorial staff.
Helen C. Evans, a Byzantinist with a Ph.D.
from New York University's Institute of Fine Arts, has been appointed Assistant Curator in the museum's Medieval Department, while Daniel Kletke, who is writing a dissertation on liturgical combs in ivory for the Frei Universität in Berlin, has been appointed Curatorial Assistant at the Cloisters.
Ms Evans specialises in Early Christian and Byzantine art with a focus on East Christian material.
She has held visiting teaching appointments at several universities, served as a research associate for Early Christian art at the Institute of Fine Arts, and is assisting curators at the Pierpont Morgan Library in preparing an exhibition of Armenian manuscripts.
She fills a spot held by the distinguished Early Christian and Byzantine scholar, Margaret Frazer, who recently retired owing to ill health.
The German-born Mr Kletke went to school in England, studied in Berlin, then visited the University of Maryland as a Fulbright scholar.
He has held a graduate internship at the Metropolitan, delivered gallery talks for the education department at the Cloisters, worked with the Museum of Applied Art in Cologne, and lectured at the Kunstsammlung NordrheinWestfalen.
For three years he helped run the ID Gallery, Düsseldorf, which deals in contemporary art.
Both Ms Evans and Mr Kletke are working with Mr Wixom preparing an exhibition of the medieval art acquired by the museum since 1977, under the directorship of Philippe de Montebello.
The show is scheduled to open in May 1993.
International Council of Museum meets in Quebec this September
QUEBEC.
The XVIth triennial General Conference of International Council of Museums (ICOM) will take place in Quebec City (19–26 September), marking only the second time in its forty-six year history that the group has met in North America.
The Paris-based organisation comprises more than 8,000 individual and institutional members and twenty-four international committees.
The meeting, titled ‘Museums: rethinking the boundaries’, will include sessions on creative and intellectual freedom, ecology, world famine, North-South economic issues, political tensions and the survival of centuries-old cultures in the age of technology.
A concurrent trade fair will comprise stands of about fifty museums, exhibition specialists and suppliers.
The conference will be based in the Hotel Loew's le Concorde, and will branch out into twelve locations in the historic Old City of Quebec.
Registration is open to members at C$425, and C$250 for each accompanying person.
For further information call ICOM 1992 at (418) 694 1992; or Fax (418) 694 1450.
Barnes Collection
‘Seurat's ‘Les Poseuses’ too fragile to travel’, says conservator in court
Legal wrangling over proposed tour of Collection continues as Carter Brown says, ‘This tour will be the Barnes's salvation’
MERION, PA.
In testimony before a court that will eventually rule on whether or not paintings from the Barnes Collection will go on tour for the first time, a conservator argued that several of the Barnes masterpieces should not tour under any circumstances.
Testifying as an expert for the Violette de Mazia Trust, an organisation that opposes the current board of trustees of the Barnes Foundation, conservator Wendy Hartman Samet reported that yellow paint on the surface of Henri Matisse's renowned 1906 ‘Le Bonheur de Vivre’ has the consistency of a moth's wing.
‘If you blow on it, the paint will come off’, she said, urging that the painting should not be allowed to travel.
Similarly, Samet added, the paint is flaking on Georges Seurat's 1888 masterpiece ‘Les Poseuses’, reason enough not to put that work on tour.
The tour in question is expected to begin in the summer of 1993 at the National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C., and then travel to Tokyo and Paris, if the Orphans Court of Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, allows the Barnes Foundation to override the indenture to benefactor Albert C. Barnes's will that prohibits the loan of any works from the eccentric millionaire's collection.
National Gallery staff have examined the paintings at the Barnes and testified in support of the tour.
Lawyers for the Barnes Foundation sought to keep Ms Samet from testifying, arguing that she was an expert in paintings conservation and not in the preparation of works of art for travel.
Now employed by the Freer Gallery and Winterthur, Ms Samet worked as a conservator for the Barnes Foundation from January 1990 to January 1992.
She was dismissed, sources say, after opposing the international tour expected by Barnes trustees to bring the foundation at least $7 million.
More than a year ago, the Barnes board had failed in a bid for permission to sell up to fifteen works from the legendary collection of early modern  materpieces in order to fund building repairs.
‘This tour, if it is allowed by the courts, will be the Barnes's salvation’, said National Gallery director J. Carter Brown, ‘because when it comes back from Paris and Japan, there will be many millions of dollars that will have been generated this way.
In the meantime, they will have been spreading the word about the collection and ensuring their future health’.
The judge hearing the Barnes  petition to send about eighty of its paintings on tour has put all other legal issues facing the Barnes aside while he decides whether or not that tour will take place.
Those disputes, however, could have serious implications for the art collection and educations program housed in a 1924 limestone villa in suburban Merion, Pennsylvania.
One recent charge alleges that the Violette de Mazia Trust, an endowment derived from the estate of the late Barnes protégée Violette de Mazia, was created from the sale of paintings de Mazia purloined while an intimate of Dr Barnes.
Since the de Mazia Trust remains the most forceful opponent of the current Barnes leadership (and a major source of operating funds for the Barnes Foundation), serious doubts about its legitimacy would lift a major obstacle from the Barnes board's freedom of movement.
Another dispute focuses on the Barnes board itself and a contract signed with Alfred A. Knopf to publish several volumes on the Barnes Collection.
As a snub to the wealthy Philadelphia establishment, just before his death in a fatal car crash in 1951, Albert C. Barnes willed the power to name four out of five trustees of this foundation to Lincoln University, a small, predominantly black college in rural Pennsylvania established in the mid-nineteenth century to educate former slaves.
The de Mazia Trust alleges that the Barnes's current contract with the New York publisher Alfred A. Knopf was signed only after Lincoln received a $2 million gift from the Samuel I Newhouse Foundation, a philanthropy set up by the family of Knopf's owner.
The de Mazia Trust and others also allege that the Barnes Foundation had given control over the copyrights to the collection's paintings to Lincoln University Press, a previously non-existent imprint.
In contract negotiations, the Barnes Foundation had demanded that Lincoln University Press be advanced several hundred thousand dollars and receive a share in any publishing profits.
The current contract with Knopf mentions Lincoln University Press as a co-publisher.
Sources say that other documents and depositions of Barnes trustees reveal much more manoeuvring on Lincoln's behalf, all of which would be illegal.
New York publishers echo accusations of a conflict of interest in the choice of Knopf without prior competitive bidding.
Among them, Nicholas Calloway of Calloway Editions, Inc., of New York maintains that he informed the Barnes trustees in late 1990 that his firm would match any price offered to publish a Barnes book, thanks to a major corporation willing to provide several million dollars' subsidy for the volume.
Calloway estimated the sales potential of such a book at one million copies worldwide.
Nonsense, says Knopf editor Susan Ralston, who is heading the Barnes project.
Ralston dismissed Calloway's sales projection, but acknowledges that no auction for Barnes publishing rights was held.
The foundation simply expressed its preference for a publisher, she says, with no talk of a quid pro quo.
While Ralston concedes that negotiations did include a discussion of Lincoln's collaboration in the project including the participation of Lincoln University Press no Lincoln role is mentioned in the final contract.
Ralston did say that the first volume Knopf intends to publish (and is now rushing to complete) will be entitled French Masterpieces of the Barnes Collection, with an introduction by Richard Wattenmaker, an alumnus of the Barnes art appreciation classes, who is currently director of the Archives of American Art in Washington, D.C. Catalogue essays, by a team of ten writers five from the National Gallery in Washington, five from the Réunion des Musées Nationaux in France will examine eighty works from the Barnes to be displayed at the National Gallery, the starting point for the Barnes tour.
Subsequent sites for the tour in France, Japan, and the United States will display fewer pictures, somewhere around seventy.
Knopf's contract, Ralston said, is for two volumes on the Barnes.
So far, she admitted, the contents of the second book have not been decided.
The promised catalogue raisonné of the entire collection, according to Ralston, is likely to be a third volume.
Ralston and other Knopf officials, including S.I.Newhouse, were due to be deposed by the de Mazia Trust's lawyers this month.
Those sessions have been postponed to expedite a decision to allow the tour to take place.
Students of the Barnes Foundation's art education classes who support the de Mazia Trust's case accuse Knopf of no wrongdoing.
In a separate case, those students have been given standing in the Montgomery County Orphans Court for their petition to deny the foundation permission to change the terms of Dr Barnes's will without reasonable grounds.
(Besides banning the loan or sale of paintings, the will prohibits social events in the grounds of the Barnes villa.
In recent months, students allege, the Barnes Collection has become a stop for special private visits by celebrities visiting Philadelphia, in violation of Barnes's will).
Introducing institutions
The Tàpies Foundation in Barcelona
Not just a shrine to the master but a forum for international artists who comment on society
BARCELONA.
A major retrospective by Polish artist Krzysztof Wodiczko entitled ‘Instruments, Projections, Vehicles’ is at the Fundació Antoni Tàpies in Barcelona until 6 September.
Anyone considering the venue a rather incongruous one for startling political imagery and prototype ‘vehicles’ for those with and without power in society (the police on one side, immigrants and the homeless on the other), has obviously not got the message the Fundació has aimed to get across since it opened exactly two years ago: that it is not just about Tàpies, but has a wider and more challenging agenda.
First established as a concept by the Catalan artist in 1984 when he announced that he would be donating 300 paintings and 3000 graphic works to the city of Barcelona, the Fundació was the subject of protracted negotiations with the local autonomous government and the Ministry of Culture in Madrid, which finally resulted in a handsome level of funding for building in which to house them.
Assisted by his younger son Miquel Tàpies and Manuel J. Borja-Villel (respectively executive and curatorial directors), Tàpies' blueprint has become an innovative institution with international links.
The Fundació is housed in a spacious early modernista building on Calle Arago in the heart of Barcelona's commercial district.
Originally designed by Lluis Domènech i Montaner as the headquarters of the Montaner i Simón publishing house, its conversion was by the architect's great grandson Lluis Domènech together with his wife Roser Amadó, and has exhibition spaces on three levels.
The Fundació has its premises on loan from the local government for fifty years, which is fortunate as the building took some finding, and cost Pta.
700 million to buy and convert, a sum provided by the local and national government, who continue to allocate annual funds to cover its running costs (Pta30 million and 25 million respectively per annum; there are are currently nineteen staff).
Tàpies' main aim was to promote the study and understanding of modern art and culture; to create a museum in the form of a working research centre with a pluralist approach and activities of international scope, not a passive repository or shrine to the artist (like the Dalí Museum in Figueres).
He sensibly left the evolution of this ambitious concept to the two young directors (both art historians) who have devised a three-part programme.
The Fundació is committed to mounting changing exhibitions examining facets of Tàpies' work; showing and promoting non-Western art forms, and curating retrospectives of contemporary artists who make connections between art and society such as Wodiczko, Louise Bourgeois and Jannis Kounellis.
Next year Mario Merz and Brassai's photographs from the 1940s and '50s will be shown.
Miquel Tàpies does not want to have a hectic turnover of exhibitions, but a twin programme of major retrospectives and seminars which engender debate.
Among the symposia mooted is one in 1993 looking at new museum media for the millennium, organised with the Video Department of the Whitney Museum in New York.
As yet most of the artists billed for exhibitions are non-Spanish, with high international profiles.
Local artists will probably get a look in eventually, although there are other organisations such as the cultural foundation of the Caixa de Pensiones Bank which actively promote younger artists within Spain.
The directors regard their non-Western art programme as a serious academic campaign.
Chinese and Japanese art, in particular, is very thin on the ground in Spanish collections, and home-grown experts in these areas are also rare.
By establishing formal links with the universities, and international specialists, they hope to redress the balance.
Similarly, a projected exhibition of contemporary African art to be mounted in conjunction with Susan Vogel of the Africa Center in New York, will help to refocus art historical research, and allow a range of points of view to be promoted.
Miquel Tàpies points out that the Fundació's impressive library is actually Barcelona's only public specialist art facility of its kind.
At its core is a unique collection of books on various non-Western art forms donated by Tàpies himself.
The Fundació's maintenance costs eat up the lion's share of government subsidy, and as the programme is expanded the directors hope to cultivate funds for the exhibition and education programmes from sponsorship and patronage.
At present Spain's tax laws make this an uphill prospect, but Miquel Tàpies is determined to break some boundaries.
More than a museum devoted to one artist's work (like the Museum Picasso, or the Fundació Joan Miró), it will be competing for income and audiences with an increasing number of new museums in Barcelona: the stylish Centre d'Art Santa Mònica which cuts a dash on the tourist drag of the Ramblas; a museum of contemporary art being designed by Richard Meier, to be squeezed into the dense Barri Gotic, as well as the National Museum of Catalan Art up on Montjuic, remodelled by Gae Aulenti, and currently under construction.
Miquel Tàpies does not find the plethora of new cultural centres a worrying prospect, nor does he aim to compete directly with them.
He explains that, ‘For many years no one did anything for art in Barcelona.
Then in the 1960s Picasso gave an important collection to the city and Miró a large donation of paintings and sculptures.
Now the government understands that they have to do things for culture’, compensating for neglected priorities in the past.
He's confident that the ‘new programmes will clarify a lot’, not just in terms of Catalonia's cultural identity but on an international scale, and that means making long term financial commitments.
As for the connection between his father's lauded status as an artist and the activities of the Fundació, Miquel Tàpies is also committed to establishing a distinct identity: ‘It's important for us to go beyond the name’.
London's home of bishops opens new museum
LONDON.
Fulham Palace, home of the bishops of London from 704AD to 1973, has opened two newly-restored rooms to display its collection and chart the history of this unique building and the lives of the bishops who lived there.
The Palace, set in idyllic leafy grounds in west London (the first magnolia to be cultivated in Europe was grown here), is owned by Church of England and sub-let to Hammersmith and Fulham Council who have contributed to the cost of the new rooms.
They will be used to display the Palace's collection of paintings which include royal and ecclesiastical portraits and two important designs by Benjamin West for stained glass windows for Fonthill Abbey, home of the eccentric collector William Beckford.
Previously thought to be lost, one of the designs, for a window depicting the martyr saint Thomas à Beckett, is a variant of a design now in Toronto.
Also on show are newly restored eighteenth-century stained glass panels and an elaborately embroidered early twentieth-century cope on loan from St Paul's Cathedral.
The Palace owns the matching mitre and the two garments are reunited for the first time since the 1930s.
Finally, Neolithic, Roman and medieval finds from the grounds are displayed, together with old gardening tools and a mummified rat found in the medieval roof.
Opening hours of the museum are Wednesday to Sunday 2 to 5pm.
The Palace has launched a friends association with the aim of raising funds for its ongoing restoration programme.
Contact the Curator for further details.
Zichy Museum at Zala, Hungary, reinaugurated by President
ZALA.
On 16 May 1992 the Zichy Museum at Zala in Western Hungary was reinaugurated by President Göncz.
Referring to the range of Zichy's work, of the museum he said, ‘It will perhaps entice those who want to see the ocean in a drop of water’.
Mihály Zichy (1827–1906) came from an ancient family of Hungarian counts.
He trained as a painter in Vienna, spent long periods in Russia and France and became one of Hungary's leading Romantic painters and illustrators.
‘Zichy, like Gustave Doré, is an extraordinary genius, a portentum, to use the Latin expression, a volcano exploding with talent’, said Théophile Gautier.
His most important painting, ‘The triumph of the Genius of Destruction’, intended for the Paris World Fair in 1878, portrayed the inhumanity of those who opposed progress and the murders perpetrated by Church and State.
Not surprisingly his career as Court Painter to the Tsars of Russia was limited.
His artistic debts were to the French Romantics and also Goya, Wiertz and Hogarth.
In 1880 he temporarily returned to his birthplace, Zala, and built a studio at his ancestral home.
In 1927 a private museum was established there by his granddaughter, following his wish that his collection, which included a library and armour, be kept together at Zala.
In 1944 her son, Dr Istvan Csicsery-Rónay, prevailed on the Soviet commander to return the contents, with which he had just made off.
However, in 1947 he was arrested by the Communists.
Escaping to the West, he returned to Hungary in 1990, when he instigated the restoration of the museum and the creation of the Mihály Zichy Foundation to support it and its library, to promote Zichy's work and create a park and house of rest for artists.
Selby Whittingham
Gilbert mosaics at Los Angeles
LOS ANGELES.
Three new galleries opened in May at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art to display the Gilbert collection of mosaics.
The largest of its kind in the west, a substantial part of the collection assembled by Rosalinde and Arthur Gilbert has already been donated to the museum and the rest is promised.
Roman micromosaics are displayed in the first two rooms.
These include large scale pieces of furniture and pictures and small luxury objects such as snuff boxes, jewellery and miniatures favoured by Grand Tour visitors to Italy.
The third room displays Florentine pietra dura (hard stone) work in the form of cabinets, tabletops, pictures and decorative objects.
Met's textile holdings further enhanced by rare early altar-frontal
NEW YORK CITY.
‘Even now museums can acquire important medieval tapestries’, says William D. Wixom, Chairman of the Metropolitan Museum of Art's Department of Medieval Art and the Cloisters.
Mr Wixom recently acquired a rare German fifteenth-century altar frontal, one of only two of its kind in the United States.
The piece was purchased from the private collection of Ruth Blumka, a New York dealer with close ties to the museum.
The 35 x 63 in. weaving is in fine condition, with a brightly coloured design depicting ‘The Man of Sorrows and four standing saints’ in a manner not unlike contemporary Gothic woodcuts.
Two coats of arms in the lower corners of the flanking foliate borders enabled scholars to trace the piece to Nuremberg, to connect it with a married couple, to date it to around 1465, and to associate it with a group of antependia the mourning widow contributed to altars in the Lorenzkirche.
Mr Wixom told The Art Newspaper there are a number of such works in German museums, but the only other one in the U.S. is in the Cleveland Museum of Art.
Both were in the Metropolitan's 1986 exhibition, ‘Gothic and Renaissance Art in Nuremberg, 1300–1550’.
After light conservation work it will go on view in the Cloisters' ‘Treasury’.
The Metropolitan's 33,000 textiles constitute one of the largest and most varied collections in the world.
Earlier this year, the museum announced plans to construct a 23,500 square foot state-of-the-art centre for the study, conservation and storage of its vast collection.
Scheduled to open in 1995, the facility will be named in honour of its principal benefactor, Antonio Ratti, founder and President of the Ratti Group of Como, Italy, the world's largest producer of printed silk fabrics (see The Art Newspaper No. 14, January 1992, p. 14).
Further evidence of the Metropolitan's heightened attention to textiles is the imminent completion of a well-illustrated catalogue of the medieval tapestries, being written on contract by Adolfo Cavallo, former curator of textiles at the Metropolitan and the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston.
The catalogue of Renaissance and later material was written by Edith Appleton Standen and published in 1985.
Nubian fruits of partage go on show at Museum of Fine Arts
BOSTON.
The Museum of Fine Arts has dedicated a gallery to its superb collection of ancient artifacts from Nubia.
The 2,000 sq.ft space contains a chronological array of nearly 500 ancient objects from the region in the southern portion of modern-day Egypt.
Rita Freed, Curator of Egyptian and Ancient Near Eastern Art at the MFA, says the presentation is the most comprehensive outside the Sudan National Museum in Khartoum, outstripping the Nubian galleries at the National Museum in Warsaw, the British Museum and the Royal Ontario Art Gallery in Toronto.
The MFA's 25,000 Nubian objects, dating from 6000 B.C. to 350 A.D., form the world's largest and finest collection outside Africa.
Virtually all were acquired during the museum's joint expeditions with Harvard University between 1905 and 1932, conducted at the invitation of the Sudanese and Egyptian governments on the eve of the enlargement of the first Aswan dam.
At that time the museum was permitted to keep half the objects excavated.
The gallery contains tools, pottery, shell and bone ornaments, gold, silver and crystal jewellery, figurines, bronze mirrors, daggers, ivory inlays from domestic furniture and Greek and Roman imports.
Conservators have reconstructed a third-century B.C. carved-sandstone ‘coffin bench’, and a fourth-century etched-sandstone chapel wall, major items that have not been seen since they were disassembled for transport decades ago.
Unfortunately, examples of large-scale statuary are restricted by the load-bearing capacity of the floor.
For example, two colossal standing figures that are among the museum's Nubian treasures will remain in the Egyptian galleries until a system can be devised to shore up the structure.
‘Nubia: Ancient Kingdoms of Africa’ has been made possible by NYNEX and New England Telephone.
Exhibitions
The Museum of Modern Art, New York
This autumn, the biggest show ever of the painter's painter: Matisse
The curator, John Elderfield, muses on the rival reputations of Matisse and Picasso and suggests that Matisse's real influence has yet to make itself felt: ‘I am going to be very interested to see whether this exhibition will have an effect on contemporary painting’
NEW YORK.
The largest exhibition of Matisse's work ever opens at the Museum of Modern Art, New York, this autumn (24 September-12 January 1993).
Comprising some 275 paintings, plus 150 works in other media including fifty découpages, thirty sculptures and a selection of drawings and illustrated books, it will occupy the entire first and second floors of the museum, temporarily displacing the permanent collection to the galleries normally used for loan exhibitions.
The exhibition unites the museum's own collection of works by Matisse with the pictures owned by the Hermitage and Pushkin Museums and by the French national collections.
Other important loans have been obtained from the Cone Collection, Baltimore; the Art Institute, Chicago; the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art; the Statens Museum for Kunst, Copenhagen; and the Tate Gallery, London.
The exhibition's organiser is John Elderfield, Director of the Department of Drawings and Curator of the Department of Paintings and Sculpture at the Museum of Modern Art.
Formerly a student of John Golding, Mr Elderfield arrived at the museum in 1975 and has curated ‘Fauvism and its affinities’(1976); ‘Matisse in the Collection of the Museum of Modern Art’(1978); ‘The drawings of Matisse’(1984); ‘Kurt Schwitters’(1985); and was a co-organiser of ‘Matisse in Morocco’(1990).
He spoke to Roger Bevan of the exhibition and the artist.
How well do we know Matisse?
John Elderfield.
I think that we really still don't know him.
I came across a text which Christian Zervos had written in 1931.
He said that we admire Matisse much more than we know him and I really think that is still true.
There have been retrospective exhibitions, but none has provided, I feel, a fully balanced representation of the different periods of his work.
They have left us with a divided artist.
With such recent specialised exhibitions like ‘Matisse: the Nice Period’ and ‘Matisse in Morocco’, is this the right moment to mount a major survey of his art?
I think there are practical and philosophical reasons for acting now.
The practical reason was that because we had collaborated with the Russian museums for earlier exhibitions we were able to make an agreement and bring together our collections with theirs.
We really felt that, with the existing uncertainties in Russia, this was a situation where, once we had an agreement, we had to go ahead.
I don't think that anyone could contemplate a retrospective of Matisse without the  involvement at least of the four central institutions which are collaborating on our exhibition: the two Russian museums; Paris and ourselves.
Strategically, it was the time to do it.
Matisse is a genuinely popular artist, but will the exhibition contain new material for scholars of his work?
I think it will emerge in different ways.
There will be broad scholarly interest simply in seeing the whole thing together and in reuniting certain pairs or groups of paintings which were conceived together but which have not been seen together in the past.
There is obviously a scholarly interest in being able to see the two versions of ‘La Dance’, from our museum and from the Hermitage, or the two versions of ‘Nasturtiums with dance’ from the Metropolitan Museum and from the Hermitage.
Second, there are some works which simply have not been seen in exhibitions in the past.
Some of these are very great pictures, but even those that are not will alter our view of Matisse.
Are there periods in his career or aspects of his art which have not been properly appreciated in the past and which will be reassessed by your exhibition?
The paintings of the Thirties and Forties have not been seen in any sort of proper way and they are quite extraordinary, particularly that last group of interiors which Matisse painted between 1946 and 1948.
He was using colour in a different way, almost as an independent element.
Of course, he had already used colour in a non-imitative way, but after 1930; in part as a result of using paper-cutouts to help with the design of the Barnes mural he realised that colour could have a tangible reality of its own.
To see this development in the context of what he was doing with paper cut-outs will, I think, be very interesting.
Then there are other areas which have been seen recently but which are, I still think, not properly understood, particularly the Nice period.
Are there works which you had hoped to borrow for the exhibition but which are not being made available to you?
There are a few works which I would have loved to have borrowed but which were simply too fragile to travel, and there were works which were prohibited by reasons of the terms under which they were given to a particular collection, the Barnes Foundation, for example.
As a result, ‘Le Bonheur de Vivre’ from 1905/6, which is clearly an extraordinarily important picture for Matisse's development, cannot, unfortunately, be included.
Another great painting, ‘La Femme au Chapeau’ of 1905, was recently given to the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art with other pictures by Matisse, but the bequest prohibited this picture from travelling.
Will Matisse emerge as a different artist after your exhibition?
Inevitably, he will emerge as a different artist, if only because the full extent of his achievement simply hasn't been seen together.
I think he will turn out to be an artist who is not the happy hedonist of popular reputation.
There are extraordinarily vivid and exuberant pictures which are countered by others which have an almost penitential mood to them.
Here is an artist for whom sensuality was extraordinarily important, but who will turn out to be emotionally far more complex than we had previously thought.
He is also an artist who covered enormous ground.
For comparison, one really has to go back to the Renaissance, to someone like Giovanni Bellini, who travelled an enormous territory; even to Giotto, the artist who Matisse said was the peak of his aspiration.
Matisse saw himself as occupying a similar transitional role to Giotto, but it is, in a way, Giotto's role turned around.
Matisse comes at the end of a tradition of Renaissance illusionism and volumetric painting which is irrevocably shifting into something different and he wants it both ways, just as Giotto wanted it both ways.
I believe that one of the most moving aspects of seeing his work together will be an extraordinary sense of purpose which will have to be understood as carrying certain moral implications of the seriousness of his enterprise.
It is the notion of an artist willing to attempt to maintain traditional ties and yet acknowledging the fact that he cannot relax in the security of the past, that art must change.
What do you consider to have been Matisse's most important contribution to modern art?
His most important contribution may be his ability to be a traditional and original painter at the same time.
More specifically, there is Matisse's individual contribution, such as how colour is reinvented in his painting.
His areas of colour are absolutely precise and integrally related and so the formal means and the pictorial incidents fit together so perfectly.
The earliest examples are pictures of 1907 or 1908, such as the wonderful ‘Bathers with a turtle’, where he lays three isolated figures and this absurd tortoise in the picture and persuades them to cohere simply by the pressure exerted on them by the colour of the ground.
It is something which seems such an ordinary thing to do, and yet the effect of it is something which has not been seen in pictorial art since Giotto.
For me, in the great compositions, there is this absolute sense of mystery which is conveyed by figural means and by formal means.
Matisse and Picasso are usually regarded as the great artists of the century.
Can they be fairly compared and, in that comparison, how does Matisse fare?
The comparison between Matisse and Picasso is true and present and I do not think that one can look at Matisse without thinking of Picasso and vice versa.
We know that Matisse is more than a decorative painter and we agree that Picasso is not always an aggressive painter, but the whole discourse about these painters has depended upon certain prejudicial polarities: colour or form; wholeness or disintegration; tradition or avant-garde; French or international.
If we can suspend the rigidity of the traditional comparisons, we can realise that Matisse and Picasso are in many respects part of the same enterprise.
They maintain the art of painting and drawing and sculpture as a figurative enterprise, and actually tend to be very close at certain points, certainly in their paintings of the 1930s.
In the end Matisse fares very well indeed.
In terms of an artist who discovers the meaning in the making of a picture, he is, I think, the superior artist, and that Picasso really only matches him in the Cubist paintings where the meaning is found in the material in an extraordinary sense, with dapplings and little markings and so on.
It becomes less important to Picasso later on but it is something which is constant for Matisse and it has always been recognised by critics who have described him as a painter's painter.
In that sense the traditional notion of Picasso as a more conceptual artist than Matisse holds but I think only in that sense.
Clearly, Picasso's work has been more influential in the sense that Cubism changed the vocabulary of twentieth-century art.
Nevertheless, I think that the influence of Matisse is something which is far more elusive and may not yet have been expressed in painting.
I am going to be very interested to see whether this exhibition has an influence on contemporary painting.
Stuttgart
Kandinsky's ‘small pleasures’ at Stuttgart
The first major show of the artist's works on paper draws heavily on private collections
STUTTGART.
Vivian Endicott Barnett, ex-Guggenheim curator and author of the ongoing catalogue raisonné of Kandinsky's watercolours, has put together the first major exhibition of the artist's work on paper.
The exhibition has previously been seen at the Kunstsammlung Nordrhein-Westfalen, Düsseldorf and is now at the Staatsgalerie Stuttgart until 2 August.
Dr Barnett conceived of the idea for the exhibition whilst working on the catalogue raisonné of the works on paper, of which Volume I, covering the years 1900–1921 has already been published.
Volume II, spanning the years 1922–44 will appear next year.
While at the Guggenheim Dr Barnett curated three documentary exhibitions on Kandinsky in the mid-1980s and was subsequently invited by Jean K. Benjamin, the co-author of the Kandinsky paintings catalogue raisonné (with the late Dr Hans Konrad Roethel) to embark on the watercolour volumes.
Entitled ‘Kandinsky kleine Freuden-Aquarelle und Zeichnungen’(Kandinsky's small pleasures-watercolours and drawings), the exhibition covers the years 1910–1944, the years during which his involvement with works on paper was most intense, and therefore presents much information in the catalogue not yet published by Dr Barnett.
From the earliest years of his career private collectors in Germany, France, the Netherlands and Russia were keen to acquire Kandinsky's paintings in gouache and tempera on cardboard which he called ‘coloured drawings’.
The author has also included new research on Kandinsky's early collectors who include the Chicago Lawyer Arthur Jerome Eddy and the important English patron Michael Sadeler, Vice-Chancellor of Leeds University, who first saw the artist's work at an exhibition in the Albert Hall, London, in 1911.
The exhibition catalogue contains two essays by Dr Barnett on Kandinsky's works in private collections and on the works on paper together with an examination of the theoretical basis of the artist's work by Armin Zweite entitled ‘Free the line for the inner sound: Kandinsky's renewal of art in the context of his time’.
The majority of exhibits have been borrowed from private collections, many of which Dr Barnett has unearthed in the course of her researches for the books and she has chosen works which exemplify Kandinsky's mastery of technique and his experimentation with processes such as stencil and spray technique (diluted watercolour sprayed onto paper with an atomizer or blowpipe).
The comparative fragility of the watercolour medium means that the exhibition will not be travelling outside Germany.
Exhibition results
The Rembrandt shows: new thoughts, new attributions
Curators and organisers share their views
LONDON.
‘Rembrandt: the master and his workshop’ closed at the National Gallery, London, on 24 May, having previously been seen in slightly different forms in Berlin and Amsterdam.
London attendance figures were 180,000 for the paintings and 120,000 for the separate (free-entry) display of prints drawn from the British Museum's holdings.
Amsterdam attendance figures were higher, at 445,000, while for Berlin's Gemäldegalerie, where the exhibition was the first major show to be held in a united Germany, visitors reached 330,000 in two months.
At the British Museum the accompanying exhibition of drawings by Rembrandt and his School from the museum's own holdings continues until 2 August.
The British Museum's show was originally scheduled to coincide with the publication of its new catalogue of the drawings of Rembrandt and his School, due to appear in a few year's time.
The Museum agreed to bring this exhibition forward to coincide with the National Gallery's.
The exhibition and the accompanying symposia in London and Amsterdam raised a number of questions, not least about some of the pictures included in the exhibition.
Christopher Brown, the curator responsible for the show at the National Gallery, singled out the issue of the corpus of works now ascribed to Isack de Jouderville (cf cats.
58 and 59) and the issue of whether the National Gallery's own ‘Anna and the blind Tobit’(cat.
55) was by Gerrit Dou alone or by Dou in collaboration with Rembrandt.
Still attracting discussion is the corpus of works now attributed to Carel Fabritius; in particular the Toronto ‘Portrait of a seated woman with a handkerchief’(cat.
75).
More successful, he felt, were the attributions to Flink, Lievens, Bol, Hoogstraten and Drost.
Asked about how the two parts of the exhibition about fifty autograph works in the first part followed by a section on debatable works by pupils and followers were connected, Dr Brown agreed that the two parts were, in fact, rather distinct.
The aim of the first section had, he felt, been to provide an overview of the artist's achievement and to outline the ‘remarkable but always consistent’ developments in his style.
Working on an exhibition of this nature inevitably leads to reflection on the artist: ‘The more I work on Rembrandt, the more fascinated I am and the more remarkable he becomes’ was Christopher Brown's assessment, ‘in range, ambition and the achievement of that ambition he stands so far above his contemporaries’.
In the light of the current debates on attribution surrounding both the paintings and drawings Martin Royalton-Kisch at the British Museum Prints and Drawings department, was pleased to note that the opinions expressed in his catalogue had generally been well-received and accepted, with less disagreement than might have been anticipated.
He singled out the red and black chalk with grey wash drawing of ‘The Angel preventing Abraham from sacrificing his son, Isaac’(cat.
no. 13), here presented as a preparatory study for the St Petersburg painted version, rather than a drawing after the Russian canvas made as a study for the variant painting now in Munich, as has been previously suggested.
In the case of drawings such as the ‘Woman ill in bed’ and ‘A young man in a high-crowned cap’(cat.
102, here attributed to Willem Drost), the first depicting the artist's sick wife Saskia, the second previously thought to be of his son Titus, Mr Royalton-Kisch felt that emotional attachment to the supposed subject matter had clouded judgement over attribution of drawings such as these.
The establishment of a core group of drawings to be used as a starting point for the attribution of other sheets on stylistic grounds remains the principal method of research and Mr Royalton-Kisch felt that the present exhibition has contributed to the furtherance of this work which, in the case of the British Museum, has whittled down the number of sheets from the 106 accepted by Benesch to eighty-four.
Ecole des Beaux-Arts shows its art treasures acquired since 1793
PARIS.
The magnificent holdings of the Ecole nationale supérieure des Beaux-Arts, founded in 1793, have traditionally been used as teaching aids for students.
The Ecole's collection was based on the works  transferred from the French royal Académies during the Revolution and has been enriched by donations since that date.
The move away from teaching by copying in the second half of this century and the lack of space for exhibiting the works has meant that the collection has been largely hidden.
A selection of around sixty of its finest works has been made and will be shown this summer (until September).
Works to be shown include architectural drawings by Huyot, Brune, and Bonnet; Old Master drawings by Parmigianino, Bandinelli, Raphel, Fra Bartolommeo, Van Dyck and Rembrandt; nineteenth-century drawings by Ingres, David, Vernet and Prudhon; paintings by David, Girodet, Fragonard, Poussin, Flandrin and Delaunay; photographs by Atget, Baldus and Marville; and sculpture by Houdon, Hubert Robert and Carpeaux.
There will be a re-hang halfway through the show to allow more works to be exhibited.
Art Institute salutes French photographer Patrick Tosani
CHICAGO.
As part of Illinois' month-long celebration of French culture, science and trade, the Art Institute of Chicago is giving Patrick Tosani his first U.S. solo show (until 19 July).
Best known in Europe he has had one-artist shows in France, Switzerland and England the thirty-seven year old Parisian makes colossal colour photographs and exhibits them in series.
Scale and repetition are integral to the thirty-four painting-size prints in his ten-year survey: the smallest is three by five feet, and he presents at least three different images of the same subject together.
The early series deal with the sculptural property of moving water in studio set-ups.
Recent works isolate and enlarge single objects such as a spoon, a fingernail, and the bubble from a carpenter's level, transforming them into meditations on space, form and texture.
After Chicago, ‘Patrick Tosani: Photographer’ travels to the Chrysler Museum, Norfolk, Virginia (16 January-21 March 1993); the Santa Monica Museum of Art, California (8 July-29 August 1993); and the Musée de Québec (25 October 1993–2 January 1994).
A bilingual catalogue, the first English language monograph on Tosani, accompanies the exhibition.
Bucharest shows private works emerge from hiding
BUCHAREST.
If you can liken works of art to the prisoners in Fidelio, such precious prisoners are now emerging into a Romanian sunlight after years of political imprisonment in attics, cellars or under floorboards.
Their liberator is Dan Nasta, Vice-President of the Society of Art Collectors, who last week opened a remarkable collection of survivors in the Museum of Art Collections, in Calea Victoriei, Bucharest.
Mr Nasta has used two large rooms to display the works, all of them privately owned and personally lent for the occasion.
His own contributions have added piquancy.
He describes five years of hell and terror, as the bulldozers clearing space for Ceausescu's Palace came ever closer to his house.
Many of his neighbours, sometimes given an hour or two's notice, had their homes demolished.
Few of them recovered from this experience.
Today it seems like a miracle, if a somewhat blighted one, that his house, with but one to go before it, still stands directly facing the huge swathe which marks the Boulevard of Socialism.
The first room of the exhibition contains paintings from the two principal periods of Romanian art: the late nineteenth century, which produced painters such as Lucian Grigorescu and Stephan Luchian; and the inter-war period, made noteworthy by such artists as Gheorgiu Petrascu and Theodor Pallady.
Across the garden, the second room contains paintings and objets d'art from the sixteenth, seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
These works which clearly reveal the Turkish, German and Greek influences on Romanian culture, include silver teapots and plates, carpets, icons, paintings on glass and china.
The lunch-time opening was a moment of nostalgia and silent drama.
Collectors, relatives of the artists and owners were all present.
And mingled among these honoured guests, many of whom wore beautiful black hats with the hint of a veil, or faded velvet jackets, were some of the up-and-thrusting National Salvation Front Ministers the sons of the very men and women who had helped to destroy Romania's culture.
Jessica Douglas-Home  
Washington and New York
Greeks overcome traditional xenophobia in major art swap with U.S.
Twenty-two fifth-century BC Greek sculptures travel to the National Gallery and Metropolitan Museum in celebration of democracy
NEW YORK.
In one of the last and most highly dramatised flourishes of his directorship at the National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C., J. Carter Brown announced on 4 June that his museum and the Metropolitan Museum of Art will be receiving on loan twenty-two fifth-century BC sculptures from Greece that have never been loaned before.
The two U.S. museums will lend the National Gallery in Athens seventy paintings for an exhibition, ‘From El Greco to Cézanne’, opening in December.
Thirty-five Old Master works will be on loan from the Met, and a similar number of Impressionist and Post-Impressionist works will come from the National Gallery.
Both the National Gallery (November 1992) and the Metropolitan (March 1993) will be hosting ‘The Greek miracle: classical sculpture from the dawn of democracy, the fifth century BC’.
The U.S. venues will show a total of thirty-three Greek works, with objects on loan from the Louvre, the Staatliche Museen of Berlin and the Metropolitan, among other institutions.
In an interview, Brown said the National Gallery had originally hoped to mark the 2500th anniversary of Kleisthenes' democratic reforms in fifth-century BC Athens with a one-object exhibition of the Kritios Boy.
As negotiations evolved, the exhibition took its current shape.
The works include a marble sixth-century BC kouros from the National Archaeological Museum in Athens, the early fifth-century BC Kritios Boy from the Acropolis Museum, and Cavalry from the Parthenon Frieze (442–438 BC), also from the Acropolis Museum.
The theme of the exhibition may have more to do with American politics than with the Greek works on loan.
The National Endowment for the Humanities, a federal body that funds scholarship, has made the celebration of a fifth-century BC Greek democracy the centrepiece of a broad funding campaign.
The NEH's approach seeks to find a common ideological strand linking Athenian democracy with the writing of the U.S. Constitution and the fall of Communist regimes in Eastern Europe.
This effort is conceived in part to counteract the backfiring of federally sponsored events marking the 500th anniversary of Christopher Columbus's arrival in the Western Hemisphere in 1492.
Rather than being welcomed, many of those exhibitions were met with protests and demonstrations.
‘One hopes that if one can be affirmative about anything, one can be affirmative about fifth-century BC Greece’, said J. Carter Brown optimistically.
The exchange of works of art is mutual, but it appears that the anniversary theme behind it is one-sided.
‘It is an American idea’, explained Ms Romiopoulou, Director of Antiquities in the Greek Ministry of Culture.
‘It is not a Greek idea, although we have accepted it’.
The announcement was broadcast live on three channels of Greek television.
‘There's a strong element of national pride here’, one curator observed.
‘You can be sure that the Greeks have been trying to organise something like this since ‘The Age of Sultan Süleyman the Magnificent’ was such a success in America’, he added, referring to a travelling exhibition of objects from Turkish collections, organised by the National Gallery in 1987.
The exhibition is sponsored by Philip Morris Companies Inc., as was the Süleyman exhibition.
It can be seen at the National Gallery from 22 November to 7 February 1993, and at the Metropolitan Museum from 11 March to 23 May 1993.
Paris
Moore the man vs the official Henry Moore
A subtle war of approaches to the sculptor is being fought by his daughter in the French capital
PARIS.
A major, official Henry Moore exhibition opened last month in the gardens of the Bagatelle.
Twenty-seven monumental bronzes, made between 1948 and 1983, three years before his death, are on show until 4 October in the Gardens of Bagatelle, close by the Bois de Boulogne in the west of Paris.
Organised by the Henry Moore Foundation, the City of Paris and the British Council, the exhibition is the first important show devoted to Moore in France since 1977, when sculptures and drawings were shown in the Orangerie and the Tuileries gardens and the artists' graphics were exhibited in the Bibliothèque Nationale.
All the bronzes set out in the Gardens of Bagatelle are on loan from the Henry Moore Foundation, with the exception of two: ‘Draped Reclining Figure’, 1952–53, from Time-Life International, London, and ‘Reclining Figure’, 1982, lent by the Fondation Pierre Gianadda, Martigny, Switzerland.
Solange Auxias de Turenne had the idea of staging an open air exhibition of Moore's sculptures in Paris after visiting a garden made especially for his large-scale bronzes at the Fondation Pierre Gianadda in 1989; the suggestion by the City of Paris to use the Gardens of Bagatelle was approved by the Director of the Henry Moore Foundation, Sir Alan Bowness.
The exhibition has had the ultimate official accolade of a visit by the Queen on 10 June in the context of her State visit to France.
It has also, however, benefited from the success of another show, ‘Moore Intime’, in the private art gallery, Galerie Didier Imbert until 24 July (see The Art Newspaper No. 17, April 1992, p.22) and moving on to the Sezon museum, Tokyo, for three weeks in September as part of a four-museum tour.
Organised by the same curator as the Bagatelle exhibition, Solange Auzias de Turenne, ‘Moore Intime’ features a life-size reconstruction of rooms from Moore's house, ‘Hoglands’, complete with contents down to the books in the same order as the artist left them in the bookcases, and items from his art collection which served as inspiration for his work.
His daughter, Mary Moore, who enthusiastically supported the exhibition and was guest of honour at the opening, is well known for opposing the approach to her father's work and, above all to his house and studios at Perry Green, taken by the Henry Moore Foundation, which she considers to be over-institutional, insufficiently concerned with the memory of her father and out of tune with his intentions.
Although ‘Moore Intime’ had the cooperation of the Henry Moore Foundation, she reminded everyone of her diverging views in her speech at the inaugural dinner: ‘I can see and feel the real Henry Moore in this exhibition in a way that has never before been achieved.
Many people have already commented on their fascination and excitement at being able to study how Henry Moore lived and worked.
That is why I am endeavouring to keep Henry Moore's house and studios at Perry Green preserved as they were when my father was alive so that future generations of students and art lovers can witness the atmosphere and environment in which he created his works’.
Madrid
A clearer picture of Ribera at the Prado than in Naples
Exhibition organiser, Perez Sanchez, says, ‘I want the Spanish to get to know the real Ribera’
NAPLES AND MADRID.
The Ribera exhibition now at the Prado until 25 August was a popular success in Naples' Castel Sant'Elmo, whose romantic fastnesses suited the shadows of the artist's style; in the two and a half months until 17 May it had 80,000 visitors, which in Italy, for a serious exhibition, is a large number.
At the Prado the display is less evocative, with the paintings hung rather baldly in the central hall, and an ill conceived diagonal wall down the centre which creates bottle necks for visitors.
It is also a rather different exhibition conceptually: Alfonso Perez Sanchez, former Director of the Prado and co-organiser of the show, has declared that he wants the Spanish to get to know ‘the real Ribera’, which means that he has whittled down the number of works.
He has eliminated a whole ‘study section’, which included works after, and attributed to, Ribera; there are no prints, and a number of paintings, which in Naples were hung as autograph, have not been invited to Spain.
These include the ‘Prometheus’ and ‘Hercules’from the collection of the Polish-American collector Mrs Basia Johnson; Nicola Spinosa, Soprintendente per i Beni artistici e Storici of Naples and the co-organiser of the exhibition has publicly withdrawn these from Ribera's oeuvre.
Also not in Madrid are the big ‘Martyrdom of St Lawrence’ and the ‘Martyrdom of St Bartholomew’, both from London private collections, which after careful comparison with definite Ribera works have also been demoted.
In addition, it was generally felt by the European as opposed to American contingent at the Ribera conference in Naples in May, that ‘The sense of smell’ from Oslo was probably by Falcone (although this is in the Prado show as by Ribera) and the ‘Portia’is by Luca Giordano (excluded).
In an entirely separate category is the ‘St Jerome’ of one Vittorio Sgarbi, a minor art historian with exhibitionist tendencies which have made him a television personality in his own country, and, like Cicciolina, have recently earned him a seat in parliament.
This studio replica of a painting in Cambridge, Mass., which fooled no-one, is illustrated in Spinosa's introductory essay as by Ribera although it is not in the catalogue proper.
At the opening it hung in the main section as a Ribera but later on was moved into the ‘study section’.
Needless to say, this has not gone to Madrid.
This is an important exhibition, and one which was scrutinised closely by scholars outside Italy since it was moving on, not only to the Prado but to the Metropolitan Museum, New York (12 September to 29 November).
The Spanish catalogue (Museo del Prado, Pta 2500) is greatly superior to the Italian one (Electa Napoli); it is better edited and better printed and it does not illustrate Sgarbi's croute.
Columbus celebrations
‘Overwhelmingly an exhibition about Genoese painting, not the arts in Genoa’
The ambitious exhibition ‘Genoa in the baroque age’ and its catalogue do not tally
GENOA.
The municipal authorities in Genoa have used Columbus year to launch a controversial programme aimed at restoring the city's fortunes and its image.
A series of events emphasising the long tradition of Ligurian exploration of the outside world has been organised, and an ambitious exhibition, ‘Genova nell'età barocca’, mounted at both the Galleria Nazionale di Palazzo Spinola and the Palazzo Reale (until 26 July), forms part of this highly conscious effort to revalue Genoa's past.
It stands at the culmination of a sequence of recent monographic exhibitions devoted to individual artists, Ansaldo, Castiglione, Fiasella, and it has benefited from the explosion of scholarly interest within the city, much of the fruit of which has been published by Sagep Editrice.
Conventional accounts of seventeenth-century Italian art consistently find little room for activity in the Republic of Genoa, and the splendid catalogue (Nuova Alfa Editoriale) of the exhibition, edited by Ezia Gavazza and Giovanna Rotondi Terminiello, should put an end to the neglect of the Genoese Baroque.
The organisers' aims are boldly stated at the outset.
In addition to establishing the coherence of a specifically identifiable Genoese artistic tradition, the catalogue emphatically challenges the hierarchy which values painting over other forms of aesthetic expression, particularly emphasising the role of such sculptors as Filippo Parodi and Pierre Puget, who should be viewed in a Mediterranean rather than in a French context.
The catalogue includes individual articles on goldsmiths' work, ceramics, coins, textiles, gardens, literary and theatrical culture, and, most importantly, case studies of the families whose patronage resulted in the two palaces housing the exhibitions, the Grimaldi, the Spinola, the Balbi and the Durazzo.
These are particularly useful contributions for understanding systems of expenditure on the arts in which the Church and the still appallingly understudied Genoese patriciate, rather than any central authority, took the pre-eminent roles.
The catalogue, therefore, places itself firmly behind the cutting edge of the historicising, multidisciplinary methodology which questions the value of the formalistic analysis and compositional description characteristic of traditional art history.
Unfortunately, too few of these goals are realised in the exhibition itself.
The reaction against extensive labelling deprives the visitor of useful didactic tools and forces him to choose between the weighty catalogue of nearly 550 pages and the intrusive Walkman.
The absence of explanatory panels on the walls means that the exhibition in no sense really ‘begins’, and the visitor is left to divine for himself that there is a rough chronological divide between the early seventeenth century at Palazzo Spinola and the later decades, initiated by works of Valerio Castello and Parodi, at Palazzo Reale.
Admirable as is the catalogue's aim to present a rounded view of artistic activity in Genoa, this goal is undermined by isolating coins, ceramics and frontispieces into separate cubicles off the staircase at Palazzo Spinola and by exiling the fabrics to the attic.
It must, therefore, be emphasised that, despite the good intentions of the organisers, ‘Genova nell'età barocca’ is overwhelmingly an exhibition about Genoese painting, not the arts in Genoa, still less Genoa in the seventeenth century.
There are practical problems with the installation as well.
Large canvases, initially intended as wall furniture, are frequently crowded together into space which is too small and displayed at eye level in emphatic lighting which dramatises the reflective surfaces.
There is a stark contrast and, indeed, contradiction between the crowded hanging of the exhibition, at times reminiscent of a dealer's show, and the permanent and elegant arrangements of the rooms of the second piano nobile of Palazzo Spinola, which provide a far more convincing picture of how paintings were actually used in a Genoese palace.
At the Palazzo Reale there is a forceful competition for attention between seventeenth-century paintings on display and the highly distinctive interiors designed by Pelagio Pelagi in the nineteenth century, although a much more satisfactory integration has been achieved in other parts of the palace, especially in the Galleria degli Specchi, designed by Domenico Parodi around 1730, which complements the exhibition of large canvases by Gregorio De Ferrari and Domenico Piola.
If the exhibition ‘Genova nell’ età barocca’, therefore, fails to rival the success of the 1963 Turin ‘Barocco piemontese’, which made a convincing case for the distinctiveness and the distinction of the visual arts of Genoa's northern neighbour, its catalogue will provide a useful introduction to the history of a city and a sovereignty whose political and artistic importance remains sadly undervalued and underanalysed outside of Liguria.
Twenty exhibits from the Genoa show travel to Frankfurt for an exhibition on the same theme at the Schirn Kunsthalle (5 September-8 November).
Don't miss ‘The great Utopia’
AMSTERDAM.
‘The great Utopia: the Russian Avant-garde 1915–32’, at the Stedelijk museum until 31 August is the exhibition previously at the Schirn Kunsthalle, Frankfurt, which some scholars thought might be infiltrated by dubious works (The Art Newspaper No. 16, March 1992, p.6), but which has turned out to be an exceptional show.
Its great attraction is that, because it was organised in conjunction with the Tretyakov gallery in Moscow and the Russian museum in St Petersburg, it contains many works never before seen in the West, some from far-flung areas of the CIS.
These include Tatlin's ‘Corner Counter Relief’, 1914–15, from the Russian Museum, one of the only two fully authenticated and relatively intact Tatlin reliefs in Russian public collections.
For many years it lay ignored in store, but was restored a few years ago; its lack of finish is particularly significant.
The exhibition also represents the first showing of works by Olga Rozanova and reveals her as a very substantial painter who clearly made a crucial contribution to the Russian Avant-garde: the paintings are stunning, both in scale and conception, and the unusual colour contrasts are highly original.
A large number of constructed reliefs by other artists, both less well known and prominent, are also on display.
These give a completely new perspective on the whole move into three dimensions and provide an interesting context for the more celebrated experiments of innovators like Tatlin, Rodchenko and Gabo.
The exhibition moves on to the recently refurbished Guggenheim Museum in New York on 9 September.
For the record
Agnew's 175th anniversary
The memoirs of a senior partner, Dick Kingzett
A vanished variety of collectors: the priest, the Russian in exile, the actor, the V&A Keeper, the German and Dutch aesthetes and a millionaire
‘I have chosen seven men whose personalities will, I hope, interest other people as much as they have intrigued me.
I do not think that I have fantasticated them, but time always supplies some element of fancy.
We should remember L.P. Hartley's, ‘The past is a foreign country.
They do things differently there’’
J. Paul Getty
He moved to the door saying, ‘If Mr Colin recommends them, I'll take all three’
Despite, or perhaps because of, the disparity in their characters and backgrounds, Colin Agnew and Paul Getty became close friends.
Their conversation had one interesting phonetic feature.
Mr Getty, by omitting the letter ‘i’, reduced Colin's Christian name to a monosyllable, while Colin contrived to get three separate sounds into the name Paul, which he always spoke with a rising inflexion.
Mr Getty bought Sutton Place in the 1960s, and this was the period when he most enjoyed acquiring pictures.
The vast rooms of that great Tudor mansion allowed him to indulge his taste for really large canvases, and the full-length portraits by Gainsborough and Batoni, the enormous hunting scenes and game larders by Snyders, and a life-size nude by Palma Vecchio all looked wonderful in their new setting.
At this date he rarely bought without consulting Colin, but as neither man had any real sense of time, their meetings required considerable stage-management.
At a lunch party celebrating Colin's ninetieth birthday, Mr Getty arrived half an hour late with the ingenuous excuse that he had miscalculated how long it would take him to walk from the Ritz to Boodles Club in St James's Street.
Once, in Colin's absence, I showed him three pictures which he was considering: a portrait by Veronese; another by Tintoretto and the centre panel of an altarpiece by Girolamo di Benvenuto.
Asking for the appropriate volumes of Bryan's Dictionary of Painters, so that he could study the entries for these artists, he read slowly through them marking the place he had reached in the text with his forefinger.
Eventually, thunder rumbled in the distance, and he looked up and asked if it was gun-fire; when I said I thought not, he moved to the door saying, ‘If Mr Colin recommends them, I'll take all three’.
Feeling that further conversation was needed, I asked what the roses were like at Sutton that summer.
He said that they were ‘just fine’, and, taking out a notebook, made an entry.
A year later, I received a letter inviting me to lunch so that I could come and see his garden.
I am glad to have had the chance to record this act of kindness on the part of a man who is more often remembered as having installed a pay-phone for the use of his week-end guests.
Frits Lugt
He had a healthy Dutch appetite.
After lunching with Général de Gaulle, his diary recorded, ‘uninteresting pictures, dull guests and no second helpings’
A warning flashed across Europe in 1907 when Max Liebermann wrote from Amsterdam to Dr Bode in Berlin, ‘There is a red-headed young man here whom we must watch’.
This ‘rothaariges Jungling’ was the twenty-three year-old Frits Lugt who was then working for the auctioneers Frederik Müller et Cie and the message led to an invitation to visit Dr Max Friedländer in that great training ground for art historians, the Print Room of the Kaiser Friedrich Museum.
Lugt's arrival in Berlin coincided with that of Colin Agnew, whom we had sent to open a branch there, and the two men, almost exact contemporaries, became lifelong friends.
Mr and Mrs Lugt were to put together one of the most fascinating collections of the next sixty years.
They were amateurs in the eighteenth-century sense of the word.
They amassed shells, English portraits, Indian miniatures, blue-and-white china and artists' letters with the same degree of expertise with which they collected pictures, drawings and prints.
Mr Lugt died on Rembrandt's birthday, and was, like the artist, a Mennonite.
He seemed austere and I never saw him with a hair out of place, or a button undone, but he had a healthy Dutch appetite.
After lunching with Général de Gaulle, his diary recorded, ‘uninteresting pictures, dull guests and no second helpings’.
At our first meeting I was nervous, remembering the glacial formality of a visit to Berenson at I Tatti, but they order things differently in the rue de Lille.
He greeted me with scrupulous courtesy and a welcoming smile.
During a two hour tour of his collection, he imparted endless information.
He was then in his late seventies, but I think he only sat down once.
It was an unforgettable Master Class.
When I thanked him he said, ‘Please come again.
We always have time for people who like to use their eyes’.
I walked home on air across the Esplanade des Invalides and bored everyone with his parting words for weeks afterwards.
The Reverend E.P.
Baker
His arrival in Bond Street with chips of frozen snow still clinging to his person recalled that epic picture of polar heroism, ‘A very gallant gentleman’, in which Captain Oates staggers out into the blizzard
The most loyal visitor to the private views of our Annual Watercolour Exhibitions was the Reverend E.P.
Baker, the rector of a small parish in the depths of Oxfordshire.
Although a member of another faith, his small, slightly portly figure and twinkling spectacles recalled Father Brown.
He had, too, the rock-like character and physical courage of Chesterton's priest.
Punctual arrival at the head of the queue which formed up by 9:15 on the January Monday morning meant for him rising in the small hours and manoeuvring a moped along frozen lanes to catch the milk train from Kingham to Paddington, but he never failed to appear.
In the grim winter of 1963, snow drifts blocked his way to the station and, as often happened in that Siberian season, the train's heating system had broken down.
His arrival in Bond Street with chips of frozen snow still clinging to his person recalled that epic picture of polar heroism, ‘A very gallant gentleman’, in which Captain Oates staggers out into the blizzard.
The queue, with whom he was a great favourite, set to work to defrost his outer clothing while we from inside sent out a nip of something warming for the inner man.
By common consent he was then allowed first choice in the Exhibition, and had soon made his annual purchase of two drawings, and returned to his normal rosy self.
Ephraim Shapiro
The fullest enjoyment of Giorgione's altarpiece could, he claimed, only be realised if we had walked from Venice to Castelfranco
Another of our clients who thought that the pleasure we derive from works of art increases in ratio to the difficulties we experience in arriving in front of them, was a Russian emigrant who had started his career in the Hermitage Museum.
The fullest enjoyment of Giorgione's altarpiece could, he claimed, only be realised if we had walked from Venice to Castelfranco.
Ephraim Shapiro worked in London in the Russian department of the B.B.C. Wartime conditions suited this complicated man, as he suffered from chronic insomnia and liked fire-watching by night while emerging in daylight to make predatory raids on the thinly attended sale-rooms which provided a happy hunting ground for someone with eyes as sharp as his.
His conversation had the inconsequence that Chekhov gave to his older characters and it was larded with Russian proverbs, many of which he was suspected of having invented himself.
There was, however, nothing phony about his powers of connoisseurship, and looking at pictures with him was fascinating.
Struwwelpeter hair streaming behind him, he took exhibitions at the run, a manic smile of glee overtaking his features when he spotted a wrong attribution.
He had the Russian love of obfuscation, and indulged it to the full in his will, in which he left several pictures to the Hermitage.
As he had become an English citizen and relations between ourselves and the Soviet Union were, when he died, a great deal pricklier than they are today, this caused considerable suspicion and distrust among the fiscal authorities of both countries.
He would have relished the confusion which must have arisen.
Paul Wallraf
Marriage gave a new thrust to Paul's collection.
He now bought figures of animals and birds in every conceivable medium from bronze and terracotta to ivory and jade.
(Sotheby's entitled a section of his posthumous sale catalogue ‘The Wallraf Menagerie’.)
Paul Wallraf had a wonderful eye, widely ranging tastes and the acquisitive instinct of a magpie.
He could rarely resist buying anything he liked even though he had nowhere to put it.
Descended from Ferdinand Franz Wallraf, who with Johann Richardt had founded Cologne's great museum, Paul lived in what was for post-war days a sizeable apartment with large rooms.
They soon proved to be far too small to contain his collection.
Visits, though immensely enjoyable, had elements of both the obstacle race and the assault course.
There was simply nowhere to put down one's drink or, eventually, anywhere to sit.
Objects of all kinds occupied every inch of space and the walls were so thickly hung with pictures that smaller drawings lay flat or propped against their neighbours.
Just when it seemed he would be evicted by his collection, the flat immediately above became available, so he took it and started collecting all over again.
Then Lebensraum became available in Venice in the Sixties, when he took on the first floor of the Palazzo Malpiero Trevisani in Campo Santa Maria Formosa.
Shortly after Paul acquired this Venetian outpost, Carlo Bestegui died and a sale of his collection was held in the Palazzo Labia.
The Italian government, concerned that the better things should remain in Italy, were delighted to hear that many of them only made the journey by canal from the Cannareggio to the piano nobile of the Palazzo Malpiero.
Paul made a very happy marriage with Muriel Ezra, the widow of a distinguished zoologist, who built up his own private menagerie in Surrey in the days before safari parks proliferated in the English countryside.
Pre-war south-bound motorists may still remember, soon after leaving the Kingston by-pass, being stared at by supercilious llamas and ruminant bison from a field on the left which was the boundary of the Ezra estate.
Marriage gave a new thrust to Paul's collection.
He now bought figures of animals and birds in every conceivable medium from bronze and terracotta to ivory and jade.
(Sotheby's entitled a section of his posthumous sale catalogue ‘The Wallraf Menagerie’.)
Paul and Muriel entertained lavishly and were much loved in Venice.
Every morning throughout the summer they would march smartly from their capanna at the Albergo Excelsior to the Hôtel des Bains at the other end of the Lido.
There they would touch the boundary fence and march smartly back again.
This daily parade assumed for the bagnini something of the significance that the Changing of the Guard has for London's tourist guides.
From the Regatta to the Fireworks, Venice has always laid on regular spectacles for her visitors, and here was a new one.
Sir Ralph Richardson
I noticed that when particularly struck by a drawing, his features would assume the same look of wide-eyed amazement that they had done in the latter rôle when Bottom wakes from his dream and begins the speech, ‘I have had a most rare vision…’
Sir Ralph Richardson rarely missed our Watercolour Exhibitions.
His favourite artist was John Varley.
He usually arrived on a powerful motor bicycle a B.M.W., I am told.
Once he brought another famous theatrical knight on the pillion.
It was fascinating to hear, as they removed their crash-helmets, the beautifully modulated tones of the greatest Hamlet of our century enunciate the words, ‘Ralph, dear boy, you really do drive much too fast’.
Richardson's enthusiasm made his visits great fun, but he could be brusque.
When I said how much I had enjoyed his performance in the title role in Uncle Vanya, he snorted, ‘Oh, did you.
I could not understand the fellow at all myself’, and stumped away.
Fine clocks were another of his many passions.
Asked by his doctor if he had recovered from flu, he said that he was fine but one of the clocks was going badly, and would the doctor come and have a look at it as soon as it was possible.
For our generation he was incomparable in two parts Falstaff and Bottom the Weaver.
I noticed that when particularly struck by a drawing, his features would assume the same look of wide-eyed amazement that they had done in the latter rôle when Bottom wakes from his dream and begins the speech, ‘I have had a most rare vision…’.
Was it, I wondered, his natural reaction to something extraordinary, and did he therefore use it on the stage, or was he simply acting and registering what he thought was the appropriate emotion under the circumstances?
I doubt if he knew himself.
Ralph Edwards
There lurked in his character, as with all the best Welshmen, an element of Dylan Thomas's ‘No Good Boyo’, and his conversation was designed to provoke, particularly in political matters about which he felt strongly
Shakespeare must have known someone very like Ralph Edwards when he put Fluellen into Henry V. If Ralph came in on St David's Day, I would have hidden to avoid being forced to eat a raw leek as was poor ancient Pistol in that play.
At all other times, Evelyn and I rushed out to meet him if we heard that he was in the Gallery, so stimulating was his company.
We were told that a recurrent illness had made him in his earlier days an abrasive and difficult colleague but when we knew him, the right pill had been found and the former angrily flashing eye and rasping voice of which people spoke had mellowed to a genial twinkle and an infectious chuckle.
There lurked in his character, as with all the best Welshmen, an element of Dylan Thomas's ‘No Good Boyo’, and his conversation was designed to provoke, particularly in political matters about which he felt strongly.
His knowledge of English furniture was legendary, but he had too a sharp eye for pictures.
Appropriately, he was one of the first to appreciate the work of Richard Wilson's fellow countryman and contemporary, Thomas Jones.
Long before the rest of us, Ralph had recognised the quality of those intimate plein air sketches of Welsh valleys and sunlit Neapolitan walls, today so sought after and so expensive.
When his book Early Conversation Pictures appeared, Evelyn took what Henry James would have called ‘the rash and insensate step’ of saying that he was enjoying it.
‘How far have you got?’, asked Ralph with a look of deep suspicion.
Evelyn admitted to only having read one chapter.
‘Ah’, snorted the author triumphantly, ‘then you still have another 160 pages of closely packed erudition to come’.
He was a well-read man, admiring especially the mystic poetry of Henry Vaughan, the Silurist who came from the Brecon country of the Black Mountains where he himself had a house.
It was said of Vaughan that he was ‘esteemed by scholars, an ingenious person, but proud and humorous’.
It could have been said of Ralph too.
Commentary
Russian museums
Beggars can't be choosers: better to depend even on dubious private money than a criminal state
From the academic who first alerted the world to the war trophies still in the former USSR, a Realpolitik for the survival of its museums in the face of a new law which may force their break-up
MOSCOW.
The last ten years of acquisitions by the Pushkin Fine Arts Museum in Moscow were recently presented in an exhibition at the museum.
It occupied the space usually reserved for large, gala events: the White Hall, the ceremonial steps and small halls facing the entrance.
Attempting to evaluate what was on show leaves a very strange impression.
Apart from the archaeological exhibits, it has to be admitted that the most lively items at this exhibition were graphics by so-called ‘Soviet’ artists, particularly Fonvisin and Sokolov.
The engravings by eighteenth-century European masters hanging nearby seemed to be suitable study material but not for display and the paintings were particularly disappointing.
These acquisitions were not up to the basic standards of the museums of Moscow, the former ‘capital of half the world’.
The whole thing struck one as being very provincial.
There were hardly any well known names; the recently purchased Simon Vouet is very poorly executed.
In fact only two pictures a still life by an eighteenth-century Italian Master and an interesting church interior deserved to be on show.
The other purchases should be evaluated only against the background of our poverty.
Such comments may sound offensive.
Perhaps it would have been better to spout the usual platitudes about the skills of museum workers who have succeeded in these hard times in preserving and accumulating, acquiring and saving.
But it is impossible to continue writing in that vein without a feeling of disgust.
The exhibition was there to display; we must take the trouble to understand what it displayed.
In the 1920s, State museums stocked up with the better known works by profiting from confiscations and arrests; in the 1930s and 1940s, by profiting from arrests and confiscations, and even from the unseen but colossal stockpile of war trophies.
Until only recently, prices paid by the museums ranged from tens to hundreds of roubles.
A thousand roubles or less was normal, lower even than agreed prices for antiques, and acquisitions were largely made underground, an accepted means of trading for private collectors.
Semi-legends of private collecting during the Soviet regime, which, for the sake of brevity, I cannot elaborate on here, depict a strange world where protecting or completely concealing collections from the authorities was possible through partners who were free from political investigation, or through extensive gifts to museums or directly to the ‘inner circle’.
Stories of fraud (obman in Russian) and misrepresentation abound, sometimes involving people in very prominent positions.
For example, Academician Igor Emmanuilovich Grabar is better known in certain circles as Igor ‘Obmanilovich’ Grabar.
From the late Felix Vishnevski to the painter Ilya Glazunov, every major collector has had the reputation of being close to the authorities, in the unfavourable sense of the phrase.
In the last decade, collectors have also become associated with the illicit export of art objects from the country.
Against such a background, the museums picked up excellent works for kopeks.
The buying up of sometimes very good pictures or drawings for internal market prices was a legalised form of robbery.
This conspiracy between State and museums was humiliating even for the museums, because in case of need, the State could sell what it liked from their collections.
No-one seemed concerned that the museums, the temples of culture and art, were subjected to such indignities.
State departments of the Ministry of Culture have until now been run by party functionaries and protégés with personal contacts within the circle of the ‘nomenclaturi’.
Irina Antonova (Pushkin Museum of Fine Arts), Vitaly Suslov (Hermitage), Konstantin Levikin (Historical Museum), Irina Rodimtseva (Moscow Kremlin Museum) and Vladimir Nabatchikov (Museum of Eastern Art) are now left without their former support.
The exhibition at the Pushkin demonstrates the end of Soviet-style museum collecting.
Whether this is good or bad remains to be seen, but the country has now opened up and according to the law, the owner of a Rembrandt drawing or a Cranach painting may sell it to anyone offering the right price.
On the internal market, the price is calculated at a third to a half of the Western auction estimate price.
It is thus inevitable that works of art will go abroad.
If one compares the latest exhibition at the Pushkin with those of the 1970s, the differences are only too obvious: then it was still possible in Odessa to buy a signed landscape by Jacob van Ruysdael; several of Matisse's works from his widow, or (and it would be interesting to know for how much) two pictures from the school of Pieter Coeck van Aelst.
Two pictures by Jan ‘Velvet’ Brueghel were mentioned, and, it was said, an honestly purchased portrait by Vigée-Lebrun.
But this will no longer happen.
Upon what then can the museums now depend?
On the goodwill of donors?
Sometimes this shows itself.
On the goodwill of the new authorities?
That is hardly likely.
There is no money, the country is in a crisis from which there seems no way out, and anyone who wants hard currency is selling anything of the slightest interest.
On 19 February, discussions began at the Tretyakov Gallery on new museum legislation formulated by the Russian Chamber of Natural and Cultural Heritage (see The Art Newspaper No. 18, May 1992, p.2).
The details have already been completed, but the proposed law has not yet been presented to parliament.
Although vague in its definition of responsibilities, the law is nevertheless to be imposed on the museums.
It may effect the closure and breakup of museums, if they have, according to Clause 8 ‘no provision for the safe keeping of some of the works in their custody’.
Such a clause would affect virtually every impoverished museum in Russia, and nothing would be able to prevent their closure.
The proposed law also states: ‘As a result of a breakup, the museum holdings are subject to sale with partial compensation of their sale price’.
‘Partial compensation’ will delight some: the majority of items were bought up wholesale for between a hundred and a thousand roubles, and inflation makes the clearance sale easier at any rate, it would make life easier for privileged auction attendees from the State Chamber of Cultural and Natural Heritage.
Here is yet another quote from Clause 8: ‘Museum organisations are subject to liquidation by decision of the Russian State Chamber of Culture and Natural Heritage in the case of activities contradictory to State cultural politics and ideology’.
What a law!
The highly respected veteran Academician Dimitri Likhachev sent a telegram to the discussion, expressing his feelings: if this document becomes law, he vows to leave the country for ever and would appeal to the UN or UNESCO to take control of those State museums that are no longer able to protect and preserve their museum treasures.
At present the new authorities appear to display a mixture of helplessness within the Russian Federal democracy and cynical enjoyment of a position of power.
There is no democracy, simply a governing body of slow-witted people serving an oligarchy, producing laws for themselves and their contemporaries, turning the embezzlement of public funds into a simple and legal occupation.
Returning to the fate of the Moscow Museum of Fine Arts, there are ways to help it to survive, even if they have long been forgotten during the years of subordination to its well-cushioned Soviet existence.
That museum, after all, built with private money, the millions of Yuriy Nechayev-Maltsev, to whom a memorial plaque has just been unveiled.
The new economic freedom in Russia and today's new private capital needs not only to grow, but to find some moral refinement and justification in the eyes of society.
Boards of trustees must be formed for Moscow's museums, with the aim of restoring them.
They would be open to the richest individuals and companies in the city.
The museums can promise them only one thing an enduring memorial and gratitude for any help given.
No doubt many rich people could be cajoled into helping the museum, but we must escape our earlier, still absurd contempt for the accumulation of wealth.
Such money may often have corrupt sources, but if something good can come from it, should we complain?
After all, the Louvre uses private donations rather than government funds to make its most expensive acquisitions.
Today's generation of museum directors here is probably not ready for such a move.
It is all too easy for them to continue their lives as minor Party ‘nomenclaturi’.
They would not really want to hand over responsibility to a board of trustees, but would rather retain rights their rights within the museum.
For the normal continuation of the museums' collecting and activities, it is better for them not to collect pictures by European masters for kopeks in Russia, but to buy equipment and restoration materials with serious money in the West.
We must build and restore and this is possible even now, if only it were understood that the former dependence of museums on the resources of a criminal state was an abomination which there would be no shame in abandoning.
Doubtless the revival of private initiative in the economy will have its own consequences and provide enlightened assistance for its own culture.
The first step should simply be to provide museum custodians and art historians.
This article may even facilitate such a step.
London
Why do art prizes make me feel so cynical?
Brian Sewell tilts at the art world honours system
LONDON.
The Praemium Imperiale, one of the largest awards to artists and boastfully described by its Japanese initiators as ‘the Nobel Prize of the arts’, is very much a cynic's hoot.
Designed to ‘foster an awareness of mankind's common spirit’, it demonstrates that Japan in the twenty-first century will be ‘dedicated to cultural development’, and even now marks Japan's ‘increasing responsibility in the international community’.
Such vacuous waffle, pretentious to boot, is of great interest to the harpooned whale, the slaughtered dolphin, the elephant murderously poached for its tusks (repellent netsuke) and to the primitive peoples whose rain forest habitats are felled for chopsticks.
This is a prize that should be treated with contempt, for, like most Japanese gifts to museums and other ‘cultural’ interventions, it is no more than camouflage for their commercial and industrial rapacity, and at its worst is an anaesthetic that renders the recipient quite helpless to protest.
Five major politicians of the West control the nomination committees: Edward Heath, Jacques Chirac, Helmut Schmidt, Amintore Fanfani and David Rockefeller Jr The recommendations of these panjandrums are then considered by the Japanese, and the decisions made.
Prizes for painting have so far been awarded to de Kooning and Hockney (jointly), to Tàpies, Balthus and this year to Soulages; in sculpture Mastroianni, Pomodoro, Chillida and this year Caro (did Signor Fanfani think Caro a third Italian, I wonder?).
In these awards there are elements of Buggins's Turn and resurrection, but what else could be expected of the merry band of superannuated politicians commanded to commend the necessary artists?
In every aspect of his work Caro is brazenly derivative, depending for effect on the assertiveness of scale, and is, in essence, trivial; but, translated from the Tate Gallery to the Roman Forum (see The Art Newspaper No. 18, May 1992, p. 5), he is this year the beam in the public's eye (would that he were only a mote), and thus inevitably the choice of Heaths and Fanfanis.
The brief fame of Soulages's easy black stroke formula when there was a School of Paris (of sorts) was, I thought, long and rightly forgotten, but it must live still in the memories of political dotards whose prime coincided with the Sixties.
Given such winners as a guide, betting shops should start a book on the ilk of Hartung and Estève (if still alive), and every contemporary sculptor, however meretricious, bent on an international round (Jeff Koons for 1993?).
Prizes, by and large, are a sick joke, whether they are the means of international whitewash, the reward of some such private professional body as the Royal Academy ‘looking after its own’(as the President once described the business there), or the promotional gift of some large commercial enterprise.
In this last case the prime purpose of the prize is to benefit its giver; if Barclays Bank had to pay for the column inches of publicity that its award brings it every year, there would be no Barclay's Prize.
The economics of all such awards are sound: give away a substantial sum of prize money (preferably the biggest that most seductive word), spend a little more on promotion, and, most essential, appoint as judges a judicious mixture of ancient worthies, the current great and good, a television personality or some such, and perhaps a critic or museum man to add some small semblance of probity to the proceedings.
Ancient worthies and the great and good tend to vote for what they know (often very little), and lend their weight to the familiar.
Old boys of the Academy and the New English Art Club often work most purposefully for their peers, familiars and friends.
The judgement of critics, museum men and those who work for Arts and British Councils is vitiated by prejudice and careless enthusiasm for the latest fad (or desperate anxiety not to let the bandwagon sweep off into the distance).
Television personalities have a prime duty to protect their popular reputations and have no genuine ability to judge the quality of a tomato, let alone contemporary art.
The errors of this motley crew have for years been apparent in the Athena, Barclay's, Hunting Group, Littlewoods, John Player, BP, Overseas League, NEAC, the R.A., and no doubt, many other prizes and awards.
In the Praemium Imperiale the sinister absurdities of prize-giving reach a preposterous degree, with the spurious reputation of an invasive state the real prize and objective a worthy winner would publicly refuse his commemorative medal and give his Y15 million straight away to Greenpeace.
When Mammon leads the blind into decisions that are governed by ignorance, vanity, nepotism and even political discretion, no artist submitting work for any prize should be cast down by failure; no artist with any self respect should be elated by success.
Brian Sewell
Lucy Willis b. 1954 ‘Her Majesty's Pleasure’.
Oil on canvas 102 x 170 cm.
First prize winner in BP Portrait Award 1992, and selected from 631 entries.
She receives £10,000 plus, at the judge's discretion, a commission for £2,000 to paint a well-known sitter.
This portrait becomes part of the National Portrait Gallery's contemporary collection.
The judges for this year's award were: the artist, Frank Auerbach; Richard Calvocoressi, Keeper of the Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art; Richard Dorment, art critic of the Daily Telegraph; Robin Gibson, Curator of the Twentieth-Century Collection of the National Portrait Gallery; Dr John Hayes, the Gallery's director; Robert Horton, chairman of BP; the art historian, Professor Norbert Linton; last year's prize winner, Justin Mortimer; and the artist, Humphrey Ocean.
Conservation
Angkor Wat
How to avoid a greedy disaster and develop dignified and durable tourism
International wrangling at last month's Asia Society conference on the way ahead for South-East Asia's greatest cultural monuments
NEW YORK.
Amid an uneasy calm, Cambodian cultural life is gradually being resurrected: Phnom Penh University has graduated its first class in more than two decades, and Mr Ouk Chea, an archaeologist, has been named Director of Cambodia's re-formed Department for the Conservation of Historic Monuments and serves also as head of the decimated State Museums.
Mr Ouk spoke with The Art Newspaper about the cultural catastrophe he and his country has endured: ‘The Khmer Rouge doesn't know what art is’, he said, referring to the murderous regime whose Maoist ‘agrarian revolution’ left more than a million Cambodians dead, and threatened to eradicate the nation's very identity.
‘The Khmer Rouge were determined to destroy all previous culture’, Mr Ouk continued.
‘They were intent on killing all but a manageable few hundred thousand people.
They eliminated the universities and destroyed the monasteries and religious shrines.
They dynamited and burned our museums, and stole works of art to sell at the border with Thailand.
Almost none of my colleagues survived’, he said sadly.
‘Of a team of fifty people who were once involved with conservation of antiquities, only three saw the liberation in 1979’.
Even the fall of the Khmer Rouge leader, Pol Pot, provided little relief, as more than a decade of civil war and chaos ensued.
Opposing factions including the Khmer Rouge finally agreed to a ceasefire last October, and formed a four-party interim coalition, with each component administering its own territory.
The United Nations has installed a peacekeeping force to maintain order until the elections in May 1993.
Now a sixty-member national Committee for the Restoration of Monuments and Museums of Cambodia has been assembled, chaired by HRH Norodom Sihanouk.
Unesco, the cultural branch of the UN, has opened a Phnom Penh office to monitor and help coordinate this international effort, and an international committee is being established to advise the agency and the Cambodian government.
Two things are of the essence: money and strategy for its dissemination.
Overburdened by commitments elsewhere, Unesco can only act as a clearing house for independently sponsored initiatives.
The organisation recommends that participating nations establish home offices to arouse public interest and collect contributions.
A June symposium at The Asia Society emphasised the need to coordinate direction of the international effort.
Representatives of Unesco, France India, Japan, the United States, and Cambodia participated.
The conference focused on Angkor Wat (see The Art Newspaper No. 2, November 1990 p.13), the twelfth-century city of the ancient Khmer kings, soon to be inscribed on Unesco's World Heritage list.
One of the principal archaeological sites in Southeast Asia, it has survived relatively intact, but age and nature have taken their toll.
Though funds are scarce, conservation teams from around the world compete to get in on this important and prestigious project.
Until recently, however, only the Archaeological Survey of India and the Konserwacji Zabytkow of Poland were permitted to work at Angkor Wat and Bayon, respectively because, like the Cambodians, they were aligned with the former Soviet bloc.
Now the field is wide open.
Sponsored by the Japanese division of American Express, a team led by the Director of the Institute of Asian Studies at Sophia University, Tokyo, have conducted a survey at Banteay Kdei temple at Angkor, while the New York-based World Monument Fund (Wmf) has examined the nearby Preah Khan monastic complex.
Both are formulating plans for the preservation of their adopted sites.
The Indians plan to resume their activities, including reconstruction and cleaning of Angkor's main temple despite criticism from many quarters of their techniques.
The French, though not active in the field, are utilising Japanese funds to create and maintain a database of the archives compiled by the École Française d'Extrëme Orient (efeo), which conducted expeditions in Indochina from 1908 to 1974.
By December, the efeo plans to open a Paris office devoted to Angkor, perhaps joining forces with the Amis d'Angkor, a private French group dedicated to the precinct.
All parties are aware of the need to train native architects, archaeologists, technicians, and craftsmen to replace the hundreds murdered by the Khmer Rouge.
Architecture students from the Université des Beaux-Arts in Phnom Penh are apprenticed to the Japanese and wmf teams, and the Thai government is prepared to expand its small workshop if funds can be found to do so.
The collegial atmosphere of the symposium was strained as it became apparent the Japanese and Americans regard the Indian team as reckless, the Indians feel Japanese criticisms are groundless, and the Americans advocate a policy that would leave the site a partial ruin, while others urge comprehensive repairs and reconstruction.
The only group that did not voice a strong opinion on these matters was the Cambodians.
Such bickering underlines the need to establish procedural guidelines.
For example, all proposals should require pre-approval of the international advisory council, the Department for Conservation of Historic Monuments, the Committee for the Restoration of Monuments and Museums of Cambodia, and Unesco.
No group should undertake conservation work without first consulting the French archive, and all work should take into account the findings of the Getty Conservation Institute's imminent study to determine the precise causes of stonework decay at Angkor.
Robbery and illegal traffic in stolen art represent a constant challenge for the Cambodian authorities.
Local, civil, and military personnel patrol or enclose ancient sites.
But looting continues apace as locals try to supplement their monthly earnings of around $3 a month.
More than 1,000 objects have been removed from Angkor alone, and decapitated statues are everywhere.
At the conference, the Director of the National Museum in Phnom Penh, Pich Keo, asked Unesco to pass information on stolen property to Interpol and the International Council of Museums, and made a plea to museum directors to research the provenance of objects in their collections, and to return those illegally exported from Cambodia.
Prince M.C. Subhadradis Diskul, Director of the seameo Regional Centre for Archaeology and Fine Arts, Bangkok, said Thailand is willing to return stolen property only when it can be fully documented with photographs which is rarely possible after the damages inflicted by the Khmer Rouge.
In February a workshop was held in Jomtien, Thailand, to discuss implementation of the 1970 Unesco Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property.
Cambodia and seventy-five other countries have ratified the convention, but the most crucial Japan, France, Germany, and Thailand have not.
Moreover, the U.S. government will legally restrict the import of materials from a particular country but only if that nation formally requests protection.
To date, several Latin American governments have done so, and a Canadian request is pending, but Cambodia has not applied.
Clearly, steps must be taken to ameliorate this situation.
The final question addressed was the need to institute a sensible programme for tourism.
Outstanding in this respect was Robertson Collins, President of Tourism Development & Heritage Conservation.
An expert on Oriental destinations, Mr Collins labelled Angkor the greatest tourist asset in South-east Asia, and the keystone of its future development.
Acknowledging the war-ravaged society's indigence, he stressed the need to avoid ‘a greedy disaster’.
His prescriptions for a ‘dignified and durable tourism’ were: first, to limit the number of visitors and levy a $150–200 fee that would go directly into a conservation fund; second, include conservation awareness as part of the visit; third, improve the existing facilities rather than build new; and fourth, work to improve the standard of living in the adjacent city of Siem Reap.
To expand the local airport and overbuild hotels would destroy the setting that makes Angkor Wat unique.
After the elections next spring, Cambodia's new government should take immediate steps to rein in development in the Angkor zone, and thereby preserve one of the landmarks of Eastern Medieval history.
New York
Now you have to pay for unsolicited restoration
‘It's blackmail’, says attorney as court sets legal precedent
NEW YORK.
In a bizarre case that has once more focused attention on the accountability of art restorers, a United States Circuit Court of Appeals has heard arguments on a decision that, for now, requires an American city to pay more than half-a-million dollars for restoration work on a city-owned mural which that city never contracted to restore.
The mural in dispute is a huge six-panel 110 x 8 ft oil on canvas depiction of heroic workers and serene family life painted in 1934 by James Daugherty for Stamford High School, in a Connecticut city about forty miles from New York.
The heroic social-realist work was commissioned by the Works Progress Administration, a federal programme which hired unemployed artists in the 1930s.
Daugherty was paid $37 a week for his efforts.
Around 1970 the Daugherty mural was taken down when the high school was renovated.
The current story begins there.
A high-school student found pieces of the mural in a container for construction debris, contacted the federal government and was instructed to take the work to a specialised restorer, Hiram Hoelzer.
Hoelzer claims the mural was wet and mouldy, and that several shapes had been razor-bladed out of the canvas.
He assumed the mural was being discarded and took it to his studio, hoping to repair and perhaps eventually sell it, as he had done with other works from that period.
Stamford's version is somewhat different.
The city argues that the mural was taken carefully from the wall, but somehow fell into the student's hands.
In the 1980s, when Stamford officials learned that Hoelzer held the work, they wanted it back and a legal battle for ownership between Stamford and Hoelzer emerged.
In two respective court cases, Stamford was recognised as the owner of the huge work, and Hoelzer was guaranteed payment for restoration he claimed to have done.
Over the years, the price of that work leapt from $6,000 (an appraisal Hoelzer offered to the federal government in 1972) to more than $60,000 (a 1980 estimate by Hoelzer of what it would cost to fully repaint, line and mount the panels).
In 1987 a Sotheby's appraiser valued the seriously damaged panels at $1.25 million, reaching that figure by dividing the auction price paid for a celebrated Thomas Hart Benton mural by three.
The appraiser reckoned that the Benton work was three times the size of Daugherty's.
Hoelzer promptly sued Stamford for $1.2 million.
Last January a federal judge dismissed those assessments of market value as preposterous, but honoured testimony that Hoelzer had salvaged the work from the trash and restored the panels in good faith.
The judge awarded Hoelzer $577,000 for his labours, based on Hoelzer's calculations of a per diem rate of $1,600 a day.
Conservators, who normally charge by the square foot, call that rate extortionate, and doubt the number of hours Hoelzer claims were devoted to the canvases.
Hoelzer and his attorney call the amount fair compensation.
Stamford's attorney calls it nothing short of blackmail.
A decision on the current appeal against that decision is expected in approximately one month.
Noticeably absent from the court battle between Hoelzer and Stamford is the American Institute of Conservators, of which Hiram Hoelzer is a Fellow.
Paul Himmelstein, the AIC's president, says his organisation can only respond to complaints, and never received one in this case.
Himmelstein added that as a trade association, the AIC cannot legally exclude anyone who seeks membership, and must accept all applicants willing to pay the annual dues of $75.
The AIC cannot expel members, but only demote them from Fellow or Professional Associate to Associate.
‘There is no legal definition of what a conservator is’, Himmelstein explained.
‘No accreditation, no certification and no state licensing’.
Himmelstein acknowledged that the reputations of serious conservators might be damaged by colleagues who work on objects without the permission of the objects' owners.
The AIC, he said, is trying to increase awareness of its code of ethics, and to encourage members to report poor quality work and unethical practices.
In the meantime, he says, clients of conservators also need to act responsibly when they entrust a work of art to someone: ‘They spend more time and more effort looking for an auto mechanic than they do finding someone to restore a work of art’.
Brompton Baroque in the balance
LONDON.
The Brompton Oratory (the Oratorian church of the Immaculate Heart of Mary) is an architecturally conspicuous bastion of British Catholicism, where the liturgy is conducted with pre-Vatican II elaboration and Latin regularly used in conjunction with a distinguished musical tradition.
It was built in 1880–96 to the designs of the distinctly un-Italian sounding Herbert Gribble in partial imitation of the great baroque churches of late sixteenth- and seventeenth-century Rome.
Among the Oratorians' most celebrated members was John Henry Newman, whose conversion from Anglicanism did much to serve the cause of English Catholicism.
In spite of its fashionable congregation and location in Knightsbridge, the Oratory is in financial trouble.
It launched its £2.5 million restoration appeal in April, and almost £500,000 has already been raised.
In particular need of repair are the east and west sides, and the roof, which was badly damaged in the storms of 1987 and 1989.
Franco-German conservation drive on major monuments
CHAMPS-SUR-MARNE, PARIS.
In 1988 a Franco-German research programme for the preservation of historic monuments was set up at the fifty-second summit meeting between the two countries.
This has resulted in collaboration between the German ministry of research and technology and the French ministries of research, culture and the environment which have jointly approved a DM1.8 million budget.
Twenty-seven research institutes will collaborate as working groups and the first buildings to be the object of conservation have been decided upon.
Under the glass restoration programme are the medieval glass windows at Tours Cathedral and the windows of the Katharinenkirche at Oppenheim am Rhein.
Under the stone conservation section are the Gothic Minster at Salem and the Saint Thiebaut monastery, Alsace.
Future research projects will prepare the way for work on the Palatine chapel at Aachen, the Pantheon in Paris, the Customs Union 12 at Essen and Le Corbusier's Cité Radieuse at Marseille, all of which are suffering from atmospheric pollution.
Eastern Europe gets $535,000 from Getty
SANTA MONICA.
The Getty Grant Program of the J. Paul Getty Trust has awarded thirty-three grants for Central and Eastern Europe in the form of arts scholarships and conservation grants.
The wide-ranging programme includes twenty-five fellowships of $10,000 each for the study of history of art, awarded primarily to scholars who have had limited access to western art historical research libraries and museums.
A $20,000 grant to the World Monuments Fund will support a preliminary study of the condition of the Postepowa Synagogue in Crakow, the only intact nineteenth-century synagogue in Poland.
In Yugoslavia the Institute for the Restoration of Dubrovnik was awarded $35,000 to prepare detailed conservation documentation for the Bishop's Palace.
The European Centre for Training Craftsmen in the Conservation of the Architectural Heritage, in Venice, has received $40,500 to enable crafts workers from Central and Eastern Europe to participate in its courses for stone masons, joiners, stucco plasterers, painters and blacksmiths.
The present grants are part of the Getty's involvement in the region since 1990, which has resulted in nearly $900,000 worth of grant-aid to date, spread over forty-five projects in fourteen countries.
Palermo cathedral's Gothic crucifix restored
PALERMO.
The International Association for Sicilian Monuments, founded in Palermo in 1981 under the leadership of Flora McDonald-Kaley, has launched its sixth project to safeguard Sicily's cultural heritage.
Its previous effort was the restoration of Francesco Laurana and Pietro de Bonitate's Arco Mastrantonio in the basilica of San Francesco d'Assisi at Palermo.
The Association now operates from Rome.
The object of this latest project is Palermo Cathedral's Chiaramonte crucifix, which dates from the late thirteenth or early fourteenth century and was given to the cathedral in 1311 by Manfredo Chiaramonte.
The wooden crucifix is Gothic in style and was probably executed by an artist from the Rhineland, though in the face of Christ the angular character of Northern European sculpture has given way to a more classical serenity.
The work is being carried out at Palazzo Abatellis, Palermo, under the supervision of the local Soprintendenza.
So far, analyses have shown that the wooden surface was heavily repainted, though the carving itself is in fairly good condition.
The Association is paying for the work, expected to cost in the region of £5,500 ($9,600) from donations worldwide and has also launched an appeal for funds to restore the whole altar.
Russian Museum given charge of restoring three major palaces
ST PETERSBURG.
St Petersburg's palaces have been given a new chance.
The Stroganov International Charitable Fund has the aim of bringing together the resources required to restore the city's well-known architectural masterpieces, above all the Stroganov Palace.
The person behind the creation of the fund, which has its headquarters in New York, is the Baroness Helene D'Ludinghausen, née Stroganova.
The founders include the Russian Museum which, following a decision by the mayor's office, has been given control of three of St Petersburg's palaces: the Marble Palace, a monument to early Russian classicism, the Mikhayl (Engineer) Castle and the Stroganov Palace, built by the architect Rastrelli.
Up until 1917, the Stroganov Palace belonged to the Stroganov family and it contained one of Russia's largest private art collections.
The Stroganov, like the other two palaces, needs a great deal of money for restoration and maintenance.
Although the Russian Museum is now responsible for the palaces, one cannot rely on their meagre financial resources, nor on finance from the city authorities.
Now there is some hope that the charitable fund will provide at least some of the resources required so that a start can be made.
Baroness D'Ludinghausen, who now lives in Paris and works for the well-known firm of Yves Saint Laurent, has according to reports in the Russian press already managed to persuade a number of notable patrons to participate in the fund, including the Princess of Jordan.
However, specialists believe that the fund's resources will be nowhere near adequate.
At least $27 million will be needed for the restoration work on the Stroganov Palace alone.
O.
Olivetti to sponsor cleaning of Masaccio's Trinity
FLORENCE.
Florence's Soprintendenza ai Beni Artistici e Storici has officially announced that Masaccio's ‘Trinity’ fresco in Santa Maria Novella is to be restored.
Although the name of the sponsor has not yet officially been announced, it is assumed to be Olivetti who, when the restoration of the Brancacci Chapel was first mooted, let it be known that it was willing to underwrite the restoration of the ‘Trinity’, Masaccio's other great fresco painting.
The forthcoming work will aim to remove the layer of dirt which has accumulated over the last thirty years not surprisingly, since the church is located in one of the most polluted parts of Florence.
Archaeology
Lord Renfrew of Kaimsthorn
Britain's most famous archaeologist in search of communication from the past
‘When a site is looted, it is not the loss of the artefacts which is the real tragedy, it is the loss of their context which can tell us everything about those objects.
Governments should, therefore, not rest at trying to keep antiquities in their country, but stop illegal excavations from happening at all’.
CAMBRIDGE.
An archaeologist who has transformed the way people think about his area of study; a communicator who can make an enthralling TV programme; a lover of contemporary art who has persuaded the Fellows of his Cambridge college at least to tolerate biannual sculpture shows (one of which involved digging up the hallowed lawns); and now, since his peerage which gives him the forum of Britain's Upper House, a politician, with strong views on how to preserve the world's history as encapsulated in its archaeology: Colin Renfrew at fifty-five has an enviable career and range of interests.
He studied natural sciences and archaeology and anthropology at St John's College, Cambridge.
He earned his first Chair, at Southampton, in 1972, and in 1981 he took up the oldest and most senior Chair of Archaeology in Britain, the Disney Professorship at Cambridge, where he is presiding over a great expansion of archaeological studies there with the creation of the Macdonald Institue for Archaeological Research.
His field work has been in the Cycladic and Orkney Islands, and he is best known to the public through appearances on BBC TV's ‘Chronicle’ programme, and for his book Before civilisation (1973), which transformed prehistoric chronology by applying the results of Carbon 14 dating.
He is advising on a draft bill for a new law to protect Britain's archaeological heritage better, but he is the kind of academic to whom the government turns for advice on all kinds of matters, not just his own specialisations: last year, for example, he was responsible for the Report on the National Curriculum in art education in schools.
Lord Renfrew talked to The Art Newspaper about aspects of all this in the wisteria-clad Lodge of Jesus College, of which he is Master.
You have been Disney Professor of Archaeology at Cambridge for eleven years and since the mid-Sixties you have held posts at the Universities of Sheffield and Southampton.
In that period what changes have you seen in archaeology, both in Europe and internationally?
Colin Renfrew On the international scene, archaeology in those years underwent the revolution sometimes referred to as the ‘new archaeology’ and has continued, as I see it, with what is now called processual archaeology: the most important component is a much greater concern to make archaeological theory and reasoning methods explicit.
In 1973 David Clarke wrote an article called ‘Archaeology: the loss of innocence’ and although things have moved on, and there have been lots of new ideas since the early days of the new archaeology, that loss of innocence, and the willingness to think about the theoretical foundations of archaeology, have been the big new development.
You have been described as being at the cutting edge of archaeology for over twenty-five years.
For example, your book Before Civilisation, published in 1973, completely redefined relationships in prehistoric Europe, and sent shockwaves through archaeology worldwide.
As an innovator, what directions would you like to see archaeology go in over the next twenty years?
One direction which interests me is the development of what one might call cognitive archaeology, if that is not too grandiose a term: using the material evidence from the past to allow us to begin to say something useful about the way peoples thought, the way they used communication systems, the way they used symbols.
I would like to see this done, and have argued that it can be done, in the mainstream of the processual archaeology I was speaking of, with an explicit methodology.
That is a direction which I think archaeology is moving in.
Our new publication here, the Cambridge Archaeological Journal which is the journal of the McDonald Institute [the new Cambridge Centre for Archaeology], is making cognitive archaeology its central underlying theme.
Besides your theoretical work and excavation of the Neolithic of the Orkneys, you are particularly noted for your work in the Cycladic islands of Greece.
You have a great love of these islands and this is clearly reflected in your new book The Cycladic Spirit.
How did you first come to work in the Cyclades and how do you evaluate their importance archaeologically?
I first became interested in the Cyclades in 1961, after I went to work on the excavations at Nea Nikomedeia, the early Neolithic village in Macedonia.
I then went down to Athens, to the National Museum, and was very impressed by the great display of Cycladic material there, and also by how little was known about the Cyclades if one looked at the literature of the time.
The importance of the Cycladic islands had been exaggerated because it was alleged that there were Cycladic influences in the Balkans and in Italy and indeed Sicily, and in Iberia.
I think the evidence now shows that that is simply not true, so there was correctional work to do there.
In a certain sense, the result was to restrict the importance of the islands.
Nonetheless, within the Aegean, the Third Millennium BC was a wonderful period, when a lot of new things happened and that is particularly true of the Cycladic islands, so anything we can do to understand the international spirit of the Early Bronze Age of the Aegean is helpful.
In your most recent book, The Cycladic Spirit, you are very forceful about the problem of the looting of antiquities and the destruction of archaeological sites.
What do you believe governments, given the resources, should be doing to prevent this destruction and sale of looted antiquities?
When a site is looted, it is not the loss of the artefacts which is the real tragedy, it is the loss of their context which can tell us everything about those objects.
Governments should, therefore, not rest at trying to keep antiquities in their country, but stop illegal excavations from happening at all.
We in Britain, for example, have no really adequate antiquities legislation.
It is only in recent years that our indigenous antiquities have come to be worth enough on the market for systematic looting to be profitable in a financial sense.
In Greece the position is different.
There, any archaeological excavation without a permit is illegal, which is not necessarily the case in Britain.
The Greeks have a very large problem because there are so many important sites, but I think there is more they could have done, and could be doing now.
They have not always been sufficiently quick to follow up when there has been evidence that a site has been tampered with, and certainly they have not always been keen to organise rescue excavations to investigate these sites.
It was encouraging last year, that when some Cycladic antiquities were being sold at Sotheby's, the Greek government made a protest and had some impact on that sale.
The reason that the protest wasn't accepted by the courts in this country was that they had not protested with equivalent vigour at an earlier stage when the looted antiquities first appeared on the market.
To return to this country, I am advising on a draft Bill for the protection of antiquities the Society of Antiquaries, the Council for British Archaeology and the museum profession are behind it.
At the moment only scheduled archaeological sites are protected by law; we need to extend that to unscheduled sites as well.
We can't just inflict heavy penalties, however, as that drives the whole business underground, as in the Mediterranean countries.
I also feel that this country cannot go on permitting the unrestricted sale of looted antiquities from abroad.
While we all deplore the sale of looted antiquities, it has been suggested recently that some ‘source’ nations, those rich in archaeological sites, might make more objects or recent archaeological finds available on loan to museums abroad.
For example, the Italian Senator Luigi Covatta has recently proposed a bill in the Italian Senate (The Art Newspaper, No. 14, January 1992, pp. 1&2) to permit long-term loans of archaeological material to foreign museums.
Is this a way forward?
I think it is a very good idea in itself.
It may be a way forward that foreign museums should be able to display a lot of this material.
I also think it might well be taken further.
I would have no objection to museum collections in whatever country, when there are duplicates, being presented that is given, not just loaned to other museums.
Indeed this is what used to happen: there is the Cycladic material in British museums which at an earlier stage was given by the Greek government; this is secondary material but of considerable interest.
Since your election to the Disney chair, what changes have you managed to bring about to archaeology here in Cambridge?
I understand, for example, that within the last few years you have been lucky in receiving a very large legacy from the late Dr D.M. McDonald to build an institute?
We have been very lucky to have two major benefactions.
The first was over £1 million to set up the George Pitt-Rivers Chair of Archaeological Science in memory of the distinguished anthropologist, the late Captain George Pitt-Rivers.
So that was one remarkable step forward.
Then, as you say, Dr McDonald visited us in Cambridge, liked what we were doing and announced his intention of setting up an institute here in Cambridge for research into archaeology.
The plan was to build a building and to endow it, and though we are very sad that Dr McDonald died before he lived to see his schemes carried through, he approved all the building designs, and made very full provision in his will, as he had promised.
So building work is underway, and the work, we hope, will be finished in two years.
There is an endowment to go with it, so we shall have a major institute, the McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research.
This will contain the necessary laboratories for the George Pitt-Rivers Professor of Archaeological Science.
Last year you were made a life peer as Lord Renfrew of Kaimsthorn.
How have you managed to make use of your membership of the House of Lords in support of our national heritage?
I have not been in the House of Lords very long, so on the heritage front, I haven't had the opportunity to do a great deal yet.
In April, I did point out that if English Heritage (the body responsible for the preservation of England's built heritage) were transferred to the new Department of National Heritage (which is now the case), very careful consideration would need to be given to how planning is coped with, because one of the strengths of English Heritage had been that it was placed within the Department of the Environment where government planning takes place.
Turning to your own interest in art, your recent book to which I have already referred, The Cycladic Spirit, has attempted to compare the 4,500-year-old marble figurine from the Cyclades with the modern aesthetic.
A recent review of that book suggested that any connection is superficial rather than essential.
Would you agree with that?
No.
One doesn't have to insist that there is a direct connection between something created 4,500 years ago and something created in this century in order that there may be a valid comparison.
What is being compared ultimately is our own response to works of art and to the qualities of simplicity in early Cycladic art, which we may compare with our own feeling for the qualities of simplicity in some of this century's art.
I see nothing at all superficial in that.
It brings us quite close to what is essential in some kinds of abstract art: when we look at the work of Rothko or Barnett Newman or maybe Brancusi, what is it exactly that makes us feel these works are so important?
There is nothing superficial in comparing works of different times and cultures, so long as one is not making glib suggestions of direct linkages between them.
Since you have taken up the Mastership of Jesus College, what have you done to encourage this, especially young contemporary British artists?
Being master of a college does give one an opportunity to work with whatever forces already exist within the college in order to get things moving.
I am not claiming it is my doing, but I have had a hand in the fact that four years ago and two years ago and again this year we have had exhibitions by living sculptors.
We also now have a policy of acquisition.
This year, our sculpture exhibition opened with works by some very well-known artists David Mach, Antony Gormley, Richard Long, for instance but also lesser known artists of great merit like Nina Saunders, Diane Maclean, Richard Bray, Michael Archer.
It will help to bring their work before the public.
Belgium
Bulldozers advance on the archaeological heart of Liège
Community action marshalled against a deep underground car park being built beneath the cathedral square
LIÈGE.
One of the richest archaeological sites in Belgium risks total destruction.
Around two years ago the town council of Liège decided to build an underground car park under the square of St Lambert, one of the busiest areas of the city.
The bulldozers will reach fifteen to twenty metres, well below the archaeological strata.
After the inception of the work, which is ongoing, the Liègeois formed protest groups and a petition of 50,000 signatures was presented at the town hall, but to no effect.
Activists encamped for two months in the square until they were cleared away by the police at the end of May.
The archaeological site is important for its date range and size.
The first excavations were begun in 1907 by the architect Paul Lohest when a gas main was being laid.
First, he identified the foundations of the tenth-century cathedral of Saint Lambert and of its Gothic successor, but then he found an extensive second- to third-century AD Roman villa.
Yet further down he discovered the remains of a Neolithic hut.
In 1980 the Ministry for the Walloon Region decided to reopen the site with assistance of the Centre for Archaeological Research of Liège University.
The director of excavations, Professor Leotard, says: ‘This is tormenting.
We are forced to work fast and badly, but we don't know whether there is any point to it because it may all be swept away in a month; on the other hand, nothing at all may happen, in which case we will have done it badly to no purpose.
Normally it's our job to dig, study, catalogue, understand the past, but when you see that what you have uncovered can't be protected, that this whole complex which is the heart and birth-place of the city can be destroyed in a moment, you feel quite sick.
It's incredible: it's the triumph of commercialism over culture and our whole history’.
Marie-Claire Valle-Bloaise, a campaigner, says: ‘What is really odd is that the whole city wants to save these remains of our past.
Everyone has signed the petition: lawyers and business men, musicians and housewives, teachers and workmen.
Only the town council doesn't give a damn’.
The conservation groups have challenged the Town hall in the courts, but the first judgment, of 5 June, has been against them.
Now they are going to appeal, but in the meanwhile the work is going on and the bulldozers are ready and waiting on the west side of the excavations, right up against the seventeenth-century cellars which were found intact, still full of bottles and vessels.
What's digging this summer: a selection of archaeological excavations being carried out throughout the old world in the summer.
The sites listed here welcome visitors.
ENGLAND
Piddington Romano-British villa (excavations 8–23 August)
Situated six miles of Northampton.
Contains a Late Iron Age to Romano-British sequence.
Second century AD villa, occupied by squatters in fourth century AD.
Courtyard, bathhouse and cellar are preserved.
Vindolanda (excavations until end August)
Situated on the A69 between Carlisle and Newcastle upon Tyne.
Part of the northern frontier of the Roman Empire of Hadrian's Wall.
One of eight fortresses along the wall, dated to 85 AD.
Well known for its preservation of textiles, leather and tablets.
Nearby are Housesteads Fort and one of the best preserved sections of the wall.
Flag fen (excavations happening continuously)
Situated two miles from Peterborough off the A1.
A waterlogged timber platform dating to about 1000 BC with literally thousands of timbers preserved.
A visit to the site can include watching preservation work in situ.
Local museum and visitor centre.
FRANCE
Bau de l'Aubesier rock shelter (excavations 1 July–30 August)
Situated about one and a half hours from Avignon by car on the Route Nationale to Carpentras.
Middle Palaeolithic (Old Stone Age) rock shelter with stone tool industry and Neanderthal remains.
GREECE
Kommos (excavations until 25 August)
Situated southwest of the Minoan site of Festos in southern Crete, north of Matala on the local road from the village of Pisidia.
Middle-Late Minoan harbour.
The Director, Joe Shaw from the University of Toronto and his team have also located Minoan houses and a later Greek Sanctuary.
HUNGARY
Szdzhalombatta (excavations 11 July-8 August)
Located near Budapest, the site can be reached by bus or train.
Bronze Age settlement and Iron Age cemetery.
ITALY
Pompeii (excavations 6–18 July)
South-east of Naples.
Excavations continue at this famous ancient Roman city, destroyed by the eruption of Vesuvius in 79 AD.
Contrada Mella (excavations until 24 July)
Situated near Oppido Mamertina (reached by bus from Gioia Tauro).
Settled early in the third century BC and survived the Punic Wars.
Occupied during the Romanisation of Calabria.
At present being excavated are two houses in the centre of the settlement.
Ossaia (excavations 8 July-8 August)
Situated two miles from Terontola railway station (on Florence/Rome line).
Roman villa of the Augustan period with large terraced walls and vaults.
PORTUGAL
Castelo de Moura (excavations in September)
To get there enquire at Moura Museum.
Very extensive medieval and Islamic remains.
RUSSIA
Moscow (excavations in August)
Being excavated are the seventeenth-century summer palace of Alexis Michailovich, father of Czar Peter the Great, and a medieval site nearby the Kremlin.
Enquire at the Pushkin Museum.
ISRAEL
Ashkelon (excavations until 2 August)
Situated in Ashkelon National Park, 30 miles south of Tel Aviv.
Canaanite to Crusader site with Middle Bronze Age ramparts, Philistine warehouses and a dog cemetery.
Hazor (excavations 19 July-7 August)
Situated in Eastern Galilee.
Canaanite settlement of great importance.
JORDAN
Petra (excavations until 3 August)
‘Petra,…half as old as time’, buses from Aqaba or Amman.
Major Iron Age stronghold, but much better known as the capital of the Ancient Nabataeans, fourth century BC to sixth century AD.
Site includes more than 700 carved monuments, spectacular tomb architecture and cult centres.
Treasures from the Israeli deep
JERUSALEM.
The Israel Museum is mounting an appealing exhibition entitled ‘A ship in the Midst of the Sea’.
It focuses on material recovered during the last five years from shipwrecks off the Mediterranean shores of Israel and from the bottom of the Dead Sea.
The exhibition spans the period from 3,000 BC to the sixteenth century, with most of the exhibits dating from the first to the third century AD.
These include coins and weights; anchors and canons from a military vessel in the Dead Sea; statues of deities carried on board to ensure good luck; and fragments of vases, sails and fishing nets.
Photographs of the divers at work on the excavations and drawn reconstructions of the objects are also included.
There is an accompanying brochure but no catalogue.
The show runs from 16 July to end of October.
Archaeologists puzzled by newly-discovered Roman treasure of Ladenburg
KONSTANZ, BADEN-WÜRTEMBERG.
A Roman treasure recently discovered at a building site at Ladenburg, is now on public display in the new Archäologische Landesmuseum, housed in a converted monastery of the former benedictine order of Petershausen, following conservation.
The find comprises five busts of various Roman divinities, two handles in the shape of lionheads and three winged brass sea-leopards dating from around the second to the third century AD.
Archaeologists are faced with the difficulty of categorising the findings as nothing comparable is known.
It is unclear whether the ensemble is complete or what purpose the pieces served, although it seems plausible that the treasure could have been part of a decoration for a large container or a large doorway.
These finds are not prominently displayed but exhibited with other Roman pieces in accord with the philosophy of the director of the Archäologisches Landesmuseum, Dr Dieter Planck who sees the presentation of the excavations within their historical context of prime importance.
The collection of the Archäologisches Landesmuseum currently consists of exhibits from the Stone Age to pieces from the Ludwigsburg porcelain factory.
It is planned that the whole collection up to the Middle Ages will be moved to the Stuttgart exhibition centre, leaving a space of approximately 6000 square metres for the city's rich medieval remains.
Sculpture from newly discovered Roman city of Bet She'an at the Israel Museum until October
JERUSALEM.
Archaeological excavations, begun in 1986 at Bet She'an in Northern Israel, have uncovered an entire Roman city including a theatre, amphitheatre, bath-houses, temples, streets and colonnades.
The marble statues and sculptures which adorned the city's monuments and squares are on view until October at the Israel Museum in Jerusalem; they are considered among the finest Roman remains to have been discovered in Israel.
Bet She'an is known to have had 7,000 years of continuous settlement: Canaanite, Israelite, Greek, Roman and Byzantine.
In Roman times Nysa-Scythopolis (its Greco-Roman name) was a major trading centre, producing the best linen in the Empire.
The city continued to thrive until a massive earthquake razed it to the ground in 749AD.
The earthquake, paradoxically, helped preserve the ancient city both from the ravages of time and from the hands of looters.
‘To have found so many rich remains in one compact concentrated area is quite unprecedented’, says curator Yael Yisraeli.
Signs of deliberate scarring on the young man's face attributed to Christian zealots bear testimony to the rise of Christianity in the site's Byzantine phase.
Hellenistic traditions continued to survive nonetheless: a fourth-century statue, erected by Artemideros, Christian Governor of Bet She'an, is inscribed with a cross but honours a pagan goddess.
It is better to journey than to arrive: the masterpiece versus fake debate continues over the Getty Kouros
ATHENS.
The conference co-sponsored by the Getty Museum and the Goulandris Foundation (the host organisation) at the end of May on the Getty Kouros concluded without a consensus of opinion over whether the statue is a fake or not.
This was no surprise to Marion True, the Getty Museum's Curator of Antiquities.
Acquired by the Getty Museum in 1985 (supposedly for a sum of nearly $9 million) the statue has been the subject of extensive scientific tests and scholarly debate ever since.
Indeed, it could be said, that even if the Kouros does turn out to be a fake, it will have generated more detailed research into Greek sculpture than any other work in existence.
The recent conference brought together an international gathering of 130 art historians, archaeologists, conservators and scientists working in the field of archaic Greek sculpture.
Reports by staff of the Getty conservation institute centred round the process of ‘dedolomitisation’ which the surface millimetres of marble have undergone.
This is an alteration of the crystalline structure of the stone through the through the action of acid leaching of magnesium from the calcium magnesium carbonate.
The conservators have so far been unable to recreate this process using chemicals in the lab, but this is an inconclusive argument for assuming this to be an ageing process.
There are no marks of modern tools on any part of the sculpture, which is carved from hard dolomitic Thasian marble, but this could again point to a very sophisticated forgery.
When the scholars were invited to comment on the style and technique of the Kouros similar arguments and points were made both for and against.
It was generally agreed that there was nothing wrong with the proportions, but this could indicate the work of a skilful forger.
A search for discrepancies was agreed to be the best avenue of research and one of the more convincing  arguments put forward for the work not to be genuine was that the Kouros combines stylistic elements that run from early to late sixth century BC.
A word of warning was however sounded by Professor John Boardman of Oxford University, in talking to The Art Newspaper, who pointed out that most kouroi are eclectic works.
None of the Greek scholars present considered the Kouros to be a genuine piece while most of the rest were uneasy and expressed reservations about the criteria employed.
The main value of the conference was to pinpoint gaps in  research into Archaic kouroi: incomplete photographic resources; a lack of methodology to determine authenticity; the absence of databases to store and compare information on the changes in composition of ancient stone.
Meanwhile the Getty Museum will continue its study of the Kouros and is mounting an exhibition at the Museum in January 1993 which will incorporate much of the debate from the recent conference.
The Kouros remains on display at the Goulandris Museum of Cycladic Art until 1 August.
Books
Paul Mellon's memoirs
‘Looking at the world today, maybe there are a lot more useful things to study than art and architecture’
Paul Mellon and Wilson Rockefeller talk over lunch about philanthropy, art and riches
NEW YORK.
Paul Mellon was born in Pittsburgh in 1907.
His paternal grandfather Thomas Mellon left Ulster for America and at the age of fifty-six opened his own private bank the Mellon Bank which his son Andrew inherited.
Such was Andrew Mellon's acumen that he and his brother were among the four richest men in America.
After an unhappy childhood (his parents suffered a very public divorce in 1912) Paul Mellon read various subjects at Yale followed by a happy year at Cambridge, England, where he discovered fox-hunting and horse racing a lifelong passion.
Mellon was made a founder trustee of his father's A.W.
Mellon Educational and Charitable Trust in 1930 to which all the family pictures were transferred with a view to donating them to the nation.
His own collecting began in  earnest in the late 1940s, encouraged by Chester Dale and by his wife Bunny's enthusiasm for nineteenth-century French painting.
The meeting with British art historian Basil Taylor first fuelled his enthusiasm for collecting British art at a time when this area was greatly undervalued.
In his autobiography Reflections in a Silver Spoon Mr Mellon describes himself as an Incurable Collector.
Paul Mellon's generosity to educational, artistic and environmental causes is astonishing over $600 million in all made primarily through the Paul Mellon Foundation and the Old Dominion Foundation.
Beneficiaries include the National Gallery of Art, Washington ($143.3 million); the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge ($3.55 million); the establishment and endowment works of the Yale Center for British Art and gifts of works of art for its collection ($214 million); Choate Rosemary Hall, Yale University ($29.4 million); the Virginia Outdoors Foundation ($11.7 million); and the Royal Veterinary College, University of London ($5.4 million).
Mr Mellon, at the end of your memoir Reflections in a Silver Spoon, you say ‘privacy is the most important asset money can buy’.
Why then did you write this book?
Paul Mellon: The book hasn't in any way curtailed my privacy because I still have the same life; I still have people to answer the telephone; I still have a private airplane and my travel plans are unannounced; and I lead my own life.
The fact that I wrote the book may have suggested that I spoke a lot about private things, but that is not really what I mean by privacy in one's life.
On the list of activities you have pursued, where would you place the enjoyment and appreciation of art?
I think what your question means is, where in the hierarchy of importance would I put my collecting, and I think I would safely put it as one of the most important things in my life, certainly ahead of the army and horses, farmer and publisher.
I'm interested in the way you were attracted to British art.
You say in your book that in June 1959 you had lunch at Claridge's with Basil Taylor and then began collecting British art.
You thought British art had been ‘needlessly neglected and undervalued and that somebody ought to do something about it’.
To what extent was your decision influenced by wanting to be that somebody, to make your mark in a field others had ignored?
I don't think it had anything to do with my wanting to make my ‘mark’, or with some ambition to be the newest Mr Huntington.
When I first started, I was not exactly working toward a goal, but having fun collecting with Basil Taylor's assistance.
It was really for myself at that time, in the same way that my buying the picture by Stubbs of ‘Pumpkin with a Stable Lad’ in 1936 was for myself.
I remember that luncheon with Basil absolutely perfectly, and that I'd been at the National Gallery or the Tate, and I had a postcard with me of one of those primitive paintings, naïve paintings, of a cricket match they still have postcards of it.
And I remember taking it out of my pocket and showing it to Basil and saying, now, this is the kind of thing I'm interested in, as well as horses, because it gives me a feeling of English life.
In my whole life of collecting and I suppose it's a little bit to assuage my conscience I've always been able to say to myself that I'm allowed to have these things and enjoy them, but eventually they're all going to museums.
It may be that one of my children might want one or two of them, but nobody these days has the houses to hang pictures in the way Bunny and I have done, and I've always known that the public will eventually enjoy them.
But I don't remember when that idea took over; probably two or three years after I started working with Basil.
Your father had a marvellous collection of Old Master paintings, and you and Mrs Mellon have purchased French paintings.
Did you never think, ‘Here's something that's been neglected and so I'll step in and begin collecting this’?
I think I talked to Basil about the fact that in America everybody thought of English paintings as being what my father collected or Mr Huntington collected or Mr Frick collected all those big portraits.
They're beautiful of course, but it amused me to wonder which artists people in America would think about if you talked about English landscapes.
Hardly anybody would think of Richard Wilson or Wright of Derby for instance they'd think of Turner or Constable.
As time went on and Basil began showing me all of these things, it gradually came over me that it would be nice for the American people to see that English art was much more variegated and lively than just these big portraits.
I'm interested in the process you go through when you look at a painting.
You wrote that in 1936 you bought your first painting (still your favourite British painting) George Stubbs's ‘Pumpkin with a Stable Lad’, immediately you saw it.
You describe yourself as an intuitive rather than an analytical collector; has this changed at all over the years?
Only, I think, in so far as I've seen so many pictures over the years that I must have picked up some knowledge and a sort of an overview of what there is in English art, so that I can make better comparisons.
But I still rely on intuition and feeling.
Throughout your book you mention many of the art world's leading figures, including Lord Duveen, whom you describe as ‘an impossibly bumptious and opinionated ass who took advantage of any opportunity that presented itself to burnish his image and to further his own interests’.
Are there any for whom you have a particularly high regard?
Oh, yes.
I always thought very, very highly of Geoffrey Agnew.
I met Agnew very early on as a collector, in fact when the Virginia Museum put on that first exhibition of ‘Sport and the Horse’ whose selection committee I headed.
I've always thought of Agnew as being the exact antithesis of Duveen.
He was dignified, he was knowledgeable, and he obviously had great feeling not only for British art but all kinds of art.
I just respected him as being one of the top people maybe the top person in the trade.
There were others whom I liked, that I thought were particularly honest and whose opinions I respected.
I have bought a lot of drawings, for instance, from Sidney Sabin and Bill Drummond who were partners.
I also did a great deal of business with Alfred Gates, director of Ackermann's, and I had great respect for him.
And, of course, my co-author John Baskett sold me many fine paintings and drawings before he retired as an art dealer, and I have the highest respect for his taste and integrity.
None of these were like Duveen.
I knew Duveen when I was between fifteen and twenty years old.
I would see him with my father and hear them talking about paintings and so forth.
Then, you know, he testified in my father's tax trial, and he really made an absolute ass of himself because he didn't know his geography of Washington.
When they asked him where it was that my father had wanted to build the gallery, he said something like, ‘Well, you know, it's that place near the pond between the pond and the obelisk’, meaning the Washington Monument and the Reflecting Pool.
Are there any people in the academic or the museum world for whom you have a particularly high regard?
I've always thought very highly of Michael Jaffé, until recently Director of the Fitzwilliam Museum, and I've had quite a lot of pleasant conversations with him.
Through Michael Jaffé I've spent some time at the Hamilton Kerr conservation centre near Cambridge.
Among others who come to mind are Sir Ellis Waterhouse, Christopher White, Martin Butlin and Graham Reynolds.
John Harris was of great help to me in collecting architectural drawings, and I've always admired his grasp of that field.
And of course Judy Egerton, former assistant to Martin Butlin, was invaluable to me in writing about my sporting art paintings, drawings and prints catalogues, along with Dudley Snelgrove, who was also invaluable to me in collecting prints and drawings.
I thought Alan Bowness, former director of the Tate, was a very good man, but I can't say that I've known intimately very many of the museum people either in England or in the States.
You'd think with my connections at the National Gallery, Washington, and the Virginia Museum and Yale that I would know more people in the field, but I just don't.
You mention your father's tax case and you go to great lengths to set the record straight.
[In 1931 Andrew Mellon was accused by Congressman Louis McFadden of cheating on his 1931 income tax return and in March 1934 the Roosevelt administration duly announced that it would seek criminal tax evasion charges for $1.3 million.
The case was subsequently dismissed but a rumour arose that Andrew Mellon had done a deal with Roosevelt, offering to build a gallery and give his collection to the nation if the administration would stop hounding him.]
Yes.
Why do you think that the stories have continued even to this day about the supposed link between the tax case and the gift of funds to build the National Gallery?
I suppose it's natural.
People think, well now, here's a man who's been accused of fraud and so forth and shortly after that it comes out that he's given a big thing to the government.
But I think it's too bad that it keeps cropping up all the time.
In the book I quote a letter from my father when I was at Cambridge, and I remember talking to my father about the National Gallery as early as 1928.
Well, that was six years before the tax trial.
Also in 1930, I believe it was, he formed the A.W.
Mellon Educational and Charitable Trust.
He put all the pictures in it.
This was in 1930 or ‘31.
Well, that was two or three years before the tax accusations.
So it was obvious that my father had been thinking of this long before.
What most people think is extraordinary is that after the government and Roosevelt came out with this thing, it would have been a perfectly human reaction of my father's to say, well the hell with it, I won't give it to the nation if they're going to accuse me of fraud.
I'll build my own museum in Pittsburgh, or someplace else, or give my paintings to the National Gallery in London.
When you've made your gifts to the various museums, you have given them with the stipulation that none of the works of art may ever be sold.
Can you foresee any circumstances when an exception might be made to this rule?
I don't think so, no.
I've thought about that and I think it's a bad policy for any museum to be known to be selling pictures or any work of art.
A donor could of course stipulate in his gift that he didn't care whether the works were sold or not.
Some donors might have great works of art which they've lost interest in, or that belonged to their father or their grandfather.
I can see that in such a case they might make a gift of paintings or other works of art for tax reasons, for example, and wouldn't care if they were sold or not.
I would understand that, but at the same time from a personal point of view, or a museum executive point of view, I think it's a mistake.
I think if a museum gets to be talked about ‘Oh, well, they've sold this and they've sold that’ I for one would want to make very sure that whatever I gave them couldn't be sold.
So you think that as a general rule, museums should not sell works of art?
They should not, because who's to decide: these things go in tremendous waves of fashion.
Maybe fifty years from now, everybody'll be laughing at the Impressionists!
Well, that's alright, a hundred more years and then, for some strange reason, they'll come back into favour.
Even if paintings are unpopular or even if people think they are bad paintings for a while, they're useful for art students.
Since the days when institutions such as the National Gallery of Art in Washington and the Museum of Modern Art in New York were established, many more museums have been founded bearing their founders' names.
From what you've seen as both founder and trustee, can you discern where art-philanthropy might be heading?
I have no idea where it's heading, but I understand completely why people want to have their names on things.
My reason for not having done it myself and my father's reasons for not having done it with the National Gallery is that, in the case of Yale, I'm looking forward to the day when there'll be other people interested in English art who will give paintings or money to the Center for British Art just because it is the Center for British Art, where they wouldn't do it if it was the Paul Mellon Center for British Art.
I have to admit I'm not as eager to give money or pictures, say, to a Carnegie Museum as to a Museum of Modern Art, and I'd rather give to the Museum of Modern Art than the Guggenheim Museum.
That's safe to say because I haven't any of that kind of art.
Last summer, when the Sainsbury Wing was being dedicated at the National Gallery, Lord Sainsbury said in his speech that, while he was very happy to have provided that money for the Wing, he really thought the government should have paid for it.
Do you see that as the difference between the way that Americans view philanthropy in the arts as opposed to the way the English view it?
I think government ought to be interested in giving money to the arts.
I think they should remember the way our Congress, at the behest of my father and my father's lawyers, agreed from the outset to underwrite all the maintenance and security and everything to do with the physical appearance and upkeep of the National Gallery in Washington.
That was guaranteed in perpetuity, and that to me is a very sensible way of the government taking care of the arts.
I think the government giving money for the National Endowment for the Arts and then trying to decide what's art and what isn't is a mistake.
That's something that ought to be taken care of by private citizens.
Perhaps most artists today and most museums would say I'm wrong about that.
But to me it just seems wrong to have the government involved in any kind of censorship or questions of taste.
I think I'd rather leave that up to the private sector.
But do you think that there's some way that the NEA can be reformed or changed so that it can serve that purpose?
No, that would be a mistake.
I think now that it exists it ought to be giving money to these things, but I think it ought to be taking the advice of the panels of artists and museum people.
The idea of trying to second guess those advisers is wrong.
I also think all this business about pornography is ridiculous.
If the NEA hadn't said anything about the Mapplethorpe show, nobody would really have complained.
Well perhaps a few, well-intentioned people like Jesse Helms [the senator who criticised the NEA vigorously for allocating public funds to pornographic and blasphemous art]might have said these things are disgusting.
As far as I'm concerned, some of them are disgusting, but I don't think it's up to me to say so.
If it's a thing that the public thinks is wrong or that isn't really, truly, basically artistic it'll fade away anyway ten years from now nobody'll think about it.
At the beginning of your memoir is a quotation from a letter by John Adams to his wife: ‘I must study politics and war, that my sons may have liberty to study mathematics and philosophy.
My sons ought to study mathematics and philosophy, geography, natural history and naval architecture, navigation, commerce and agriculture, in order to give their children a right to study painting, poetry, music, architecture, statuary, tapestry and porcelain’.
Your grandfather's and father's legacy enabled you to do just that to study and enjoy the arts.
What would you say is your legacy to the next generation?
My legacy to my children would be not to try to influence them in any way as to what they should study.
You notice in that quotation that Adams says that they may study so and so.
If my son and my daughter haven't taken up the same interest in art that I have, I see no reason that they should have, and I see no reason to tell them they ought to study this or they ought to do that.
In fact you might say that they ought to start back at the beginning and study politics and war because, looking at the world today, maybe there are a lot more useful things to study than art and architecture.
The Magritte literature
The catalogue raisonné, the exhibition catalogue and the monograph
All three have appeared simultaneously on the occasion of the major exhibition at the Hayward Gallery what are their relative contributions to our knowledge?
The study of Magritte's art, long dependent upon Suzi Gablik's short monograph completed in 1970, has received a sharp boost with the publication of three new books, each of which serves a slightly different purpose but only together provide a comprehensive evaluation of the artist as he has been researched by David Sylvester and Sarah Whitfield.
They are the authors of the first of five volumes which are expected to appear in quick succession in the next eighteen months and catalogue the complete work of Magritte, his paintings, collages, gouaches, drawings, objects and sculpture, but exclude his designs for advertising posters and other commercial activities.
It is a project of ambitious scale and could not have been realised without the generous sponsorship of the Menil Foundation, owner of an important group of works by Magritte.
Volume I covers the period of 1916 to 1930 and concludes with Magritte's return to Brussels from Paris where he had stayed for nearly three years.
During that fertile period, many of the themes and subjects which the artist would employ throughout his career were invented.
It lists, and illustrates in small black-and-white photographs only, 333 oil paintings, with a further fifty-six pictures, missing or destroyed but known from mention in correspondence or catalogues, identified in an appendix.
Entries, admirable in their crispness and objectivity, are preceded by a detailed chronology which maps out, in the form of short sections, Magritte's biography, artistic development and exhibition schedule, supported by extensive quotations from the artist's letters and other literary sources.
Intentionally omitted from this volume and its companions is any more subjective appreciation or interpretation of Magritte's art.
For those judgements, the reader must consult either the entries in the exhibition catalogue written by Sarah Whitfield and discussing nearly 170 works of art showing at the Hayward Gallery and the participating museums in the United States, or David Sylvester's monograph, the result of many years of rumination on his subject.
Divided into forty-four brief chapters and illustrated by a large selection of good colour reproductions, it is the catalogue raisonné's more discursive and speculative companion and is recommended for its explanation of Magritte's compositions and for comment on his relationship with artists, critics, poets, dealers and collectors.
Sylvester's text is authoritative, occasionally impatient.
It is illuminated by brilliant passages of interpretation and convincing proposals for source material for Magritte's imagery, ranging from Egyptian and Greek sculpture, fifteenth-century frescoes and Symbolist pictures of the nineteenth century to photography and film stills, pulp fiction and popular postcards of a mildly erotic flavour, and illustrations published in the Larousse encyclopaedia.
Although there are chapters which deal with specific periods or projects such as the Impressionist and vache styles, and the commission for a series of murals for the Knokke Casino, Sylvester has written a thematic rather than chronological account of the artist's development.
His longest and most penetrating chapter discusses the event of his mother's presumed suicide in 1912.
Pulled from the river with her nightdress apparently wound around her head, she provided Magritte with an image which haunted his art and inspired the long and diverse series of compositions in which the head is concealed by a veil or an apple, metamorphosed into a plank of wood, or shown only from the back view.
Even ‘The Rape’, that celebrated transformation of the features of a face into a female torso, can be partly understood, according to the author, by reference to the circumstances of his mother's death.
But besides offering an interpretation of the content of the art, Sylvester performs an equally necessary task in rehabilitating Magritte as a painter.
Long considered only a maker of images, it is quite apparent from the Hayward Gallery's exhibition that he is a craftsman of extraordinary technical facility, capable of luscious passages of brushwork, occasionally using thick impasto for expressive effects and employing his own distinctive and changing palette.
Sylvester's text considers these factors and balances them against the feebleness with which Magritte might execute dull repetitions of his more popular compositions.
By choosing to investigate the ideas behind Magritte's art, Sylvester's discussion of important pictures such as‘The Annunciation’ or ‘The Rape’is fragmented and spread over different chapters, an irritation aggravated by the publishers who have failed to give plate references to the illustrations and cite them appropriately in the text.
Only a reader familiar with Magritte's art will not be confused by this strange editorial decision.
To some extent, it enhances the case for Sarah Whitfield's exhibition catalogue which follows the convention of such publications and treats each work of art in its own catalogue entry.
In certain details, those entries differ from the opinions advanced by Sylvester.
An introductory essay gives a brief account of Magritte's intentions and an analysis of the responses to his art by several generations of European and American artists who followed him, from Joseph Cornell and Marcel Broodthaers to Robert Gober and Richard Wentworth.
It is a peculiar text to publish in a catalogue which will have greater circulation and sell in larger quantities than either Sylvester's monograph or the catalogue raisonné.
The simultaneous publication of these three books has been hastened by the Hayward Gallery's exhibition.
Each has its own justification and each will find its own constituency.
The catalogue raisonné is destined to become one of the finest projects devoted to a modern artist and will be the invaluable source of reference for scholarship and the trade alike.
The monograph and exhibition catalogue, broadly discussing the same group of pictures selected from Magritte's oeuvre, adopt rather different approaches to their subject, and will be favoured, respectively, by a readership enjoying the labyrinthine mind of a great scholar or preferring the clean presentation of information and explanation in a sequence of numbered catalogue entries.
Isamu Noguchi
The East and West of contemporary sculpture
The pioneer of interactive and site-specific art
Today the influence of Isamu Noguchi, who died in 1988 at the age of eighty-four, is as vast as it is underrecognised.
The sculptor pioneered approaches to his medium that young artists today take for granted: sculpture conceived as an ensemble of elements scattered over a wide area; site-specific installation; public ‘interactive’ art and sculpture on a colossal scale.
His work in stone is some of the finest sculpture of the century.
As contemporary artists and critics grapple with new work that blends influences of disparate cultures, Noguchi's life, split largely between the Japan of his father and the America of his mother, offers a rich case study.
That split between cultures is the focus of this uncritical biography by Dore Ashton, an art historian who knew Noguchi for thirty years.
Ashton carefully traces the childhood of the Los Angeles-born Sam Gilmore (the name Noguchi used in his youth in the US Midwest).
Noguchi's poet father abandoned the boy and his mother for Japan, and Ashton's account of Noguchi's quest for contact with his father and with an archaic Japanese culture is often compelling.
It is Japan, Ashton suggests, where Noguchi developed his keen appreciation for materials, particularly stone.
The rikyu or tea ceremony fed into the sculptor's appetite for myth.
Gardens and the confined performance space of noh theatre refined his gifts for composition.
Noguchi always spoke Japanese like a child.
If his longing for the real Japan could be fanciful and even cruel (he forced his actress wife to wear painful sandals because they were ‘beautiful’), conflict seemed to dominate his career in America.
Noguchi tried in vain to construct an earthwork sculpture at a Japanese-American internment camp where he lived voluntarily for a time during World War II.
We learn that America's nuclear attack on Hiroshima and its war in Vietnam anguished the sculptor.
Ashton sees Noguchi as an ‘authentic romantic’, uprooted and uncompromising.
But unlike her nuanced scrutiny of Noguchi's links to Japan, this broad characterisation misses many fine details of Noguchi's later years in the West, complete with difficult corporate patrons and endless commissions.
Nor does Ashton seem to think Noguchi ever produced failures.
On the book's back cover is an elegant serene photograph of his sunken garden four august boulders scattered in a brick pattern, sprinkled with water which Noguchi built in New York's Chase Manhattan Bank Plaza in 1964.
On paper, the work has extraordinary power; on its site, it looks more like an abandoned fishtank, dwarfed hopelessly by the colossal office towers of the project's patrons.
Noguchi did not get his first retrospective exhibition until he was in his sixties.
A first-rate biography might have reminded the art world of his unique eloquence.
With his autobiography now out of print in the United States, this volume will have to suffice until a better one comes along.
20P16N02 Piero Manzoni
Only some of the truth
‘We must protect the artist's name, image and market’
Piero Manzoni is the cheeky chappie of Italian art.
He peers out at us from the photograph on the front cover of his catalogue raisonné: all we see is his deadpan baby-face, hovering horizontal about a foot above the studio floor, the rest of his body is concealed nay, shrouded by one of his crinkly gesso ‘achrome’ paintings which is propped against the studio wall.
For the compiler of a Manzoni catalogue raisonné, there are complications.
As befits a signatory of a neo-Dada Manifesto Against Style (1957), many of Manzoni's works are unsigned, untitled and undated, and are improvised with a bewildering variety of materials and processes (‘achromes’ might be made from kaolin, felt, cotton, polystyrene, wool, rabbit fur, bread rolls or stones).
Since his death in 1963 at the age of twenty-nine, a suspiciously large number of works has appeared on the market.
This catalogue raisonné is an expanded version of the one produced by Germano Celant in 1975.
The first 170 pages are devoted to a biographical account in English, copiously illustrated by photographs, reviews and letters, written mostly in Italian and French.
But basic biographical details which are referred to in the letters often receive no mention in the main text.
You would never guess from the text that he was an alcoholic, and there is no mention of the cause of death or of a coroner's report.
Indeed, so much silence surrounds Manzoni's death that one wonders whether it really was solely down to drink.
In the explanation of their cataloguing criteria, the authors admit that they are concealing confidential information ‘so as to guarantee and protect the artist's name, image and market’.
This enigmatic statement does not inspire total confidence, though their division of works into subjects imaginary works, lines, imprints etc does work well.
One suspects that Manzoni would have rather enjoyed all the fuss and obfuscation.
He was, after all, in the business of producing quasi-religious reliquaries, sanctifying objects and people by his merest whim and touch tins of artist's shit, balloons of artist's breath, living sculptures.
And he knew it: ‘I will die when I am thirty-three (like Christ).
I want to arrange for a commemorative postage stamp to be printed with my portrait on it.
I want to arrange for my body to be closed up in a transparent plastic parallelepiped’.
Salimbeni winners
SAN SEVERINO MARCHE.
The jury of the prestigious Italian Salimbeni book prize for publications on the history and criticism of art has decided on this year's winners.
Three equal first prizes have been awarded to Bruce Boucher for The Sculpture of Jacopo Sansovino; to Giuliana Algeri and Anna De Floriani for La pittura in Liguria.
Il Quattrocento; and to Carlo Bertelli for Piero della Francesca.
La forza divina della pittura.
The judges for this year's prize were Giuliano Briganti, Mina Gregori, Jennifer Montague, Pierre Rosenberg, Giorgio Zampa, Pietro Zampetti and Federico Zeri.
Also singled out for praise were Francesco Bianchi Ferrari e la pittura a Modena fra ‘400 e ‘500 by Daniele Benati; Palazzo Vecchio e dintorni.
Studio su Franco Sacchetti e le fabbriche di Firenze by Lucia Battaglia Ricci; Pittura dal ‘200 al primo ‘500 nelle fotografie di Girolamo Bombelli, by Walter Angelelli and Andrea G. De Marchi, edited by Serena Romano; Wiligelmo e Matilde.
L'officina romanica by Arturo Carlo Quintavalle; and Della pittura italiana.
Studi critico-storici.
Le Gallerie Borghese e Doria-Pamphili a Roma, by Giovanni Morelli, edited by Jaynie Anderson.
Virtual Reality at the Pompidou
PARIS.
The Pompidou Centre's Musée National de l'art Moderne and its Centre de Création Industrielle are launching a new project under the title Revue virtuelle which will be devoted to the interraction of art and computer technology.
The cutting edge of computer technology is being used by a number of artists worldwide to create new worlds or virtual reality (VR) in the new computer art jargon.
A quarterly magazine of that title will be devoted to the work of one artist, organisation or theoretician per issue and will be backed up by a temporary exhibition in the Centre's contemporary galleries, a lecture by the author which is republished in the revue and an annual publication of the lectures with an accompanying vieotape.
The first issue is given over to Edmont Couchot, research director and professor in the Department of Arts and Image Technologies at the University of Paris 8.
Whilst there is undoubtedly a role for a new publication in this important field the accompanying publicity material gives some cause for concern, speaking as it does of ‘These new orientations [which]impinge first of all on the modes of exogeneous interactivity…’.
Let's hope the magazine itself is clearer.
A national art book prize for Britain
LONDON.
The National Art Collections Fund and Waterstone's Booksellers have announced that Jill Lloyd is the winner of the country's first national art book prize.
Entries were selected from books published between April 1991 and April 1992 and were assessed both for their scholarship and accessibility to the general reader.
The shortlisted books were: Portraiture by Richard Brilliant; Corot in Italy, open-air painting and the classical landscape tradition by Peter Galassi; William Morris, design and enterprise in Victorian Britain by Charles Harvy and Jon Press; German Expressionism by Jill Lloyd; The Cycladic Spirit by Colin Renfrew; and The Italian Renaissance Interior 1400-1600 by Peter Thornton.
The £2,000 prize was awarded on 15 June.
Handy handbook on Mod Brits
This useful and compact guide includes more than 1500 biographical entries on artists spanning the period 1900 to 1980 with some leeway on either side.
Entries on artists have brief bibliographies and there are also listings for institutions such as the Institute of Contemporary Arts, London, and the Arts Council, major galleries which have dealt in Modern British work, and art movements such as the Newlyn School.
One or two slight criticisms some artists receive a seemingly disproportionate amount of column space: thus Gillian Ayres gets more column inches than Francis Bacon and Louis Le Brocquy gets slightly more than David Hockney.
Robert Colquhoun gets more than all of them.
Inevitably a few omissions  occur ; Cecil Aldin, for example, whose reproductive prints after his paintings of horses, carriages and sportsmen have graced many an English home.
Overall though, a good thing.
At Lady Diana's: inside the British Embassy in Paris
The name which springs most readily to mind in connection with our Embassy in Paris (the Hôtel de Charost) is Lady Diana Cooper, wife of the first post-war ambassador, Sir Alfred Duff Cooper.
She revived the house, filling it with the best Paris could offer in people and le bon goût, in the tradition established there by her great predecessor Pauline Borghese, who employed Napoleon's architect Fontaine to remodel the interior (and sold the house to the Duke of Wellington).
This small book is the second in the series after the volume on Bonn.
It outlines the history of the house, its occupants and the collection, discussing its arrangement and furnishing from 1722 to the present day.
Although glamorous, the interiors do not attain to the splendour of the famous German Embassy in Paris, but contain some outstanding (and intriguing) works of art.
Among these are Sir George Hayter's ‘Lady Stuart de Rothesay and her daughters’, Pauline Borghese's canopied bed, the  spectacular surtout de table by Thomire, Jacques-Émile Blanche's ‘Queen Alexandra’ and J.D. Wingfield's ‘The Picture Gallery, Stafford House, c.1848’.
It might well be asked what purpose can such a book serve when the Embassy is not open to the public except by arrangement for specialist groups.
Dr Wendy Barron, Curator of the Government Art Collection tells The Art Newspaper, ‘These books have a definite diplomatic purpose, in helping foreign visitors to our embassies to appreciate their contents.
Many people fail to realise the often invisible benefits of the role of diplomacy.
We had absolutely no budget for such a venture (already undertaken by the Italian and United States Governments) until Lord Carrington of Christie's suggested this collaboration’.
Diplomatically correct, the appearance of the book conveys lavishness, but with elegant restraint.
International record of sponsored research in art history
WASHINGTON, D.C. The Center for Advanced Study in the Visual Arts at the National Gallery of Art has just published volume 11 of Sponsored Research in the History of Art 1991–1992.
These yearly volumes are the only reference resource identifying current grants subject to the peer review process in a wide spectrum of art research.
The most recent volume records almost 1,600 new research projects sponsored by 145 public and private institutions in thirty countries.
The listings are in two sections grouped under art history plus archaeology and prehistory.
Also identified is research in a variety of allied disciplines, including architecture, landscape architecture, urbanism, industrial design, numismatics, film, photography and television.
Grantees are indexed by name, institutions by country.
Prague National Gallery launches a new bulletin
PRAGUE.
Under the editorship of Roman Prahl of the National Gallery of Prague, the first foreign language Czech art periodical has been launched, entitled Bulletin of the National Gallery in Prague, with articles in French, English and German.
Somewhat behind schedule, the 1991 volume appeared this May and includes a broad range of studies on works in the Gallery's collection and on the history of the Gallery itself.
The bulletin is fully illustrated in black and white and articles include: ‘Paintings by the Vivarinis in the National Gallery’ by Hana Hlavackova; ‘Dürer's ‘Feast of the Rosegarlands’: a Venetian Altarpiece’by Peter Humfrey; ‘Abraham Bloemaert and his son Hendrik: two unpublished drawings’by Anna Rollova; and ‘Leos Kubicke's sculpture ‘Lips’, 1916’by Jiri Zemanek.
The editor intends two issues for 1992, the second in the form of a report on the Gallery's activities.
The publication has received financial support from the Czech Ministry of Culture but is still in need of funding to ensure its survival.
One issue of the bulletin costs $9 (US) or DM12 (Europe) and orders should be sent to the Bulletin Narodni galerie v Praze, Narodni galerie, Hradcanske namesti 15, 11904 Praha1, Czechoslovakia.
Cheques should be made payable to CSOB a.s.
na prikope 14, Praha 1, Czechoslovakia, account no. 62 174.
The Art Market
London and New York
French decorative arts apparently recession-proof
The international market absorbs the Polo, Patiño and Johnson collections in one year
Tous les Louis do well but Louis XVI best of all
NEW YORK.
Sotheby's May sales of fine eighteenth-century French furniture and decorations revealed again that this field remains one of the strongest and most recession-proof areas of the art market.
In the opinion of many, the finest eighteenth-century French furniture set a standard of quality and craftsmanship that has never been equalled though much emulated, appearing in such widely divergent mutations as John Henry Belter's high Victorian rococo revival to the sleek Art Deco refinement of Jacques-Emile Ruhlmann.
Sotheby's sales were based on two large consignments from Jaime Ortiz-Patiño and Basia Johnson.
The Patiño material was much the finer, being enshrined in a separate owner catalogue (an increasing rarity among auction houses in these budget-conscious days)(see The Art Newspaper No. 18, May 1992, p. 18).
A relative novelty for this important property was that, for once, Sotheby's did not give the consignor a guarantee, correctly judging that with material this good there was little reason to feel the sale would not do splendidly.
Although estimates were attractive, they were not unrealistically underpriced: ‘I don't believe in low estimates for superb things’, says Sotheby's French furniture expert Thierry Millerand.
‘It's easy to say you have a great sale if you put everything so low’.
The Patiño furniture easily surpassed Sotheby's expectations, however.
Every lot sold, bringing the total to $15.8 million (£8.8 million), a record session for a French furniture sale in America.
The first half of the sale consisted mostly of good solid decorator merchandise, filled with such essentials as bras de lumière and ormolu candlesticks.
Most notable among them were a Louis XVI ormolu-and-Wedgwood porcelain mounted clock thermometer and its companion barometer-thermometer attributed to Adam Weisweiler (est. $150–200,000) which sold to a telephone bidder for $250,000 (£138,900) and an amusing pair of painted jeux de loto (essentially eighteenth-century bingo cards in their holders), which sold over the telephone for $60,000 (£33,300)(est. $20–30,000).
The most sumptuous of all the decorations was undoubtedly a huge Chinese Ming-dynasty celadon porcelain vase embellished with elaborate and highly wrought ormolu mounts incorporating ring-toothed lions' heads of around 1760.
Strongly estimated at $400–600,000, it survived some slow bidding to sell for $475,000 (£263,900).
Of the furniture, one of the rare disappointments (if you can call it that) was the $825,000 (£458,300) sale of an important Louis XIV ormolu-mounted Boulle marquetry bureau plat, around 1710, attributed to André-Charles Boulle, that had been estimated to sell for $1–1.5 million.
‘If there was a problem with this piece it is that it is not unique’, said Millerand.
‘There are at least ten other examples of this table known, and that might well have dampened enthusiasm for it’.
Additionally, says Millerand, elaborate Louis XIV furniture has a much narrower audience than later eighteenth-century styles, and those that like it may simply not have the space to accommodate such a very large piece of furniture.
It seemed that anybody could live with the small Louis XIV marquetry table, more an objet d'art than a piece of furniture.
Exquisitely inlaid all over in Chinoiserie decoration in stained horn, mother-of-pearl, tortoiseshell and brass with silvered bronze mounts, it is one of only a handful of similar pieces known (the most recent example sold by Sotheby's in December 1991 made $875,000).
Although the maker and even country of origin of these pieces surprisingly remains unknown, one view holding that they are German rather than French, this uncertainty did not matter to the bidders as it sold to an anonymous private collector for $1,700,000 (£944,400).
Equally coveted were a magnificent pair of Louis XVI ormolu-mounted Boulle marquetry and Japanese lacquer commodes by Etienne Levasseur which had the added distinction of being beautiful, practical and with an eighteenth-century provenance (one of the few Patiño pieces with that distinction), made for the great connoisseur Pierre Louis-Paul Randon de Boisset.
After being sold by de Boisset's estate in 1777, they were subsequently acquired by Alexander, Tenth Duke of Hamilton, and were a highlight of the great Hamilton Palace dispersal at Christie's in 1882.
In their lavish use of Japanese lacquer coupled with a relatively restrained form they were especially attractive to contemporary taste, and they sold to London dealer Bill Redford for $1.55 million (£861,100)(est. $1–1.5 million), reputedly acting for the London steel magnate Ronald Fuhrer.
The highlight of the sale was a Louis XVI ormolu-mounted sycamore, satinwood and mahogany commode, designed by Etienne-Louis Boullée and signed by Joseph Baunhauer with extraordinary painted decoration by Jean-Louis Prevost of a still-life and bouquets of flowers, encircled by ribbon-tied laurel garlands.
It is curious that painted decoration, probably the first type of decoration applied to furniture, is of the greatest rarity in eighteenth-century France, and only seven other examples are known to exist.
Of them all, the Patiño commode is perhaps the finest, forming part of a three-piece suite (the other two pieces, at Waddesdon Manor and formerly in the Polo collection, have been altered) made for Nicholas Beaujon, a collector who amassed his fortune by hoarding wheat during a famine.
The commode was a relatively recent Patiño purchase, having been acquired at the Deane F. Johnson sale at Christie's, New York in 1980 for $240,000 (£133,300).
Twelve years later, it went for $1.8 million (est. $1.2–1.6 million) again, reportedly, to Ronald Fuhrer.
While the following day's mixed owner sale was also successful, it was also business as usual with greedy consignors and less than spectacular goods making for the usual ups and downs.
As in the Patiño sale, decorative works of art made a strong showing.
A fine pair of Louis XVI ormolu–mounted carved ivory vases (one of only seven pairs known) sold for $330,000 (£180,800)(est. $300–400,000) and two important Meissen groups previously auctioned by Sotheby's in the great Wrightsman dispersal sold exceedingly well, both estimated at a fraction of their 1984 prices.
The covered potpourri jar flanked by two rather ungainly guinea fowl, which had sold for $34,000, made $47,000 (£25,100) this time (est. $15–25,000), and the amusing ormolu-mounted table-fountain-cum-water cooler with cat tails and swans, which had brought $34,100, now made $37,500 (£20,500)(est. $15–25,000).
The furniture section was less consistent.
Definitely an acquired taste was a clunky Spanish colonial gilt-metal mounted mother-of-pearl, tortoiseshell, pewter, ebonised and parcel-gilt cabinet made for a viceroy of Peru, and dating from the second half of the seventeenth century.
It seemed even more awkward in the company of its finer European counterparts and was unsold at $475,000 (est. $500–700,000).
Most of the troublesome lots, however, were consigned by Basia Johnson.
Mrs Johnson has been a major supplier to both Sotheby's and Christie's this spring season, offering silver, furniture and works of art at sales both in New York and London (some lots undesignated as to their owner).
While Mr Patiño may well be selling to simplify his life after he moves into his new London residence, Mrs Johnson's reasons for selling are much more controversial, as it is generally believed that the heiress has not paid for the celebrated Badminton Cabinet which she bought at Christie's, London, in July 1990 for a record £7.6 million ($15.2 million).
In June after the export licence was finally granted (following a lengthy fund-raising campaign to keep the cabinet in Great Britain), the cabinet was still at the restorers in London.
Sources reveal that while the consignor, the Duke of Beaufort, has been paid by the auction house, Christie's has not been paid by the purchaser, and that Mrs Johnson's flurry of consignments are to make good her final bid.
Unfortunately, many of her goods at Sotheby's did not attract the same rapt attention as did Mr Patiño's.
Much of it was of the Louis XIV period (which has a much more limited market than Louis XVI furniture), and in contrast to the freshness of the Patiño lots, had mostly been recently bought at high prices.
Dealers felt they could be choosy, passing several highly touted lots, including a Louis XIV Boulle marquetry writing table (which some believed to have been extensively altered), unsold at $325,000 (est. $400–600,000) and a set of four Louis XVI ormolu-mounted Boulle marquetry cabinets (est. $400–600,000) which failed at $250,000.
Luckier fates awaited the Louis XIV Boulle marquetry console, sold to a telephone bidder under-estimate for $675,000 (£375,000)(est. $800–1.2 million), a small Louis XIV ormolu-mounted Boulle bureau plat around 1700–1710, sold to Bernard Steinitz for $850,000 (£472,200)(est. $1–1.5 million), a simple Louis XV tulipwood marquetry table à écrire by Bernard van Risamburgh, sold to Partridge for $460,000 (£255,500)(est. $400–600,000) and the skeleton of a charming Louis XVI giltwood lit à la polonaise around 1780 (est. $100–150,000), a form not often seen at auction, which went to a phone bidder for $440,000 (£244,400).
The most successful of Mrs Johnson's consignments was a large Louis XIV Savonnerie carpet of around 1670.
Depicting swags of flowers interspaced between Berain-inspired cartouches and masks, it was in remarkably fine condition, its rich oranges and deep blues unfaded.
Although the carpet's original owner is still unknown, the recipient must have been highly considered, since all the Savonnerie workshops were monopolised by the King during this time for making carpets for the Louvre.
As there is at present in the United States an embargo against Iranian carpets, it has been suggested that renewed attention is being given to European examples.
An Empire Aubusson pile carpet around 1810 with rewoven areas brought $270,000 (£150,000) at the Patiño sale (est. $60–80,000) and even an attractive late nineteenth-century Louis XVI style Savonnerie carpet (est. $40–60,000) brought $220,000 (£120,500).
Estimated at $700–900,000, the Johnson carpet was special, and after fierce bidding sold to a New York dealer (acting for a private collector) for $1.2 million (£672,200)(underbid by Maurice Segoura, who had sold the carpet to Mrs Johnson), a world record price for a carpet at auction.
£1.1 million for Johnson desk
LONDON.
Coinciding with the Grosvenor House Antiques Fair, Christie's 11 June Important French and Continental Furniture, Carpets and Tapestries sale was guaranteed a full room, although a number of the most important lots were in fact sold on the telephone or on commission bids.
Few important pieces were unsold and the overall sold percentage was 82% by value.
Alistair Clarke of Christie's furniture department expressed satisfaction that the market had held up in the light of the considerable quantity of important French furniture which has already been offered this season.
He pointed to a high percentage of private buyers, willing to spend on top quality pieces while French trade purchasers were conspicuously absent due to lack of funds.
The sale was notable both in content and in consignors: more pieces from the collection of Mrs Barbara Johnson; a number of lots from the Luton Hoo Wernher family collection; from John Kluge; and sixty lots from the Meikleour Estate Trust which comprises the celebrated collection of furniture assembled in the first half of the nineteenth century by the comte de Flahaut de la Billarderie, natural son of Talleyrand, and his wife, Margaret, Baroness Keith and Nairne.
Rather neatly, the sale's top lot, Mrs Johnson's bureau plat by Leleu, which sold on a commission bid at £1.1. million ($2 million; estimate in excess of £750,000), had been purchased by her from Christie's for £300,000 in 1981, where it had been consigned from Meikleour, having formed part of the original collection.
Conceived in the most advanced taste of the period, the bureau is most closely comparable to a suite of furniture supplied by Leleu to the prince de Condé at the Palais Bourbon between 1772 and 1777.
Other Johnson pieces were less successful: the highly-carved Régence giltwood canapé (lot 150), part of a now-dispersed set (other pieces are in the Metropolitan, at Versailles and formerly in the Patiño collection), made £120,000 ($219,000; est. £150,000–200,000), while the magnificent Weisweiler ormolu-mounted ebony and Japanese lacquer commode à vantaux (lot 165), bought at Sotheby's Monaco in 1983, was unsold against an estimate of £500,000–700,000.
In similar materials but totally contrasting style, the Luton Hoo Louis XV ebonised kingwood and Chinese lacquer commode by Bernard II van Risamburgh (lot 73) was more successful, selling on the telephone for £600,000 ($1.09 million; est. £300,000-500,000).
Of the Meikleour property the most successful lot was the outstanding pair of Louis XVI ormolu-mounted vases of Egyptian alabaster, made for the duc d'Aumont around 1770–75 and purchased for 13,801 livres at the celebrated Aumont sale in 1782 by Louis XVI.
In an elegant and scholarly catalogue entry, Christie's included a reproduction of the relevant pages from the catalogue of the Aumont sale which lasted nine days and was preceded by nearly a month's viewing.
In the slightly less august context of yesterday's sale they made £260,000 ($474,500) against a strong estimate of £150,000–250,000.
The superb quality of the ormolu by Pierre Gouthière was undoubtedly part of the vases' attraction, also accounting for the healthy £72,000 ($131,400; est. £25,000–35,000) paid for a pair of Louis XVI candlesticks attributed to this master (lot 72).
Perhaps more curious than beautiful was the Meikleour Louis XV brass-inlaid coffre de mariage, decorated with corne verte (green stained horn), made to hold a bride's jewels.
Probably made around 1750, it was already a rather outdated design by that date.
It made £62,000 ($113,150; est. £70,000–100,000).
Of the sixty lots in the Meikleour property which kicked off the sale, only six mainly lesser pieces were unsold, a tribute to Christie's cataloguing and estimates.
Without doubt the rarest and most significant item offered yesterday was the ‘Ashburton Cabinet’, an ormolu-mounted ivory-inlaid kingwood and parquetry bureau-cabinet by the Piedmontese sculptor and cabinet-maker Pietro Piffetti of around 1770 (see The Art Newspaper, No. 19, June 1992, p.18).
The unique nature of Piffetti's pieces, their present scarcity and the fact that the Ashburton piece was unknown and unpublished until the present sale should all have contributed to its chances, and the final figure of £700,000 ($1.27 million, to a private Italian buyer) was felt by some members of the trade to be low: ‘It's a bargain: a jewel-like piece of furniture.
But one for a serious collector, not a decorator’, was one London dealer's verdict.
Just how much the London trade valued this piece has subsequently emerged.
It seems that the cabinet was the subject of a £1 million ($1.8 million) pre-sale offer by London dealers Carlton Hobbs, turned down by the owners.
Australia
The hubris of the ‘Irises’
Christie's to hold liquidation sale of paintings from collection of Sotheby's client Alan Bond
LONDON.
Australian businessman Alan Bond shot to international prominence when it was revealed that Sotheby's had lent him the money to purchase van Gogh's $53.9 million ‘Irises’.
As his creditors closed in, a desperate Bond sold ‘Irises’ to the Getty Museum in April 1990.
Dallhold Investments, Bond's private company, went into liquidation nearly a year ago, since when the fate of Bond's collection of Australian art (valued in July 1991 at A$10–20 million) has been shrouded in mystery.
The sale on 28 July sees the end of Bond's dream to build an historical collection of Australian art.
He began collecting in earnest in the late 1970s, buying French Impressionists and Australian art throughout the 1980s.
At its peak, the collection totalled over ninety Australian works and about thirty-five French Impressionist paintings and sculpture.
With the exception of Renoir's ‘Femme à la guitare’, many Impressionists were disposed of by his London dealer Angela Nevill in 1990.
She will dispose by private treaty of the three remaining minor Impressionists and eight French sculptures and the Renoir (est.
A$3–4 million (£1.25–1.7 million; $2.25–3 million) will be sold by Christie's in London.
According to Brisbane dealer Phillip Bacon, ‘Bond was passionate about his Australian collection and its dispersal will give him more pain than many more valuable assets’.
Several paintings are missing from the sale.
The curator, Diana de Bussy, produced a catalogue in 1990, which was never distributed, and about fifteen paintings owned by Bond Corporation Holdings were never included, among them, Webber's portrait of Captain Cook and a major oil by Nicholas Chevalier, ‘Mount Zero and Lake Taylor’, valued at A$ 400,000 (£166,700; $300,000).
According to Kim McGrath, executive director of Bond Corporation Holdings, the works were sold in January 1991 to a Freemantle dealer called Mr George Wey.
Mr Wey and his gallery have vanished and no one can locate the pictures.
The Cook, one of only two authenticated portraits of him, would not have gained an export licence.
The Bond family claim a group of paintings which include a very rare portrait of Mathew Flinders, and the National Australia Bank and Bond Mining & Exploration dispute another group, which will nonetheless be sold and the claim settled retrospectively.
Twenty works leased to Bond by the Australian Guarantee Corporation have been repossessed; Heavside Clark's early watercolours of Aboriginal Field Sports, and the group of Conrad Martens watercolours bought from Kerry Packer in 1987.
Back in the mid Eighties, the Australian economy was booming and every Australian entrepreneur wanted an instant art collection.
Bicentennial fever, and aggressive marketing by Sotheby's Australia, which opened in 1983, spurred businessmen Robert Holmes à Court, Laurie Connell and Alan Bond to compete for authentic images of their homeland.
As Philip Bacon put it, ‘A quite extraordinary group of people who all courted publicity were playing the game.
No one took any notice of auction estimates and the media loved the idea of naming names’.
Between 1984 and 1988, prices spiralled: Bunnys were fetching up to A$ 1,000,000; Glover's ‘Bath of Diana’ fetched A$1,706,000 (Sotheby's Melbourne, April 1989) and Bond paid A$ 210,000 for Conrad Martens' ‘Woolloomooloo Farm’(Sotheby's Australia, 1986).
With the collapse of the Australian economy, prices toppled, stabilising at about 1984 levels.
Bond paid very high prices A$1,250,000 for Bunnys' ‘Une Nuit de Canicule’(Joels Melbourne, 1988) destroyed in last year's fire at Bourlet art shippers, and A$506,000 for Webber's ‘Portrait of Captain Cook’(Sotheby's Melbourne, 1984) but he purchased the best available.
His buying was marked by its selectiveness.
Sydney dealer Tim McCormick rates it as among the top two or three Australian private collections, along with Holmes à Court's and corporate collections Wesfarmers and Smorgans.
He bought nothing without the advice of dealer Angela Nevill and many works were acquired before 1988 when the market reached its height.
Unlike Laurie Connell who formed an instant collection in a couple of years, Bond's collection was still in the making and aimed to be a balanced historical survey.
Captain Cook material remains in demand as so little survives outside public collections.
A drawing by Webber, the artist assigned by the Admiralty to Cook's third voyage, of Keelakekula Bay inscribed ‘the Place where Captain Cook was killed’ is reputed to have already found a buyer not far below its original purchase price.
Works worthy of the National Library of Australia in Canberra or Sydney's Mitchell Library include views of Botany Bay and Port Jackson by William Westall from Mathew Flinders' voyage and watercolours of rare Australian birds by Lewin.
According to Barry Pierce, Curator of Australian Art at the Gallery of New South Wales, other key works are: Glover's ‘View of Patterdale’, the finest Glover in private hands; the Skinner Prout ‘Willoughby Falls’(bought for A$180,000 at Christie's Australia, 1986), one of only two oils he ever painted; and the Skinner Prout ‘From Sandy Bay, Hobarton’(£15,400, Christie's London, 1986); and McCubbin's ‘Feeding Time’(A$630,000 at Sotheby's Australia, 1986) which stand comparison with their European contemporaries.
It is anybody's guess as to how the sale will fare.
Barry Pierce says ‘the quality is there but is the market?’.
At the end of April, Sotheby's and Christie's had their best sales in Melbourne since 1989 totalling A$ 3.5 million (£1.5 million; $2.7 million) and A$1.5 million (£652,000; $1.16 million) respectively with works by Bunny, Russell Drysdale, Boyd and W.B. Gould all doing well.
Dealers are confident that the market has stabilised or is even on the up-turn.
However, the Australian economy is still weak; museums are very short of funds and there are few buyers for works over A$ 50,000.
As Phillip Bacon put it, ‘It will be a tragedy if by auctioning all the paintings at once the market is flooded and the sale flops.
It might have been better to handle the sale more discreetly through dealer Angela Nevill, but either way they could never fetch the prices Bond paid for them’.
Christie's to cut back?
LONDON.
Serious discussions are apparently underway at Christie's at the moment on the possibility of combining a number of the picture departments of the London operation.
Under the new proposals the Impressionist and Modern, Contemporary and Nineteenth-century Departments would be combined.
This return to a leaner structure is a direct result of the downturn in sales in key areas such as Impressionist paintings.
Photofakes do well at Christie's
LONDON.
After an elegant supper given by the Racing and Breeding Fine Arts Fund at Christie's on 1 June, forty ‘Colourmasters’ were auctioned, raising in total £128,000 in aid of more than thirty charities including Racing Welfare, the Equine Fertility Endowment Appeal, the Royal Commonwealth Society for the Blind, Crusaid and the Multiple Sclerosis Society.
Colourmasters are one-off photographic copies of paintings mainly in English private collections, a process invented by the late Leo Valla and further developed by Colour Processing Laboratories of Edenbridge.
Duncan Grant's ‘Still Life’ fetched £4,800, Fantin-Latour's ‘Azalea and Pansies’brought £5000, and a pair of small Canaletto views of London reached £6200.
It has been suggested that hanging these would obviate the necessity for the owners of major paintings to risk hanging the originals, but at such prices, even these require insurance.
New York
Buyer confidence returns at Impressionist and Modern paintings sales
The auction houses bring out six long-held major estates to tempt collectors
NEW YORK.
Real collectors returned to the salerooms this spring, pushing sale totals at Sotheby's and Christie's Impressionist and Modern paintings sales (11–14 May) to a respectable $138.8 million (£76 million)(on expectations of $160 million), paring the overall bought-in rate to 14% by lot, and convincing many that the art market has hit bottom and is heading back up.
Although collectors have been the traditional mainstays of this market, they had been largely absent for several seasons.
First Japanese and other speculators had pushed prices to heights at which few collectors could compete, then the artificial market collapsed and the ensuing confusion kept almost anything of quality off the block.
Without much to tempt them, wary collectors continued to shun an unstable post-boom market.
Bought-in rates in November were 35%, and as Sotheby's Senior Vice President of North America, David Nash, says, ‘Buyer confidence was lacking’.
But this May, with six estates of desirable, long held, reasonably estimated, property locked up, auction houses had ammunition to break this cycle.
The expectations of some more exacting living sellers were also whittled to realistic levels, and, faced with good property at tempting estimates, collectors apparently decided it was safe to come back.
‘It's group psychology’, says New York dealer Susan Seidel of William Beadleston Fine Art.
‘People say to themselves: ‘If we're at the bottom, I'd better get in now’’.
Perhaps it was also relief at not seeing a flood of overpriced Japanese owned art back on the market, or the sense that the cloud of economic recession might be lifting.
In any case, collector confidence built slowly.
After two lacklustre contemporary art sales, not much had changed.
But the first Impressionist and Modern sale, Christie's estate of Billy McCarty-Cooper, turned out to be a watershed event (see The Art Newspaper, No. 19, June 1992, p. 18).
With a well known provenance, and a varied group of top quality pictures, fresh to the market and offered with flexible estate reserves, the sale was 95% sold.
A subtle psychological barrier was crossed and at the next two evening sales, as Swiss dealer Jan Krugier says, ‘The revival of the Impressionist market was astonishing’.
Christie's sale brought a total of $30 million (£16.4 million) and was 82% sold by lot.
Most of the top works went to private collectors faces both old and new.
Mexican hotel chain owner Ignazio Cobo was one of the major new buyers, spending a total of $2.4 million (£1.3 million) on five lots, including $880,000 (£482,200; est. $800,000–$1 million) for ‘La maison de Collette à Cagnes’ by Renoir, from a Boston estate.
Cobo also dropped $825,000 (£452,000) on another Renoir listed as ‘the property of a private European collector’.
This is known to be German fertiliser manufacturer Hermann Schnabel, whose consignment of fourteen paintings included the cover lot, ‘La Loge’ by Renoir.
Schnabel had paid $12.1 million (£6.6 million) for it in 1989, but expectations for this sale had been downsized to $6 million (£3.29 million).
Still, there were no takers.
‘That estimate made no sense,’ says London dealer Heinz Berggruen.
‘At $2–3 million, maybe it would have sold’.
Maybe, but perhaps no estimate would have been low enough.
‘La Loge’ had been up very recently, and with nothing sold lately at anything like $12 million, it is hard to say what it is now worth.
Generally, works by Renoir, Chagall, Sisley and Pissarro artists hardest hit by the Japanese pull-out stabilised at pre-boom prices, Renoir's ‘Yvonne et Jean’ from the Boston estate sold to an anonymous collector at $2.2 million (£1.2 million; est. $2–2.5 million).
New York private dealer René Scharf paid $2.86 million (£1.57 million; within estimates) for another Schnabel picture, ‘Bouquet de Fleurs’ by Marc Chagall, and a European dealer paid $1.87 million (£1.02 million) for Pissarro's ‘Le Pont Neuf, après-midi de pluie’.
In the same family since 1953, the painting was in pristine condition, and sold easily within estimates.
‘Composition avec rouge, gris, bleu et jaune’ by Piet Mondrian, which sold to a European collector at $2.58 million (£1.41 million; est. $1.8–2.5 million) was part of the long held property from the estate of New York collector Henri-Georges Doll.
The fact that Mondrian had painted over the back of the canvas had helped keep the painting in particularly fine condition.
Sotheby's sale brought $28.9 million (£15.8 million) and was 83% sold.
The sale's priciest lot, another Renoir, ‘Portrait of Jean Renoir’, sold within estimates at $2.31 million (£1.26 million) to a South American collector.
The appearance of such collectors from south of the border (including one rumoured to have bought the $7.7 million (£4.2 million) McCarty-Cooper estate Braque) was responsible for another interesting appearance that of pesos on the electronic bid boards at both houses.
North American TWA chairman Carl Icahn, who had shunned the auction rooms since the mid Eighties, purchased two works by Sisley at under $700,000 (£383,500) apiece.
A Korean dealer was the buyer of ‘Nu debout devant la cheminée’ by Henri Matisse, within estimates, at $2.2 million (£1.2 million) a reminder that there are still real Asian collectors active.
That collectors not speculators are driving this market was also clear from the strong prices made by many works on paper.
Lacking the bright colours and obvious tradeability of oils by famous names, works on paper provide something else: a more intimate, aesthetic experience that many knowledgeable collectors crave.
‘Drawings reveal the creative process, while paintings often conceal those aspects’, says New York private dealer Stephen Mazoh.
Even after the market had absorbed the many drawings and watercolours in the McCarty-Cooper sale (at good prices), a Picasso drawing of 1904–5 from Sotheby's Sidney E. Cohn estate ‘Etude pour l'acteur et deux profils de Fernando’ brought $825,000 (£452,000) two and a half times estimates.
Then, a New York collector paid a record $1.2 million (£657,500) for ‘Femme assise en blouse roumaine’, a drawing by Henri Matisse that until recently had been part of the private collection of New York dealer William Acquavella.
At the end of the week, observers were optimistic, yet some still sounded a cautionary note: ‘This is the first time for a long while I have seen people saying ‘I want this drawing or painting’ without any idea of speculation’, says Jan Krugier, ‘but now we must keep control of the situation.
We must have enough self discipline not to repeat 1989.
That lesson was very severe’.
Berlin
Overall results good but no records broken
Summer sales at Sotheby's and Villa Grisebach
BERLIN.
No record prices were achieved, but the overall results of auctions numbers 24 to 26 at the Villa Grisebach on 29 May were satisfactory, as was the third held by Sotheby's in Berlin.
The newcomers' decision to present themselves in the city as ‘Sotheby Deutschland’, rather than as an Anglo-American auction house, has proved to be a wise one.
With 76% of the ninety-three lots sold at the midday auction at the Palais am Festungsgraben, Sotheby's took a net figure of DM6,276,000 (£ 2.2 million; $3.9 million).
The highest price was paid for Otto Dix's portrait of the Dresden businessman Max Roesberg.
The Modern Art Museum of New York paid DM900,000 (£310,300; $558,600), double the estimate, for the painting, sold from a private collection in the USA.
With fast and competitive bidding between private collectors and dealers, Kokoschka's ‘Lac d'Annecy’ went to a London bidder for DM620,000 (£213,800; $384,800).
The organisers' policy of making the estimates attractive to potential buyers was again vindicated with Willi Baumeister's painting ‘Four Points’ which realised DM200,000 (£68,000; $124,100), a 1964 untitled watercolour by Ernst Wilhelm Nay which went under the hammer at DM62,000 (£21.400; $38,500) and an unusually bright picture of the Tiergarten by Liebermann, secured by a private bidder for the princely sum of DM430,000 (£148,300; $266,900: estimate DM300,000).
A hitherto unknown gouache, ‘Café’ by Otto Dix went to a London bidder for the exact estimate of DM220,000 (£75,862; $136,551).
Sebastian Schmidt, Sotheby's Munich expert, supports company policy of auctioning works by Nolde, Nay and Jawlensky in Berlin where they are likely to fetch higher prices.
Emigré artists like Klee, Schwitters and Max Ernst will continue to be auctioned in New York.
At the evening auction, Villa Grisebach achieved a net sales figure of just under DM9 million (£3.1 million; $5.5 million), with 75% of the lots disposed of.
The two following auctions, numbers 25 and 26, staggered according to price range, grossed DM3.54 million (£1.2 million; $2.2 million) and DM580,000 (£200,000; $360,000).
For the first time, items from the former East Germany accounted for a large proportion of the lots on offer.
For example Otto Modersöhn's moorland scene realised DM58,000 (£20,000; $36,000).
Well over half the sales were to private bidders.
As at previous auctions, there was strong interest from the American trade, which took a quarter of the items on sale at the evening session.
There were surprises where they were least expected.
Disappointingly, with a far too high estimate of DM2.4 million (£82,600; $149,000), Max Beckmann's 1928 painting ‘Neubau’ failed to sell.
Bidding ceased at DM1.45 million (£500,000; $900,000).
A second attractive Beckmann, ‘Blick auf das Meer’ from a private collection in Switzerland was withdrawn from the auction to give the former owner, the Wallraf-Richartz Museum of Cologne the opportunity to buy it back.
In 1937, the painting was condemned as ‘degenerate’ and sold.
Among the lots realising sums above their estimates were Ferdinand Khnopff's ‘Bruges’, an atmospheric work using a mixture of techniques, which sold for DM155,000 (£53,400; $96,200); Chagall's watercolour ‘Vitebsk’, selling for DM100,000 (£34,500; $62,000), and Schmidt-Rottluff's watercolour ‘Mädchen’, bought for DM175,000 (£60,300; $18,600).
At the later session, there was a marked lack on interest in Picasso and Chagall graphics.
Overall, taking account of current market conditions, the three Villa Grisebach auctions achieved satisfactory results.
London
Christie's Spanish venture totals a healthy £7.4 million
Record price for El Greco
LONDON.
Despite two major disappointments in the Old Master section of the sale, Christie's were pleased with the results of their two-day Spanish sale on 28 and 29 May which covered a wide range of categories including jewellery, ceramics, frames, carpets, arms, books and Old Master, modern and contemporary pictures.
A record price for seventeenth-century emerald jewellery was achieved for the magnificent Spanish Colonial emerald and gold cross (lot 153), salvaged from the wreck of the Nuestra Señora de las Maravillas, which sold on the telephone for £210,000 (est. £150,000–200,000) while the next lot, another emerald and gold brooch, made £55,000 (est. £40,000–60,000).
The forty-one lots in the Old Master pictures section made £4.5 million, a gratifying total according to Charles Beddington, Head of Old Master Paintings, who pointed particularly to the strength of bidding for works estimated at less than £500,000.
In this category the ‘Last Supper’ by The Perea Master (lot 301) made £280,000 ($520,000; est. £150,000–250,000), Coello's ‘Portrait of Hernán Cortés’(lot 311) made £240,000 ($446,000; est. £100,000–150,000), a Ribera ‘Saint Peter in penitence’(lot 312), thought to be a studio work until 1984, made £200,000 ($372,000; est. £70,000–100,000) and a group of thirteen late eighteenth-century Mexican School costume subjects made £110,000 ($204,600; est. £40,000–60,000).
In the higher price range, the most notable result was for the El Greco ‘Disrobing of Christ’(lot 309), a preparatory study for the work of that subject in Toledo Cathedral, which made a new record for the artist at £1.7 million ($3.1; est. £1.5–2.5 million).
On the thorny question of the failure of the Goya ‘Portrait of Dona Maria Teresa de Vallabriga y Rozas’(lot 342), unsold at £600,000 Charles Beddington noted that prices for Goya paintings are still puzzlingly low (particularly as the record price for a Goya drawing now stands at £600,000) while he felt that a recession-led caution may have contributed to the lack of interest in the Zurbarán, bought in at £900,000 (est. £1.2–1.6 million).
The sale attracted a large proportion of new faces not normally seen at Old Master sales, attracted by the Spanish subject matter and willing to purchase works which were by no means new to the market in a number of cases.
In the Impressionist and modern section of the sale an oil sketch once in the collection of Sargent by Joaquin Sorolla y Bastida for his celebrated painting ‘Sad Inheritance’, depicting crippled children bathing on the beach at Barcelona, made £90,000 ($167,400; est. £25,000–40,000).
Another important but unsuccessful Goya was offered at Edmund Peel on 19 May: the portrait of the court embroiderer Juan Lopez de Robredo (lot 10) was bought in at Pta210 million (£1.1 million; $2.1 million).
More successful were a ‘Still-life with flowers on a ledge’ by Juan de Arellano which achieved a new record for the artist of Pta108.4 million (£592,400; $1.1 million), and a ‘Pietà’by Luis de Morales (lot 3), also a record at Pta22.6 million (£123,824; $230,314, est.
Pta22–26 million).
The general message from the London and Madrid sales must be that the recent consistent and strong interest in Spanish Old Master paintings is still evident and, if anything, increasing.
Paris
The Château sale of the summer goes to Tajan
Steinitz ‘satisfied’ with the sale of the contents of his Château de Saint-Paul en Cornillon
PARIS.
Wielding the gavel in front of 1,500 people in sweltering heat under a tent on a village football pitch, Paris auctioneer Jacques Tajan sold off the entire contents of the château of antique dealer Bernard Steinitz over the weekend of 29-31 May for FFr 20,049,290 (£2,045,845; $3,682,522).
Tajan, who estimated the 2,000-lot sale would have been a success at anything over FFr15 million, described the final result as ‘satisfactory’.
Half of the furniture and furnishings however of the twenty-five room Château de Saint-Paul en Cornillon (an eleventh-century castle perched on a rocky outcrop overlooking the Loire near Lyon, estimated at FFr20 million and on sale separately through a Paris notaire) went unsold, with one-third in terms of value being bought in.
Prepared in only a few weeks to satisfy an urgent need for cash on the part of Steinitz, who is building an auction house complex at Saint Ouen in the suburbs of Paris, the auction did have a catalogue covering 352 major items but without printed estimates.
Despite the fact that many serious buyers stayed away because not everything was described in the catalogue, the event drew collectors and dealers from Switzerland, Belgium, France and Britain.
Bidding was kept lively by a large number of Italian clients who according to one organiser all arrived in open Porsches with Milan number plates and invariably occupied front row seats ‘flamboyant but not the very rich sort of Italians, you understand’, he said.
Steinitz's own furniture, amassed over the twenty years since he acquired the Château and its contents, accounted for one-third of the lots.
It was predominantly of a country, not a ‘high’ style, pre-eighteenth century and frequently not French, factors which tended to keep Paris-based buyers away while proving too pricey for local people.
Tajan was able to hold the sale thanks to recent changes to French legislation permitting auctioneers to practise away from their places of residence.
The contents of Steinitz's attics which the dealer claimed he had never had time to inspect comprising all manner of junk and broken pieces of furniture, occupied the weekend of 23–24 May and visibly left Tajan wishing he had never bothered.
Most of the 1,500 crowd who came for the best objects on the last two days of the sale meanwhile, were just tourists, which made taking bids extremely difficult and fatiguing, Tajan said.
Exceptional pieces sold without any difficulty: an extremely fine set of twelve Louis XIV armchairs covered in embroidered Genoa velvet was sold to a Frenchman for FFr 1.5 million (£153,000; $275,500).
A set of four Henri IV armchairs and canapé, upholstered in the seventeenth century with silver embroidered red velvet sold for FFr1 million (£102,000; $183,700).
A seventeenth-century Antwerp cabinet in ebony with ivory and horn marquetry went for FFr 350,000 (£35,700; $64,300); a small and unusual seventeenth-century bureau with beautiful coloured wood inlay sold to a Belgian collector for FFr320,000 (£32,650; $58,800).
Competition for a sixteenth-century Italian mirror with an architectural gilt and lacquered wood surround pushed bidding up to FFr 95,000 (£9,700; $17,500) over twice the estimate set by Tajan and his expert Olivier Le Fuel.
A German amateur meanwhile sat stoically through the afternoon to bid FFr 80,000 (£8,200; $14,700) for what he really wanted a delightful seventeenth-century plate decorated with characters in tones of beige, green and orange.
An exceptional and elegant set of four, one metre high, bronze Louis XIV Church candlesticks, sold for FFr380,000 (£38,800; $69,800).
But other pieces of exquisite taste went unsold.
No-one, for example, could be found to bid enough for a rare walnut cabinet, its nine drawers covered with sculpted bone and ivory plates and plaques decorated with polychrome enamel plates, bought in at FFr 160,000.
London
The Henri Matisse Index
Matisse has always been an artist for discerning buyers and was never speculated in like Picasso and Renoir
LONDON.
Matisse prices have risen 260% since 1975.
That increase applies to the mainstream of Matisse oil paintings and works on paper.
From £20,000 in 1975, the average climbed to £130,000 (up 550%) but fell back to £72,000 in 1991.
Too few of his greatest paintings are sold at auction to be indexed but appear to have risen at least twice as fast.
The growth rate is modest, because Matisse was fully appreciated in the Seventies and the massive revaluations that were widely applied in the Eighties had in his case already happened.
Even by 1910 Matisse had a group of enlightened and daring collectors behind him, Leo and Gertrude Stein and the great Russian collectors Morosov and Shchukin among them.
But in the 1920s £200 was a high price for a Matisse and even in the Thirties his work rarely made over £1000.
A steeper climb of around 500% occurred between 1960 and 1975 bringing the average to £20,000.
The explanation for the lacklustre increase of 260% since 1975 for one of the century's greatest artists lies also in the variable quality and variety of styles.
Dealers regard Matisse as an unreliable vineyard whose quality and yield varied from year to year.
The Impressionist style paintings of 1896–7 are rare but of great interest; works of the proto-Fauve period from 1899–1901, anticipating the great outburst of 1905, though considered important are less valuable; the hard, sombre images of the ‘dark’ 1901–4 period, reflecting Matisse's own depressed state, are not easy to sell.
Very little from the Fauve period (1905–7) appears on the market, though a prime example must now be worth £20 million plus.
The decade of 1907–17, including the Moroccan works, is vintage Matisse.
Works done in Nice between 1917 and 1932 used to be hard to sell but have now been upgraded.
Meanwhile, Matisse's strongest period as far as the market is concerned, is that of the 1930s and '40s when he was moving towards abstraction.
The découpages of the last years are greatly admired but seldom appear at auction.
Sotheby's expert Melanie Clore emphasises that Matisse has alway been an artist for discerning collectors and was never speculated in even during the 1988–90 period like Picasso and Renoir.
This highly selective buying explains why Matisse's mainstream work has performed disappointingly.
Prices for Matisse's graphic work mainly lithographs which he created on and off throughout his life have climbed by 420% since 1975.
Most lithographs were published in editions of fifty and the etchings in editions of twenty-five.
The overall average climbed from £750 in 1975 to £8500 in 1990, but dropped more than half last year.
Even so, at 420%, the increase is appreciably better than for oils and works on paper.
Picard, Sotheby's and Lempertz look to Brussels
PARIS.
Auctioneer Jean-Louis Picard held his first sale in Brussels on 15 June as partner in a new Belgian company, Euro-Auction.
Picard, who last year set up on his own after splitting from his associate Jacques Tajan, is using offices he inherited as his part of the separation.
Picard's main associates are Belgian designer Michel Wittamer and Princess Wauthier de Ligne.
Euro-Auction uses the former's home, an Art Nouveau hôtel particulier designed by Horta on Avenue Louise, to receive clients.
Picard will be employing the services of leading Paris art experts such as Eric Turquin for Old Master paintings and Bruno de Bayser for drawings.
His first sale is a deliberately mixed bag affair of mainly Belgian provenance, including eighteenth-to nineteenth-century objets d'art, tapestries, tribal art and furniture with a number of Belgian items sent up from Paris and one hundred pieces of Far Eastern porcelain from a Belgian collection.
‘Belgium is a country of collectors, of collections, of amateurs d'art and of considerable private fortunes.
Brussels itself is a very important North European pole with extraordinarily good communications between Britain and Germany.
And it is next door to Holland and Luxembourg’, Picard said.
As well as being close to so much North European prosperity, Brussels offers the boon of a 6% rate of VAT on objects sold at auction as against the  crippling 18.6% imposed on all but ‘original works of art’ in Paris.
Picard's enthusiasm for the potential of the Belgian capital is shared by Sotheby's who held their first sale there on 16 and 17 June.
The German auction firm Lempertz, meanwhile, recently held their second sale, of primitive art, in Brussels.
Can the art market be subject to econometrics?
Of course every work of art is unique but enter the technique of ‘hedonic regression’
Trends in Old Master drawings over the last twelve years analysed by Professor Victor Ginsburgh and Nicholas Schwed of Brussels University, who apply a new methodology
BRUSSELS.
Trends in prices for Flemish-Dutch, French and Italian drawings over the last twelve years are described here, with an attempt at evaluating how the technique used, the subject of the drawing, its dimensions, its provenance and other objective characteristics may influence prices.
The results are based on prices obtained in public auctions between 1980 and 1991 in almost all Christie's and Sotheby's sales; this includes drawings by sixty-eight representative artists for whom drawings turn up frequently, including Cambiaso, Rosa, the two Tiepolos, Rubens, Van Goyen, De Wit, Verdier and Boucher.
This makes for 2,375 drawings (707 Flemish-Dutch, 513 French and 1,155 Italian).
Constructing price indices
The methods used to construct price indices for commodities (wheat, gold, oil) or stocks and bonds can hardly be used for art.
There are two obvious reasons for this.
First, commodities and stocks are homogeneous goods; paintings, drawings and works of art in general are not; a bushel of wheat sold in Chicago in 1947 is almost identical to a bushel sold in London twenty-five years later, while even two Picassos may be very different goods (a fortiori, a Picasso is different from a Chagall).
Second, commodities and stocks are quoted almost continuously (once a day or once a week); art works are not.
Therefore, it is straightforward to devise a price index for a specific commodity by merely observing the prices quoted every day or week.
It is a little more difficult for stocks, since one needs to aggregate (add) the prices of various stocks; to do this, one uses weighted averages (the weight for stock X can be any observed characteristic of the firm; for instance, the value of its assets).
It is precisely this weighting which cannot be observed for art works.
Therefore, indexes for art are often constructed by mere addition of the values of sales.
That this may lead to strange results can be illustrated as follows.
Assume there are only two artists and two years; the first sells five drawings for £1,000 each in year one, and two drawings at the same price in year two.
The second sells three drawings at £200 in year one, and eight at £300 in year two.
The number of drawings sold has increased from eight to ten, but the total value has decreased from £5,600 to £4,400.
What is the value of the price index in year two with respect to year one?
The usual (but wrong) method of calculation would simply compare the value of an average sale in the two years, viz £700 in year one and £440 in year two, and conclude that the index dropped.
Obviously though, prices have increased, and a properly defined index should reflect this, by taking into account the qualitative change in the drawings sold over the two years.
Note that the mix of qualities did not change, average values would give the correct index.
This quality weighting, missing in the previous calculation, can precisely be computed by using a technique inspired by what econometricians have come to call hedonic regression.
Roughly speaking, the technique starts from the assumption that an object (here a drawing) consists of a bundle of observable characteristics (true attributes such as technique used, subject, dimensions, artist, year of sale, etc) and aims at inferring statistically the non-observable ‘price’ of each such characteristic.
The observed price of the object can then be decomposed and thought of as a weighted sum of the prices of each characteristic; since one does not observe all the attributes, a part of the price of each drawing will remain unexplained, and contain the influence of time (the trend, if any), as well as random elements; this is the ‘characteristic free’(i.e. corrected for quality) price of a drawing; these prices can now be added and by taking annual averages, one obtains the ‘average price of the year’.
Clearly, the method does more than that, by allowing us to infer how the various attributes affect the price of a drawing: could the subject change the price of a drawing; how does provenance or technique used affect prices, etc.
As characteristics, we have included:
eight drawing techniques: pen and ink, black chalk, red chalk, wash, oil, pastel, watercolour or gouache, white heightening
seven types of subjects: religious drawings, one-person studies, landscapes, animals or flowers, historical or mythological drawings, several-person studies, heads or portraits
provenance of the drawing: this is represented by the number of prestigious collection stamps
dimensions: height and width
other characteristics: such as signature, and the fact that the drawing is reproduced in the catalogue of the auction
the auction house
the artist.
Pricing of characteristics
Table 1 and Figures 1 and 2 illustrate our results and call for the following comments.
Technique
Often the most decorative techniques, such as red chalk or watercolour are the most expensive, while pen and ink, black chalk or slight pastels tend to be cheaper.
Differences can account for prices varying between one and four: Flemish-Dutch pastels are about three times cheaper than watercolours; French pastels are four times cheaper than oils; the differences are less important for the Italian School, since Italian drawings in general are more sought after and collected than others.
Clearly, however, the fame of the artist overrides all these statements: a pen and ink Rembrandt is vastly more expensive than an eighteenth-century watercolour.
Subject matter
Here again, the most common subjects (religious, ‘academies’) are the cheapest, while landscapes and mythological drawings can be twice as expensive as religious.
Again, the differences are less pronounced for Italian art, for the same reason as before.
The fact that French academies are relatively expensive should come as no surprise: this style was much more developed in eighteenth-century France than elsewhere, namely by Boucher and Greuze.
Provenance
It is not rare to see a mediocre drawing reach a relatively high price, just because it was owned, three hundred years ago, by a prestigious collector.
Needless to say, though, drawings which bear a good provenance are usually of good quality: the drawings collected by such a fine connoisseur as the seventeenth-century English painter Peter Lely are now the pride of the world's greatest museums.
A prestigious provenance is amongst the best proof of quality.
Therefore, we estimated the price of the characteristic ‘provenance’, for those drawings bearing stamps from important collections.
As can be seen, this may very significantly increase the price; two stamps make the price six times higher for Flemish-Dutch drawings and may multiply the price by as much as twenty for French drawings.
Dimensions
The effect of size is marginal; an additional centimetre in height or width adds approximately 0.2% to the price.
Signature
A signature, rather than a characteristic of a drawing, is more a characteristic of an artist.
Some artists used to sign; most, in particular the Italians, did not.
A signature may, however, if present as on seventeenth- and eighteenth-century Low Countries drawings, add as much as 40% to the price.
Reproduction
Most drawings are reproduced in the catalogues published before the auction.
Christie's and Sotheby's obviously reproduce only quality drawings, and these appear, on average, to be 2 to 2.6 times more expensive than non-reproduced ones.
Note that the price may also be driven up as a consequence of being reproduced; it is well known, for example, that drawings reproduced on a catalogue's cover fetch a higher price.
Saleroom
Drawings sold by Sotheby's seem to be some 5 to 10% more expensive than those sold by Christie's.
This effect is however statistically not very significant.
Price indices 1980–91
The price indices (in current prices, i.e. with no correction for inflation) for 1980–1991 appear in Table 2 and in Figure 3.
The French School is obviously the one for which prices have increased most (14% per year), while Italian and Flemish-Dutch drawings have increased with 10.5% and 9% per year respectively.
Though after eleven years the differences are not very large, the detailed profiles over time may well be so.
In particular, prices for drawings from the Low Countries were stagnant (and thus decreased in real terms) until 1986, they soared in 1987 but not enough to catch up with French and Italian.
The jump in 1984 for French and Italian artists obviously reflects the prestigious Chatsworth sale and the entry into the market of the Getty Museum.
Robin Duthy's calculations for Italian artists (see The Art Newspaper No. 15, February 1992, p. 19) roughly lead to the same profile as ours.
However, his average price still increases by 18% in 1991, while we have a very significant downturn for Italians, while the decreases are of the order of 10%, 18% and 35% for the Flemish, French and Italian drawings respectively.
Though drawings were not part of the dramatic price increases of art during the late 1980s, it does not seem justified to claim that they went untouched by the general downturn of 1991.
Predicting prices
The last point worth discussing is whether we are capable of predicting prices.
To test this, we computed our equations on sales between 1980 and 1990, thus excluding 1991; also, to make our life more comparable to that of experts who see the drawing before estimating its value, we have awarded marks to the drawings reproduced in the catalogues, classifying them as outstanding, good or fair.
Then, using our equations, we predicted the prices for the first four sales of the year 1991: Sotheby's 8 January and 18 February 1991, Christie's 9 January and 16 April 1991.
The results are summarised in Table 3; there, we compare the mean error made by Christie's and Sotheby's experts (on the basis of their pre-sale estimation) with ours (on the basis of the econometric equation).
Dealers & Galleries
Tokyo
‘Paintings are just like stocks and shares’ plead Japanese dealers under investigation by tax office
Dealers request leniency as almost nothing is selling for more than $80,000 in Japan at present TOKYO.
The Japanese tax office is investigating dealers in the Ginza, the area of Tokyo where there are more than 300 galleries.
The investigation is ongoing and has spread to the other important cities for art trading, Osaka and Kyoto.
The big dealers are really being hit as some have been under investigation for almost a year and have had their passports confiscated.
They complain that it is not fair for the tax office to be quibbling after they have spent all their profits on buying new stock whose value has declined to half or even less.
The dealers want the tax office to recognise an appraisal loss of the paintings instead of valuing the paintings at the price paid for them, just as, under Japanese law, losses in stocks and securities are recognised if there is a great difference between the acquisition price and the current price at the end of the fiscal year.
Dealers insist that paintings should be treated the same way because of the auctions for dealers only, where ‘dead’ stock is exchanged and where new prices are set.
Japanese dealers calculate the prices of paintings by establishing a price per figure.
If a one-figure Foujita painting costs Y2 million (£8600; $15,700) then Foujita's six-figure painting would cost Y12 million (£51,600; $94,170).
However it does not always go by size but depends on the subject, as Foujita's young girls cost much more, and the year in which it was painted makes a difference in price.
But on the whole it is easy to value paintings by Japanese artists as they paint similar subjects, and new prices are set by the dealers' auction which takes place once a month at the Tokyo Bijutsu Club, of which most big dealers are members.
The Japanese tax office is not convinced that paintings can be treated like stocks and shares.
They say that works of art have differing values all of their own.
They can take into account a painting's decline in value if it has actually sold for that price, but because the decline in prices has only occurred at a dealers' auction, they will not accept that a similar composition by the same artist would automatically be valued at much less than the price paid for it.
In the meantime, the banks which lent the money to the dealers to enable them to pay the vast prices of the boom period are being very patient in waiting for their money, as it was partly their fault that a bubble economy was created in Japan.
Since all the speculators, mainly companies, have left the market and real collectors are waiting to buy until the market bottoms out, galleries in the Ginza are having a difficult time selling any painting which costs more than $80,000.
But the dealers are all hoping the situation will improve by the end of the year, as the economists are predicting.
Paris
The Biennale des Antiquaires aims to regain its former prestige this autumn
Italian stage designer, Pier Luigi Pizzi, to give each stand a front door and first-floor balcony, declaring, ‘Art of museum quality does not belong on the street’
PARIS.
This year's Sixteenth Biennale Internationale des Antiquaires, to be held in the Grand Palais in Paris from 18 September to 4 October, will be more theatrical than ever thanks to Italian stage designer Pier Luigi Pizzi who has been hired to create a neo-classical Italianate mise en scène for participants to show off their wares.
Gone this year are the pools, dripping fountains, occasional pieces of statuary, scraps of lawns and peach-coloured awnings screening off the magnificent metal vault of the Grand Palais.
Mr Pizzi is replacing them with a main circular space with a two storey-colonnaded façade.
All booths are identical from the outside with a single entrance the front door and a first floor balcony.
Stands will have ceilings and only artificial light.
Mr Pizzi, according to a spokesman for the Biennale, wanted to give the show back all the prestige and originality it has lost over the years.
Most dealers are content but some have expressed alarm not only about the expense but the difficulty of showing large objects such as tapestries in an enclosed space and the inconveniences of artificial lighting.
‘Mr Pizzi reserves the right to change his mind up until the last minute.
But he is adamant there must be no art on display outside the booths themselves because art of museum quality does not belong in the street’, the spokesman said.
One hundred and twenty dealers, including seventeen from abroad but only two from the U.S., are taking part in this year's Biennale which as usual includes four book specialists and a jewellery section (Blancpain, Bulgari, Chaumet, Eva Segoura, Leysen Frères and Reza Gem).
The twenty-five dealers specialising in drawings and paintings are joined for the first time by Colnaghi who opened a small Paris branch in May and are keeping their exhibits a closely guarded secret.
Old Master specialist Bruno Meissner of Zurich, tied up with moving into new London premises, is not taking part.
Paris furniture and, increasingly, paintings and drawings dealer Jean Gismondi, is planning to line his stands with late eighteenth-century boiseries from the Paris hôtel particulier of the dancer Mademoiselle Guimard, painted pale blue and pale green and decorated with terracotta plaques by Clodion, painted medallions and exquisitely fine carved foliage and flowers.
Tapestry specialists Jacqueline Boccara from Paris and Bernard Blondeel from Antwerp, who hold joint exhibitions twice a year, will have separate stands but will coincidentally show ‘Mois Lucas’ tapestries late sixteenth-century March and April from Brussels and eighteenth-century Gobelins July and September, respectively.
The prestigious Antiquaires à Paris group of dealers who specialise in eighteenth-century French furniture albeit with many sidelines is back again this year for the first time since 1986, although with nothing to compare with the extravagantly decorated and richly stocked collective stand which caused so much jealousy then.
Since deciding to join in the Biennale the group has shed one member, Bernard Steinitz, who is nevertheless still participating.
Specialities such as Chinese art are represented by dealers Gisèle Croës from Brussels and Jacques Barrère of Paris, Art Deco by Paris's Galerie Vallois and Galerie Arc en Seine.
Switzerland
Basel TransFormed
Ernst Beyeler, doyen of Basel dealers, has taken over the Kunstmuseum and the Kunsthalle to connect paintings with sculpture
BASEL.
Is Europe's oldest art fair going down-market?
Organised guided tours for the uninitiated and the last minute promotion of the multiples section, where the less well-off will have the opportunity to acquire first-class signed works at rock-bottom prices, might suggest that it is.
Knowing how hard times are, local dealer Ernst Beyeler is inviting visitors to join a pilgrimage from market to temple: until 27 September, he is taking over both Kunstmuseum and Kunsthalle to stage an exhibition.
Although the famous gallery owner is thinking of retiring and has for some time been searching for an institution to take on his private collection, the title of the event ‘TransForm’ is not a veiled reference to his forthcoming conversion from art dealer to museum collector.
The exhibition does nevertheless reflect changes and blurrings in the artistic vocabulary of which Beyeler has had first-hand experience during his forty-year career, as it explores developments from Minimal Art to the international Transavanguardia.
It would be simplistic to interpret ‘TransForm’ as a study of the overlapping and interconnection of painting and sculpture in the twentieth century; it would be more exact to say that avant-garde movements abandoned the concept of ‘a painting’or ‘a sculpture’as such.
It is no coincidence that the exhibition begins with examples of Matisse's work in ‘papier découpé’, in which the three-dimensional element is extremely tenuous (the different thicknesses of the assembled pieces of paper barely perceptible) and with Picasso's Synthetic Cubist creations.
For others, such as Miró and Calder, the boundary between painting and sculpture is continually displaced as they search for new ways of combining the two, with the emphasis on space, in the case of Giacometti, or real movement of forms.
This was the theoretical foundation for Tinguely's ‘Métamechaniques’, which were worked by motors and emitted noises and puffs of smoke.
Work by this Swiss artist a direct heir of Dada and Futurism, can be seen in the Kunsthalle section of the exhibition.
Beyeler has in fact made a distinction, broadly historical, between painter-sculptors and those artists, mainly those of Minimalist and Conceptualist tendencies, who have sought to blur the two idioms in their installations and in performance and video art.
This is why the Kunstmuseum section concludes with Baselitz, who, in the context of Transavanguardia and Neo-Expressionism, has attempted to return to the traditional forms of painting and ‘standing sculpture’.
The Kunsthalle, on the other hand, includes works by Newmann and Stella represented by his latest wall reliefs Walter De Maria, Donald Judd and Beuys; also Naumann, who was one of the first to use neon as a medium for painting, sculpture and graphic work, and Borofsky, who forces drawing, traditionally considered the basis of all the arts, to serve the spatial and environmental demands of his installations.
Circle of Mantegna? of Antonio Lombardo? or even of Leonardo?
A work catalogued by Sotheby's for its sale on 12 December last year as ‘a very fine and rare bronze fountain figure, perhaps Orpheus, probably German, Nuremberg?, second quarter sixteenth century’ and bought by London dealer Danny Katz has turned out to be an Italian Renaissance sculpture.
Katz suspected that an earlier Italian work lurked under its heavy black patination and his suspicions were justified during cleaning when a richer, brown surface was revealed.
The figure has now been recognised as a late fifteenth-century masterpiece and it has aroused some excitement in the art world, but there is still perplexity as to its author.
Opinions range from the circle of Mantegna to Antonio Lombardo or even a Milanese follower of Leonardo, but the absence of comparative material makes it difficult to pin the bronze down.
Nor, for that matter, is the identity of the figure established since the youth has some features which resemble the sun-god Apollo and others more appropriate to the wine-god Bacchus.
Museum professionals are agreed, however, that it is the work of a North Italian master in the last quarter of the fifteenth century and one of the few major bronzes to have survived from this period.
Art Basel
After fear, resignation
Lower prices and lesser works marked this year's event but the mood was ‘We shall survive’
BASEL.
In contrast to the pervading mood of fear and uncertainty of last year, the atmosphere from 17 to 22 June this year was one of resignation: the crisis is upon us; there's no end to it in sight, but we still have to be here.
Various small signs of the times point to this, including the ready availability of hotel rooms.
The days of mad spending are gone and exhibitors are looking to cover their costs and pay back the bank as soon as possible.
Stands that set out to rival museums are pretty much a thing of the past, with only Jan Krugier of Geneva holding out here.
There were also considerably fewer one-man shows, with only Beyeler of Basel offering Baselitz, Pauli of Lausanne showing Jim Dine, and Edward Totah of London with Adami proving the exceptions to this rule.
Another new phenomenon was the downturn in dealers offering works fresh out of the salerooms.
One exception was De Chirico's ‘Natura morta evangelica’(Evangelical still life), shown by Malingue, sold by the Museum of Modern Art, New York at Sotheby's in 1988 for $5.28 million and now priced at $7.5 million.
Worth remembering is the fact that it was offered here last year by Waddington for 20% more than that.
Prices have come down by between 30% and 50% but dealers are simply not exposing major works which they know will not find a buyer and may become unsaleable as a consequence.
Take Gmurzynska from Cologne, who in past years have offered outstanding works by Kandinsky; this year their best effort was a small Schlemmer from 1928 priced at SF365,000 ($137,200; $250,400).
The outstanding classic stand remains that of Jan Krugier of Geneva; several Picasso's of Marina, and an outstanding 1953 Francis Bacon, offered at the reasonable figure of $2.4 million.
Elsewhere, Waddington of London are still offering important pieces, although not quite up to previous years, and at rather high prices compared to nearby stands: a 1949 Dubuffet ‘Joie de vivre’ for SF1.28 million (£481,200; $878,200); and a wonderful 1938 Miró watercolour at SF2.3 million (£864,700; $1.57 million).
Elsewhere Karsten Greve of Cologne was asking a big price for a big picture: SF2.5 million for a huge Twombly, while the soon to be closed Galerie Nierendorf of Berlin showed a four metre wide Morris Louis priced at $530,900 (£290,900).
Among a group of interesting, works London's Anthony D'Offay offered ‘Defence of Nature’ by Joseph Beuys for $647,000 (£354,500) and a Gerhard Richter from 1970 for $325,000 (£178,000), a price in line with recent auction results.
Bruno Muheim
Fine Art Society's collections dispersed
EDINBURGH.
Phillips Edinburgh sold the contents of the Fine Art Society's premises in the New Town on 26 May, ending an era in dealing in a previously long-neglected section of nineteenth- and twentieth-century Scottish art in the capital.
The stock was always conceived as essentially complementary to the house's fine interior, with the result that it retained a domestic atmosphere.
The majority of lots went to private buyers, and prices exceedes estimate.
A pair of oak armchairs by George Walton, whose design was used in the famous Charles Rennie Mackintosh Buchanan Street Tearooms in Glasgow brought £6,000 (est. £400–600).
Furniture by the Edinburgh firm of Whytock and Reid did well, now increasingly sought after for its technical perfection.
A pair of mahogany and ebonised doors by Alfred Waterhouse from the Natural History Museum in London sold for £1,700 to the Fine Art Society itself (est. £800–1,200), while an oak corner bookcase by Waterhouse brought £8,500 (est. £2–3000).
Painting prices were topped by the Scottish Colourist S.J. Peploe's vivid oil of ‘Kirkcudbright’, sold for £25,000 (est. £25,000–35,000).
A particularly attractive Robert Herdman oil of ‘The Children of Patrick Allan Fraser’ fetched £3,800 (est. £3–4,000).
The superb four-storey Georgian town house premises failed to find a buyer despite its low estimate (£250,000–£350,000) just sufficient to buy a reasonable flat in London.
Daniel Malingue opens a branch in Geneva
GENEVA.
The Parisian art dealer Daniel Malingue has opened a new gallery here, managed by Simon Studen and Dominique Lévy, former head of the paintings department of Sotheby's.
According to Lévy, ‘The only galleries of modern and contemporary art in Geneva have been those of Daniel Varenne and Jan Krugier.
Over the last twenty years, the Swiss have become accustomed to going abroad to buy works of art.
It is often said that this is just an example of Swiss discretion in business, but in my view we have begun to believe that works acquired abroad are somehow superior.
In our little way, we are setting out to reform people's thinking’.
By starting with Nicolas de Staël, who was born in Russia and trained in France and Belgium, the Malingue gallery evidently has more than commercial interests in mind.
De Staël was much admired in Switzerland until 1972, when his work was last shown at the Peter Nathan gallery in Zurich, but was then largely neglected.
The inaugural exhibition concentrates on the last six years of the artist's life.
It consists of twenty-six high-quality works, many of which are for sale.
The carefully prepared catalogue contains detailed notes on each work, a piece by the artist himself, some contemporary criticism, and memoirs written by De Staël's wife Françoise, his daughter Anne, and Braque's assistant, Mariette Lachaud, who was a great friend of the artist.
‘Nicolas de Staël priorité peinture’ runs until 25 July.
Private dealers in the States go public
NEW YORK.
In June the Private Art Dealers Association of America published its first directory of members.
The organisation, chartered in 1990, is a non-profit-making group of dealers who are recognised specialists in their respective fields, deal by appointment and work with an inventory of art works; each member is vetted carefully by the organisation and a guarantee of authenticity of what the dealers sell is a condition of membership.
In addition to an alphabetical listing, the guide also lists the fifty-four current members by speciality, including African-American, Contemporary, Impressionist, Latin American, Modern, American and Nineteenth/Twentieth-century European art as well as Old Master Painting, Photography, Prints, Sculpture and Drawings.
As a self-regulating body, the organisation, and by extension its directory, should help chart a course for collectors through what has been, until now, a part of the trade in which word of mouth alone was often the only means of access.
The Private Art Dealers Association Directory, 1992–93 is available free of charge from PADA, 605 Third Avenue, Suite 1501, New York, NY 10168, USA.
Tessiers, a Huguenot firm, sells up at Sotheby's
LONDON.
On 16 and 17 June, Sotheby's sold the existing stock of the New Bond Street firm of jewellers, Tessiers Ltd., a landmark whose old fashioned arched windows retain strong nostalgic connotations for many people.
The firm was founded by Etienne de Tessier, a Huguenot who moved to London in 1712, and whose grandson probably bought from French Revolutionary emigrés.
The firm is now under new management and the shop has undergone extensive renovation and structural work.
Although some early silver and jewellery was included in the sale, most was relatively modern.
Fourteen coronets worn by peers at coronations from George IV to George VI were also sold.
New York's International Antique Dealers Show
NEW YORK.
The fourth International Fine Art and Antique Dealers Show will run from 24 to 29 October at the Seventh Regiment Armory.
Seventy-eight dealers will be taking part.
In 1991 the event attracted over 18,000 visitors.
New gallery of Egyptian art holds first exhibition with an unpublished head of Tutankhamun
LONDON.
The recently-opened London office of the New York gallery Daedalus Ancient Art is having its first show in the premises of Rupert Wace Ancient Art, at 107 Jermyn Street, St James's.
It has been organised for Daedalus by its European director Dr Nicholas Reeves, who was formerly a curator in The British Museum's Department of Egyptian Antiquities (and now advises the Earl of Carnarvon on his Egyptian collection at Highclere), together with Rupert Wace who has dealt in ancient art for over fifteen years.
The antiquities for sale have come from private collections in London and New York, from auction rooms and the trade.
Nicholas Reeves says that three years of collecting is reflected in the exhibition,(among the difficulties of  acquiring top quality pieces is the fact that it is currently illegal to export antiquities from Egypt).
The collection ranges in date from before the first Pharaoh (c. 3500 BC) to objects produced during the Roman domination of Egypt in the early centuries AD.
Appropriately, on the seventieth anniversary of the discovery of the tomb of Tutankhamun, one of the pieces is an unpublished black granite head of Tutankhamun in the guise of the god Amun.
Dating from 1330 BC it was probably carved for the Karnak temple complex on the east bank of the Nile.
Also on show is a bronze falcon deity from the Late Period (after c. 600 BC), a blue faience statuette of King Osorkon III, who ruled around 875 BC, a bronze statuette of his ancestor Osorkon I, dating from 980 BC, and a pair of green porphyry column capitals from the Roman Period.
Reeves comments that there are very few collectors of Egyptian art actively buying at the moment ‘People don't appreciate that there is a wide variety of pieces available and that there is considerable scope for new collectors’.
The exhibition continues into September.
Galerie Nierendorf closes
BERLIN.
After seventy-two years Berlin's Galerie Nierendorf is closing.
The announcement was made by Thomas Kartsch, the gallery's director since 1955, who ascribed his gallery's collapse to the high costs of management and rent.
Founded in 1920 the gallery exhibited the work of the German Expressionists and continued to do so after its post-war reopening in 1955.
Gagosian-Halley-Sonnabend: not exactly Queensberry Rules
NEW YORK.
It seems that in the world of contemporary art a gentleman's word is no longer his bond.
Until now few agreements between artists and their dealers were written down, but the decision by Sonnabend gallery to sue artist Peter Halley for breach of contract and damages may change all this.
Halley recently left Sonnabend after six years, to join Gagosian who are currently holding a show of the artist's recent works.
According to documents consigned by Sonnabend to the Supreme Court on 13 May, Halley had already agreed to hold a one-man show with them last May and all the works in it had already been sold to Sonnabend clients, as Halley well knew.
Following a judge's refusal to prevent the Gagosian show taking place, Sonnabend have decided to sue.
They have now supplied documents showing that Gagosian paid Halley a $2 million cash bonus (denied by the artist and by Gagosian).
Halley claims that Sonnabend are disorganised and failed to make suitable contact with collectors and museums interested in his work.
He also states that the agreements made with Sonnabend clients regarding the purchase of works destined for the May 1991 show were written out after he had notified Sonnabend that he was leaving them.
For their part, Sonnabend agree that Halley has the right to leave them but claim that he should have honoured his verbal agreement to put together the 1991 May show.
In the ongoing law suit, Sonnabend are represented by Daniel Shapiro, husband of the president of MOMA, Agnes Gund.
De Bayser père et fils extend premises
PARIS.
Patrick de Bayser, the twenty-seven year old son of French drawings expert and dealer Bruno de Bayser, opened a new gallery on 3 June in the townhouse in the rue Sainte Anne used by his father.
While Bruno de Bayser continues to work in the Galerie de Bayser, his first floor premises, Bayser fils has converted two ground floor courtyard rooms previously used for storing picture frames into a gallery devoted mainly to nineteenth-century drawings.
Patrick de Bayser worked in his father's gallery for two years after spending the previous two years in the gallery of paintings expert and dealer Eric Turquin.
While his clients have included dealers and museums, among them the British Museum, Patrick de Bayser says he is aiming mainly for a clientèle of private collectors.
The inaugural exhibition at the new gallery the third he has organised with Galerie de Bayser comprises ten paintings and thirty-five drawings by artists including François-André Vincent, Louis Durameau, Antoine Vaudoyer, Jean-Baptiste Isabey, Jean-Antoine Gros, Eugène Fromentin and Théodule Ribot.
Prices vary from FFr 4,000–25,000 with a handful of works around the FFr100,000 mark.
New SoHo Gallery for contemporary Japanese art
NEW YORK.
Akira Ikeda, probably Japan's best known dealer/promoter in international contemporary art, has added an address on Prince Street in SoHo to his list of galleries in Tokyo, Nagoya and Taura.
Kikuko Toyama, the gallery's director, said Mr Ikeda has opened up in New York to acquaint American collectors with the work of contemporary Japanese artists.
She concedes, ‘We are aware that a market for these Japanese artists does not yet exist, but it seemed like a good moment.
The market for New York real estate is very soft, compared with the rent we are paying for our Tokyo gallery’.
A quick glance at Ikeda's sepulchral concrete space indicates what the gallery does hope to sell while it waits for American collectors to warm up to the cutting edge of new Japanese art.
Works by Julian Schnabel, George Condo, Jean-Michel Basquiat and Robert Ryman line the walls.
‘We have to support ourselves, and it's a good way to get attention’, Ms Toyama explained.
Privately, New York dealers say the Ikeda Gallery is loading works purchased by Japanese investors and dealers back into the U.S. market, part of a trend that has been observed for a year now.
The official opening of the Akira Ikeda Gallery is scheduled for October.
International art dealers get together in Venice
VENICE.
From 4 to 5 July Venice plays host to the annual conference of the International Confederation of Art Dealers (CINOA), organised by the Italian Antique Dealers Association.
Delegates from Austria, Belgium, France, Great Britain, Ireland, Holland, Germany, South Africa, Switzerland, the US and Italy will take part and as new president will be voted in this year to succeed Andrew Hill who has held the post for twenty years.
A number of important topics will be on the agenda for discussion; EEC fiscal policies in the light of 1993; the restitution of stolen or illegally exported works of art; the progress on legislation regarding endangered species and protected materials such as ivory and tortoiseshell; and the often prickly relations between dealers and auction houses.
Around the galleries
A selection of the commercial shows in July, August and September
New York
Anyone for tennis?
Summertime shows around the city
Museums truly worth visiting are worth standing as New Yorkers say on line for.
Right?
The French learned that lesson in Paris where footing it in a queue suffering at least a little bit for art is required before access to the Winged Victory of Samothrace or ‘The artist's studio’ by Gustave Courbet.
Now New Yorkers are getting a chance to do a little suffering for art right here at home.
The Guggenheim's back.
The unprecedented blitz of media hype surrounding the restoration, expansion and long awaited re-opening of Frank Lloyd Wright's great spiralling concrete shell has created a huge public interest and lining up to get in and see what all the fuss is about has become the latest hot civic pursuit.
Needless to say, the yellow and red-awninged snack vendors at the corner of Fifth Avenue and Eighty-eighth Street are in hot dog heaven.
If Thomas Krens, the museum's think-big director, has his way, the Wright building will be but the flagship of a flotilla of Guggenheims dotting the globe.
One of them has in fact already opened just downtown in Arata Isosaki's renovated space in a building at the corner of Prince Street and Broadway in the heart (perhaps a more appropriate word would be bowels) of SoHo.
(Rosa Esman and the other dealers who also occupy the building are, of course, thrilled with their new neighbour!)
Leo Castelli has taken the occasion of all this Guggenmania to mount a show exploring plans for two of the other projected Guggenheims those for Bilbao, Spain, and for Salzburg, Austria.
In one room Frank Gehry has designed an installation outlining his plans for the Bilbao museum, a series of soft-shouldered, interconnecting shapes arranged in a sort of artful pile.
Landscaping will include waterworks, a reference to the ocean view the museum will enjoy.
Models, watercolour drawings, photographs and actual plans make it all clear.
In the adjoining room similar materials are arrayed by Hans Hollein for his Salzburg project.
Hollein is best known to New Yorkers for the townhouse on East 79th Street he renovated in the late Sixties to house Richard Feigen's gallery (it's now the Hanae Mori shop).
In Salzburg he envisions another renovation of a gigantic rock.
He intends to make spelunkers of us all, carving the galleries for his Guggenheim out of the core of Mönchsberg mountain, against which Salzburg is nestled.
You would enter from below, at the level of the Old Town, and progress upwards, just as Wright's generous ramp encourages you to do in New York.
Also echoing Wright will be a rotunda open to the daylight at the top.
Impossible?
Perhaps not.
But visionary for sure.
No sooner was Peter Galassi appointed to the post of Director of Photography at the Museum of Modern Art than he began a systematic rummaging through the holdings not only of the photography department but of all the other departments of the museum as well.
His idea was to find works in these unlikely locations which incorporate photographic strategies and techniques to find artists other than pure photographers who use the medium in making paintings, sculpture, drawings, prints, books, installations and videos.
‘More Than One Photography’(on at the museum until 9 August) is the result of his efforts and it consists of about sixty works by artists of all disciplines (including ‘pure’ photographers who present their work non-traditionally).
Among these is James Casebere, who photographs miniature architectural constructions in artificial light.
His work is also featured in a four person show at Michael Klein, ‘Photoworks’.
The premise is the same as Galassi's artists incorporating photography within a wider frame.
New works by Elaine Reichek, Cary S. Leibowitz/Candyass and Beverly Semmes round out the group, opening on 6 July and running until the 31st.
Marcus Leatherdale's photographs look downright mainstream by comparison, though his subject matter may include the bizarre and the theatrically far-out.
New black-and-white prints by him are on at Arthur Roger until the 24th.
Images have always crowded Bevan Davies' mind and in an effort to capture them he has been a photographer for many years.
But his interest in them came out in a unique way almost twenty years ago when he founded a shop that has become a fixture on Prince Street Untitled.
Within its tiny confines are to be found thousands of carefully sorted postcards, old and new (some in categories such as‘Giotto’, ‘Snakes’, ‘Cities’, ‘Bourgeois’) and because of the enormous variety, a visitor is virtually guaranteed to spend some money once inside the door.
Meanwhile Davies has been busy with the camera and his latest 16 x 20 inch black-and-white prints of sharply-shadowed New York store fronts are on at Sonnabend through to the end of the month.
As a change from its usual summer survey Galerie St Etienne is presenting three exhibitions focusing on the principal areas of the gallery's interests.
‘The Naive Vision’ highlights the work of such well-known folk painters as Camille Bombois, John Kane, Grandma Moses and Louis Vivan.
‘Art Nouveau and Expressionism’ traces the connection between turn-of-the century graphic design and the German Expressionist movement, while ‘Road to the White House’is a new series of work by Sue Coe which draws on the social and political satire of Expressionists such as Grosz to comment on America today.
All three until 4 September.
Annina Nosei is not a galerist known for specialising in photography but she has arranged, this summer, a largish show of those whose work especially interests her.
The title is ‘Specs’ and the participants are Ellen Brooks & Vikki Alexander, Jeanne Dunning, Carl Goldberger, Elaine Reichek, Christiane Richter, Todd Watts, Roger Welsh and James Welling.
What does a stable of artists look like?
A group of besmocked persons tethered to posts, contentedly chomping on hay?
Well, if you really want to know go to Jason McCoy before the end of August and you can see what an actual stable looks like, his stable.
Arthur Mones has done black-and-white photo portraits of them all, including Philip Smith, Helen Miranda Wilson and Jane Kaplowitz.
If artists gather in stables then New York in the summertime is a veritable art rodeo: group shows abound and it is a matchless time to take the measure of any given gallery.
Here is a list of some of the galleries showcasing their own artists in permanent or rotating exhibitions (be sure to check before going to note galleries' often reduced summer hours): Beitzel, Blum Helman Warehouse, Brown, Fischbach, Gagosian, Gladstone, Goodman, Gorney, Graham Modern, Hirschl & Adler, Knoedler, Louver, Curt Marcus, Barbara Mathes, McKee, Metro Pictures, Midtown-Payson, Victoria Munroe, Pace, P.P.O.W., Protech, Solomon, Sperone Westwater, Tatischeff, Thorp, Barbara Toll and Germans van Eck.
Galleries often also use the summer months to invite artists other than those they represent to show.
American Fine Arts Co. has asked a bunch among them Dan Graham, Louise Lawler, Stephen Prina, Andrea Frazier and James Welling; John Good, a group which includes Byron Kim, Jessica Stockholder, Fabian Marcaccio, James Hyde, Paula Hayes, Adrian Schiess and Wolfgang Staehle (both shows through August); and Robert Miller five painters Martha Diamond, Mary Heilmann, Bernard Pifaretti, Louise Fishman and Harriet Korman.
Ms Korman's dance card is crowded.
She's also been invited by Lennon, Weinberg to participate in a show along with Richard Kalina, Melissa Meyer, Carmengloria Morales, Bruno Rousselet and Mia Westerlund Roosen (both these latter shows until 31 July).
Jack Pierson has organised ‘Portraits’ for Tom Cugliani, until the end of the month.
Taking part are Alex Katz, Robert Greene, Nan Goldin, Billy Sullivan and others.
Feature features ‘Trouble Over So Much Skin’, a show devoted to exploring issues of sexuality in art (until 31 July) and Blum Helman has asked twelve or so sculptors to contribute pieces to ‘The Figure’.
Those present are Roy Lichtenstein, Bryan Hunt, Win Knowlton, Anthony Gormley and Joel Schapiro, among others (until 25 July).
More figurative work in both paintings and drawings old and new shows up at Forum all this month and next where canvases by Gregory Gillespie and Alan Feltus co-mingle with those of George Grosz, Oscar Bluemner, Edward Hopper and John Graham.
Kiki Smith, known for her often shocking figurative papier-mâché works, has selected four artists who also work with paper for a show on until 15 August at Fawbush.
‘Paper’ includes pieces by Paula Hayes, Mary Beth Edelson, Leslie Dill and Carl Fudge.
Unlike most artist-curators, Ms Smith has resisted the temptation to put herself in the show.
Paper also figures importantly in the work of George Fitzpatrick, a self-taught artist from Cleveland, Ohio.
He connects large sheets of handmade paper into vast surfaces (one of his works is six by fourteen feet) and then copies out texts onto them in long, continuing penmanship.
The texts tend to be from old archaeologists.
In one, for instance, you can read from Austin Henry Layard's book on Assyrian art (he was the discoverer of Ninevah and Nimrod) and in another from a book by William Petrie on Egyptian art.
Fitzpatrick has been involved in one way or another with this text-copying enterprise since the 1970s and you can see it for yourself or read it this month until the 31st at Salander O'Reilly.
Tennis anyone?
Well, it is summertime and if you have trouble getting time on the courts here in town and tripping to the Hamptons presents a problem why not simply go to Terry Dintenfass where the witty William King he of the loopy lanky aluminoids has set up a gallery-wide installation called ‘Tennis: The Monument’?
The game players, balls, nets and all continues until the end of the month.
London
Flowers in expansion
Two exhibitions of Tàpies include historic material
An erratic season, for many dealers even more disappointing than they had feared, draws to its close.
It will be remembered for contemporary art's declining audience, with many exhibitions attracting very little interest, and for the closure of noted and less established galleries.
As a result, artists have been displaced, but the signature of leading abstract painter, Gillian Ayres, available with Fischer's withdrawal, has been obtained by Pomeroy Purdy, with whom she will show in 1993, and Craigie Aitchison, previously with Albemarle, has joined Thomas Gibson.
But against that gloomy prognosis, other galleries are opening or expanding.
Flowers East made the brave step to East London several years ago and has now acquired an additional space of large proportions directly opposite its headquarters in Richmond Road.
Known as London Fields, Angela and Matthew Flowers had intended to use it for storage, but the appeal of the space suggested a more imaginative solution and so a proportion will be employed for changing exhibitions or for more permanent installations by gallery artists.
Current exhibitions in the Flowers complex include new paintings by Anthony Daley and the wall reliefs of Neil Jeffries (to 26 July), to be followed by ‘Artist's Choice’(31 July-6 September), in which the gallery's thirty artists will show new works with the art of their invited guests.
Another dealer stepping into an empty space is Patrick Corbally Stourton, the enthusiastic young specialist in Aboriginal art, a field introduced to London by Rebecca Hossack.
He has acquired the Cork Street premises vacated three years ago by Bernard Jacobson.
Now a coat of seagrass hides that distinctive, but dated, copper floor, and the cramped basement has been transformed by the removal of Jacobson's old print chests.
It is a handsome conversion and gives a catholic flavour to a street which used to be the exclusive preserve of contemporary Western art.
In Cork Street, the most interesting exhibition of the month is Victoria Miro's congregation of younger artists working in opaque and transparent materials (to 31 July).
Her list includes Jake Chapman, Alex Hartley whose recent exhibition at Anderson O'Day attracted the acquisitive attention of Charles Saatchi David Batchelor, Pat Kaufman and Sarah Staton, whose depiction of the Union Jack in crushed glass decorated the Serpentine Gallery's lawn last summer.
Nearby, Anthony Brown has mounted an exhibition entitled ‘The Man, The Worm and The Spirit’ for Connaught Brown (to 31 July).
It unites six established British artists who might be linked in a wider definition of The School of London.
They are Tony Bevan, William MacIlraith, Robert Mason, Hughie O'Donoghue, Terry Setch, whose powerful exhibition of the flotsam of Cardiff Bay is being held at the Camden Arts Centre (to 5 July), and Victor Willing.
Sally Lescher's Conservation Management is giving a first exhibition in London to Glaswegian portraitist, John Boyd (to 24 July), whose thickly brushed nude studies and landscapes have won admiration in Scotland.
Gimpel's ‘Scope’ reviews the different approaches to making abstraction in the Fifties (to 5 September).
Curated by gallery director, Simon Lee, it features ‘Toledo’, a wooden string piece of 1957, by Barbara Hepworth, two bronze screens, working models by Henry Moore for Time-Life's London headquarters (1952) and for the shopping centre in Rotterdam (1955), Ben Nicholson's ‘Balearic’(1953) and the two rare monochrome paintings by Sam Francis (1951), in addition to important works by Albers, Peter Lanyon and Tingueley.
With it, there is a small exhibition of sculptures by Nikki de St. Phalle, marking her large retrospective which opens the new Kunsthalle in Bonn (to 1 November).
At long last, Antoni Tàpies, the important Catalan master, has been receiving proper attention in the international markets.
Redfern launched a circulating exhibition of recent graphic works at the beginning of the year, there has been a print survey at New York's Museum of Modern Art, and now a collection of important and fragile pictures dating from the Fifties and Sixties, coordinated by the Tàpies Foundation in Barcelona and already seen at IVAM in Valencia, has arrived at the Serpentine Gallery (to 9 August).
Marking the occasion, Annely Juda is showing a group of more recent paintings and works on paper, with three sculptures (1 July-29 August).
Lisson is showing new paintings by Alex Landrum, whose monochromatic canvases, subtly embossed with the title by which that colour is described in a paint chart, are included in the current exhibition at the Saatchi Collection.
He will be seen with two new artists, Rachel Evans and Tom Benson (to 22 August), with the computer-generated art of New York partnership, Michael Grey and Randolph Huff, probably linked with John Latham, to follow (through September).
Karsten Schubert is exhibiting new paintings by Keith Coventry (2 July-1 August), and Francis Graham Dixon shows eight recent table sculptures by Brian Wall (to 2 August), who worked as Barbara Hepworth's assistant from 1955–60 and then left this country in 1969 to go to Berkeley's University of California where he is now Professor of Art.
A British audience will not have seen his work for more than twenty years, although he was included by his earlier art in the Tate Gallery's ‘St Ives’ exhibition of 1985, and the new works, delicately constructed and monochromatic in colour, will be a happy surprise.
Gavin Turk, who attracted notice for erecting, as his only contribution to his degree show at the Royal College of Art a year ago, a blue English Heritage plaque announcing that he had been working in his studio for two years, is having a first exhibition at an apartment in Docklands, opposite Canary Wharf (1–31 July; by appointment only, call 071–274 0041).
The exhibition, which has been coordinated by Turk's agent, Jay Jopling, with Bipasha Ghosh, comprises ten drawings which explore the theme of the signature of the artist, the traditional confirmation of authenticity.
Different forms and styles are employed, including a rubber stamp, and a signed paper tablecloth stained with the traces of a meal eaten by the artist.
The original drawing for the blue plaque is included.
Some, but not all, of London's contemporary art galleries shut for business in August.
Those remaining open may be drawing upon their stock for the summer programme.
The following exhibitions were reviewed in last month's column and can be recommended: Anselm Kiefer's ‘The Women of the Revolution’ at Anthony d'Offay (to 8 August); James Turrell's studies for ‘The Irish Sky Garden’at Turske-Hue-Williams (to 31 July); Mayor's installation by Rebecca Horn (to 31 August); Simon Edmondson's new paintings at Benjamin Rhodes (to 7 August); Marlborough's second exhibition of Stephen Conroy (to 25 July); and Nayland Blake's ‘Bleep’at Milch (to 11 July).
Paris
Nuclear reactions
Louis Jammes' doomsday photos
Throughout July, Franka Berndt is staging ‘Plans et signes’ by Cesar Cofone.
Following on from his recent installations, the Argentinean artist has been working on moveable objects consisting of a wooden surface, on which he draws in graphite or coloured pastels, and a superimposed sheet of lead some distance from the base.
The subjects of Louis Jammes' photographs are becoming increasingly sombre in mood and contemporary in content.
From Figuration Libre painters, each portrayed in his own iconographical universe, he moved on to more natural, less intrusive backgrounds in his silkscreen-on-metal prints of Tunisian children or Berliners celebrating the fall of the Wall.
He has since visited Chernobyl and the sarcophagus built to contain what remains of reactor no.4.
His photographs of power station workers the so-called liquidators and of the local inhabitants, full frontal shots against a doomsday background, are printed on steel using a silver bromide process.
Jammes' work is being shown by Yvon Lambert until 30 July.
The Di Meo brothers' exhibition of paintings by Michel Haas, whose figures emerge from deep shadow, continues until 11 July, while the review of Spanish art put on by Artcurial ends on the same date.
Many of the significant trends in Spanish art over the last ten years are represented: the return to expressionism of Sicilia, Sevilla and Barcelo, the lyrical style of Campano and Broto, the monumental sculpture of Susana Solano and the geometrical works of Sergi Aguilar, not forgetting the surrealist objects of Pepe Espaliu and the metaphysical inspiration of Dis Berlin.
Until 18 July at the Jennifer Flay gallery, the American Karen Kilimnik is exhibiting a three-dimensional composition with the intriguing title: ‘Mrs Peel…
We're needed’.
Another American artist, Rona Pondick, creates disturbing assemblages out of a mixture of materials (for instance: a wooden beam, a row of white shoes and a cushion, all held together by frayed nylon cords, the ends of which spill onto the floor like white seaweed).
Her latest work is being featured by Thaddeus Ropac until the middle of the month, together with paintings by Jonathan Lasker.
Le Monde de l'Art, established a few months ago in Hippolyte Boulanger's former ceramics factory, which for many years housed the poster museum, the Musée de l'Affiche, is a place devoted to art and spectacle.
Until 1 August, it will be showing the works of three Cuban artists, Huberto Castro, Moïses Finalé and Manuel Mendive.
Daniel Buren, with ‘Couvrir-Découvrir-Travaux situés’, can be seen at Christine et Isy Brachot until 11 July.
Meanwhile, Froment & Putman, Gilbert Brownstone, Hadrian Thomas and the Montenay are staging collective exhibitions.
Paintings of 1947 vintage by Wilfredo Lam are being shown throughout the month by Lelong, while the Maeght gallery in the rue St-Merri is exhibiting sculptures and engravings by Miró.
As part of the exhibition, the celebrated publishing house will be showing six films it has produced on the Catalan artist.
Maeght have also recently brought out the fifth and sixth volumes of their catalogue raisonné ‘Miró Lithographe’.
For more than twenty-five years, the Englishman John Hilliard has concentrated his research on movement in photographs.
He juxtaposes two or more negatives in a single frame or, again superimposing different shots, transfers the printed photograph to a large canvas backing using a computer able to read a positive image and reproduce it in polychrome.
Hilliard's work is being shown by Liliane and Michel Durand-Dessert until 29 July.
Gilles Peyroulet is featuring ‘Constructive’ sculpture by Wolfgang Luy, a Düsseldorf artist akin to Thomas Schütte and Reinhardt Mucha, whose concern is the relationship between man, nature and architecture.
Quite different in feel are the sculptures on show until the end of the month at the Beaubourg gallery: two large groups of figures executed by the painter Pierre Klossowski, here on show for the first time, entitled ‘Roberte aux barres parallèles’ and ‘Monsieur de Max et Mademoiselle Glissant’, portrayed in the roles of Diana and Actaeon.
Claude and François-Xavier Lalanne are still being featured by Jean-Gabriel Mitterrand at the J.G.M. gallery.
The summer tradition of recapping all the year's exhibitions ends on the last day of the month at the Zabriskie, while Marie-Jo Lafontaine continues at the Montaigne gallery until the 18th.
David Mach's exhibition chez Nikki Diana Marquardt has been extended; the Scottish artist is also exhibiting with Claire Burrus.
Work by Emmanuelle Renard, Dominique Corlay and Olivier Leroy is on show at the Vidal-Saint-Phalle for the whole month.
The Galerie de France is featuring syntagmatic volumes works framed in iron by Jean-Pierre Bertrand, and the recent output of Rebecca Horn.
Finally, Bernard Prize has brought his latest paintings from the Carnegie Museum, Pittsburg, to the Crousel-Robelin-Bama gallery.
Berlin
Brusberg celebrates a decade
Lybke opens a branch of his Leipzig gallery
Hoping to bring a breath of fresh air to the Berlin gallery scene is Gerd Harry Lybke.
He has recently opened a branch of his Leipzig gallery Eigen & Art in the city's Scheunenviertel district.
Lybke's workshop-gallery, opened in 1985, soon became a refuge for artists in the former East Germany who were excluded from officially-approved art centres.
Now such well-known artists as Angela Hampel, Hans Scheuerecker, Frank Seidel and Hartwig Ebersbach exhibit at his gallery.
With his remarkable gift for talent-spotting, Lybke discovered former East German artists engaged in ‘undesirable’ art forms such as free painting, installations or performance art, including Rainer Görss, Jörg Herold, Uwe Kowski, the Carsten brothers and Olaf Nicolai.
Lybke has for many years presented his artists in an international context.
He has represented the English artist Cornelia Parker, Annelies Strba from Switzerland, and West German video artists Klaus Vom Bruch and Marcel Odenbach.
In July Eigen & Art in Berlin presents a cross-section of innovative work by young, international artists.
The Zwinger gallery also keeps abreast of the times.
Werner Müller concentrates on art inspired by reflection and critical observation rather than by emotion or mythology.
At his summer exhibition Müller has managed to bring together a collection rich in associations.
It includes works executed by Gerhard Faulhaber and Daniel Habegger with the minimum of materials, Ueli Etter's games, and British computer artist Brian Reffin Smith's ‘The Beast’ which links German history with childhood games.
Other members of the Zwinger crew are Documenta participant Eran Schaerf, the Berlin performance group Die Tödlische Doris and the solo performance artist Susi Pop.
For the first time in twenty-three years Galerie Franck & Schulte is once more presenting new works by the American Richard Artschwager, who took part in Documenta.
Until 2 July, visitors can see seven sculptures, including a recapitulation of his Documenta contribution and ‘Filing Cabinet’ with humorous fixtures, will be attached to the wall in the style of classical panel paintings.
Encouraged by a major project entitled ‘Wien in Berlin’, abandoned for the time being, Thomas Schulter and the Austrian Helmut Federle have agreed to stage an exhibition of paintings and drawings in August, with works by Sol Le Witt completing the show.
Founded over thirty years ago in Hanover, Galerie Brusberg celebrates ten years in Berlin on 29 August.
During July the spacious rooms on Kurfürstendamm remain closed.
From the beginning of August the work of classic modern artists René Magritte, Max Ernst and Henri Laurens can be seen alongside those of an array of contemporary artists associated with the gallery, including Gerhard Altenbourg, Bernhard Heisig, Jürgen Brodwof, Rolf Szymanki, Hejke Ruschmeyer, Horst Antes and Fernando Botero.
From 3 July until 29 August, the Salander-O'Reilly gallery brings together three early twentieth-century painters from its permanent collection.
Ranging from Cubism, represented by Henri Le Fauconnier's painting ‘Mountaineers attacked by bears’ to the revived Expressionism of Karl Friedrich Gotsch, a pupil of Kokoschka once consigned to oblivion.
Between these two come the portraits, landscapes and genre paintings of the Paris-based Russian Nicolas Tarkoff, showing the influence of both the Impressionists and the Fauves.
In July the Galerie Berlin, in its bright rooms overlooking Friedrichstrasse, will hang works by artists represented by the gallery, Werner Libuda, Gerd Sonntag and Siegfried Klotz.
At the same time, the Galerie Poll introduces the Israeli painter Moshe Gershun.
Using large format paper and a variety of watery colours, Gershun creates eloquent pictures in which isolated floral and other motifs can be identified.
The following exhibition, from 3 to 27 August, features the work of painters and sculptors attached to the gallery.
Starting from the artists' personal standpoints, the exhibition shows the diversity of artistic perception of reality today.
For the first time since 1965, the Ladengalerie is exhibiting work by the sculptor Fritz Cremer, now eighty-six years old.
In the 1950s Cremer was commissioned by the East German government to create a sculptural memorial to the victims of the Buchenwald and Ravensbrück concentration camps.
The one-man exhibition at the Ladengalerie consists of drawings, etchings and small bronzes, mostly on the classic themes of Eros, passion and the self-portrait.
From 7 July until 7 August, Ingrid Raab who has, since 1959, fostered Wilde Malerei, or New Expressionism, in Berlin, opens a panoramic exhibition of sculptures, paintings and drawings by artists attached to the gallery.
The exhibition concentrates on the one hand on Elvira Bach, Luciano Castelli, Rainer Fetting and their teacher Karl Horst Hödicke.
At the other end of the scale are Stephanus Heidacker and Peter Chevalier, whose paintings are based on a revision of classicism, and the Frenchman Philippe Cognée who aims at the breaking down of figurative painting.
For August and September Ingrid Raab is planning to introduce three young Berlin artists.
At his Kreuzberg gallery Im Kabinett, painter Gerd Sonntag is staging an exhibition of works by Erika Dobslaff executed between 1969 and 1991.
Born in Poland in 1940, Erika Dobslaff fled to Berlin in 1945.
After training as an actress, she taught herself to paint, which she has continued to do for the past thirty years.
Her only previous solo exhibition took place in 1977 at Jörgen Freiherr Von Schweinebraden's legendary underground gallery.
Although she works in secret, she took an active part in the debate about the forms of artistic expression characteristic of the Fifties and Sixties.
Several of those who shared those discussions are now big names in the art market.
Dobslaff's intense canvases owe more to the abstract than to the figurative tradition.
The most recent oil paintings blend seemingly amorphous shapes in subtle gradations of green and blue with landscapes of the psyche that have yet to be fathomed.
The exhibition continues until 27 July.
Art Market
Freud and Auerbach
London, Sotheby's, 2 July.
A strong group of British work including ‘Naked girl asleep I’ from 1967 by Lucian Freud (est. £350,000–450,000; $639,00–821,000) and a rare landscape drawing of Loch Ness by the artist dated 1943 (£50,000–60,000; $91,000–109,500); a Frank Auerbach of ‘Railway arches, Bethnal Green II’(est. £180,000–250,000; $328,500–456,000) and a 1965 ‘Julia’(£35,000–45,000; $64,000–82,000).
Going native à la Rubens
London, Christie's, 7 July.
‘A Jesuit Missionary in Chinese costume’ by Rubens (est. £50–100,000; $90–180,000) is included in this sale of Old Master drawings, which will also put on offer Pierre-Paul Prud'hon's ‘Seated youth’, one of a group of drawings from the Woodner Collection (est. £60–80,000; $110-150,000), and ‘A winged deity and other figures on clouds’by Giambattista Tiepolo (est. £30–50,000; $55–90,000).
Desire in bronze
London, Christie's, 7 July.
A bronze group of Nessus abducting Deianira cast by Antonio Susini in about 1600 from a model by Giambologna is a feature of this sale of European sculpture and is expected to realize £300–500,000 ($550–900,000).
A sixteenth- century gilt bronze horse is estimated at £150–200,000 ($270–360,000) and a Florentine glazed terracotta medallion portrait of a youth, attributed to Andrea della Robbia, is expected to make £50–80,000 ($90–150,000).
Italian views
London, Phillips, 7 July.
This sale of Old Master paintings will concentrate on early Italian and German sixteenth-century works.
Two Italian views share the estimate of £100–150,000 ($180–270,000).
One is an early ‘View of Verona’ by Antonio Zucchi and the other a ‘View of the Tiber’by Antonio Joli.
A seventeenth-century central panel of a triptych depicting the Crucifixion by Pieter Lastman is estimated at £180–200,000 ($325–360,000), while a forest landscape by Jan Brueghel the Elder is expected to sell for £80–120,000 ($150–220,000).
Silver sconces
London, Christie's, 8 July.
At the centre of this silver sale will be a set of four Queen Anne wall sconces by Anthony Nelme, which are estimated to fetch £250–350,000 ($450–630,000).
Also on offer are a pair of silver-gilt candelabra by Philip Rundell, estimated at £30–50,000 ($55–90,000).
Country house Antiquities
London, Christie's, 8 July.
The centrepiece of this sale of Antiquities is a Graeco-Roman bronze statuette of Harpocrates dating from about the first century BC, which is estimated to go for £150–200,000 ($270–360,000).
Collectors will also have the opportunity to acquire objects formerly at Marbury Hall, including a bust of the Emperor Antoninus Pius (est. £50–60,000; $90–110,000) and a Roman marble altar from the first century A.D. (est. £25–35,000; $45–63,000).
Sacred sculpture
London, Phillips, 8 July.
Italian pieces predominate in this sale of European sculpture and works of art.
A pink marble carved figure of Christ on the column, attributed to the Master of Rimini, is expected to make £70–90,000 ($130–160,000) and four bronze figures of the Apostles by Alessandro Vittoria bear the estimate of £30–40,000 ($55–73,000).
Chippendales
London, Christie's, 9 July.
The highlight of this sale of English furniture will be a group of seven documented pieces by Thomas Chippendale.
Of these the finest are a pair of silvered mirrors measuring 173x98.5 cm supplied to Edwin Lascelles and placed in the Yellow Damask Sitting Room at Harewood House.
They are expected to fetch £300–500,000 ($550–900,000).
Also of great interest is a pair of harewood, kingwood and marquetry commodes commissioned by William Constable, estimated to make £200–300,000 ($360–550,000).
Ottonian ivory and royal bronze
London, Sotheby's, 9 July.
The highlight of this sale of European sculpture and works of art is a late Ottonian ivory relief of the Crucifixion, Ascension and Christ Enthroned.
Carved in Germany in the late tenth or early eleventh century, the plaque measures 13.7x11.3 cm and has been in private ownership throughout this century.
It has been attributed to the ivory-carver of the Crucifixion relief on the book-cover of the abbess Theophanu of Essen and is estimated to sell for £200–300,000 ($360–540,000).
£80–120,000 ($150–220,000) is expected for a Florentine bronze statuette of the Knife-Grinder after the antique, No.14 from the French Royal Inventory of Louis XIV, and a Netherlandish figure of Venus Marina of the early seventeenth century is expected to sell for a similar figure.
A bronze statuette of Louis XIII on horseback signed by Hubert Le Sueur and probably cast in Paris before 1625 is estimated to bring £60–80,000 ($110–150,000).
Quartz for Egyptian courts
London, Sotheby's, 9 & 10 July.
A 35.5 cm high Egyptian quartzite bust of Senbef, a court official in the reign of King Psamtik I, has been sent over from the United States for this two-day sale of Antiquities and is estimated to fetch £600–800,000 ($1.1–1.5m).
Another Egyptian piece is a kneeling temple statue of Ptah-Ankh carrying a libation basin, dating from the reign of Amenhotep III, probably from Memphis.
Formerly in the Richard von Kaufmann Collection, it is now expected to bring £275–320,000 ($500–600,000).
The auction will also disperse the Erlenmeyer Collection of Western Asiatic cylinder seals and antiquities, the proceeds of which are to benefit environmental organizations.
Bellotto and Canaletto
London, Christie's, 10 July.
A pair of views of Venice by Canaletto formerly the property of H.J.Joel stand out in this sale of Old Master pictures.
One depicts the ‘The Grand Canal, Venice, looking east from the Campo di S.Vio’(68.7x92 cm), and the other ‘The Grand Canal, Venice, looking north from the Rialto Bridge’(68.8x94 cm).
Both are estimated to sell for £600–800,000 ($1.1–1.5m).
‘The ruins of the old Kreuzkirche, Dresden, from the east’ by Bernardo Bellotto, is also being offered with the estimate of £500–700,000 ($900,000–1.3m).
Gillows table
London, Sotheby's, 10 July.
This sale of English furniture will put on offer a serpentine library table with original leather-lined top made by Gillows of Lancaster to a design by Thomas Chippendale.
Supplied to Sir James Ibbetson in 1778, it is being sold by his descendant to fund restoration of Constable Burton Hall in North Yorkshire and is estimated to make around £500,000 ($900,000).
Also included in the sale is a group of pieces associated with commissions of the Prince Regent.
The finest is a boulle centre-table by Thomas Parker, which was placed in the Gilt Column Room at Carlton House and included in the 1822 portrait of George IV by Lawrence.
The table bears the estimate of £120–150,000 ($220–270,000).
Nature wild and tamed
London, Christie's, 14 July.
This sale of British drawings and watercolours will have at its hub ‘The Splügen Pass’ by J.M.W.Turner (pencil and watercolour with scratching out, 292x451 mm), which is estimated to fetch £250–350,000 ($450–630,000), and Thomas Gainsborough's ‘A peasant family going to market’(black chalk and stump, grey and brown wash heightened with white on brown paper, 410x533 mm), which is expected to sell for £300–400,000 ($550–725,000).
First of a Lott
London, Sotheby's, 15 July.
Many of Constable's paintings feature Willy Lott's house and this sale of British paintings 1500–1850 includes his first rendering of this favourite subject.
It was painted in 1802 and is expected to fetch around £200,000 ($360,000).
A totally different note is struck by J.F.Herring's painting inspired by Byron's Mazeppa.
The work depicts Mazeppa about to be crushed by his stumbling horse and is estimated to make £200–300,000 ($360–540,000).
A horse is also the subject of a painting jointly executed by George Stubbs and George Barret.
‘A horse frightened by a lion’ is one of seventeen versions of the subject and is estimated at £100–150,000 ($180–270,000).
Dash of Worcester
London, Sotheby's, 16 July.
The highest estimate in this sale of eighteenth and nineteenth-century British drawings and watercolours is associated with a watercolour of Lake Albano in Italy by John Cozens, painted between late 1776 and early 1779 (est. £30–40,000; $55–73,000), but the greatest curiosity is a recently identified pencil sketch of Worcester Cathedral.
The drawing is dated 6 October 1835 and is one of three executed by Constable during his visit to the town.
It is estimated at £20–30,000 ($36–55,000).
Gracious living
Melbourne, Christie's, 28 July.
Included in this sale of the Dallhold Collection is Rupert Bunny's ‘Mrs Herbert Jones and her daughters, Hilda and Dulce’(signed, 1904, oil on canvas, 107x137 cm,), which is expected to go for Aus$450–550,000 (£190–230,000; $340–415,000).
Also on offer are Frederick McCubbin's ‘Feeding time’(signed and dated 1893, oil on canvas, 78x127 cm), which is estimated at Aus$350–450,000 (£145–190,000; $265–340,000), and the watercolour ‘A view of Sydney looking from the north shore towards the city’ by Conrad Martens (signed, 46x66 cm), which is expected to realize Aus$170–200,000 (£70–85,000; $130–150,000).